{"id": "51039", "revid": "43080961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51039", "title": "Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester", "text": "English statesman (1532\u20131588)\nRobert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester (24 June 1532 \u2013 4 September 1588) was an English statesman and the favourite of Elizabeth I from her accession until his death. He was a suitor for the queen's hand for many years.\nDudley's youth was overshadowed by the downfall of his family in 1553 after his father, the Duke of Northumberland, had failed to prevent the accession of Mary I. Robert Dudley was condemned to death but was released in 1554 and took part in the Battle of St. Quentin under Mary's husband and co-ruler, Philip, which led to his full rehabilitation, but also to the death of his younger brother Henry. On Elizabeth I's accession in November 1558, Dudley was appointed Master of the Horse. In October 1562, he became a privy councillor and, in 1587, was appointed Lord Steward of the Royal Household. In 1564, Dudley became Earl of Leicester and, from 1563, one of the greatest landowners in North Wales and the English West Midlands by royal grants.\nThe Earl of Leicester was one of Elizabeth's leading statesmen, involved in domestic as well as foreign politics alongside William Cecil and Sir Francis Walsingham. Although he refused to be married to Mary, Queen of Scots, Leicester was for a long time relatively sympathetic to her until, from the mid-1580s, he urged her execution. As patron of the Puritan movement, he supported non-conforming preachers but tried to mediate between them and the bishops of the Church of England. A champion also of the international Protestant cause, he led the English campaign in support of the Dutch Revolt (1585\u20131587). His acceptance of the post of governor-general of the United Provinces infuriated Queen Elizabeth. The expedition was a military and political failure, and it ruined Leicester financially. Leicester was engaged in many large-scale business ventures and was one of the main backers of Francis Drake and other explorers and privateers. During the Spanish Armada, Leicester was in overall command of the English land forces. In this function, he invited Queen Elizabeth to visit her troops at Tilbury. This was the last of many events he had organised over the years, the most spectacular being the festival at his seat Kenilworth Castle in 1575 on the occasion of a three-week visit by the Queen. Leicester was a principal patron of the arts, literature, and the Elizabethan theatre.\nLeicester's private life interfered with his court career and \"vice versa\". When his first wife, Amy Robsart, fell down a flight of stairs and died in 1560, he was free to marry the queen. However, the resulting scandal very much reduced his chances in this respect. Popular rumours that he had arranged for his wife's death continued throughout his life, despite the coroner's jury's verdict of accident. For 18 years he did not remarry for Queen Elizabeth's sake and when he finally did, his new wife, Lettice Knollys, was permanently banished from court. This and the death of his only legitimate son and heir were heavy blows. Shortly after the child's death in 1584, a virulent libel known as \"Leicester's Commonwealth\" was circulated in England. It laid the foundation of a literary and historiographical tradition that often depicted Leicester as the Machiavellian \"master courtier\" and as a deplorable figure around Elizabeth I. More recent research has led to a reassessment of his place in Elizabethan government and society.\nEarly life.\nEducation and marriage.\nRobert Dudley was the fifth son of John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland, and his wife Jane, daughter of Sir Edward Guildford. His paternal grandfather, Edmund Dudley, had been an adviser to King Henry VII and was executed for treason in 1510 by King Henry VIII. John and Jane Dudley had 13 children in all and were known for their happy family life. Among the siblings' tutors figured John Dee, Thomas Wilson, and Roger Ascham.\nRoger Ascham believed that Robert Dudley possessed a rare talent for languages and writing, including in Latin, regretting that his pupil had done himself harm by preferring mathematics. Robert learned the craft of the courtier at the courts of Henry VIII, and especially Edward VI, among whose companions he served.\nIn 1549, Robert Dudley participated in crushing Kett's Rebellion and probably first met Amy Robsart, whom he was to wed on 4 June 1550 in the presence of the young King Edward. She was of the same age as the bridegroom and the daughter and heiress of Sir John Robsart, a gentleman-farmer of Norfolk. It was a love-match, the young couple depending heavily on their fathers' gifts, especially Robert's. John Dudley, who since early 1550 effectively ruled England, was pleased to strengthen his influence in Norfolk by his son's marriage. Lord Robert, as he was styled as a duke's son, became an important local gentleman and served as a Member of Parliament for Norfolk in 1551\u201352, March 1553 and 1559. His court career went on in parallel.\nCondemned and pardoned.\nOn 6 July 1553, King Edward VI died and the Duke of Northumberland attempted to transfer the English crown to Lady Jane Grey, who was married to his second youngest son, Lord Guildford Dudley. Robert Dudley led a force of 300 into Norfolk where Edward's half-sister Mary was assembling her followers. After some ten days in the county and securing several towns for Jane, he took King's Lynn and proclaimed her in the marketplace. The next day, 19 July, Jane's reign was over in London. Soon, the townsmen of King's Lynn seized Robert Dudley and the rest of his small troop and sent him to Framlingham Castle before Mary I.\nRobert Dudley was imprisoned in the Tower of London, attainted, and condemned to death, as were his father and four brothers. His father went to the scaffold. In the Tower, Dudley's stay coincided with the imprisonment of his childhood friend, Edward and Mary's half-sister Elizabeth, who was sent there on suspicion of involvement in Wyatt's rebellion. Guildford Dudley was executed in February 1554. The surviving brothers were released in the autumn; working for their release, their mother (who died in January 1555) and their brother-in-law, Henry Sidney, had befriended the incoming Spanish nobles around Philip of Spain, Mary's husband.\nIn December 1554, Ambrose and Robert Dudley took part in a tournament held to celebrate Anglo-Spanish friendship. Yet, the Dudley brothers were welcome at court only as long as King Philip was there, otherwise they were suspected of associating with people who conspired against Mary's regime. In January 1557, Robert and Amy Dudley were allowed to repossess some of their former lands, and in March of the same year Dudley was at Calais where he was chosen to deliver personally to Queen Mary the happy news of Philip's return to England. Ambrose, Robert, and Henry Dudley, the youngest brother, fought for Philip\u00a0II at the Battle of St. Quentin in August 1557. Henry Dudley was killed in the following siege by a cannonball\u2014according to Robert, before his own eyes. All surviving Dudley children \u2014 Ambrose and Robert with their sisters, Mary and Katherine \u2014 were restored in blood by Mary I's next parliament in 1558.\nRoyal favourite.\nRobert Dudley was counted among Elizabeth's special friends by Philip II's envoy to the English court a week before Queen Mary's death. On 18 November 1558, the morning after Elizabeth's accession, Dudley witnessed the surrender of the Great Seal to her at Hatfield. He became Master of the Horse on the same day. This was an important court position entailing close attendance on the sovereign. It suited him, as he was an excellent horseman and showed great professional interest in royal transport and accommodation, horse breeding, and the supply of horses for all occasions. Dudley was also entrusted with organising and overseeing a large part of the Queen's coronation festivities.\nIn April 1559 Dudley was elected a Knight of the Garter. Shortly before, Philip II had been informed:\nLord Robert has come so much into favour that he does whatever he likes with affairs and it is even said that her majesty visits him in his chamber day and night. People talk of this so freely that they go so far as to say that his wife has a malady in one of her breasts and the Queen is only waiting for her to die to marry Lord Robert ... Matters have reached such a pass ... that ... it would ... be well to approach Lord Robert on your Majesty's behalf ... Your Majesty would do well to attract and confirm him in his friendship.\nWithin a month the Spanish ambassador, Count de Feria, counted Robert Dudley among three persons who ran the country. Visiting foreigners of princely rank were bidding for his goodwill. He acted as an official host on state occasions and was himself a frequent guest at ambassadorial dinners. By the autumn of 1559 several foreign princes were vying for the Queen's hand; their impatient envoys came under the impression that Elizabeth was fooling them, \"keeping Lord Robert's enemies and the country engaged with words until this wicked deed of killing his wife is consummated.\" \"Lord Robert\", the new Spanish ambassador de Quadra was convinced, was the man \"in whom it is easy to recognise the king that is to be ... she will marry none but the favoured Robert.\" Many of the nobility would not brook Dudley's new prominence, as they could not \"put up with his being King.\" Plans to kill the favourite abounded, and Dudley took to wearing a light coat of mail under his clothes. Among all classes, in England and abroad, gossip got underway that the Queen had children by Dudley\u2014such rumours never quite ended for the rest of her life.\nAmy Dudley's death.\nAlready in April 1559 court observers noted that Elizabeth never let Dudley from her side; but her favour did not extend to his wife. Amy Dudley lived in different parts of the country since her ancestral manor house was uninhabitable. Her husband visited her for four days at Easter 1559 and she spent a month around London in the early summer of the same year. They never saw each other again; Dudley was with the Queen at Windsor Castle and possibly planning a visit to her, when his wife was found dead at her residence Cumnor Place near Oxford on 8 September 1560:\nThere came to me Bowes, by whom I do understand that my wife is dead and as he sayeth by a fall from a pair of stairs. Little other understanding can I have of him. The greatness and the suddenness of the misfortune doth so perplex me, until I do hear from you how the matter standeth, or how this evil should light upon me, considering what the malicious world will bruit, as I can take no rest.\nRetiring to his house at Kew, away from court as from the putative crime scene, he pressed for an impartial inquiry which had already begun in the form of an inquest. The jury found that it was an accident: Lady Dudley, staying alone \"in a certain chamber\", had fallen down the adjoining stairs, sustaining two head injuries and breaking her neck. It was widely suspected that Dudley had arranged his wife's death to be able to marry the Queen. The scandal played into the hands of nobles and politicians who desperately tried to prevent Elizabeth from marrying him. Most historians have considered murder to be unlikely. The coroner's report came to light in The National Archives in 2008 and is compatible with an accidental fall as well as suicide or other violence. In the absence of the forensic findings of 1560, it was often assumed that a simple accident could not be the explanation\u2014on the basis of near-contemporary tales that Amy Dudley was found at the bottom of a short flight of stairs with a broken neck, her headdress still standing undisturbed \"upon her head\", a detail that first appeared as a satirical remark in the libel \"Leicester's Commonwealth\" of 1584 and has ever since been repeated for a fact. To account for such oddities and evidence that she was ill, it was suggested in 1956 by Ian Aird, a professor of surgery, that Amy Dudley had suffered from breast cancer, which through metastatic cancerous deposits in the spine, could have caused her neck to break under only limited strain, such as a short fall or even just coming down the stairs. This explanation has been widely accepted. Suicide has also often been considered an option, motives being Amy Dudley's depression or mortal illness.\nMarriage hopes and proposals.\nElizabeth remained close to Dudley and he, with her blessing and on her prompting, pursued his suit for her hand in an atmosphere of diplomatic intrigue. His wife's and his father's shadows haunted his prospects. His efforts leading nowhere, in the spring of 1561 Dudley offered to leave England to seek military adventures abroad; Elizabeth would have none of that and everything remained as it was. In 1587, a man named Arthur claimed to have been born in 1561 as the illegitimate son of Robert Dudley and Queen Elizabeth I, but his claims could not be proven.\nIn October 1562, the Queen fell ill with smallpox and, believing her life to be in danger, she asked the Privy Council to make Robert Dudley Protector of the Realm and to give him a suitable title together with 20,000 pounds a year. There was universal relief when she recovered her health. Dudley was made a privy councillor. He was already deeply involved in foreign politics, including Scotland.\nIn 1563, Elizabeth suggested Dudley as a consort to the widowed Mary, Queen of Scots, the idea being to achieve firm amity between England and Scotland and diminish the influence of foreign powers. Elizabeth's preferred solution was that they should all live together at the English court, so that she would not have to forgo her favourite's company. Mary at first enquired if Elizabeth was serious, wanting above all to know her chances of inheriting the English crown. Elizabeth repeatedly declared that she was prepared to acknowledge Mary as her heir only on condition that she marry Robert Dudley. Mary's Protestant advisors warmed to the prospect of her marriage to Dudley, and in September 1564 he was created Earl of Leicester, a move designed to make him more acceptable to Mary. In January 1565, Thomas Randolph, the English ambassador to Scotland, was told by the Scottish queen that she would accept the proposal. To his amazement, Dudley was not to be moved to comply: But a man of that nature I never found any ... he whom I go about to make as happy as ever was any, to put him in possession of a kingdom, to lay in his naked arms a most fair ... lady ... nothing regardeth the good that shall ensue unto him thereby ... but so uncertainly dealeth that I know not where to find him. Dudley indeed had made it clear to the Scots at the beginning that he was not a candidate for Mary's hand and forthwith had behaved with passive resistance. He also worked in the interest of Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, Mary's eventual choice of husband. Elizabeth herself wavered as to declaring Mary her heir, until in March 1565 she decided she could not bring herself to it. Still, she finally told the Spanish ambassador that the proposal fell through because the Earl of Leicester refused to cooperate.\nBy 1564, Dudley had realised that his chances of becoming Elizabeth's consort were small. At the same time he could not \"consider ... without great repugnance\", as he said, that she chose another husband. Confronted with other marriage projects, Elizabeth continued to say that she still would very much like to marry him. Dudley was seen as a serious candidate until the mid-1560s and later. To remove this threat to Habsburg and Valois suitors, between 1565 and 1578, four German and French princesses were mooted as brides for Leicester, as a consolation for giving up Elizabeth and his resistance to her foreign marriage projects. These he had sabotaged and would continue to sabotage. In 1566 Dudley formed the opinion that Elizabeth would never marry, recalling that she had always said so since she was eight years old; but he still was hopeful\u2014she had also assured him he would be her choice in case she changed her mind (and married an Englishman).\nLife at court.\nAs \"a male favourite to a virgin queen\", Robert Dudley found himself in an unprecedented situation. His apartments at court were next to hers, and\u2014perceived as knowing \"the Queen and her nature best of any man\"\u2014his influence was matched by few. Another side of such privileges was Elizabeth's possessiveness and jealousy. His company was essential for her well-being and for many years he was hardly allowed to leave. Sir Christopher Hatton reported a growing emergency when the Earl was away for a few weeks in 1578: \"This court wanteth your presence. Her majesty is unaccompanied and, I assure you, the chambers are almost empty.\"\nOn ceremonial occasions, Dudley often acted as an unofficial consort, sometimes in the Queen's stead. He largely assumed charge of court ceremonial and organised hundreds of small and large festivities. From 1587 he was Lord Steward, being responsible for the royal household's supply with food and other commodities. He displayed a strong sense for economising and reform in this function, which he had \"de facto\" occupied long before his official appointment. The sanitary situation in the palaces was a perennial problem, and a talk with Leicester about these issues inspired John Harington to construct a water closet. Leicester was a lifelong sportsman, hunting and jousting in the tiltyard, and an indefatigable tennis-player. He was also the Queen's regular dancing partner.\nAncestral and territorial ambition.\nAfter the Duke of Northumberland's attainder the entire Dudley inheritance had disappeared. His sons had to start from scratch in rebuilding the family fortunes, as they had renounced any rights to their father's former possessions or titles when their own attainders had been lifted in January 1558. Robert Dudley financed the lifestyle expected of a royal favourite by large loans from City of London merchants until in April 1560 Elizabeth granted him his first export licence, worth \u00a36,000 p.a. He also received some of his father's lands, but since he was not the family heir it was a matter of some difficulty to find a suitable estate for his intended peerage. In June 1563 the Queen granted him Kenilworth Manor, Castle, and Park, together with the lordships of Denbigh and Chirk in North Wales. Other grants were to follow. Eventually, Leicester and his elder brother Ambrose Dudley, 3rd Earl of Warwick, came to preside over the greatest aristocratic interest in the West Midlands and North Wales.\nDenbighshire.\nAt the time Robert Dudley entered his new Welsh possessions there had existed a tenurial chaos for more than half a century. Some leading local families benefited from this to the detriment of the Crown's revenue. To remedy this situation, and to increase his own income, Dudley affected compositions with the tenants in what Simon Adams has called an \"ambitious resolution of a long-standing problem ... without parallel in Elizabeth's reign\". All tenants that had so far only been copyholders were raised to the status of freeholders in exchange for newly agreed rents. Likewise, all tenants' rights of common were secured as were the boundaries of the commons, thus striking a balance between property rights and protection against enclosure.\nThough an absentee landlord, Leicester, who was also Lord of Denbigh, regarded the lordship as an integral part of a territorial base for a revived House of Dudley. He set about developing the town of Denbigh with large building projects; the church he planned, though, was never finished, being too ambitious. It would have been not only the largest, but also the first post-Reformation church in England and Wales built according to a plan where the preacher was to take the centre instead of the altar, thus stressing the importance of preaching in the Protestant Church. In vain Leicester tried to have the nearby episcopal see of St Asaph transferred to Denbigh. He also encouraged and supported the translation of the Bible and the Common Prayer Book into Welsh.\nWarwick and Kenilworth.\nAmbrose and Robert Dudley were very close, in matters of business and personally. Through their paternal grandmother they descended from the Hundred Years War heroes, John Talbot, 1st Earl of Shrewsbury, and Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick. Robert Dudley was especially fascinated by the Beauchamp descent and, with his brother, adopted the ancient heraldic device of the earls of Warwick, the Bear and Ragged Staff. Due to such genealogical aspects the West Midlands held a special significance for him. The town of Warwick felt this during a magnificent visit by the Earl in 1571 to celebrate the feast of the Order of Saint Michael, with which Leicester had been invested by the French king in 1566. He shortly afterwards founded Lord Leycester's Hospital, a charity for aged and injured soldiers still functioning today. Kenilworth Castle was the centre of Leicester's ambitions to \"plant\" himself in the region, and he substantially transformed the site's appearance through comprehensive alterations. He added a 15th-century style gatehouse to the castle's medieval structures, as well as a formal garden and a residential wing which featured the \"brittle, thin walls and grids of windows\" that were to become the hallmark of Elizabethan architecture in later decades. His works completed, the Earl staged a spectacular 19-day-festival in July 1575 as a final, allegorical bid for the Queen's hand; it was as much a request to give him leave to marry someone else. There was a Lady of the Lake, a swimming papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 dolphin with a little orchestra in its belly, fireworks, masques, hunts, and popular entertainments like bear baiting. The whole scenery of landscape, artificial lake, castle, and Renaissance garden was ingeniously used for the entertainment.\nLove affairs and remarriage.\nConfronted by a Puritan friend with rumours about his \"ungodly life\", Dudley defended himself in 1576: I stand on the top of the hill, where ... the smallest slip seemeth a fall ... I may fall many ways and have more witnesses thereof than many others who perhaps be no saints neither ... for my faults ... they lie before Him who I have no doubt but will cancel them as I have been and shall be most heartily sorry for them. With Douglas Sheffield, a young widow of the Howard family, he had a serious relationship from about 1569. He explained to her that he could not marry, not even in order to beget a Dudley heir, without his \"utter overthrow\": You must think it is some marvellous cause ... that forceth me thus to be cause almost of the ruin of mine own house ... my brother you see long married and not like to have children, it resteth so now in myself; and yet such occasions is there ... as if I should marry I am sure never to have [the Queen's] favour\". Although in this letter Leicester said he still loved her as he did at the beginning, he offered her his help to find another husband for reasons of respectability if she so wished. The affair continued and in 1574 Douglas gave birth to a son, also called Robert Dudley.\nLettice Knollys was the wife of Walter Devereux, 1st Earl of Essex, and a first cousin once removed of Queen Elizabeth on her mother's side. Leicester had flirted with her in the summer of 1565, causing an outbreak of jealousy in the Queen. After Lord Essex went to Ireland in 1573, they possibly became lovers. There was much talk, and on Essex's homecoming in December 1575, \"great enmity between the Earl of Leicester and the Earl of Essex\" was expected. In July 1576 Essex returned to Ireland, where he died of dysentery in September. Rumours of poison, administered by the Earl of Leicester's means, were soon abroad. The Lord Deputy of Ireland, Sir Henry Sidney, conducted an official investigation which did not find any indications of foul play but \"a disease appropriate to this country ... whereof ... died many\". The rumours continued.\nThe prospect of marriage to the Countess of Essex on the horizon, Leicester finally drew a line under his relationship with Douglas Sheffield. Contrary to what she later claimed, they came to an amicable agreement over their son's custody. Young Robert grew up in Dudley's and his friends' houses, but had \"leave to see\" his mother until she left England in 1583. Leicester was very fond of his son and gave him an excellent education. In his will he left him the bulk of his estate (after his brother Ambrose's death), including Kenilworth Castle. Douglas Sheffield remarried in 1579. After the death of Elizabeth\u00a0I in 1603, the younger Robert Dudley tried unsuccessfully to prove that his parents had married 30 years earlier in a secret ceremony. In that case, he would have been able to claim the earldoms of Leicester and Warwick. His mother supported him, but maintained that she had been strongly against raising the issue and was possibly pressured by her son. Leicester himself had throughout considered the boy as illegitimate.\nOn 21 September 1578, Leicester secretly married Lady Essex at his country house at Wanstead, with only a handful of relatives and friends present. He did not dare to tell the Queen of his marriage; nine months later Leicester's enemies at court acquainted her with the situation, causing a furious outburst. She already had been aware of his marriage plans a year earlier, though. Leicester's hope of an heir was fulfilled in 1581 when another Robert Dudley, styled Lord Denbigh, was born. The child died aged three in 1584, leaving his parents disconsolate. Leicester found comfort in God since, as he wrote, \"princes ... seldom do pity according to the rules of charity.\" The Earl turned out to be a devoted husband: In 1583, the French ambassador, Michel de Castelnau, wrote of \"the Earl of Leicester and his lady to whom he is much attached\", and \"who has much influence over him\". Leicester was a concerned parent to his four stepchildren, and in every respect worked for the advancement of Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, whom he regarded as his political heir.\nThe marriage of her favourite hurt the Queen deeply. She never accepted it, humiliating Leicester in public: \"my open and great disgraces delivered from her Majesty's mouth\". Then again, she would be as fond of him as ever. In 1583 she informed ambassadors that Lettice Dudley was \"a she-wolf\" and her husband a \"traitor\" and \"a cuckold\". Lady Leicester's social life was much curtailed. Even her movements could pose a political problem, as Francis Walsingham explained: \"I see not her Majesty disposed to use the services of my Lord of Leicester. There is great offence taken at the conveying down of his lady.\" The Earl stood by his wife, asking his colleagues to intercede for her; there was no hope: \"She [the Queen] doth take every occasion by my marriage to withdraw any good from me\", Leicester wrote even after seven years of marriage.\nColleagues and politics.\nFor the first 30 years of Elizabeth's reign, until Leicester's death, he and Lord Burghley were the most powerful and important political figures, working intimately with the Queen. Robert Dudley was a conscientious privy councillor, and one of the most frequently attending.\nIn 1560 the diplomat Nicholas Throckmorton advocated vehemently against Dudley marrying the Queen, but Dudley won him over in 1562. Throckmorton henceforth became his political advisor and intimate. After Throckmorton's death in 1571, there quickly evolved a political alliance between the Earl of Leicester and Sir Francis Walsingham, soon to be Secretary of State. Together they worked for a militant Protestant foreign policy. There also existed a family relationship between them after Walsingham's daughter had married Philip Sidney, Leicester's favourite nephew. Leicester, after some initial jealousy, also became a good friend of Sir Christopher Hatton, himself one of Elizabeth's favourites.\nRobert Dudley's relationship with William Cecil, Lord Burghley, was complicated. Traditionally they have been seen as enemies, and Cecil behind the scenes sabotaged Dudley's endeavours to obtain the Queen's hand. On the other hand, they were on friendly terms and had an efficient working relationship which never broke down. In 1572, the vacant post of Lord High Treasurer was offered to Leicester, who declined and proposed Burghley, stating that the latter was the much more suitable candidate. In later years, being at odds, Dudley felt like reminding Cecil of their \"thirty years friendship\".\nOn the whole, Cecil and Dudley were in concord about policies while disagreeing fundamentally about some issues, such as the Queen's marriage and some areas of foreign policy. Cecil favoured the suit of Francois, Duke of Anjou, in 1578\u20131581 for Elizabeth's hand, while Leicester was among its strongest opponents, even contemplating exile in letters to Burghley. The Anjou courtship, at the end of which Leicester and several dozen noblemen and gentlemen escorted the French prince to Antwerp, also touched the question of English intervention in the Netherlands to help the rebellious provinces. This debate stretched over a decade until 1585, with the Earl of Leicester as the foremost interventionist. Burghley was more cautious of military engagement while in a dilemma over his Protestant predilections.\nUntil about 1571/1572, Dudley supported Mary Stuart's succession rights to the English throne. He was also, from the early 1560s, on the best terms with the Protestant lords in Scotland, thereby supporting the English or, as he saw it, the Protestant interest. After Mary Stuart's flight into England (1568) Leicester was, unlike Cecil, in favour of restoring her as Scottish queen under English control, preferably with a Protestant English husband, such as the Duke of Norfolk. In 1577 Leicester had a personal meeting with Mary and listened to her complaints about her captivity. By the early 1580s Mary had come to fear Leicester's influence with James VI, her son, in whose privy chamber the English Earl had placed a spy. She spread stories about his supposed lust for the English throne, and when the Catholic anti-Leicester libel, \"Leicester's Commonwealth\", was published in 1584 Dudley believed that Mary was involved in its conception.\nThe \"Bond of Association\", which the Privy Council gave out in October 1584, may have originated in Dudley's ideas. Circulated in the country, the document's subscribers swore that, should Elizabeth be assassinated (as William the Silent had been a few months earlier), not only the killer but also the royal person who would benefit from this should be executed. Leicester's relations with James of Scotland grew closer when he gained the confidence of the King's favourite, Patrick, Master of Gray, in 1584\u20131585. His negotiations with the Master were the basis for the Treaty of Berwick, a defensive alliance between the two British states against European powers. In 1586 Walsingham uncovered the Babington Plot. Following the Ridolfi Plot (1571) and the Throckmorton Plot (1583), this was another scheme to assassinate Elizabeth in which Mary Stuart was involved. Following her conviction, Leicester, then in the Netherlands, vehemently urged her execution in his letters; he despaired of Elizabeth's security after so many plots.\nLeicester having returned to England, in February 1587 Elizabeth signed Mary's death warrant, with the proviso that it be not carried out until she gave her approval. As there was no sign of her doing so, Burghley, Leicester, and a handful of other privy councillors decided to proceed with Mary's execution in the interest of the state. Leicester went to Bath and Bristol for his health; unlike the other privy councillors involved, he escaped Elizabeth's severe wrath on hearing the news of Mary's death.\nPatronage.\nExploration and business.\nRobert Dudley was a pioneer of new industries; interested in many things from tapestries to mining, he was engaged in the first joint stock companies in English history. The Earl also concerned himself with relieving unemployment among the poor. On a personal level, he gave to poor people, petitioners, and prisons on a daily basis. Due to his interests in trade and exploration, as well as his debts, his contacts with the London city fathers were intense. He was an enthusiastic investor in the Muscovy Company and the Merchant Adventurers. English relations with Morocco were also handled by Leicester. This he did in the manner of his private business affairs, underpinned by a patriotic and missionary zeal (commercially, these relations were loss-making). He took much interest in the careers of John Hawkins and Francis Drake from early on, and was a principal backer of Drake's circumnavigation of the world. Robert and Ambrose Dudley were also the principal patrons of Martin Frobisher's 1576 search for the Northwest Passage. Later Leicester acquired his own ship, the \"Galleon Leicester\", which he employed in a luckless expedition under Edward Fenton, but also under Drake. As much as profit, English seapower was on his mind, and accordingly, Leicester became a friend and leading supporter of Dom Ant\u00f3nio, the exiled claimant to the Portuguese throne after 1580.\nLearning, theatre, the arts, and literature.\nApart from their legal function, the Inns of Court were the Tudor equivalents of gentlemen's clubs. In 1561, grateful for favours he had done them, the Inner Temple admitted Dudley as their most privileged member, their \"Lord and Governor\". He was allowed to build his own apartments on the premises and organised grand festivities and performances in the Temple. As Chancellor of Oxford University Dudley was highly committed. He enforced the Thirty-nine Articles and the oath of royal supremacy at Oxford, and obtained from the Queen an incorporation by Act of Parliament for the university. Leicester was also instrumental in founding the official Oxford University Press, and installed the pioneer of international law, Alberico Gentili, and the exotic theologian, Antonio del Corro, at Oxford. Over del Corro's controversial case he even sacked the university's Vice-Chancellor.\nAround 100 books were dedicated to Robert Dudley during Elizabeth's reign. In 1564/1567 Arthur Golding dedicated his popular translation of Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" to the Earl. Dudley took a special interest in translations, which were seen as a means to popularise learning among \"all who could read.\" He was also a history enthusiast, and in 1559 suggested to the tailor John Stow to become a chronicler (as Stow recalled in 1604). Robert Dudley's interest in the theatre was manifold, from academic plays at Oxford to the protection of the Children of St. Paul's and of the Royal Chapel, and their respective masters, against hostile bishops and landlords. From at least 1559 he had his own company of players, and in 1574 he obtained for them the first royal patent issued to actors to allow them to tour the country unmolested by local authorities. The Earl also kept a separate company of musicians who in 1586 played before the King of Denmark; with them travelled William Kempe, \"the Lord Leicester's jesting player\".\nLeicester possessed one of the largest collections of paintings in Elizabethan England, being the first great private collector. He was a principal patron of Nicholas Hilliard, as well as interested in all aspects of Italian culture. The Earl's circle of scholars and men of letters included, among others, his nephew Philip Sidney, the astrologer and Hermeticist John Dee, his secretaries Edward Dyer and Jean Hotman, as well as John Florio and Gabriel Harvey. Through Harvey, Edmund Spenser found employment at Leicester House on the Strand, the Earl's palatial town house, where he wrote his first works of poetry. Many years after Leicester's death Spenser wistfully recalled this time in his \"Prothalamion\", and in 1591 he remembered the late Earl with his poem \"The Ruins of Time\".\nReligion.\nRobert Dudley grew up as a Protestant. Presumably conforming in public under Mary I, he was counted among the \"heretics\" by Philip II's agent before Elizabeth's accession. He immediately became a major patron to former Edwardian clerics and returning exiles. Meanwhile, he also helped some of Mary's former servants and maintained Catholic contacts. From 1561 he advocated and supported the Huguenot cause, and the French ambassador described him as \"totally of the Calvinist religion\" in 1568. After the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre in 1572 this trait in him became more pronounced, and he continued as the chief patron of English Puritans and a champion of international Calvinism. On the other hand, in his household, Leicester employed Catholics like Sir Christopher Blount, who held a position of trust and of whom he was personally fond. The Earl's patronage of and reliance on individuals was as much a matter of old family loyalties or personal relationships as of religious allegiances.\nLeicester was especially interested in the furtherance of preaching, which was the main concern of moderate Puritanism. He went to great lengths to support non-conforming preachers, while warning them against too radical positions which, he argued, would only endanger what reforms had been hitherto achieved. He would not condone the overthrow of the existing church model because of \"trifles\", he said. \"I am not, I thank God, fantastically persuaded in religion but ... do find it soundly and godly set forth in this universal Church of England.\" Accordingly, he tried to smooth things out and, among other moves, initiated several disputations between the more radical elements of the Church and the episcopal side so that they \"might make reconcilement\". His influence in ecclesiastical matters was considerable until it declined in the 1580s under Archbishop John Whitgift.\nGovernor-General of the United Provinces.\nDuring the 1570s, Leicester built a special relationship with Prince William of Orange, who held him in high esteem. The Earl became generally popular in the Netherlands. Since 1577 he pressed for an English military expedition, led by himself (as the Dutch strongly wished) to succour the rebels. In 1584 the Prince of Orange was murdered, political chaos ensued, and in August 1585 Antwerp fell to the Duke of Parma. An English intervention became inevitable; it was decided that Leicester would go to the Netherlands and \"be their chief as heretofore was treated of\", as he phrased it in August 1585. He was alluding to the recently signed Treaty of Nonsuch in which his position and authority as \"governor-general\" of the Netherlands had only been vaguely defined. The Earl prepared himself for \"God's cause and her Majesty's\" by recruiting the expedition's cavalry from his retainers and friends, and by mortgaging his estate to the sum of \u00a325,000.\nOn Thursday, 9 December 1585, the Earl of Leicester set sail for the Low Countries from Harwich and landed after a swift crossing of less than 24 hours, the fleet anchored at Flushing (Vlissingen). At the end of December 1585 Leicester was received in the Netherlands, according to one correspondent, in the manner of a second Charles V; a Dutch town official already noted in his minute-book that the Earl was going to have \"absolute power and authority\". After progress through several cities and so many festivals he arrived in The Hague, where on 1 January 1586 he was urged to accept the title governor-general by the States General of the United Provinces. Leicester wrote to Burghley and Walsingham, explaining why he believed the Dutch importunities should be answered favourably. He accepted his elevation on 25 January, having not yet received any communications from England due to constant adverse winds.\nThe Earl had now \"the rule and government general\" with a Council of State to support him (the members of which he nominated himself). He remained a subject of Elizabeth, making it possible to contend that she was now sovereign over the Netherlands. According to Leicester, this was what the Dutch desired. From the start such a position for him had been implied in the Dutch propositions to the English, and in their instructions to Leicester; and it was consistent with the Dutch understanding of the Treaty of Nonsuch. The English queen, however, in her instructions to Leicester, had expressly declined to accept offers of sovereignty from the United Provinces while still demanding of the States to follow the \"advice\" of her lieutenant-general in matters of government. Her ministers on both sides of the Channel hoped she would accept the situation as a \"fait accompli\" and could even be persuaded to add the rebellious provinces to her possessions. Instead her fury knew no bounds and Elizabeth sent Sir Thomas Heneage to read out her letters of disapproval before the States General, Leicester having to stand nearby. Elizabeth's \"commandment\" was that the Governor-General immediately resign his post in a formal ceremony in the same place where he had taken it. After much pleading with her and protestations by the Dutch, it was postulated that the governor-generalship had been bestowed not by any sovereign, but by the States General and thereby by the people. The damage was done, however: \"My credit hath been cracked ever since her Majesty sent Sir Thomas Heneage hither\", Leicester recapitulated in October 1586.\nElizabeth demanded of her Lieutenant-General to refrain at all costs from any decisive action with Parma, which was the opposite of what Leicester wished and what the Dutch expected of him. After some initial successes, the unexpected surrender of the strategically important town of Grave was a serious blow to English morale. Leicester's fury turned on the town's governor, Baron Hemart, whom he had executed despite all pleadings. The Dutch nobility were astonished: even the Prince of Orange would not have dared such an outrage, Leicester was warned; but, he wrote, he would not be intimidated by the fact that Hemart \"was of a good house\".\nLeicester's forces, small and seriously underfinanced from the outset, faced the most formidable army in Europe. Unity among their ranks was at risk by Leicester's and the other officers' quarrels with Sir John Norris, who had commanded previous English contingents in the Netherlands and was now the Earl's deputy. Elizabeth was angry that the war cost more than anticipated and for many months delayed sending money and troops. This not only forced Dudley to raise further funds on his own account, but much aggravated the soldiers' lot. \"They cannot get a penny; their credit is spent; they perish for want of victuals and clothing in great numbers ... I assure you it will fret me to death ere long to see my soldiers in this case and cannot help them\", Leicester wrote home.\nMany Dutch statesmen were essentially politiques; they soon became disenchanted with the Earl's enthusiastic fostering of what he called \"the religion\". His most loyal friends were the Calvinists at Utrecht and Friesland, provinces in constant opposition to Holland and Zeeland. Those rich provinces engaged in a lucrative trade with Spain which was very helpful to either side's war effort. On Elizabeth's orders Leicester enforced a ban on this trade with the enemy, thus alienating the wealthy Dutch merchants. He also affected a fiscal reform. In order to centralise finances and to replace the highly corrupt tax farming with direct taxation, a new Council of Finances was established which was not under the supervision of the Council of State. The Dutch members of the Council of State were outraged at these bold steps. English peace talks with Spain behind Leicester's back, which had started within days after he had left England, undermined his position further.\nIn September 1586 there was a skirmish at Zutphen, in which Philip Sidney was wounded. He died a few weeks later. His uncle's grief was great. In December Leicester returned to England. In his absence, William Stanley and Rowland York, two Catholic officers whom Leicester had placed in command of Deventer and the fort of Zutphen, respectively, went over to Parma, along with their key fortresses\u2014a disaster for the Anglo-Dutch coalition in every respect. His Dutch friends, as his English critics, pressed for Leicester's return to the Netherlands. Shortly after his arrival in June 1587 the English-held port of Sluis was lost to Parma, Leicester being unable to assert his authority over the Dutch allies, who refused to cooperate in relieving the town. After this blow Elizabeth, who ascribed it to \"the malice or other foul error of the States\", was happy to enter into peace negotiations with the Duke of Parma. By December 1587 the differences between Elizabeth and the Dutch politicians, with Leicester in between, had become insurmountable; he asked to be recalled by the Queen and gave up his post. He was irredeemably in debt because of his personal financing of the war.\nArmada and death.\nIn July 1588, as the Spanish Armada came nearer, the Earl of Leicester was appointed \"Lieutenant and Captain-General of the Queen's Armies and Companies\". At Tilbury on the Thames he erected a camp for the defence of London, should the Spaniards land. Leicester vigorously counteracted the disorganisation he found everywhere, having few illusions about \"all sudden hurley-burleys\", as he wrote to Walsingham. When the Privy Council was already considering disbanding the camp to save money, Leicester held against it, setting about to plan with the Queen a visit to her troops. On the day she gave her famous speech he walked beside her horse, bare-headed.\nAfter the Armada, the Earl was seen riding in splendour through London \"as if he were a king\", and for the last few weeks of his life he usually dined with the Queen, a unique favour. On his way to Buxton in Derbyshire to take the baths, he died at Cornbury Park near Oxford, on 4 September 1588. Leicester's health had not been good for some time; historians have considered malaria and stomach cancer as causes of death. His death came unexpectedly, and only a week earlier he had said farewell to Elizabeth. She was deeply affected and locked herself in her apartment for a few days until Lord Burghley had the door broken. Her nickname for Dudley had been \"Eyes\", which was symbolised by the sign of \u00f4\u00f4 in their letters to each other. Elizabeth kept the letter he had sent her six days before his death in her bedside treasure box, endorsing it with \"his last letter\" on the outside. It was still there when she died 15 years later on 24 March 1603.\nLeicester was buried, as he had requested, in the Beauchamp Chapel of the Collegiate Church of St Mary, Warwick on 10 October 1588\u2014in the same chapel as Richard Beauchamp, his ancestor, and the \"noble Impe\", his little son. Countess Lettice was also buried there when she died in 1634, alongside the \"best and dearest of husbands\", as the epitaph, which she commissioned, says.\nHistoriographical treatment.\nThe book which later became known as \"Leicester's Commonwealth\" was written by Catholic exiles in Paris and printed anonymously in 1584. It was published shortly after the death of Leicester's son, which is alluded to in a stop-press marginal note: \"The children of adulterers shall be consumed, and the seed of a wicked bed shall be rooted out.\" Smuggled into England, the libel became a best-seller with underground booksellers and the next year was translated into French. Its underlying political agenda is the succession of Mary, Queen of Scots, to the English throne, but its most outstanding feature is an all-round attack on the Earl of Leicester. He is presented as an atheistic, hypocritical coward, a \"perpetuall Dictator\", terrorising the Queen and ruining the whole country. He is engaged in a long-term conspiracy to snatch the Crown from Elizabeth in order to settle it first on his brother-in-law, the Earl of Huntingdon, and ultimately on himself. Spicy details of his monstrous private life are revealed, and he appears as an expert poisoner of many high-profile personalities. This influential classic is the origin of many aspects of Leicester's historical reputation. Similar conspiracies are often mentioned in coded letters from Mary, Queen of Scots, to the French ambassador.\nIn the early 17th century, William Camden saw \"some secret constellation\" of the stars at work between Elizabeth and her favourite; he firmly established the legend of the perfect courtier with the sinister influence. Some of the most often-quoted characterisations of Leicester, such as that he \"was wont to put up all his passions in his pocket\", his nickname of \"the Gypsy\", and Elizabeth's \"I will have here but one mistress and no master\"-reprimand to him, were contributed by Sir Henry Wotton and Sir Robert Naunton almost half a century after the Earl's death.\nThe Victorian historian James Anthony Froude saw Robert Dudley as Elizabeth's soft plaything, combining \"in himself the worst qualities of both sexes. Without courage, without talent, without virtue\". The habit of comparing him unfavourably to William Cecil was continued by Conyers Read in 1925: \"Leicester was a selfish, unscrupulous courtier and Burghley a wise and patriotic statesman\". Geoffrey Elton, in his widely read \"England under the Tudors\" (1955), saw Dudley as \"a handsome, vigorous man with very little sense.\"\nSince the 1950s, academic assessment of the Earl of Leicester has undergone considerable changes. Leicester's importance in literary patronage was established by Eleanor Rosenberg in 1955. Elizabethan Puritanism has been thoroughly reassessed since the 1960s, and Patrick Collinson has outlined the Earl's place in it. Dudley's religion could thus be better understood, rather than simply to brand him as a hypocrite. His importance as a privy councillor and statesman has often been overlooked, one reason being that many of his letters are scattered among private collections and not easily accessible in print, as are those of his colleagues Walsingham and Cecil. Alan Haynes describes him as \"one of the most strangely underrated of Elizabeth's circle of close advisers\", while Simon Adams, who since the early 1970s has researched many aspects of Leicester's life and career, concludes: \"Leicester was as central a figure to the 'first reign' [of Elizabeth] as Burghley.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51040", "revid": "39051176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51040", "title": "Second Peace of Thorn (1466)", "text": "Peace treaty between Poland and the Teutonic Order\nThe Peace of Thorn or Toru\u0144 of 1466, also known as the Second Peace of Thorn or Toru\u0144 (; ), was a peace treaty signed in the Hanseatic city of Thorn (Toru\u0144) on 19 October 1466 between the Polish king Casimir IV Jagiellon and the Teutonic Knights, which ended the Thirteen Years' War, the longest of the Polish\u2013Teutonic Wars.\nThe treaty was signed in the Artus Court, and afterward a mass was held in the Gothic Franciscan Church of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary to celebrate the peace treaty.\nBackground.\nThe treaty concluded the Thirteen Years' War which had begun in February 1454 with the revolt of the Prussian Confederation, led by the cities of Danzig (Gda\u0144sk), Elbing (Elbl\u0105g), Kulm (Che\u0142mno) and Toru\u0144, and the Prussian gentry against the rule of the Teutonic Knights in the Monastic State, in order to join the Kingdom of Poland.\nBoth sides agreed to seek confirmation from Pope Paul II and Holy Roman Emperor Frederick III, but the Polish side stressed (and the Teutonic side agreed) that this confirmation would not be needed for validation of the treaty. The peace talks were held in Nieszawa (present-day Ma\u0142a Nieszawka) from 23 September 1466, and in the final stages moved to Toru\u0144.\nTerms.\nIn the treaty, the Teutonic Order renounced any claims to the territories of Gda\u0144sk/Eastern Pomerania and Che\u0142mno Land, which were reintegrated with Poland, and the region of Elbing (Elbl\u0105g) and Marienburg (Malbork), and the Bishopric of Warmia, which were also recognized as part of Poland. The eastern part remained with the Teutonic Order as a fief and protectorate of Poland, also considered an integral part of the \"one and indivisible\" Kingdom of Poland. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Che\u0142mno became a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Gniezno.\nFrom now on, every Grand Master of the Teutonic Order was obliged to swear an oath of allegiance to the reigning Polish king within six months of taking office, and any new territorial acquisitions by the Teutonic Order, also outside Prussia, would also be incorporated into Poland. The Grand Master became a prince and counselor of the Polish king and the Kingdom of Poland. Poles were to be admitted to the Teutonic Order. The Teutonic Knights were obliged to help Poland in the event of war, and were forbidden to wage war against Catholics without the consent of Polish kings. Any prisoners of war on both sides were to be released.\nThe treaty also dismissed any possibility of releasing the Teutonic Order from dependence to Poland or of any revision of the terms of the treaty by referring to any foreign authority, including imperial and papal.\nOutcome.\nThe territories directly held by Poland were already organized into three voivodeships (Che\u0142mno, Pomeranian, Malbork) and the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia, all of which formed the province of Royal Prussia (later also part of the larger Greater Poland Provincen), which was considered the exclusive property of the Polish king and Polish kingdom. Later, some disagreements arose concerning certain prerogatives that Royal Prussia and the cities held, like Danzig's privileges. The region possessed certain privileges such as the minting of its own coins, its own Diet meetings (see the Prussian estates), its own military, and its own administrative usage of the German language. A conflict over the right to name and approve Bishops in Warmia, resulted in the War of the Priests (1467\u20131479). Eventually, Royal Prussia became integrated into the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, but retained some distinctive features until the partitions of Poland in the late 18th century.\nIn 1525, the Order was ousted from their territory by its own Grand Master when Albert, Duke of Prussia adopted Lutheranism and assumed the title of duke as hereditary ruler under the overlordship of Poland in the Prussian Homage. The area became known as the Duchy of Prussia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51042", "revid": "17167633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51042", "title": "Paleoclimatology", "text": "Study of changes in ancient climate\nPaleoclimatology (British spelling, palaeoclimatology) is the scientific study of climates predating the invention of meteorological instruments, when no direct measurement data were available. As instrumental records only span a tiny part of Earth's history, the reconstruction of ancient climate is important to understand natural variation and the evolution of the current climate.\nPaleoclimatology uses a variety of proxy methods from Earth and life sciences to obtain data previously preserved within rocks, sediments, boreholes, ice sheets, tree rings, corals, shells, and microfossils. Combined with techniques to date the proxies, the paleoclimate records are used to determine the past states of Earth's atmosphere.\nThe scientific field of paleoclimatology came to maturity in the 20th century. Notable periods studied by paleoclimatologists include the frequent glaciations that Earth has undergone, rapid cooling events like the Younger Dryas, and the rapid warming during the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum. Studies of past changes in the environment and biodiversity often reflect on the current situation, specifically the impact of climate on mass extinctions and biotic recovery and current global warming.\nStudying paleoclimatology is important when looking towards the Earth's future regarding climate specifically. \nHistory.\nNotions of a changing climate most likely evolved in ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley and China, where prolonged periods of droughts and floods were experienced. In the seventeenth century, Robert Hooke postulated that fossils of giant turtles found in Dorset could only be explained by a once warmer climate, which he thought could be explained by a shift in Earth's axis. Fossils were, at that time, often explained as a consequence of a biblical flood. Systematic observations of sunspots started by amateur astronomer Heinrich Schwabe in the early 19th century, starting a discussion of the Sun's influence on Earth's climate.\nThe scientific study of paleoclimatology began to take shape in the early 19th century, when discoveries about glaciations and natural changes in Earth's past climate helped to understand the greenhouse effect. It was only in the 20th century that paleoclimatology became a unified scientific field. Before, different aspects of Earth's climate history were studied by a variety of disciplines. At the end of the 20th century, the empirical research into Earth's ancient climates started to be combined with computer models of increasing complexity. A new objective also developed in this period: finding ancient analog climates that could provide information about current climate change.\nReconstructing ancient climates.\nPaleoclimatologists employ a wide variety of techniques to deduce ancient climates. The techniques used depend on which variable has to be reconstructed (this could be temperature, precipitation, or something else) and how long ago the climate of interest occurred. For instance, the deep marine record, the source of most isotopic data, exists only on oceanic plates, which are eventually subducted; the oldest remaining material is https:// million years old. Older sediments are also more prone to corruption by diagenesis. This is due to the millions of years of disruption experienced by the rock formations, such as pressure, tectonic activity, and fluid flowing. These factors often result in a lack in quality or quantity of data, which causes resolution and confidence in the data decrease over time.\nSpecific techniques used to make inferences on ancient climate conditions are the use of lake sediment cores and speleothems. These utilize an analysis of sediment layers and rock growth formations respectively, amongst element-dating methods utilizing oxygen, carbon and uranium.\nProxies for climate.\nDirect Quantitative Measurements.\nThe Direct Quantitative Measurements method is the most direct approach to understand the change in a climate. Comparisons between recent data to older data allows a researcher to gain a basic understanding of weather and climate changes within an area. There is a disadvantage to this method. Data of the climate only started being recorded in the mid-1800s. This means that researchers can only utilize 150 years of data. That is not helpful when trying to map the climate of an area 10,000 years ago. This is where more complex methods can be used.\nIce.\nMountain glaciers and the polar ice caps/ice sheets provide much data in paleoclimatology. Ice-coring projects in the ice caps of Greenland and Antarctica have yielded data going back several hundred thousand years, over 800,000 years in the case of the EPICA project.\nA multinational consortium, the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA), has drilled an ice core in Dome C on the East Antarctic ice sheet and retrieved ice from roughly 800,000 years ago. The international ice core community has, under the auspices of International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences (IPICS), defined a priority project to obtain the oldest possible ice core record from Antarctica, an ice core record reaching back to or towards 1.5 million years ago.\nDendroclimatology.\nClimatic information can be obtained through an understanding of changes in tree growth. Generally, trees respond to changes in climatic variables by speeding up or slowing down growth, which in turn is generally reflected by a greater or lesser thickness in growth rings. Different species, however, respond to changes in climatic variables in different ways. A tree-ring record is established by compiling information from many living trees in a specific area. This is done by comparing the number, thickness, ring boundaries, and pattern matching of tree growth rings.\nThe differences in thickness displayed in the growth rings in trees can often indicate the quality of conditions in the environment, and the fitness of the tree species evaluated. Different species of trees will display different growth responses to the changes in the climate. An evaluation of multiple trees within the same species, along with one of trees in different species, will allow for a more accurate analysis of the changing variables within the climate and how they affected the surrounding species.\nOlder intact wood that has escaped decay can extend the time covered by the record by matching the ring depth changes to contemporary specimens. By using that method, some areas have tree-ring records dating back a few thousand years. Older wood not connected to a contemporary record can be dated generally with radiocarbon techniques. A tree-ring record can be used to produce information regarding precipitation, temperature, hydrology, and fire corresponding to a particular area.\nSedimentary content.\nOn a longer time scale, geologists must refer to the sedimentary record for data.\nOn a longer time scale, the rock record may show signs of sea level rise and fall, and features such as \"fossilised\" sand dunes can be identified. Scientists can get a grasp of long-term climate by studying sedimentary rock going back billions of years. The division of Earth history into separate periods is largely based on visible changes in sedimentary rock layers that demarcate major changes in conditions. Often, they include major shifts in climate.\nSclerochronology.\nCoral \"rings\" share similar evidence of growth to that of trees and thus can be dated in similar ways. A primary difference is their environments and the conditions within those that they respond to. Examples of these conditions for coral include water temperature, freshwater influx, changes in pH, and wave disturbances. From there, specialized equipment, such as the Advanced Very High-Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) instrument, can be used to derive the sea surface temperature and water salinity from the past few centuries. The \u03b418O of coralline red algae provides a useful proxy of the combined sea surface temperature and sea surface salinity at high latitudes and the tropics, where many traditional techniques are limited.\nLandscapes and landforms.\nWithin climatic geomorphology, one approach is to study relict landforms to infer ancient climates. Being often concerned about past climates climatic geomorphology is considered sometimes to be a theme of historical geology. Evidence of these past climates to be studied can be found in the landforms they leave behind. Examples of these landforms are those such as glacial landforms (moraines, striations), desert features (dunes, desert pavements), and coastal landforms (marine terraces, beach ridges). Climatic geomorphology is of limited use to study recent (Quaternary, Holocene) large climate changes since there are seldom discernible in the geomorphological record.\nTiming of proxies.\nThe field of geochronology has scientists working on determining how old certain proxies are. For recent proxy archives of tree rings and corals the individual year rings can be counted, and an exact year can be determined. Radiometric dating uses the properties of radioactive elements in proxies. In older material, more of the radioactive material will have decayed and the proportion of different elements will be different from newer proxies. One example of radiometric dating is radiocarbon dating. In the air, cosmic rays constantly convert nitrogen into a specific radioactive carbon isotope, 14C. When plants then use this carbon to grow, this isotope is not replenished anymore and starts decaying. The proportion of 'normal' carbon and Carbon-14 gives information of how long the plant material has not been in contact with the atmosphere.\nNotable climate events in Earth history.\nKnowledge of precise climatic events decreases as the record goes back in time, but some notable climate events are known:\nHistory of the atmosphere.\nEarliest atmosphere.\nThe first atmosphere would have consisted of gases in the solar nebula, primarily hydrogen. In addition, there would probably have been simple hydrides such as those now found in gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn, notably water vapor, methane, and ammonia. As the solar nebula dissipated, the gases would have escaped, partly driven off by the solar wind.\nSecond atmosphere.\nThe next atmosphere, consisting largely of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and inert gases, was produced by outgassing from volcanism, supplemented by gases produced during the late heavy bombardment of Earth by huge asteroids. A major part of carbon dioxide emissions were soon dissolved in water and built up carbonate sediments.\nWater-related sediments have been found dating from as early as 3.8 billion years ago. About 3.4 billion years ago, nitrogen was the major part of the then stable \"second atmosphere\". An influence of life has to be taken into account rather soon in the history of the atmosphere because hints of early life forms have been dated to as early as 3.5 to 4.3 billion years ago. The fact that it is not perfectly in line with the 30% lower solar radiance (compared to today) of the early Sun has been described as the \"faint young Sun paradox\".\nThe geological record, however, shows a continually relatively warm surface during the complete early temperature record of Earth with the exception of one cold glacial phase about 2.4 billion years ago. In the late Archaean eon, an oxygen-containing atmosphere began to develop, apparently from photosynthesizing cyanobacteria (see Great Oxygenation Event) which have been found as stromatolite fossils from 2.7 billion years ago. The early basic carbon isotopy (isotope ratio proportions) was very much in line with what is found today, suggesting that the fundamental features of the carbon cycle were established as early as 4 billion years ago.\nThird atmosphere.\nThe constant rearrangement of continents by plate tectonics influences the long-term evolution of the atmosphere by transferring carbon dioxide to and from large continental carbonate stores. Free oxygen did not exist in the atmosphere until about 2.4 billion years ago, during the Great Oxygenation Event, and its appearance is indicated by the end of the banded iron formations. Until then, any oxygen produced by photosynthesis was consumed by oxidation of reduced materials, notably iron. Molecules of free oxygen did not start to accumulate in the atmosphere until the rate of production of oxygen began to exceed the availability of reducing materials. That point was a shift from a reducing atmosphere to an oxidizing atmosphere. O2 showed major variations until reaching a steady state of more than 15% by the end of the Precambrian. The following time span was the Phanerozoic eon, during which oxygen-breathing metazoan life forms began to appear.\nThe amount of oxygen in the atmosphere has fluctuated over the last 600 million years, reaching a peak of 35% during the Carboniferous period, significantly higher than today's 21%. Two main processes govern changes in the atmosphere: plants use carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, releasing oxygen and the breakdown of pyrite and volcanic eruptions release sulfur into the atmosphere, which oxidizes and hence reduces the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere. However, volcanic eruptions also release carbon dioxide, which plants can convert to oxygen. The exact cause of the variation of the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere is not known. Periods with much oxygen in the atmosphere are associated with rapid development of animals. Today's atmosphere contains 21% oxygen, which is high enough for rapid development of animals.\nClimate during geological ages.\nIn 2020 scientists published a continuous, high-fidelity record of variations in Earth's climate during the past 66 million years and identified four climate states, separated by transitions that include changing greenhouse gas levels and polar ice sheets volumes. They integrated data of various sources. The warmest climate state since the time of the dinosaur extinction, \"Hothouse\", endured from 56 Mya to 47 Mya and was ~14\u00a0\u00b0C warmer than average modern temperatures.\nPrecambrian climate.\nThe Precambrian took place between the time when Earth first formed 4.6 billion years (Ga) ago, and 542 million years ago. The Precambrian can be split into two eons, the Archean and the Proterozoic, which can be further subdivided into eras. The reconstruction of the Precambrian climate is difficult for various reasons including the low number of reliable indicators and a, generally, not well-preserved or extensive fossil record (especially when compared to the Phanerozoic eon). Despite these issues, there is evidence for a number of major climate events throughout the history of the Precambrian: The Great Oxygenation Event, which started around 2.3 Ga ago (the beginning of the Proterozoic) is indicated by biomarkers which demonstrate the appearance of photosynthetic organisms. Due to the high levels of oxygen in the atmosphere from the GOE, CH4 levels fell rapidly cooling the atmosphere causing the Huronian glaciation. For about 1 Ga after the glaciation (2\u20130.8 Ga ago), the Earth likely experienced warmer temperatures indicated by microfossils of photosynthetic eukaryotes, and oxygen levels between 5 and 18% of the Earth's current oxygen level. At the end of the Proterozoic, there is evidence of global glaciation events of varying severity causing a 'Snowball Earth'. Snowball Earth is supported by different indicators such as, glacial deposits, significant continental erosion called the Great Unconformity, and sedimentary rocks called cap carbonates that form after a deglaciation episode.\nPhanerozoic climate.\nMajor drivers for the preindustrial ages have been variations of the Sun, volcanic ashes and exhalations, relative movements of the Earth towards the Sun, and tectonically induced effects as for major sea currents, watersheds, and ocean oscillations. In the early Phanerozoic, increased atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations have been linked to driving or amplifying increased global temperatures. Royer et al. 2004 found a climate sensitivity for the rest of the Phanerozoic which was calculated to be similar to today's modern range of values.\nThe difference in global mean temperatures between a fully glacial Earth and an ice-free Earth is estimated at 10\u00a0\u00b0C, though far larger changes would be observed at high latitudes and smaller ones at low latitudes. One requirement for the development of large-scale ice sheets seems to be the arrangement of continental land masses at or near the poles. The constant rearrangement of continents by plate tectonics can also shape long-term climate evolution. However, the presence or absence of land masses at the poles is not sufficient to guarantee glaciations or exclude polar ice caps. Evidence exists of past warm periods in Earth's climate when polar land masses similar to Antarctica were home to deciduous forests rather than ice sheets.\nThe relatively warm local minimum between Jurassic and Cretaceous goes along with an increase of subduction and mid-ocean ridge volcanism due to the breakup of the Pangea supercontinent.\nSuperimposed on the long-term evolution between hot and cold climates have been many short-term fluctuations in climate similar to, and sometimes more severe than, the varying glacial and interglacial states of the present ice age. Some of the most severe fluctuations, such as the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, may be related to rapid climate changes due to sudden collapses of natural methane clathrate reservoirs in the oceans.\nA similar, single event of induced severe climate change after a meteorite impact has been proposed as reason for the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event. Other major thresholds are the Permian-Triassic, and Ordovician-Silurian extinction events with various reasons suggested.\nQuaternary climate.\nThe Quaternary geological period includes the current climate. There has been a cycle of ice ages for the past 2.2\u20132.1 million years (starting before the Quaternary in the late Neogene Period).\nNote in the graphic on the right the strong 120,000-year periodicity of the cycles, and the striking asymmetry of the curves. This asymmetry is believed to result from complex interactions of feedback mechanisms. It has been observed that ice ages deepen by progressive steps, but the recovery to interglacial conditions occurs in one big step.\nThe graph on the left shows the temperature change over the past 12,000 years, from various sources; the thick black curve is an average.\nClimate forcings.\nClimate forcing is the difference between radiant energy (sunlight) received by the Earth and the outgoing longwave radiation back to space. Such radiative forcing is quantified based on the CO2 amount in the tropopause, in units of watts per square meter to the Earth's surface. Dependent on the radiative balance of incoming and outgoing energy, the Earth either warms up or cools down. Earth radiative balance originates from changes in solar insolation and the concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols. Climate change may be due to internal processes in Earth sphere's and/or following external forcings.\nOne example of a way this can be applied to study climatology is analyzing how the varying concentrations of CO2 affect the overall climate. This is done by using various proxies to estimate past greenhouse gas concentrations and compare those to that of the present day. Researchers are then able to assess their role in progression of climate change throughout Earth's history.\nInternal processes and forcings.\nThe Earth's climate system involves the atmosphere, biosphere, cryosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere, and the sum of these processes from Earth's spheres is what affects the climate. Greenhouse gasses act as the internal forcing of the climate system. Particular interests in climate science and paleoclimatology focus on the study of Earth climate sensitivity, in response to the sum of forcings. Analyzing the sum of these forcings contributes to the ability of scientists to make broad conclusive estimates on the Earth's climate system. These estimates include the evidence for systems such as long-term climate variability (eccentricity, obliquity precession), feedback mechanisms (Ice-Albedo Effect), and anthropogenic influence.\nExamples:\nMechanisms.\nOn timescales of millions of years, the uplift of mountain ranges and subsequent weathering processes of rocks and soils and the subduction of tectonic plates, are an important part of the carbon cycle. The weathering sequesters CO2, by the reaction of minerals with chemicals (especially silicate weathering with CO2) and thereby removing CO2 from the atmosphere and reducing the radiative forcing. The opposite effect is volcanism, responsible for the natural greenhouse effect, by emitting CO2 into the atmosphere, thus affecting glaciation (Ice Age) cycles. Jim Hansen suggested that humans emit CO2 10,000 times faster than natural processes have done in the past.\nIce sheet dynamics and continental positions (and linked vegetation changes) have been important factors in the long term evolution of the Earth's climate. There is also a close correlation between CO2 and temperature, where CO2 has a strong control over global temperatures in Earth's history.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51043", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51043", "title": "Charles Lapworth", "text": "English geologist (1842\u20131920)\nCharles Lapworth FRS FGS (20 September 1842 \u2013 13 March 1920) was a headteacher and an English geologist who pioneered faunal analysis using index fossils and identified the Ordovician period.\nBiography.\nCharles Lapworth was born at Faringdon in Berkshire (now Oxfordshire) the son of James Lapworth.\nHe trained as a teacher at the Culham Diocesan Training College near Abingdon, Oxfordshire. He moved to the Scottish border region, where he investigated the previously little-known fossil fauna of the area. He was headmaster of the school in Galashiels from 1864 to 1875. In 1869 he married Janet, daughter of Galashiels schoolmaster Walter Sanderson.\nThrough mapping and innovative use of index fossil analysis, based on a sequence exposed at Dob's Linn, Lapworth showed that what was thought to be a thick sequence of Silurian rocks was in fact a much thinner series of rocks repeated by faulting and folding.\nHe completed this pioneering research in the Southern Uplands while employed as a schoolmaster for 11 years at the Episcopal Church school, Galashiels. He then studied geology and became in 1875 an assistant at Madras College in St Andrews, Fife, and then in 1881 the first professor of geology at Mason Science College, later the University of Birmingham, where he taught until his retirement in 1913.\nHe is best known for pioneering faunal analysis of Silurian beds by means of index fossils, especially graptolites, and his proposal (eventually adopted) that the beds between the Cambrian beds of north Wales and the Silurian beds of South Wales should be assigned to a new geological period: the Ordovician. He resolved the long running \"Highlands Controversy. Lapworth received numerous awards for his research work, while for teaching he used the English Midlands as a setting for demonstrating the fieldwork techniques he had pioneered in his own research.\nFollowing his researches in the Southern Uplands Charles Lapworth also devoted time to mapping near Durness in Scotland's northwest highlands and was first to propose the controversial theory that here older rocks were found lying above younger, suggesting complex folding or faulting as a cause. Later Peach and Horne were dispatched to the area and their monumental memoir proved Lapworth correct. In the English Midlands he carried out important work in Shropshire, in particular identifying fossils of Olenelloid trilobites of Cambrian age, demonstrating that Cambrian rocks underlay the Carboniferous rocks between Nuneaton and Atherstone, and suggesting a pre-Cambrian date for the Longmyndian rocks that underlay them. He extrapolated these findings to the N.W. Highlands of Scotland, suggesting that the Torridonian sandstone might correspond to the Longmyndian rocks, and thus be pre-Cambrian rather than Cambrian, and that the Durness-Eriboll series, overlaying the Torridonian, would be of Cambrian age rather than Silurian. Again Peach and Horne, surveying in Dundonnell Forest, confirmed Lapworths's suggestion, finding Olenelloid fossils in the fucoid beds of the Durness-Eriboll series. For a modern account and discussion of the elucidation of the geology of the N.W. Highlands, see Oldroyd (1990).\nHe died on 13 March 1920 and is buried in Lodge Hill Cemetery near Birmingham.\nFamily.\nHe married Janet Sanderson in 1869.\nThe couple had five children in total. The first and last born children died during infancy; Ernest, born 22 January 1871 and died 6 February 1871, and Walter Sanderson Lapworth, born in 1882 and died in 1884 before his second birthday. The children who survived to adulthood were Arthur (born c. 1873), Herbert (born c. 1876), and Edith Matilda (born c. 1879). Arthur Lapworth became a renowned chemist and Herbert a civil engineer, engineering geologist, stratigrapher and palaeontologist.\nHonours and awards.\nLapworth received many awards for his work and contributions to geology. In June 1888 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and in 1891 was awarded their Royal Medal. In 1899, he received the highest award of the Geological Society of London, the Wollaston Medal, in recognition of his outstanding work in the Southern Uplands, and Northwest Highlands of Scotland. There years later, in February 1902, he was elected President of the Geological Society for the years 1902\u20131904.\nThe glacial Lake Lapworth, was named for him by Leonard Johnston Wills in recognition of his original suggestion of its existence in 1898.\nAberdeen University awarded him an honorary doctorate in 1884 and Glasgow University in 1912 (both LLD).\nIn 1916 he was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.\nLapworth Museum of Geology.\nPapers relating to Charles Lapworth can be found at the University of Birmingham in the Lapworth Museum of Geology, located within the Aston Webb building on the main Edgbaston campus. The Lapworth Archive contains a remarkably complete record of all areas of his research work and teaching. In August 2021 an Archives Revealed funded project began to catalogue and promote Lapworth's archive, which is due to be completed in January 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51045", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51045", "title": "Guided rat", "text": "A remotely guided rat, popularly called a ratbot or robo-rat, is a rat with electrodes implanted in the medial forebrain bundle (MFB) and sensorimotor cortex of its brain. They were developed in 2002 by Sanjiv Talwar and John Chapin at the State University of New York Downstate Medical Center. The rats wear a small electronics backpack containing a radio receiver and electrical stimulator. The rat receives remote stimulation in the sensorimotor cortex via its backpack that causes the rat to feel a sensation in its left or right whiskers, and stimulation in the MFB that is interpreted as a reward or pleasure.\nAfter a period of training and conditioning using MFB stimulation as a reward, the rats can be remotely directed to move left, right, and forward in response to whisker stimulation signals. It is possible to roughly guide the animal along an obstacle course, jumping small gaps and scaling obstacles.\nEthics.\nConcerns have been raised by animal rights groups about the use of animals in this context, particularly due to a concern about the removal of autonomy from an independent creature. For example, a spokesman of the Dr Hadwen Trust, a group funding alternatives to animal research in medicine, has said that the experiments are an \"appalling example of how the human species instrumentalizes other species.\"\nResearchers tend to liken the training mechanism of the robo-rat to standard operant conditioning techniques. Talwar himself has acknowledged the ethical issues apparent in the development of the robo-rat, but points out that the research meets standards for animal treatment laid down by the National Institute of Health. Moreover, the researchers emphasize that the animals are trained, not coerced, into particular behaviors. Because the rats are encouraged to act via the reward of pleasure, not muscularly compelled to behave in a particular manner, their behavior under MFB stimulation is likened to a carrot-and-stick model of encouraged behavior versus a system of mind control. It seems unlikely that the rats could be persuaded to knowingly risk their lives even with this stimulation. \"Our animals were completely happy and treated well,\" Talwar stated.\nThe technology is reminiscent of experiments performed in 1965 by Dr. Jose Delgado, a controversial scientist who was able to pacify a charging bull via electrodes fitted in its brain. He was also said to control cats and monkeys like \"electronic toys.\" Doctor Robert Galbraith Heath also placed electrodes deep into the brains of patients and wrote hundreds of medical papers on his work.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51049", "revid": "937293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51049", "title": "Francesco Foscari", "text": "Doge of Venice from 1423 to 1457\nFrancesco Foscari (19 June 1373 \u2013 1 November 1457) was the 65th Doge of the Republic of Venice, serving from 1423 until his death in 1457. His reign of 34 years, 6 months, and 8 days was the longest in Venetian history. His tenure coincided with the early stages of the Italian Renaissance, a period during which Venice increased its prominence in art, humanism, and diplomacy.\nFoscari's dogeship marked a critical phase in the territorial expansion of Venice onto the Italian mainland\u2014known as the Domini di Terraferma\u2014through prolonged wars with Milan during the Wars in Lombardy.\nBiography.\nFrancesco Foscari was born in 1373, as the oldest son of Nicol\u00f2 Foscari and his wife Cateruzia Michiel. The Foscari family had been of only moderate importance, but had managed to become one of the few noble families that secured a hereditary place in the Great Council of Venice after the so-called \"Serrata\" (\"Closing\") of the Great Council, and had begun to rise in prominence throughout the 14th century. Francesco's ancestors began holding high public office, and his father Nicol\u00f2 even became a member of the powerful Council of Ten.\nFrancesco served the Republic of Venice in numerous official capacities\u2014as ambassador, president of the Council of Forty, member of the Council of Ten, inquisitor, Procurator of St Mark's, \"avogador de com\u00f9n\"\u2014before he was elected in 1423 defeating the other candidate, Pietro Loredan. His task as doge was to lead Venice in a long and protracted series of wars against Milan, governed by the Visconti, who were attempting to dominate all of northern Italy. Despite the justification of Venetian embroilment in the terraferma that was offered in Foscari's funeral oration, delivered by the humanist senator and historian Bernardo Giustiniani, and some victories, the war was extremely costly to Venice, whose real source of wealth and power was at sea. Venice, which during Foscari's leadership abandoned her ally Florence, was eventually overcome by the forces of Milan under the leadership of Francesco Sforza. Sforza soon made peace with Florence, however, leaving Venice alone.\nFoscari was married twice: first to Maria Priuli, and then in 1415 to Marina Nani. In 1445, his only surviving son, Jacopo, was tried by the Council of Ten on charges of bribery and corruption and exiled from the city. Two further trials, in 1450 and 1456 \u2013 during the latter he confessed, without even the need of torture, to having pleaded for help from the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II and the aforementioned Duke of Milan, both Venice's enemies \u2013 led to Jacopo's imprisonment on Crete and his eventual death there soon after.\nNews of Jacopo's death caused Foscari to withdraw from his government duties, and in October 1457 the Council of Ten forced him to abdicate. However, his death a week later provoked such public outcry that he was given a state funeral.\nBeside his profile portrait by Lazzaro Bastiani, Foscari commissioned a bas-relief bronze plaquette from Donatello, which survives in several examples. His figure kneeling in prayer to St Mark figured over the portal to the Doge's Palace until it was dismantled by order of the revolutionary government, 1797; the head was preserved and is conserved in the Museo dell'Opera di Palazzo Ducale. His monument by the sculptor Antonio Bregno in collaboration with his architect brother Paolo was erected in the church of Santa Maria dei Frari in Venice.\nHe was deposed from office on 27 October 1457 and died five days after.\nIn literature and opera.\nFoscari's life was the subject of a play \"The Two Foscari\" by Lord Byron (1821) and an episode in Samuel Rogers' long poem \"Italy\". The Byron play served as the basis for the libretto written by Francesco Maria Piave for Giuseppe Verdi's opera \"I due Foscari\", which premiered on 3 November 1844 in Rome. Mary Mitford, author of the popular literary sketches of the English countryside entitled \"Our Village\", also wrote a successful play concerned with events in Foscari's life. Mitford's play \"Foscari\" debuted at Covent Garden in 1826 with famed actor Charles Kemble in the lead.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51051", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51051", "title": "Battle of the Crater", "text": "Military action of the American Civil War\nThe Battle of the Crater took place during the American Civil War, part of the Siege of Petersburg. It occurred on Saturday, July 30, 1864, between the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia, commanded by General Robert E. Lee, and the Union Army of the Potomac, commanded by Major General George G. Meade (under the direct supervision of the general-in-chief, Lieutenant General Ulysses S. Grant).\nAfter weeks of preparation, on July 30 Union forces exploded a mine across from Union Major General Ambrose E. Burnside's IX Corps sector, blowing a gap in the Confederate defenses of Petersburg, Virginia. Instead of being a decisive advantage to the Union, this precipitated a rapid deterioration in the Union position. Unit after unit charged into and around the crater, where most of the soldiers milled in confusion in the bottom of the crater. Grant considered this failed assault as \"the saddest affair I have witnessed in this war.\"\nThe Confederates quickly recovered, and launched several counterattacks led by Brigadier General William Mahone. The breach was sealed off, and the Union forces were repulsed with severe casualties, while Brigadier General Edward Ferrero's division of black soldiers was badly mauled. It may have been Grant's best chance to end the siege of Petersburg; instead, the soldiers settled in for another eight months of trench warfare.\nBurnside was relieved of command for his role in the fiasco, and he was never returned to command. Ferrero and General James H. Ledlie were observed behind the lines in a bunker, drinking liquor throughout the battle. Ledlie was criticized by a court of inquiry into his conduct that September, and in December he was effectively dismissed from the Army by Meade on orders from Grant, formally resigning his commission on January 23, 1865.\nBackground.\nDuring the Civil War, Petersburg, Virginia, was an important railhead, where four railroad lines from the south met before they continued to Richmond, Virginia, the capital of the Confederacy. Most supplies to General Lee's army and Richmond funneled through that location. Consequently, the Union regarded it as the \"back door\" to Richmond and as necessary for its defense. The result was the siege of Petersburg. It was actually trench warfare, rather than a true siege, as the armies were aligned along a series of fortified positions and trenches more than long, extending from the old Cold Harbor battlefield near Richmond to areas south of Petersburg.\nAfter Lee stopped Grant's attempt to seize Petersburg on June 15, the battle settled into a stalemate. Grant had learned a hard lesson at Cold Harbor about attacking Lee in a fortified position and was chafing at the inactivity to which Lee's trenches and forts had confined him. Finally, Lt. Col. Henry Pleasants, commanding the 48th Pennsylvania Infantry of Major General Ambrose E. Burnside's IX Corps, offered a novel proposal to break the impasse.\nPleasants, a mining engineer from Pennsylvania in civilian life, proposed digging a long mine shaft under the Confederate Army lines and planting explosive charges directly underneath a fort (Elliott's Salient) in the middle of the Confederate First Corps line. If successful, not only would all the defenders in the area be killed, but also a hole in the Confederate defenses would be opened. If enough Union troops filled the breach quickly enough and drove into the Confederate rear area, the Confederates would not be able to muster enough force to drive them out, and Petersburg might fall. Burnside, whose reputation had suffered from his 1862 defeat at the Battle of Fredericksburg and his poor performance earlier that year at the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House, agreed to Pleasants's plan.\nMine construction.\nDigging began in late June, but even Grant and Meade saw the operation as a \"mere way to keep the men occupied\" and doubted it of any actual tactical value. They quickly lost interest, and Pleasants soon found himself with few materials for his project, and his men even had to forage for wood to support the structure.\nWork progressed steadily, however. Earth was removed by hand and packed into improvised sledges made from cracker boxes fitted with handles, and the floor, wall, and ceiling of the mine were shored up with timbers from an abandoned wood mill and even from tearing down an old bridge.\nThe shaft was elevated as it moved toward the Confederate lines to make sure moisture did not clog up the mine, and fresh air was drawn in by an ingenious air-exchange mechanism near the entrance. A canvas partition isolated the miners' air supply from outside air and allowed miners to enter and exit the work area easily. The miners had constructed a vertical exhaust shaft located well behind Union lines. At the vertical shaft's base, a fire was kept continuously burning. A wooden duct ran the entire length of the tunnel and protruded into the outside air. The fire heated stale air inside of the tunnel, drawing it up the exhaust shaft and out of the mine by the chimney effect. The resulting vacuum then sucked fresh air in from the mine entrance via the wooden duct, which carried it down the length of the tunnel to the place in which the miners were working. That avoided the need for additional ventilation shafts, which could have been observed by the enemy, and it also easily disguised the diggers' progress.\nOn July 17, the main shaft reached under the Confederate position. Rumors of a mine construction soon reached the Confederates, but Lee refused to believe or act upon them for two weeks before he commenced countermining attempts, which were sluggish and uncoordinated, and were unable to discover the mine. However, General John Pegram, whose batteries would be above the explosion, took the threat seriously enough to build a new line of trenches and artillery points behind his position as a precaution. Shafts were also sunk by the Confederates in an effort to intercept the passage. Pleasants became aware of the Confederate's counter-movements and was able to frustrate their effort by changing the direction of the main and lateral galleries while increasing their depth below the surface.\nThe mine was in a \"T\"-shape. The approach shaft was long, starting in a sunken area downhill and more than below the Confederate battery, making detection difficult. The tunnel entrance was narrow, about wide and high. At its end, a perpendicular gallery of extended in both directions. Grant and Meade suddenly decided to use the mine three days after it was completed after a failed attack known later as the First Battle of Deep Bottom. Union soldiers filled the mine with 320 kegs of gunpowder, totaling . The explosives were approximately under the Confederate works, and the T-gap was packed shut with of earth in the side galleries. A further of packed earth was placed in the main gallery to prevent the explosion blasting out the mouth of the mine. On July 28, the powder charges were armed.\nPreparation.\nBurnside had trained a division of United States Colored Troops (USCT) under Brigadier General Edward Ferrero to lead the assault. The division consisted of two brigades, one designated to go to the left of the crater and the other to the right. A regiment from both brigades was to leave the attack column and extend the breach by rushing perpendicular to the crater, and the remaining regiments were to rush through, seizing the Jerusalem Plank Road just beyond, followed by the churchyard and, if possible, Petersburg itself. Burnside's two other divisions, made up of white troops, would then move in, supporting Ferrero's flanks and race for Petersburg itself. Two miles (3\u00a0km) behind the front lines, out of sight of the Confederates, the men of the USCT division were trained for two weeks on the plan.\nDespite the careful planning and intensive training, on the day before the attack, Meade, who lacked confidence in the operation, ordered Burnside not to use the black troops in the lead assault. He claimed that if the attack failed, black soldiers would be killed needlessly, creating political repercussions in the North. Meade may have also ordered the change of plans because he lacked confidence in the black soldiers' abilities in combat and feared that if they were butchered, Radical Republicans would make an issue out of it and claim they were deliberately allowed to be killed. Burnside protested to Grant, who sided with Meade. When volunteers were not forthcoming, Burnside selected a replacement white division by having the three commanders draw lots. Brigadier General James H. Ledlie's 1st Division was selected, but he failed to brief the men on what was expected of them and was reported during the battle to be drunk, well behind the lines, and not providing leadership. Ledlie would be dismissed for his actions during the battle. Ledlie, a civilian soldier with no proper military training, also commanded the smallest and weakest division in the army; one brigade was made of heavy artillery regiments that had not performed well in combat so far and Burnside himself had complained about their performance during the June 18 assaults on Petersburg. Worse than that, Ledlie was known as a coward; during the battle on June 18 he had hidden behind the lines and although his officers and enlisted men knew it, this escaped Burnside's notice.\nBattle.\nThe plan called for the mine to be detonated between 3:30 and 3:45\u00a0a.m. on the morning of July 30. Pleasants lit the fuse accordingly, but as with the rest of the mine's provisions, they had been given poor-quality fuses, which his men were forced to splice themselves. After more and more time passed and no explosion occurred (the impending dawn creating a threat to the men at the staging points, who were in view of the Confederate lines), two volunteers from the 48th Regiment (Lt. Jacob Douty and Sgt. Harry Reese) crawled into the tunnel. After discovering the fuse had burned out at a splice, they spliced on a length of new fuse and lit it again. Finally, at 4:44\u00a0a.m., the charges exploded in a massive shower of earth, men, and guns. A crater (still visible today) was created, long, wide, and at least deep.\nThe explosion immediately killed 278 Confederate soldiers of the 18th and 22nd South Carolina and the stunned Confederate troops did not direct any significant rifle or artillery fire at the enemy for at least 15 minutes. However, Ledlie's untrained division was not prepared for the explosion, and reports indicate they waited 10 minutes before leaving their own entrenchments. Footbridges were supposed to have been placed to allow them to cross their own trenches quickly. Because they were missing, however, the men had to climb into and out of their own trenches just to reach no-man's land. Once they had wandered to the crater, instead of moving around it, as the USCT troops had been trained, they thought that it would make an excellent rifle pit in which to take cover. They therefore moved down into the crater itself, wasting valuable time and realizing too late that the crater was much too deep and exposed to function as a rifle pit and quickly becoming overcrowded while the Confederates, under Brigadier General William Mahone, gathered as many troops together as they could for a counterattack. In about an hour, they had formed up around the crater and began firing rifles and artillery down into it in what Mahone later described as a \"turkey shoot\".\nSensing that the plan had failed, Grant sent Meade an order to terminate the attack. Meade passed this order on to Burnside but the latter believed it could still work and ignored the order, so he sent in Ferrero's division. Burnside preferred to work from his headquarters so he had only a vague idea of what was going on at the front lines as disaster was unfolding. Now faced with considerable flanking fire, the USCT also descended into the crater, and for the next few hours, Mahone's soldiers, along with those of Major General Bushrod Johnson and artillery, slaughtered the IX Corps as Union soldiers attempted to escape from the crater or surrender. Confederates along the rim of the crater could be heard to yell \"Take the white man prisoner! Kill the nigger!\" The black Union soldiers who attempted to surrender were specifically targeted for battlefield execution or, if they were taken as prisoners, executed in the rear.\nSome of the officers in Ferrero's division removed their USCT badges, fearing the Confederates would also kill them on-site if they were captured and accounts by survivors of the battle report that some bayoneted black soldiers in the hope that the Confederates would be more lenient to them if they were captured. Ferrero himself was AWOL, having joined Ledlie in the rear to drink alcohol together. Some Union troops eventually advanced and flanked to the right beyond the crater to the earthworks and assaulted the Confederate lines, driving the Confederates back for several hours in hand-to-hand combat. Mahone's Confederates conducted a sweep out of a sunken gully area about from the right side of the Union advance. The charge reclaimed the earthworks and drove the Union force back towards the east. The Confederates rained mortar shells into the crater, killing scores of men in the process.\nThe weather was also very hot as it neared noon the sun was beating down on the crater relentlessly. Soldiers who were not killed outright by the Confederates dropped by the dozens from dehydration and heat stroke, worsened by the frantic mob of men jammed into a small area. Survivors could remember little due to the chaos in the crater, the shell fire, and the extreme heat. Some details were organized to pick up cartridges from the dead or run back to the Union lines to fetch water.\nAftermath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Following the Crater affair a Reb wrote his homefolk that all the colored prisoners \"would have been killed had it not been for gen Mahone who beg our men to Spare them.\" One of his comrades killed several, he continued; Mahone \"told him for God's sake stop.\" The man replied, \"Well gen let me kill one more,\" whereupon, according to the correspondent, \"he deliberately took out his pocket knife and cut one's throat.\"\u2014\u200a\nUnion casualties were 3,798 (504 killed, 1,881 wounded, 1,413 missing or captured), Confederate 1,491 (361 killed, 727 wounded, 403 missing or captured). Disproportionate Union losses were suffered by Ferrero's division of the United States Colored Troops, many of whom were summarily executed on the battlefield or in the rear. Compared to the average ratio for Civil War battles of 4.8 wounded to one dead, for black troops at the Crater it was 1.8 to one. Both black and white wounded prisoners were taken to the Confederate hospital at Poplar Lawn, in Petersburg. Burnside had not given up hope and he petitioned Meade to let him try another attack but General E.O.C. Ord dismissed the idea as absurd. Meade brought charges against Burnside, and a subsequent court of inquiry censured him along with Brig. Gens. Ledlie, Ferrero, Orlando B. Willcox, and Col. Zenas R. Bliss. Burnside was removed from command of the IX Corps on August 26 and replaced with General John G. Parke. Although he was as responsible for the defeat as Burnside, Meade escaped immediate censure. However, in early 1865, the Congressional Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War exonerated Burnside and condemned Meade for changing the plan of attack, which did little good for Burnside, whose reputation had been ruined. As for Mahone, the victory, won largely because of his efforts in supporting Johnson's stunned men, earned him a lasting reputation as one of the best young generals of Lee's army in the last years of the war.\nGrant wrote to Chief of Staff Henry W. Halleck, \"It was the saddest affair I have witnessed in this war.\" He also stated to Halleck, \"Such an opportunity for carrying fortifications I have never seen and do not expect again to have.\"\nPleasants, who had no role in the battle itself, received praise for his idea and its execution. When he was appointed a brevet brigadier general on March 13, 1865, the citation made explicit mention of his role.\nGrant subsequently gave in his evidence before the Committee on the Conduct of the War:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;General Burnside wanted to put his colored division in front, and I believe if he had done so it would have been a success. Still I agreed with General Meade as to his objections to that plan. General Meade said that if we put the colored troops in front (we had only one division) and it should prove a failure, it would then be said and very properly, that we were shoving these people ahead to get killed because we did not care anything about them. But that could not be said if we put white troops in front.\"\nDespite the battle being a tactical Confederate victory, the strategic situation in the Eastern Theater remained unchanged. Both sides remained in their trenches, and the siege continued.\nHistoric site.\nThe area of the Battle of the Crater is a frequently-visited portion of Petersburg National Battlefield Park. There are sunken areas, where air shafts and cave-ins extend up to the \"T\" shape near the end. The park includes many other sites, primarily those that were a portion of the Union lines around Petersburg.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "51052", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51052", "title": "Semiotic literary criticism", "text": "Semiotic literary criticism, also called literary semiotics, is the approach to literary criticism informed by the theory of signs or semiotics. Semiotics, tied closely to the structuralism pioneered by Ferdinand de Saussure, was extremely influential in the development of literary theory out of the formalist approaches of the early twentieth century.\nHistory.\nThe early forms of literary semiotics grew out of formalist approaches to literature, especially Russian formalism, and structuralist linguistics, especially the Prague school. Notable early semiotic authors included Vladimir Propp, Algirdas Julius Greimas, and Viktor Shklovsky. These critics were concerned with a formal analysis of narrative forms which would resemble a literary mathematics, or at least a literary syntax, as far as possible. They proposed various formal notations for narrative components and transformations and attempted a descriptive taxonomy of existing stories along these lines.\nPropp's \"Morphology of the Folktale\" (orig. Russian pub. 1928; English trans. 1958) provides an example of the formal and systematic approach. In successive chapters, Propp analyzes the characters, plot events, and other elements of traditional folktales (primarily from Russia and Eastern Europe). For each of these key components he provides a letter designation (with superscripts to designate specific subtypes). He proceeds to analyze individual tales by transposing them into this notation and then to generalize about their structure. For example:\n Analysis of a simple, single-move tale of class H-I, of the type: kidnapping of a person.\n 131. A tsar, three daughters (\u03b1). The daughters go walking (\u03b2\u00b3), overstay in the garden (\u03b4\u00b9). A dragon kidnaps them (A\u00b9). A call for aid (B\u00b9). Quest of three heroes (C\u2191). Three battles with the dragon (H\u00b9\u2013I\u00b9), rescue of the maidens (K4). Return (\u2193), reward (w\u00b0). (Propp 128)\nHe then gives the complete structure of this story in one line of notation, the analysis complete and ready to be compared systematically with other tales:\n \u03b1\u03b2\u00b3\u03b4\u00b9A\u00b9B\u00b9C\u2191H\u00b9\u2013I\u00b9K4\u2193w\u00b0\nLater semiotic approaches to literature have often been less systematic (or, in some special cases such as Roland Barthes's \"S/Z\", they have been so specifically and exhaustively systematic as to render the possibility of a complete literary semiotics doubtful). As structuralist linguistics gave way to a post-structuralist philosophy of language which denied the scientific ambitions of the general theory of signs, semiotic literary criticism became more playful and less systematic in its ambitions. Still, some authors harbor more scientific ambition for their literary schemata than others. Later authors in the semiotic tradition of literary criticism include Tzvetan Todorov, Mikhail Bakhtin, Roland Barthes, Juri Lotman, Julia Kristeva, Michael Riffaterre, and Umberto Eco.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51053", "revid": "38415975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51053", "title": "Psychoanalytic literary criticism", "text": "Branch of literary criticism\nPsychoanalytic literary criticism is literary criticism or literary theory that , in method, concept, or form, is influenced by the tradition of psychoanalysis begun by Sigmund Freud.\nPsychoanalytic reading has been practiced since the early development of psychoanalysis itself, and has developed into a heterogeneous interpretive tradition. As Celine Surprenant writes, \"Psychoanalytic literary criticism does not constitute a unified field. However, all variants endorse, at least to a certain degree, the idea that literature ... is fundamentally entwined with the psyche.\"\nPsychoanalytic criticism views artists, including authors, as neurotic. However, an artist escapes many of the outward manifestations and end results of neurosis by finding in the act of creating their art a pathway back to sanity and wholeness.\nOverview.\nThe object of psychoanalytic literary criticism, at its very simplest, can be the psychoanalysis of the author or of a particularly interesting character in a given work. The criticism is similar to psychoanalysis itself, closely following the analytic interpretive process discussed in Freud's \"The Interpretation of Dreams\" and other works. Critics may view the fictional characters as psychological case studies, attempting to identify such Freudian concepts as the Oedipus complex, Freudian slips, Id, ego and superego, and so on, and demonstrate how they influence the thoughts and behaviors of fictional characters.\nHowever, more complex variations of psychoanalytic criticism are possible. The concepts of psychoanalysis can be deployed with reference to the narrative or poetic structure itself, without requiring access to the authorial psyche (an interpretation motivated by French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan's remark that \"the unconscious is structured like a language\"). Or the founding texts of psychoanalysis may themselves be treated as literature and reread for the light cast by their formal qualities on their theoretical content (Freud's texts frequently resemble detective stories, or the archaeological narratives of which he was so fond).\nLike all forms of literary criticism, psychoanalytic criticism can yield useful clues to the sometime baffling symbols, actions, and settings in a literary work; however, like all forms of literary criticism, it has its limits. For one thing, some critics rely on psychocriticism as a \"one size fits all\" approach, when other literary scholars argue that no one approach can adequately illuminate or interpret a complex work of art. As Guerin, et al. put it in \"A Handbook of Critical Approaches to Literature\",\nThe danger is that the serious student may become theory-ridden, forgetting that Freud's is not the only approach to literary criticism. To see a great work of fiction or a great poem primarily as a psychological case study is often to miss its wider significance and perhaps even the essential aesthetic experience it should provide.\nMethods.\nEarly applications.\nFreud wrote several important essays on literature, which he used to explore the psyche of authors and characters, to explain narrative mysteries, and to develop new concepts in psychoanalysis (for instance, \"Delusion and Dream in Jensen's Gradiva\" and his influential readings of the Oedipus myth and Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" in \"The Interpretation of Dreams\"). The criticism has been made, however, that in his and his early followers' studies 'what calls for elucidation are not the artistic and literary works themselves, but rather the psychopathology and biography of the artist, writer, or fictional characters'. Thus 'many psychoanalysts among Freud's earliest adherents did not resist the temptation to psychoanalyze poets and painters (sometimes to Freud's chagrin'). Later analysts would conclude that 'clearly one cannot psychoanalyse a writer from his text; one can only appropriate him'.\nEarly psychoanalytic literary criticism would often treat the text as if it were a kind of dream. This means that the text represses its real (or latent) content behind obvious (manifest) content. The process of changing from latent to manifest content is known as the dream work and involves operations of concentration and displacement. The critic analyzes the language and symbolism of a text to reverse the process of the dream work and arrive at the underlying latent thoughts. The danger is that 'such criticism tends to be reductive, explaining away the ambiguities of works of literature by reference to established psychoanalytic doctrine; and very little of this work retains much influence today'.\nJungians.\nLater readers, such as Carl Jung and another of Freud's disciples, Karen Horney, broke with Freud, and their work, especially Jung's, led to other rich branches of psychoanalytic criticism: Horney's to feminist approaches including womb envy, and Jung's to the study of archetypes and the collective unconscious. Jung's work in particular was influential as, combined with the work of anthropologists such as Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss and Joseph Campbell, it led to the entire fields of mythocriticism and archetype analysis.\nNorthrop Frye considered that 'the literary critic finds Freud most suggestive for the theory of comedy, and Jung for the theory of romance'.\nForm.\nWaugh writes, 'The development of psychoanalytic approaches to literature proceeds from the shift of emphasis from \"content\" to the fabric of artistic and literary works'. Thus for example Hayden White has explored how 'Freud's descriptions tally with nineteenth-century theories of tropes, which his work somehow reinvents'.\nEspecially influential here has been the work of Jacques Lacan, an avid reader of literature who used literary examples as illustrations of important concepts in his work (for instance, Lacan argued with Jacques Derrida over the interpretation of Edgar Allan Poe's \"The Purloined Letter\").\n'Lacan's theories have encouraged a criticism which focuses not on the author but on the linguistic processes of the text'. Within this Lacanian emphasis, 'Freud's theories become a place from which to raise questions of interpretation, rhetoric, style, and figuration'.\nHowever, Lacanian scholars have noted that Lacan himself was not interested in literary criticism \"per se\", but in how literature might illustrate a psychoanalytic method or concept.\nReader response.\nAccording to Ousby, 'Among modern critical uses of psychoanalysis is the development of \"ego psychology\" in the work of Norman Holland, who concentrates on the relations between reader and text' \u2013 as with reader response criticism. Rollin writes that 'Holland's experiments in reader response theory suggest that we all read literature selectively, unconsciously projecting our own fantasies into it'.\nThus in crime fiction, for example, 'Rycroft sees the criminal as personifying the reader's unavowed hostility to the parent'.\nCharles Mauron: psychocriticism.\nIn 1963, Charles Mauron conceived a structured method to interpret literary works via psychoanalysis. The study implied four different phases:\nOn Mauron's concept, the author cannot be reduced to a ratiocinating self: his own more or less traumatic biographical past, the cultural archetypes that have suffused his soul contrast with the conscious self, The chiasmic relation between the two tales may be seen as a sane and safe acting out. A basically unconscious sexual impulse is symbolically fulfilled in a positive and socially gratifying way, a process known as Sublimation.\nAnxiety of influence.\n'The American critic Harold Bloom has adopted the Freudian notion of the Oedipus Complex to his study of relationships of influence between poets...and his work has also inspired a feminist variant in the work of Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar'.\nIn similar vein, Shoshana Felman has asked with respect to what she calls \"the guilt of poetry\" the question: 'Could literary history be in any way considered as a repetitive unconscious \"transference\" of the guilt of poetry?'.\nCultural examples.\nIn \"\", one of David Lodge's satires of academia, the naive hero Persse follows Angelica to a forum where she discourses on Romance: '\"Roland Barthes has taught us the close connection between narrative and sexuality, between the pleasures of the body and the 'pleasure of the text'...Romance is a multiple orgasm.\" Persse listened to this stream of filth flowing from between Angelica's exquisite lips and pearly teeth with growing astonishment and burning cheeks, but no one else in the audience seemed to find anything remarkable or disturbing about her presentation'.\nIn A.S. Byatt's novel \"Possession\", the heroine/feminist scholar, while recognising that '\"we live in the truth of what Freud discovered\"', concedes that '\"the whole of our scholarship \u2013 the whole of our thought \u2013 we question everything except the centrality of sexuality\"'.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51054", "revid": "50755660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51054", "title": "American black bear", "text": "Species of bear\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe American black bear (Ursus americanus), or simply black bear, is a species of medium-sized bear which is endemic to North America. It is the continent's smallest and most widely distributed bear species. It is an omnivore, with a diet varying greatly depending on season and location. It typically lives in largely forested areas; it will leave forests in search of food and is sometimes attracted to human communities due to the immediate availability of food.\nThe International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) lists the American black bear as a least-concern species because of its widespread distribution and a large population, estimated to be twice that of all other bear species combined. Along with the brown bear (\"Ursus arctos\"), it is one of the two modern bear species not considered by the IUCN to be globally threatened with extinction.\nTaxonomy.\nThe American black bear is not closely related to the brown bear or polar bear, though all three species are found in North America; genetic studies reveal that they split from a common ancestor 5.05 million years ago (mya). American and Asian black bears are considered sister taxa and are more closely related to each other than to the other modern species of bears. \nEvolution.\nThe ancestors of American black bears and Asian black bears diverged from sun bears 4.58 mya. The American black bear then split from the Asian black bear 4.08 mya. A small primitive bear called \"Ursus abstrusus\" is the oldest known North American fossil member of the genus \"Ursus\", dated to 4.95 mya. This suggests that \"U. abstrusus\" may be the direct ancestor of the American black bear, which evolved in North America.\nThe earliest American black bear fossils, from the Early Pleistocene of Port Kennedy, Pennsylvania, greatly resemble the Asian species, though later specimens grew to sizes comparable to grizzly bears. Once described as a precursor species (\"Ursus vitabilis\"), these specimens have been synonymized with \"U. americanus\". The American black bear lived during the same period as the giant and lesser short-faced bears (\"Arctodus simus\" and \"A. pristinus\", respectively) and the Florida spectacled bear (\"Tremarctos floridanus\"). These tremarctine bears evolved from bears that had emigrated from Asia to the Americas 7\u20138 mya. The giant and lesser short-faced bears are thought to have been heavily carnivorous and the Florida spectacled bear more herbivorous, while the American black bears remained arboreal omnivores, like their Asian ancestors. From the Holocene to the present, American black bears seem to have shrunk in size, but this has been disputed because of problems with dating these fossil specimens.\nThe American black bear's generalist behavior allowed it to exploit a wider variety of foods and has been given as a reason why, of these three genera, it alone survived climate and vegetative changes through the last Ice Age while the other, more specialized North American predators became extinct. However, both \"Arctodus\" and \"Tremarctos\" had survived several other, previous ice ages. After these prehistoric ursids became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene, American black bears, brown bears and polar bears were the only remaining bears in North America.\nHybrids.\nAmerican black bears are reproductively compatible with several other bear species and occasionally produce hybrid offspring. According to Jack Hanna's \"Monkeys on the Interstate\", a bear captured in Sanford, Florida, was thought to have been the offspring of an escaped female Asian black bear and a male American black bear. In 1859, an American black bear and a Eurasian brown bear were bred together in the London Zoological Gardens, but the three cubs that were born died before they reached maturity. In \"The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication\", Charles Darwin noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the nine-year Report it is stated that the bears had been seen in the zoological gardens to couple freely, but previously to 1848 most had rarely conceived. In the reports published since this date three species have produced young (hybrids in one case),\u00a0...\nA bear shot in autumn 1986 in Michigan was thought by some to be an American black bear/grizzly bear hybrid, because of its unusually large size and its proportionately larger brain case and skull. DNA testing was unable to determine whether it was a large American black bear or a grizzly bear.\nSubspecies.\nSixteen subspecies are traditionally recognized; however, a recent genetic study does not support designating some of these, such as the Florida black bear, as distinct subspecies. Listed alphabetically according to subspecific name:\nDistribution and population.\nHistorically, American black bears occupied the majority of North America's forested regions. Today, they are primarily limited to sparsely settled, forested areas. American black bears currently inhabit much of their original Canadian range, though they seldom occur in the southern farmlands of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba; they have been extirpated on Prince Edward Island since 1937. Surveys taken in the mid-1990s found the Canadian black bear population to be between 396,000 and 476,000 in seven provinces; this estimate excludes populations in New Brunswick, the Northwest Territories, Nova Scotia and Saskatchewan. All provinces indicated stable populations of American black bears over the 2000s.\nThe current range in the United States is constant throughout most of the Northeast and within the Appalachian Mountains almost continuously from Maine to northern Georgia, the northern Midwest, the Rocky Mountain region, the West Coast and Alaska. However, it becomes increasingly fragmented or absent in other regions. Despite this, American black bears in those areas seem to have expanded their range in recent decades, such as with recent sightings in Ohio, Illinois, southern Indiana, and western Nebraska. Sightings of itinerant black bears in the Driftless Area of southeastern Minnesota, northeastern Iowa, and southwestern Wisconsin are common. In 2019, biologists with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources confirmed documentation of an American black bear living year-round in woodlands near the town of Decorah in northeastern Iowa, believed to be the first instance of a resident black bear in Iowa since the 1880s.\nSurveys taken from 35 states in the early 1990s indicated that American black bear populations were either stable or increasing, except in Idaho and New Mexico. The population in the United States was estimated to range between 339,000 and 465,000 in 2011, though this estimate does not include data from Alaska, Idaho, South Dakota, Texas or Wyoming, whose populations were not recorded in the survey. In California there were an estimated 25,000-35,000 black bears in 2017, making it the largest population of the species in any of the 48 contiguous United States. In 2020 there were about 1,500 bears in Great Smoky Mountains National Park, where the population density is about two per square mile. In western North Carolina, the black bear population has dramatically increased in recent decades, from about 3,000 in the early 2000s to over 8,000 in the 2020s.\nAs of 1993, known black bear populations in Mexico existed in four areas, though knowledge on the distribution of populations outside those areas has not been updated since 1959. Mexico is the only country where the species is classified as \"endangered\".\nHabitat.\nThroughout their range, habitats preferred by American black bears have a few shared characteristics. They are often found in areas with relatively inaccessible terrain, thick understory vegetation and large quantities of edible material (especially masts). The adaptation to woodlands and thick vegetation in this species may have originally been because the bear evolved alongside larger, more aggressive bear species, such as the extinct giant short-faced bear and the grizzly bear, that monopolized more open habitats and the historic presence of larger predators, such as \"Smilodon\" and the American lion, that could have preyed on black bears. Although found in the largest numbers in wild, undisturbed areas and rural regions, American black bears can adapt to surviving in some numbers in peri-urban regions, as long as they contain easily accessible foods and some vegetative coverage.\nIn most of the contiguous United States, American black bears today are usually found in heavily vegetated mountainous areas, from in elevation. For American black bears living in the American Southwest and Mexico, habitat usually consists of stands of chaparral and pinyon juniper woods. In this region, bears occasionally move to more open areas to feed on prickly pear cactus. At least two distinct, prime habitat types are inhabited in the Southeastern United States. American black bears in the southern Appalachian Mountains survive in predominantly oak-hickory and mixed mesophytic forests. In the coastal areas of the southeast (such as Florida, the Carolinas and Louisiana), bears inhabit a mixture of flatwoods, bays and swampy hardwood sites.\nIn the northeastern part of the range (the United States and Canada), prime habitat consists of a forest canopy of hardwoods such as beech, maple, birch and coniferous species. Corn crops and oak-hickory mast are also common sources of food in some sections of the northeast; small, thick swampy areas provide excellent refuge cover largely in stands of white cedar. Along the Pacific coast, redwood, Sitka spruce and hemlocks predominate as overstory cover. Within these northern forest types are early successional areas important for American black bears, such as fields of brush, wet and dry meadows, high tidelands, riparian areas and a variety of mast-producing hardwood species. The spruce-fir forest dominates much of the range of the American black bear in the Rockies. Important non-forested areas here are wet meadows, riparian areas, avalanche chutes, roadsides, burns, sidehill parks and subalpine ridgetops.\nIn areas where human development is relatively low, such as stretches of Canada and Alaska, American black bears tend to be found more regularly in lowland regions. In parts of eastern Canada, especially Labrador, American black bears have adapted exclusively to semi-open areas that are more typical habitat in North America for brown bears (likely due to the absence there of brown and polar bears, as well as other large carnivore species).\nDescription.\nBuild.\nThe skulls of American black bears are broad, with narrow muzzles and large jaw hinges. In Virginia, the length of adult bear skulls was found to average . Across its range, the greatest skull length for the species has been reportedly measured from . Females tend to have slenderer and more pointed faces than males. Sexual dimorphism can also be observed in the larger cheek teeth of males.\nTheir claws are typically black or grayish-brown. The claws are short and rounded, being thick at the base and tapering to a point. Claws from both hind and front legs are almost identical in length, though the foreclaws tend to be more sharply curved. The paws of the species are relatively large, with a rear foot length of , which is proportionately larger than other medium-sized bear species, but much smaller than the paws of large adult brown, and especially polar bears. The soles of the feet are black or brownish and are naked, leathery and deeply wrinkled.\nThe hind legs are relatively longer than those of Asian black bears. The typically small tail is long. The ears are small and rounded and are set well back on the head.\nAmerican black bears are highly dexterous, being capable of opening screw-top jars and manipulating door latches. They also have great physical strength; a bear weighing was observed turning flat rocks weighing by flipping them over with a single foreleg. They move in a rhythmic, sure-footed way and can run at speeds of . American black bears have good eyesight and have been proven experimentally to be able to learn visual color discrimination tasks faster than chimpanzees and just as fast as domestic dogs. They are also capable of rapidly learning to distinguish different shapes such as small triangles, circles and squares.\nSize.\nAdults typically range from in head-and-body length, and in shoulder height. Although the American black bear is the smallest bear species in North America (smaller than the brown bear and the polar bear), large males exceed the size of other bear species in other continents.\nWeight tends to vary according to age, sex, health and season. Seasonal variation in weight is very pronounced: in autumn, their pre-den weight tends to be 30% higher than in spring, when black bears emerge from their dens. Bears on the East Coast tend to be heavier on average than those on the West Coast, although they typically follow Bergmann's rule, and bears from the northwest are often slightly heavier than the bears from the southeast. Adult males typically weigh between , while females weigh 33% less at .\nIn California, studies indicate that the average mass is in adult males and in adult females. Adults in Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge in east-central Alaska were found to average in males and in females, whereas on Kuiu Island in southeastern Alaska (where nutritious salmon are readily available) adults averaged . In Great Smoky Mountains National Park, adult males averaged and adult females averaged per one study.\nIn one of the largest studies on regional body mass, bears in British Columbia averaged in 89 females and in 243 males. In Yellowstone National Park, a study found that adult males averaged and adult females averaged . Black bears in north-central Minnesota averaged in 163 females and in 77 males. In New York, the males average and females . It was found in Nevada and the Lake Tahoe region that bears closer to urban regions were significantly heavier than their arid-country dwelling counterparts, with males near urban areas averaging against wild-land males which averaged whereas peri-urban females averaged against the average of in wild-land ones. In Waterton Lakes National Park, Alberta, adults averaged .\nThe biggest wild American black bear ever recorded was a male from New Brunswick, shot in November 1972, that weighed after it had been dressed, meaning it weighed an estimated in life and measured long. Another notably outsized wild American black bear, weighing in at , was the cattle-killer shot in December 1921 on the Moqui Reservation in Arizona. The record-sized American black bear from New Jersey was shot in Morris County December 2011 and scaled . The Pennsylvania state record weighed and was shot in November 2010 in Pike County. The North American Bear Center, located in Ely, Minnesota, is home to the world's largest captive male and female American black bears. Ted, the male, weighed in the fall of 2006. Honey, the female, weighed in the fall of 2007.\nPelage.\nThe fur is soft, with dense underfur and long, coarse, thick guard hairs. The fur is not as shaggy or coarse as that of brown bears. American black bear skins can be distinguished from those of Asian black bears by the lack of a white blaze on the chest and hairier footpads.\nDespite their name, black bears show a great deal of color variation. Individual coat colors can range from white, blonde, cinnamon, light brown or dark chocolate brown to jet black, with many intermediate variations existing. Silvery-gray American black bears with a blue luster (found mostly on the flanks) occur along a portion of coastal Alaska and British Columbia. White to cream-colored American black bears occur in the coastal islands and the adjacent mainland of southwestern British Columbia. Albino individuals have also been recorded. Black coats tend to predominate in humid areas, such as Maine, New England, New York, Tennessee, Michigan and western Washington. Approximately 70% of all American black bears are black, though only 50% in the Rocky Mountains are black. Many in northwestern North America are cinnamon, blonde or light brown in color and thus may sometimes be mistaken for grizzly bears. Grizzly (and other types of brown) bears can be distinguished by their shoulder hump, larger size and broader, more concave skull.\nIn his book \"The Great Bear Almanac\", Gary Brown summarized the predominance of black or brown/blonde specimens by location:\nBehavior and life history.\nTheir keenest sense is smell, which is about seven times more sensitive than a domestic dog's. They are excellent and strong swimmers, swimming for pleasure and to feed (largely on fish). They regularly climb trees to feed, escape enemies and hibernate. Four of the eight modern bear species are habitually arboreal (the most arboreal species, the American and Asian black bears and the sun bear, being fairly closely related). Their arboreal abilities tend to decline with age. They may be active at any time of the day or night, although they mainly forage by night. Bears living near human habitations tend to be more extensively nocturnal, while those living near brown bears tend to be more often diurnal.\nAmerican black bears tend to be territorial and non-gregarious in nature. However, at abundant food sources (e.g. spawning salmon or garbage dumps), they may congregate and dominance hierarchies form, with the largest, most powerful males dominating the most fruitful feeding spots. They mark their territories by rubbing their bodies against trees and clawing at the bark. Annual ranges held by mature male bears tend to be very large, though there is some variation. On Long Island off the coast of Washington, ranges average , whereas on the Ungava Peninsula in Canada ranges can average up to , with some male bears traveling as far as at times of food shortages.\nBears may communicate with various vocal and non-vocal sounds. Tongue-clicking and grunting are the most common sounds and are made in cordial situations to conspecifics, offspring and occasionally humans. When at ease, they produce a loud rumbling hum. During times of fear or nervousness, bears may moan, huff or blow air. Warning sounds include jaw-clicking and lip-popping. In aggressive interactions, black bears produce guttural pulsing calls that may sound like growling. Cubs squeal, bawl or scream when anxious and make a motor-like humming sound when comfortable or nursing. American black bears often mark trees using their teeth and claws as a form of communication with other bears, a behavior common to many species of bears.\nReproduction and development.\nSows usually produce their first litter at the age of 3 to 5 years, with those living in more developed areas tending to get pregnant at younger ages. The breeding period usually occurs in the June\u2013July period, though it can extend to August in the species' northern range. The breeding period lasts for two to three months. Both sexes are promiscuous. Males try to mate with several females, but large, dominant ones may violently claim a female if another mature male comes near. Copulation can last 20\u201330 minutes. Sows tend to be short-tempered with their mates after copulating.\nThe fertilized eggs undergo delayed development and do not implant in the female's womb until November. The gestation period lasts 235\u00a0days, and litters are usually born in late January to early February. Litter size is between one and six cubs, typically two or three. At birth, cubs weigh and measure in length. They are born with fine, gray, down-like hair and their hind quarters are underdeveloped. They typically open their eyes after 28\u201340\u00a0days and begin walking after 5 weeks. Cubs are dependent on their mother's milk for 30\u00a0weeks and will reach independence at 16\u201318\u00a0months. At 6 weeks, they attain , by 8 weeks they reach and by 6 months they weigh . They reach sexual maturity at 3 years and attain their full growth at 5 years.\nLongevity and mortality.\nThe average lifespan in the wild is 18\u00a0years, and it is quite possible for wild individuals to survive for more than 23 years. The record age of a wild individual was 39\u00a0years, while that in captivity was 44\u00a0years. The average annual survival rate is variable, ranging from 86% in Florida to 73% in Virginia and North Carolina. In Minnesota, 99% of wintering adult bears were able to survive the hibernation cycle in one study. A study of American black bears in Nevada found that the amount of annual mortality of a population of bears in wilderness areas was 0%, whereas in developed areas in the state this figure rose to 83%. Survival in subadults is generally less assured. In Alaska 14\u201317% of subadult males and 30\u201348% of subadult females were found in a study to survive to adulthood. Across the range, the estimated number of cubs who survive past their first year is 60%.\nWith the exception of the rare confrontation with an adult brown bear or a gray wolf pack, adult black bears are not usually subject to natural predation. Scats with fur inside of them and a carcass of an adult sow with puncture marks in the skull indicate black bears may occasionally be killed by jaguars in the southern parts of their range. In such scenarios, the big cat would have the advantage if it ambushed the bear, killing it with a crushing bite to the back of the skull. Cubs tend to be more vulnerable to predation than adults, with known predators including bobcats, coyotes, cougars, gray wolves, brown bears and other bears of their own species. Many of these will stealthily snatch small cubs right from under the sleeping mother. There is record of a golden eagle snatching a yearling cub. Once out of hibernation, mother bears may be able to fight off most potential predators. Even cougars will be displaced by an angry mother bear if they are discovered stalking the cubs. Flooding of dens after birth may also occasionally kill newborn cubs. Bear fatalities are mainly attributable to human activities. Seasonally, thousands of black bears are hunted legally across North America, and some are illegally poached or trapped unregulated. Auto collisions also may kill many black bears annually.\nHibernation.\nAmerican black bears were once not considered true or \"deep\" hibernators, but because of discoveries about the metabolic changes that allow black bears to remain dormant for months without eating, drinking, urinating or defecating, most biologists have redefined mammalian hibernation as \"specialized, seasonal reduction in metabolism concurrent with scarce food and cold weather\". American black bears are now considered highly efficient hibernators. The physiology of American black bears in the wild is closely related to that of bears in captivity. Understanding the physiology of bears in the wild is vital to the bear's success in captivity.\nThe bears enter their dens in October and November, although in the southernmost areas of their range (i.e. Florida, Mexico, the southeastern United States), only pregnant females and mothers with yearling cubs will enter hibernation. Prior to that time, they can put on up to of body fat to get them through the several months during which they fast. Hibernation typically lasts 3\u20138\u00a0months, depending on regional climate.\nHibernating bears spend their time in hollowed-out dens in tree cavities, under logs or rocks, in banks, caves, or culverts, and in shallow depressions. Although naturally-made dens are occasionally used, most dens are dug out by the bear. During their time in hibernation, an American black bear's heart rate drops from 40 to 50 beats per minute to 8 beats per minute, and the metabolic rate can drop to a quarter of the bear's (non-hibernating) basal metabolic rate. These reductions in metabolic rate and heart rate do not appear to decrease the bear's ability to heal injuries during hibernation. Their circadian rhythm stays intact during hibernation. This allows the bear to sense the changes in the day based on the ambient temperature caused by the sun's position in the sky. It has also been shown that ambient light exposure and low disturbance levels (that is to say, wild bears in ambient light conditions) directly correlate with their activity levels. The bear keeping track of the changing days allows it to awaken from hibernation at the appropriate time of year to conserve as much energy as possible.\nThe hibernating bear does not display the same rate of muscle and bone atrophy relative to other nonhibernatory animals that are subject to long periods of inactivity due to ailment or old age. A hibernating bear only loses approximately half the muscular strength compared to that of a well-nourished, inactive human. The bear's bone mass does not change in geometry or mineral composition during hibernation, which implies that the bear's conservation of bone mass during hibernation is caused by a biological mechanism. During hibernation American black bears retain all excretory waste, leading to the development of a hardened mass of fecal material in the colon known as a fecal plug. Leptin is released into the bear's systems to suppress appetite. The retention of waste during hibernation (specifically in minerals such as calcium) may play a role in the bear's resistance to atrophy.\nThe body temperature does not drop significantly, like other mammalian hibernators (staying around ) and they remain somewhat alert and active. If the winter is mild enough, they may wake up and forage for food. Females also give birth in February and nurture their cubs until the snow melts. During winter, American black bears consume 25\u201340% of their body weight. The footpads peel off while they sleep, making room for new tissue.\nMany of the physiological changes an American black bear exhibits during hibernation are retained slightly post-hibernation. Upon exiting hibernation, bears retain a reduced heart rate and basal metabolic rate. The metabolic rate of a hibernating bear will remain at a reduced level for up to 21 days after hibernation. After emerging from their winter dens in spring, they wander their home ranges for two weeks so that their metabolism accustoms itself to the activity. In mountainous areas, they seek southerly slopes at lower elevations for forage and move to northerly and easterly slopes at higher elevations as summer progresses.\nThe time that American black bears emerge from hibernation varies. Factors affecting this include temperature, flooding, and hunger. In southern areas, they may wake up in midwinter. Further north, they may not be seen until late March, April, or even early May. Altitude also has an effect. Bears at lower altitudes tend to emerge earlier. Mature males tend to come out earliest, followed by immature males and females, and lastly mothers with cubs. Mothers with yearling cubs are seen before those with newborns.\nDietary habits.\nGenerally, American black bears are largely crepuscular in foraging activity, though they may actively feed at any time. Up to 85% of their diet consists of vegetation, though they tend to dig less than brown bears, eating far fewer roots, bulbs, corms and tubers than the latter species. When initially emerging from hibernation, they will seek to feed on carrion from winter-killed animals and newborn ungulates. As the spring temperature warms, American black bears seek new shoots of many plant species, especially new grasses, wetland plants and forbs. Young shoots and buds from trees and shrubs during the spring period are important to bears emerging from hibernation, as they assist in rebuilding muscle and strengthening the skeleton and are often the only digestible foods available at that time. During summer, the diet largely comprises fruits, especially berries and soft mast such as buds and drupes.\nDuring the autumn hyperphagia, feeding becomes virtually the full-time task. Hard mast becomes the most important part of the diet in autumn and may even partially dictate the species' distribution. Favored mast such as hazelnuts, oak acorns and whitebark pine nuts may be consumed by the hundreds each day by a single bear during the fall. During the fall period, bears may also habitually raid the nut caches of tree squirrels. Also extremely important in fall are berries such as huckleberries and buffalo berries. Bears living in areas near human settlements or around a considerable influx of recreational human activity often come to rely on foods inadvertently provided by humans, especially during summertime. These include refuse, birdseed, agricultural products and honey from apiaries.\nThe majority of the animal portion of their diet consists of insects, such as bees, yellow jackets, ants, beetles and their larvae. American black bears are also fond of honey and will gnaw through trees if hives are too deeply set into the trunks for them to reach it with their paws. Once the hive is breached, the bears will scrape the honeycombs together with their paws and eat them, regardless of stings from the bees. Bears that live in northern coastal regions (especially the Pacific Coast) will fish for salmon during the night, as their black fur is easily spotted by salmon in the daytime. Other bears, such as the white-furred Kermode bears of the islands of western Canada, have a 30% greater success rate in catching salmon than their black-furred counterparts. Other fish, including suckers, trout and catfish, are readily caught whenever possible. Although American black bears do not often engage in active predation of other large animals for much of the year, the species will regularly prey on mule and white-tailed deer fawns in spring, given the opportunity. Bears may catch the scent of hiding fawns when foraging for something else and then sniff them out and pounce on them. As the fawns reach 10 days of age, they can outmaneuver the bears, and their scent is soon ignored until the next year. American black bears have also been recorded similarly preying on elk calves in Idaho and moose calves in Alaska.\nPredation on adult deer is rare, but it has been recorded. They may even hunt prey up to the size of adult female moose, which are considerably larger than themselves, by ambushing them. There is at least one record of a male American black bear killing two bull elk over the course of six days by chasing them into deep snow banks, which impeded their movements. In Labrador, American black bears are exceptionally carnivorous, living largely off caribou, usually young, injured, old, sickly or dead specimens, and rodents such as voles. This is believed to be due to a paucity of edible plant life in this sub-Arctic region and a local lack of competing large carnivores (including other bear species). Like brown bears, American black bears try to use surprise to ambush their prey and target the weak, injured, sickly or dying animals in the herds. Once a deer fawn is captured, it is frequently torn apart alive while feeding. If it is able to capture a mother deer in spring, the bear frequently begins feeding on the udder of lactating females, but generally prefers meat from the viscera. Bears often drag their prey to cover, preferring to feed in seclusion. The skin of large prey is stripped back and turned inside out, with the skeleton usually left largely intact. Unlike gray wolves and coyotes, bears rarely scatter the remains of their kills. Vegetation around the carcass is usually matted down, and their droppings are frequently found nearby. Bears may attempt to cover remains of larger carcasses, though they do not do so with the same frequency as cougars and grizzly bears. They will readily consume eggs and nestlings of various birds and can easily access many tree nests, even the huge nests of bald eagles. Bears have been reported stealing deer and other game from human hunters.\nInterspecific predatory relationships.\nOver much of their range, American black bears are assured scavengers that can intimidate, using their large size and considerable strength, and if necessary dominate other predators in confrontations over carcasses. However, on occasions where they encounter Kodiak or grizzly bears, the larger two brown subspecies dominate them. American black bears tend to escape competition from brown bears by being more active in the daytime and living in more densely forested areas. Violent interactions, resulting in the deaths of American black bears, have been recorded in Yellowstone National Park.\nAmerican black bears do occasionally compete with cougars over carcasses. Like brown bears, they will sometimes steal kills from cougars. One study found that both bear species visited 24% of cougar kills in Yellowstone and Glacier National Parks, usurping 10% of the carcasses. Another study found that American black bears visited 48% of cougar kills in summer in Colorado and 77% of kills in California. As a result, the cats spend more time killing and less time feeding on each kill.\nAmerican black bear interactions with gray wolves are much rarer than with brown bears, due to differences in habitat preferences. The majority of American black bear encounters with wolves occur in the species' northern range, with no interactions being recorded in Mexico. Despite the American black bear being more powerful on a one-to-one basis, packs of wolves have been recorded to kill black bears on numerous occasions without eating them. Unlike brown bears, American black bears frequently lose against wolves in disputes over kills. Wolf packs typically kill American black bears when the larger animals are in their hibernation cycle.\nThere is at least one record of an American black bear killing a wolverine (\"Gulo gulo\") in a dispute over food in Yellowstone National Park. Anecdotal cases of alligator predation on American black bears have been reported, though such cases may involve assaults on cubs. At least one jaguar (\"Panthera onca\") has been recorded to have attacked and eaten a black bear: \"El Jefe\", the jaguar famous for being the first jaguar seen in the United States in over a century.\nRelationships with humans.\nIn folklore, mythology and culture.\nIndigenous.\nBlack bears feature prominently in the stories of some of North America's indigenous peoples. One tale tells of how the black bear was a creation of the Great Spirit, while the grizzly bear was created by the Evil Spirit. In the mythology of the Haida, Tlingit and Tsimshian people of the northwest coast, mankind first learned to respect bears when a girl married the son of a black bear chieftain. In Kwakwa\u0331ka\u0331\u02bcwakw mythology, black and brown bears became enemies when Grizzly Bear Woman killed Black Bear Woman for being lazy. Black Bear Woman's children, in turn, killed Grizzly Bear Woman's children. The Navajo believed that the Big Black Bear was chief among the bears of the four directions surrounding Sun's house and would pray to it in order to be granted its protection during raids.\nSleeping Bear Dunes in Michigan is named after a Native American legend, where a female bear and her two cubs swam across Lake Michigan to escape a fire on the Wisconsin shore. The mother bear reached the shore and waited for her cubs, but they did not make it across. Two islands mark where the cubs drowned, while the dune marks the spot where the mother bear waited.\nAnglo-American.\nMorris Michtom, the creator of the teddy bear, was inspired to make the toy when he came across a cartoon of Theodore Roosevelt refusing to shoot a black bear cub tied to a tree.\nThe fictional character Winnie-the-Pooh was named after Winnipeg, a female cub that lived at the London Zoo from 1915 until her death in 1934.\nA cub, who in the spring of 1950 was caught in the Capitan Gap Fire, was made into the living representative of Smokey Bear, the mascot of the United States Forest Service.\nTerrible Ted was a de-toothed and de-clawed bear who was forced to perform as a pro wrestler and whose \"career\" lasted from the 1950s to the 1970s.\nClark's Bears, previously named Clark's Trading Post, is a visitor attraction in Lincoln, New Hampshire known for its trained bear shows since 1949.\nThe American black bear is the mascot of the University of Maine and Baylor University, the latter of which houses two live bears on campus.\nAttacks on humans.\nAlthough an adult bear is quite capable of killing a human, American black bears typically avoid confronting humans. Unlike grizzly bears, which became a subject of fearsome legend among the European settlers of North America, black bears were rarely considered overly dangerous, even though they lived in areas where the pioneers had settled.\nAmerican black bears rarely attack when confronted by humans and usually only make mock charges, emit blowing noises and swat the ground with their forepaws. The number of attacks on humans is higher than those by brown bears in North America, but this is largely because black bears considerably outnumber brown bears. Compared to brown bear attacks, aggressive encounters with black bears rarely lead to serious injury. Most attacks tend to be motivated by hunger rather than territoriality and thus victims have a higher probability of surviving by fighting back rather than submitting. Unlike female brown bears, female American black bears are not as protective of their cubs and rarely attack humans in the vicinity of the cubs. However, occasionally such attacks do occur. The worst recorded attack occurred in May 1978, in which a bear killed three teenagers fishing in Algonquin Park in Ontario. Another exceptional attack occurred in August 1997 in Liard River Hot Springs Provincial Park in British Columbia, when an emaciated bear attacked a mother and child, killing the mother and a man who intervened. The bear was shot while mauling a fourth victim.\nThe majority of attacks happened in national parks, usually near campgrounds, where the bears had habituated to close human proximity and food. Of 1,028\u00a0incidents of aggressive acts toward humans, recorded from 1964 to 1976 in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, 107 resulted in injury and occurred mainly in tourist hot spots where people regularly fed the bears handouts. In almost every case where open garbage dumps that attracted bears were closed and handouts ceased, the number of aggressive encounters dropped. However, in the Liard River Hot Springs case, the bear was apparently dependent on a local garbage dump that had closed and so was starving to death. Attempts to relocate bears are typically unsuccessful, as the bears seem able to return to their home range, even without familiar landscape cues.\nLivestock and crop predation.\nA limitation of food sources in early spring and wild berry and nut crop failures in summer may contribute to bears regularly feeding from human-based food sources. These bears often eat crops, especially during autumn hyperphagia when natural foods are scarce. Favored crops include apples, oats and corn. American black bears can do extensive damage in areas of the northwestern United States by stripping the bark from trees and feeding on the cambium. Livestock depredations occur mostly in spring.\nAlthough they occasionally hunt adult cattle and horses, they seem to prefer smaller prey such as sheep, goats, pigs and young calves. They usually kill by biting the neck and shoulders, though they may break the neck or back of the prey with blows with the paws. Evidence of a bear attack includes claw marks and is often found on the neck, back and shoulders of larger animals. Surplus killing of sheep and goats is common. American black bears have been known to frighten livestock herds over cliffs, causing injuries and death to many animals; whether this is intentional is not known. Occasionally bears kill pets, especially domestic dogs, which are most prone to harass a bear. It is not recommended to use unleashed dogs to deter bear attacks. Although large, aggressive dogs can sometimes cause a bear to run, if pressed, angry bears often turn the tables and end up chasing the dogs in return. A bear in pursuit of a pet dog can threaten both canid and human lives.\nHunting.\nThe hunting of American black bears has taken place since the initial settlement of the Americas. The first piece of evidence dates to a Clovis site at Lehner Ranch, Arizona. Partially calcined teeth of a 3-month old black bear cub came from a roasting pit, suggesting the bear cub was eaten. The surrounding charcoal was dated to the Early Holocene (10,940 BP). Black bear remains also appear to be associated with early peoples in Tlapacoya, Mexico. Native Americans increasingly utilized black bears during the Holocene, particularly in the late Holocene upper Midwest, e.g., Hopewell and Mississippian cultures.\nSome Native American tribes, in admiration for the American black bear's intelligence, would decorate the heads of bears they killed with trinkets and place them on blankets. Tobacco smoke would be wafted into the disembodied head's nostrils by the hunter that dealt the killing blow, who would compliment the animal for its courage. The Kutchin typically hunted American black bears during their hibernation cycle. Unlike the hunting of hibernating grizzly bears, which was fraught with danger, hibernating American black bears took longer to awaken and hunting them was thus safer and easier. During the European colonization of eastern North America, thousands of bears were hunted for their meat, fat and fur. Theodore Roosevelt wrote extensively on black bear hunting in his \"Hunting the Grisly and other sketches\", in which he stated,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;in [a black bear] chase there is much excitement, and occasionally a slight spice of danger, just enough to render it attractive; so it has always been eagerly followed.\nHe wrote that black bears were difficult to hunt by stalking, due to their habitat preferences, though they were easy to trap. Roosevelt described how, in the southern states, planters regularly hunted bears on horseback with hounds. General Wade Hampton was known to have been present at 500 successful bear hunts, two-thirds of which he killed personally. He killed 30 or 40 bears with only a knife, which he would use to stab the bears between the shoulder blades while they were distracted by his hounds. Unless well trained, horses were often useless in bear hunts, as they often bolted when the bears stood their ground. In 1799, 192,000 American black bear skins were exported from Quebec. In 1822, 3,000 skins were exported from the Hudson's Bay Company. In 1992, untanned, fleshed and salted hides were sold for an average of $165.\nIn Canada, black bears are considered as both a big game and furbearer species in all provinces, save for New Brunswick and the Northwest Territories, where they are only classed as a big game species. There are around 80,900 licensed bear hunters in Canada. Canadian black bear hunts take place in the fall and spring, and both male and female bears can be legally taken, though some provinces prohibit the hunting of females with cubs, or yearlings.\nCurrently, 28 of the U.S. states have American black bear hunting seasons. Nineteen states require a bear hunting license, with some also requiring a big game license. In eight states, only a big game license is required. Overall, over 481,500 American black bear hunting licenses are sold per year. The hunting methods and seasons vary greatly according to state, with some bear hunting seasons including fall only, spring and fall, or year-round. New Jersey, in November 2010, approved a six-day bear-hunting season in early December 2010 to slow the growth of the population. Bear hunting had been banned in New Jersey for five years before that time. A Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll found that 53% of New Jersey voters approved of the new season if scientists concluded that bears were leaving their usual habitats and destroying private property. Men, older voters and those living in rural areas were more likely to approve of a bear hunting season in New Jersey than women, younger voters and those living in more developed parts of the state. In the western states, where there are large American black bear populations, there are spring and year-round seasons. Approximately 18,000 American black bears were killed annually in the U.S. between 1988 and 1992. Within this period, annual kills ranged from six bears in South Carolina to 2,232 in Maine. According to Dwight Schuh in his \"Bowhunter's Encyclopedia\", American black bears are the third most popular quarry of bowhunters, behind deer and elk.\nMeat.\nBear meat had historically been held in high esteem among North America's indigenous people and colonists. American black bears were the only bear species the Kutchin hunted for their meat, though this constituted only a small part of their diet. According to the second volume of \"Frank Forester's Field Sports of the United States, and British Provinces, of North America\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The flesh of the [black] bear is savoury, but rather luscious, and tastes not unlike pork. It was once so common an article of food in New-York as to have given the name of \"Bear Market\" to one of the principal markets of the city.\u2014\u200a\nTheodore Roosevelt likened the flesh of young American black bears to that of pork, and not as coarse or flavorless as the meat of grizzly bears. The most favored cuts are concentrated in the legs and loins. Meat from the neck, front legs and shoulders is usually ground into minced meat or used for stews and casseroles. Keeping the fat on tends to give the meat a strong flavor. As American black bears can have trichinellosis, cooking temperatures need to be high in order to kill the parasites.\nBear fat was once valued as a cosmetic article that promoted hair growth and gloss. The fat most favored for this purpose was the hard white fat found in the body's interior. As only a small portion of this fat could be harvested for this purpose, the oil was often mixed with large quantities of hog lard. However, animal rights activism over the last decade has slowed the harvest of these animals; therefore the lard from bears has not been used in recent years for the purpose of cosmetics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51056", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51056", "title": "Lake Huron", "text": "One of the Great Lakes of North America\nLake Huron ( ) is one of the five Great Lakes of North America. It is shared on the north and east by the Canadian province of Ontario and on the south and west by the U.S. state of Michigan. The name of the lake is derived from early French explorers who named it for the indigenous people they knew as Huron (Wyandot) inhabiting the region.\nHydrologically, Lake Huron comprises the eastern portion of Lake Michigan\u2013Huron, having the same surface elevation as Lake Michigan, to which it is connected by the , Straits of Mackinac. Combined, Lake Michigan\u2013Huron is the largest freshwater lake by area in the world. The Huronian glaciation was named from evidence collected from the Lake Huron region. The northern parts of the lake include the North Channel and Georgian Bay. Saginaw Bay is located in the southwest corner of the lake. The main inlet is the St. Marys River from Lake Superior, and the main outlet is through the St. Clair River toward Lake Erie. Lake Huron has a fairly large drainage basin covering parts of Michigan and Ontario. Water flows through Lake Huron faster than the other Great Lakes with a retention time of only 22 years.\nGeography.\nBy surface area, Lake Huron is the second-largest of the Great Lakes, with a surface area of \u2014of which lies in Michigan and lies in Ontario\u2014making it the third-largest fresh water lake on Earth (or the fourth-largest lake, if the Caspian Sea is counted as a lake). By volume however, Lake Huron is only the third largest of the Great Lakes, being surpassed by Lake Michigan and Lake Superior. When measured at the low water datum, the lake contains a volume of and a shoreline length (including islands) of .\nThe surface of Lake Huron is above sea level. The lake's average depth is 32 fathoms 3 feet (), while the maximum recorded (by sonar) depth is . It has a length of and a greatest breadth of . A large bay that protrudes northeast from Lake Huron into Ontario, Canada, is called Georgian Bay. A notable feature of the lake is Manitoulin Island, which separates the North Channel and Georgian Bay from Lake Huron's main body of water. It is the world's largest lake island. A smaller bay that protrudes southwest from Lake Huron into Michigan is called Saginaw Bay.\nCities with over 10,000 people on Lake Huron include Sarnia, the largest city on Lake Huron, and Saugeen Shores in Canada and Bay City, Port Huron, and Alpena in the United States. Major centres on Georgian Bay include Owen Sound, Wasaga Beach, Collingwood, Midland, Penetanguishene, Port Severn and Parry Sound.\nWater levels.\nHistoric high water\nThe lake fluctuates from month to month with the highest lake levels in October and November. The normal high-water mark is above datum (\"577.5\u00a0ft or 176.0 m\"). In the summer of 1986, Lakes Michigan and Huron reached their then highest level at above datum. The high-water records were broken for several months in a row in 2020.\nHistoric low water\nLake levels tend to be the lowest in winter. The normal low-water mark is below datum (\"577.5 ft or 176.0 m\"). In the winter of 1964, Lakes Michigan and Huron reached their then lowest level at below datum. As with the high-water records, monthly low-water records were set each month from February 1964 through January 1965. During this twelve-month period, water levels ranged from below Chart Datum. The all-time low-water mark was eclipsed in January 2013.\nGeology.\nCounting its 30,000 islands, Lake Huron has the largest shore line length of any of the Great Lakes. It is separated from Lake Michigan, which lies at the same level, by the , Straits of Mackinac, making them hydrologically the same body of water (sometimes called Lake Michigan-Huron and sometimes described as two 'lobes of the same lake'). Aggregated, Lake Huron-Michigan, at , \"is technically the world's largest freshwater lake\". Lake Superior, at 21 feet higher elevation, drains into the St. Marys River which then flows into Lake Huron. The water then flows south to the St. Clair River, at Port Huron, Michigan, and Sarnia, Ontario. The Great Lakes Waterway continues thence to Lake St. Clair; the Detroit River and Detroit, Michigan; into Lake Erie and thence \u2013 via Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence River \u2013 to the Atlantic Ocean.\nLike the other Great Lakes, it was formed by melting ice as the continental glaciers retreated toward the end of the last ice age. Before this, Lake Huron was a low-lying depression through which flowed the now-buried Laurentian and Huronian Rivers; the lake bed was criss-crossed by a large network of tributaries to these ancient waterways, with many of the old channels still evident on bathymetric maps.\nThe Alpena-Amberley Ridge is an ancient ridge beneath the surface of Lake Huron, running from Alpena, Michigan, southwest to Point Clark, Ontario.\nHistory.\nAbout 9,000 years ago, when water levels in Lake Huron were approximately below today's levels, the Alpena-Amberley Ridge was exposed. That land bridge was used as a migration route for large herds of caribou. Since 2008, archaeologists have discovered at least 60 stone constructions along the submerged ridge that are thought to have been used as hunting blinds by Paleo-Indians. That a trade network brought obsidian from Oregon almost ten thousand years ago to be used for toolmaking was confirmed by a 2013 underwater discovery along the ridge. \nOn the eve of European contact, the extent of development among Eastern Woodlands Native American societies is indicated by the archaeological evidence of a town on or near Lake Huron that contained more than one hundred large structures housing a total population of between 4,000 and 6,000. The French, the first European visitors to the region, often referred to Lake Huron as La Mer Douce, \"the fresh-water sea\". In 1656, a map by French cartographer Nicolas Sanson refers to the lake by the name , a Wyandot word that has been translated variously, as \"Freshwater Sea\", \"Lake of the Hurons\", or simply \"lake\". Generally, the lake was labeled \"Lac des Hurons\" (Lake of the Huron) on most early European maps. \nBy the 1860s, many European settlements on the shores of Lake Huron were becoming incorporated, including Sarnia, the largest city on Lake Huron. On October 26, 2010, the Karegnondi Water Authority was formed to build and manage a pipeline from the lake to Flint, Michigan.\nShipwrecks.\nMore than a thousand wrecks have been recorded in Lake Huron. Of these, 185 are located in Saginaw Bay, and 116 are found in the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary and Underwater Preserve, which was established in 2000. Georgian Bay contains 212 sunken vessels.\nPurportedly the first European vessel to sail the Great Lakes, \"Le Griffon\" also became the first ship lost on the Great Lakes. It was built in 1679 on the eastern shore of Lake Erie near Buffalo, New York. Robert Cavalier, Sieur de la Salle navigated across Lake Erie, up the Detroit River, Lake St. Clair and the St. Clair River out into Lake Huron. Passing the Straits of Mackinac, La Salle made landfall on Washington Island, off the tip of the Door Peninsula on the Wisconsin side of Lake Michigan. La Salle filled \"Le Griffon\" with pelts and in late November 1679 sent \"Le Griffon\" back to the site of modern-day Buffalo, never to be seen again. Two wrecks have been identified as \"Le Griffon\", although neither has gained final verification as the actual wreck. Blown by a fierce storm after leaving, \"Le Griffon\" ran aground before the storm. The people of Manitoulin Island say that the wreck in Mississagi Strait at the western tip of the island is that of \"Le Griffon\". Meanwhile, others near Tobermory, say that the wreck on Russell Island, farther east in Georgian Bay, is that of \"Le Griffon\".\nStorm of 1913.\nOn November 9, 1913, the Great Lakes Storm of 1913 in Lake Huron sank 10 ships, and more than 20 were driven ashore. The storm, which raged for 16 hours, killed 235 seamen.\n\"Matoa\u2014a\" propeller freighter measuring 2,311 gross register tons\u2014had passed between Port Huron, Michigan, and Sarnia, Ontario, just after midnight. On November 9, just after six in the morning, \"Senator\" pushed upstream. Less than an hour later, \"Manola\"\u2014a propeller freighter of 2,325 gross register tons also built in Cleveland in 1890\u2014passed through. Captain Frederick W. Light of \"Manola\" reported that both the Canadian and the American weather stations had storm flag signals flying from their weather towers. Following behind at 7:00\u00a0a.m. that Sunday, \"Regina\" steamed out of Sarnia into the northwest gale. The warnings had been up for four hours. \"Manola\" passed \"Regina\" off Port Sanilac, up the lake. Captain Light determined that if it continued to deteriorate, he would seek shelter at Harbor Beach, Michigan, another up the lake. There, he could seek shelter behind the breakwater. Before he reached Harbor Beach, the winds turned to the northeast and the lake began to rise. It was noon when he reached Harbor Beach and ran for shelter. \nThe waves were so violent that \"Manola\" touched bottom entering the harbor. With help from a tugboat, \"Manola\" tied up to the break wall with eight lines. It was about 3:00\u00a0p.m. when \"Manola\" was secured and the crew prepared to drop anchor. As they worked, the cables began to snap from wind pressure against the hull. To keep from being pushed aground, they kept their bow into the wind with the engines running half to full in turns, yet the ship still drifted before its movement was arrested. Waves breaking over the ship damaged several windows, and the crew reported seeing portions of the concrete break wall peeling off as the waves struck it. Meanwhile, fifty miles farther up the lake, \"Matoa\" and Captain Hugh McLeod had to ride out the storm without a safe harbor. \"Matoa\" was found stranded on the Port Austin reef when the winds subsided. \nIt was noon on Monday before the winds let up and not until 11:00 p.m. that night before Captain Light determined it to be safe to continue his journey. Although \"Manola\" survived the storm, she was renamed \"Mapledawn\" in 1920, and on November 24, 1924, she became stranded on Christian Island in Georgian Bay. It was declared a total loss. Salvagers were able to recover approximately 75,000 bushels of barley.\nEcology.\nLake Huron has a lake retention time of 22 years. Like all of the Great Lakes, the ecology of Lake Huron has undergone drastic changes in the last century. The lake originally supported a native deepwater fish community dominated by lake trout, which fed on several species of ciscos as well as sculpins and other native fishes. Several invasive species, including sea lamprey, alewife and rainbow smelt, became abundant in the lake by the 1930s. The major native top predator, lake trout, was virtually extirpated from the lake by 1950 through a combination of overfishing and the effects of sea lamprey. Several species of ciscos were also extirpated from the lake by the 1960s; the only remaining native ciscoes are bloater and cisco (lake herring). Non-native Pacific salmon have been stocked in the lake since the 1960s, but are less abundant since a profound food web change that took place in 2003. Lake trout have also been stocked for decades in an attempt to rehabilitate the species and today are largely self-sustaining, especially in the northern half of the lake.\nLake Huron contains many species of algae and seaweed, including the curly-leafed pondweed, a tall, kelp-like seaweed with small curly leaves able to grow up to ; spiked water-milfoil, a tall kelp-like seaweed with pine-like leaves, often growing in bushes, reaching heights of ; water silk, a smooth, silk-like algae that often grows on rocks; and muskgrass, a seaweed with a skinny stem and flower-like leaves. It is important to note that spiked water-milfoil and curly-leafed pondweed are both invasive species that can remove resources from native algae species.\nLake Huron has suffered recently by the introduction of a variety of new invasive species, including zebra and quagga mussels, the spiny water flea, and round gobies. The demersal fish community of the lake was in a state of collapse by 2006, and a number of drastic changes have been observed in the zooplankton community of the lake. Chinook salmon catches have also been greatly reduced in recent years, and lake whitefish have become less abundant and are in poor condition. These recent changes may be attributable to the new exotic species. Some native species, however were beneficiaries of these chances (principally a result of the almost complete disappearance of the invasive Alewife in the lake). These native species include Lake Trout and Walleye. The Walleye population in Saginaw Bay area of Lake Huron reached recovery targets in 2009.\nCities.\nMichigan&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOntario&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "51058", "revid": "46993000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51058", "title": "Feminist literary criticism", "text": "Literary criticism informed by feminist theory\nFeminist literary criticism is literary criticism informed by feminist theory, or more broadly, by the politics of feminism. It uses the principles and ideology of feminism to critique the language of literature. This school of thought seeks to analyze and describe the ways in which literature portrays the narrative of male domination by exploring the economic, social, political, and psychological forces embedded within literature. This way of thinking and criticizing works can be said to have changed the way literary texts are viewed and studied, as well as changing and expanding the canon of what is commonly taught. \nTraditionally, feminist literary criticism has sought to examine old texts within literary canon through a new lens. Specific goals of feminist criticism include both the development and discovery of female tradition of writing, and rediscovering of old texts, while also interpreting symbolism of women's writing so that it will not be lost or ignored by the male point of view and resisting sexism inherent in the majority of mainstream literature. These goals, along with the intent to analyze women writers and their writings from a female perspective, and increase awareness of the sexual politics of language and style were developed by Lisa Tuttle in the 1980s, and have since been adopted by a majority of feminist critics.\nThe history of feminist literary criticism is extensive, from classic works of nineteenth-century female authors such as George Eliot and Margaret Fuller to cutting-edge theoretical work in women's studies and gender studies by \"third-wave\" authors. Before the 1970s\u2014in the first and second waves of feminism\u2014feminist literary criticism was concerned with women's authorship and the representation of women's condition within the literature; in particular the depiction of fictional female characters. The feminist wave model is useful to identify important surges in history, however, a lot of feminist literary work was still done in between waves. Using the wave model can diminish some of that work. In addition, feminist literary criticism is concerned with the exclusion of women from the literary canon, with theorists such as Lois Tyson suggesting that this is because the views of women authors are often not considered to be universal.\nAdditionally, feminist criticism has been closely associated with the birth and growth of queer studies. Modern feminist literary theory seeks to understand both the literary portrayals and representation of both women and people in the queer community, expanding the role of a variety of identities and analysis within feminist literary criticism.\nMethods Employed.\nFeminist scholarship has developed a variety of ways to unpack literature in order to understand its essence through a feminist lens. Scholars under the camp known as Feminine Critique sought to divorce literary analysis away from abstract diction-based arguments and instead tailored their criticism to more \"grounded\" pieces of literature (plot, characters, etc.) and recognize the perceived implicit misogyny of the structure of the story itself. Others schools of thought such as gynocriticism\u2014which is considered a 'female' perspective on women's writings\u2014uses a historicist approach to literature by exposing exemplary female scholarship in literature and the ways in which their relation to gender structure relayed in their portrayal of both fiction and reality in their texts. Gynocriticism was introduced during the time of second wave feminism. Elaine Showalter suggests that feminist critique is an \"ideological, righteous, angry, and admonitory search for the sins and errors of the past,\" and says gynocriticism enlists \"the grace of imagination in a disinterested search for the essential difference of women's writing.\"\nMore contemporary scholars attempt to understand the intersecting points of femininity and complicate our common assumptions about gender politics by accessing different categories of identity (race, class, sexual orientation, etc.) The ultimate goal of any of these tools is to uncover and expose underlying patriarchal tensions within novels and interrogate the ways in which our basic literary assumptions about such novels are contingent on female subordination. In this way, the accessibility of literature broadens to a far more inclusive and holistic population. Moreover, works that historically received little or no attention, given the historical constraints around female authorship in some cultures, are able to be heard in their original form and unabridged. This makes a broader collection of literature for all readers insofar as all great works of literature are given exposure without bias towards a gender influenced system.\nWomen have also begun to employ anti-patriarchal themes to protest the historical censorship of literature written by women. The rise of decadent feminist literature in the 1990s was meant to directly challenge the sexual politics of the patriarchy. By employing a wide range of female sexual exploration and lesbian and queer identities by those like Rita Felski and Judith Bennet, women were able attract more attention about feminist topics in literature.\nSince the development of more complex conceptions of gender and subjectivity and third-wave feminism, feminist literary criticism has taken a variety of new routes, namely in the tradition of the Frankfurt School's critical theory, which analyzes how the dominant ideology of a subject influences societal understanding. It has also considered gender in the terms of Freudian and Lacanian psychoanalysis, as part of the deconstruction of existing relations of power, and as a concrete political investment. The more traditionally central feminist concern with the representation and politics of women's lives has continued to play an active role in criticism. More specifically, modern feminist criticism deals with those issues related to the perceived intentional and unintentional patriarchal programming within key aspects of society including education, politics and the work force.\nWhen looking at literature, modern feminist literary critics also seek ask how feminist, literary, and critical the critique practices are, with scholars such as Susan Lanser looking to improve both literature analysis and the analyzer's own practices to be more diverse.\nHistory and Critics.\nWhile the beginning of more mainstream feminist literary criticism is typically considered during second-wave feminism, there are multiple texts prior to that era that contributed greatly to the field. Feminist literary criticism can be traced back to medieval times, with some arguing that Geoffrey Chaucer's Wife of Bath could be an example of early feminist literary critics. Additionally, the period considered First wave feminism also contributed extensively to literature and women's presence within it. For example, 1929's \"A Room of One's Own\" by Virginia Woolf is undoubtedly considered one of these formative texts. In it, Woolf argues that in order to write creatively and be critically successful, a woman must be able to own her own space and financial stability. And though the basis of the plot is around a Woolf speaking at a conference for women's literature, she speculates that there is still a long way to go for women and so-called 'women's issues' in creative space, especially based on the differences in educational quality Woolf observed between men and women.\nModern feminist literary criticism finds most of its roots in the 1960s second-wave feminist movements. Beginning with the interrogation of male-centric literature that portrayed women in a demeaning and oppressed model, theorists such as Mary Ellman, Kate Millet and Germaine Greer challenged past imaginations of the feminine within literary scholarship. Within second-wave feminism, three phases can be defined: the feminine phase, the feminist phase, and the female phase. During the feminine phase, female writers adhered to male values. In the feminist phase, there was a theme of criticism of women's role in society. And in the female phase, it was now accepted that women's writing was valid, and the works were less combative than in the feminist phase.\nSusan Lanser suggested changing the name of feminist literary criticism to \"critical literary feminism\" to change the focus from the criticism to the feminism, and points out that writing such works requires \"consciousness of political context.\" In a similar vein, Elaine Showalter became a leading critic in the gynocritical method with her work \"A Literature of their Own\" in 1977. By this time, scholars were not only interested in simply demarcating narratives of oppression but also creating a literary space for past, present and future female literary scholars to substantiate their experience in a genuine way that appreciates the aesthetic form of their works.\nAdditionally, Black literary feminist scholars began to emerge, in the post-Civil Rights era of the United States, as a response to the masculine-centric narratives of Black empowerments began to gain momentum over female voices. Although not a \"critical\" text, \"The Black Woman: An Anthology\", edited by Cade (1970) is seen as essential to the rise of Black literary criticism and theory. Its compilation of poems, short stories and essays gave rise to new institutionally supported forms of Black literary scholarship. The Combahee River Collective released what is called one of the most famous pieces in Black literary scholarship known as \"A Black Feminist Statement\" (1977), which sought to prove that literary feminism was an important component to black female liberation.\nIn 1979 Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar published \"The Madwoman in the Attic\", an analysis of women's poetry and prose, and how it fits into the larger feminist literary canon. This publication has become a staple of feminist criticism and has expanded the realm of publications considered to be feminist works, especially in the 19th century. The book specifically argues that women have largely been considered in two distinct categories by men in academia, monsters or angels. Gilbert and Gubar argued that being trapped in these categories regulated women writers to specific areas of literature and writing, leaving the rest open only to men, and causing a distinct anxiety in women's writers to stay specifically within those categories or be ridiculed. Gilbert and Gubar's specific focus on literary criticism in the realm of poetry and other short pieces has expanded the possibilities of feminist literary contributions today, as they were previously seen as less valid than longer works. Today, writers like Gloria E. Anzald\u00faa have been able to contribute to the feminist canon, while still working with writing forms other than full-sized novels.\nIn the 1980s, Hazel Carby, Barbara Christian, bell hooks, Nellie McKay, Valerie Smith, Hortense Spillers, Eleanor Traylor, Cheryl Wall and Sheryl Ann Williams all contributed heavily to the Black Feminist Scholarship of the period. During that same time, Deborah E. McDowell published \"New Directions for Black Feminist Criticism\", which called for a more theoretical school of criticism versus the current writings, which she deemed overly practical. In this essay McDowell also extensively discussed black women's portrayal in literature, and how it came across as even more negative than white women's portrayal. As time moved forward, the theory began to disperse in ideology. Many decided to shift towards the nuanced psychological factors of the Black experience and further away from broad sweeping generalizations. Others began to connect their works to the politics of lesbianism. Some decided to analyze the Black experience through their relationship to the Western world. Regardless, these scholars continue to employ a variety of methods to explore the identity of Black feminism in literature.\nFrench scholars such as Julia Kristeva, H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Cixous, Luce Irigaray and Bracha L. Ettinger introduced psychoanalytic discourses into their work by way of Sigmund Freud and Jacques Lacan as a way to truly \"get to the root\" of feminine anxieties within text to manifest broader societal truths about the place of women. Current feminist scholars in the field of literature include Hortense Spillers, Nancy Armstrong, Annette Kolodny and Irene Tayler who all come from a variety of backgrounds who use their own nuanced and subjective experiences to inform their understanding of feminist literature. Currently, several university scholars all employ the usage of literary feminism when critiquing texts. The mainstreaming of this school has given academia an extremely useful tool in raising questions over the gender relationships within texts.\nModern applications.\nAs with other aspects of feminist theory, over the course of the second half of twentieth century feminist literary criticism has expanded to include a significantly broader spectrum of identities under the umbrella term of 'feminism'. Third wave feminist theory and beyond has striven to include more identities and aspects of intersectionality, and feminist literary criticism has followed suit. Third wave feminism and feminist literary criticism is concerned more with the intersection of race and other feminist concerns. As a result, the variety and nature of texts examined has grown to include more texts from transnational perspective, while still maintaining its roots in analyzing how male dominated society effects the interpretation and creation of literature. At the same time, new feminist literary critics examine the universal images used by women writers to uncover the unconscious symbolism women have used to describe themselves, their world, female society across time and nationalities to uncover the specifically feminine language in literature. New Feminist literature and criticism minimize the focus on male influences and disruptions in a woman's text by socio-political hegemony to better uncover the universal unconscious of the female mind in its own context.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51059", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51059", "title": "Fyodor Dostoevsky (old)", "text": ""}
{"id": "51062", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51062", "title": "Sewer", "text": "Sewer commonly refers to a part of sewerage, the infrastructure that conveys sewage.\nTypes of sewers include:\nOther uses:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51066", "revid": "33145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51066", "title": "Box-cutterknife", "text": ""}
{"id": "51067", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51067", "title": "Anomie", "text": "Sociological term for \"normlessness\"\nIn sociology, anomie or anomy () is a social condition defined by an uprooting or breakdown of any moral values, standards or guidance for individuals to follow. Anomie is believed to possibly evolve from conflict of belief systems and causes breakdown of social bonds between an individual and the community (both economic and primary socialization).\nThe term, commonly understood to mean \"normlessness\", is believed to have been popularized by French sociologist \u00c9mile Durkheim in his influential book \"Suicide\" (1897). \u00c9mile Durkheim suggested that Protestants exhibited a greater degree of anomie than Catholics. However, Durkheim first introduced the concept of anomie in his 1893 work \"The Division of Labour in Society\". Durkheim never used the term \"normlessness\"; rather, he described \"anomie\" as \"derangement\", and \"an insatiable will.\" Durkheim used the phrase \"the malady of the infinite\" because desire without limit can never be fulfilled; it only becomes more intense.\nFor Durkheim, anomie arises more generally from a mismatch between personal or group standards and wider social standards; or from the lack of a social ethic, which produces moral deregulation and an absence of legitimate aspirations, i.e.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nIn 1893, Durkheim introduced the concept of \"anomie\" to describe the mismatch of collective guild labour to evolving societal needs when the guild was homogeneous in its constituency. He equated homogeneous (redundant) skills to \"mechanical solidarity\" whose inertia hindered adaptation. He contrasted this with the self-regulating behaviour of a division of labour based on differences in constituency, equated to \"organic solidarity\", whose lack of inertia made it sensitive to needed changes.\nDurkheim observed that the conflict between the evolved organic division of labour and the homogeneous mechanical type was such that one could not exist in the presence of the other. When solidarity is organic, anomie is impossible, as sensitivity to mutual needs promotes evolution in the division of labour:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Producers, being near consumers, can easily reckon the extent of the needs to be satisfied. Equilibrium is established without any trouble and production regulates itself. Durkheim contrasted the condition of anomie as being the result of a malfunction of organic solidarity after the transition to mechanical solidarity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDurkheim's use of \"anomie\" was in regards to the phenomenon of industrialization\u2014mass-regimentation that could not adapt due to its own inertia. More specifically, its resistance to change causes disruptive cycles of collective behavior (e.g. economics) due to the necessity of a prolonged buildup of sufficient force or momentum to overcome the inertia.\nLater in 1897, in his studies of suicide, Durkheim associated \"anomie\" to the influence of a lack of norms or norms that were too rigid. However, such normlessness or norm-rigidity was a \"symptom\" of anomie, caused by the lack of differential adaptation that would enable norms to evolve naturally due to self-regulation, either to develop norms where none existed or to change norms that had become rigid and obsolete. Durkheim found that Protestant communities have noticeably higher suicide rates than Catholic ones, and justified it with individualism and lack of social cohesion prevalent amongst Protestants, creating poorly integrated society and making Protestants less likely to develop close communal ties that would be crucial in times of hardship. Conversely, he states that the Catholic faith binds individuals together and builds strong social ties, decreasing the risk of suicide and alienation. In this, Durkheim argued that religion is much more important than culture in regards to anomic suicide. This allowed Durkheim to successfully tie social cohesion to suicide rates:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the individual isolates himself, it is because the ties uniting him with others are slackened or broken, because society is not sufficiently integrated at the points where he is in contact with it. These gaps between one and another individual consciousness, estranging them from each other, are authentic results of the weakening of the social fabric.\nIn 1938, Robert K. Merton linked \"anomie\" with \"deviance\", arguing that the discontinuity between culture and structure have the dysfunctional consequence of leading to deviance within society. He described 5 types of deviance in terms of the acceptance or rejection of social goals and the institutionalized means of achieving them.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"anomie\u2014\"\"a reborrowing with French spelling of \"anomy\"\"\u2014comes from (), namely the privative alpha prefix (\"a-\", 'without'), and \"nomos\" (). The Greeks distinguished between \"nomos\", and \"arch\u00e9\" (). For example, a monarch is a single ruler but he may still be subject to, and not exempt from, the prevailing laws, i.e. \"nomos\". In the original city state democracy, the majority rule was an aspect of \"arch\u00e9\" because it was a rule-based, customary system, which may or may not make laws, i.e. \"nomos\". Thus, the original meaning of \"anomie\" defined anything or anyone against or outside the law, or a condition where the current laws were not applied resulting in a state of illegitimacy or lawlessness.\nThe contemporary English understanding of the word \"anomie\" can accept greater flexibility in the word \"norm\", and some have used the idea of normlessness to reflect a similar situation to the idea of anarchy. However, as used by \u00c9mile Durkheim and later theorists, \"anomie\" is a reaction against or a retreat from the regulatory social controls of society, and is a completely separate concept from anarchy, which consists of the absence of the roles of rulers and submitted.\nSocial disorder.\nNineteenth-century French sociologist \u00c9mile Durkheim borrowed the term \"anomie\" from French philosopher Jean-Marie Guyau. Durkheim used it in his influential book \"Suicide\" (1897) in order to outline the social (and not individual) causes of suicide, characterized by a rapid change of the standards or values of societies (often erroneously referred to as \"normlessness\"), and an associated feeling of alienation and purposelessness. He believed that \"anomie\" is common when the surrounding society has undergone significant changes in its economic fortunes, whether for better or for worse and, more generally, when there is a significant discrepancy between the ideological theories and values commonly professed and what was actually achievable in everyday life. This was contrary to previous theories on suicide which generally maintained that suicide was precipitated by negative events in a person's life and their subsequent depression.\nIn Durkheim's view, traditional religions often provided the basis for the shared values which the anomic individual lacks. Furthermore, he argued that the division of labor that had been prevalent in economic life since the Industrial Revolution led individuals to pursue egoistic ends rather than seeking the good of a larger community. Robert King Merton also adopted the idea of anomie to develop strain theory, defining it as the discrepancy between common social goals and the legitimate means to attain those goals. In other words, an individual suffering from anomie would strive to attain the common goals of a specific society yet would not be able to reach these goals legitimately because of the structural limitations in society. As a result, the individual would exhibit deviant behavior. Friedrich Hayek notably uses the word \"anomie\" with this meaning.\nAccording to one academic survey, psychometric testing confirmed a link between anomie and academic dishonesty among university students, suggesting that universities needed to foster codes of ethics among students in order to curb it. In another study, anomie was seen as a \"push factor\" in tourism.\nAs an older variant, the 1913 \"Webster's Dictionary\" reports use of the word \"anomie\" as meaning \"disregard or violation of the law.\" However, \"anomie\" as a social disorder is not to be confused with anarchy: proponents of anarchism claim that anarchy does not necessarily lead to anomie and that hierarchical command actually increases lawlessness. Some anarcho-primitivists argue that complex societies, particularly industrial and post-industrial societies, directly cause conditions such as anomie by depriving the individual of self-determination and a relatively small reference group to relate to, such as the band, clan or tribe.\nIn 2003, Jos\u00e9 Soltero and Romeo Saravia analyzed the concept of anomie in regards to Protestantism and Catholicism in El Salvador. Massive displacement of population in the 1970s, economic and political crises as well as cycles of violence are credited with radically changing the religious composition of the country, rendering it one of the most Protestant countries in Latin America. According to Soltero and Saravia, the rise of Protestantism is conversationally claimed to be caused by a Catholic failure to \"address the spiritual needs of the poor\" and the Protestant \"deeper quest for salvation, liberation, and eternal life\". However, their research does not support these claims, and showed that Protestantism is not more popular amongst the poor. Their findings do confirm the assumptions of anomie, with Catholic communities of El Salvador enjoying high social cohesion, while the Protestant communities have been associated with poorer social integration, internal migration and tend to be places deeply affected by the Salvadoran Civil War. Additionally, Soltero and Saravia found that Salvadoran Catholicism is tied to social activism, liberation theology and the political left, as opposed to the \"right wing political orientation, or at least a passive, personally inward orientation, expressed by some Protestant churches\". They conclude that their research contradicts the theory that Protestantism responds to the spiritual needs of the poor more adequately than Catholicism, while also disproving the claim that Protestantism appeals more to women:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These outcomes contradict the theory that Protestantism responds to the spiritual needs of the poor (Shaull and Cesar 2001; Smith, 1998; Vazquez 2000) more adequately than Catholicism in El Salvador's less resourceful suburban areas. In fact, the results indicate that individuals of different resource levels, among the sample studied, have no real preference between Protestantism and Catholicism for the most part. Hence, believers' spiritual needs may or may not take them to another church, independently of their social class background, as demonstrated by the existence of Protestant churches with middle and upper middle class constituencies (Cleary 1992; Garrard-Burnett 1998). In a study of Guatemalan highland Maya, Smith (1998) reports no differences in lifestyle between poor Protestants and poor Catholic.[...] There is no difference between men and women in terms of their likelihood of joining a non-Catholic church (Protestant or otherwise) or being non-religious, rather than being Catholic. Indeed, Peterson (2001:30) argues that in El Salvador, \"progressive Catholic communities offer many women support, both material and moral, for their efforts to cope with domestic problems such as a husband's departure or alcoholism.\"\nThe study by Soltero and Saravia has also found a link between Protestantism and no access to healthcare:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSynnomie.\nFreda Adler coined \"synnomie\" as the opposite of anomie. Using \u00c9mile Durkheim's concept of social solidarity and collective consciousness, Adler defined \"synnomie\" as \"a congruence of norms to the point of harmonious accommodation\".\nAdler described societies in a synnomie state as \"characterized by norm conformity, cohesion, intact social controls and norm integration\". Social institutions such as the family, religion and communities, largely serve as sources of norms and social control to maintain a \"synnomic society\".\nIn culture.\nIn Albert Camus's existentialist novel \"The Stranger\", Meursault\u2014the bored, alienated protagonist\u2014struggles to construct an individual system of values as he responds to the disappearance of the old. He exists largely in a state of anomie, as seen from the apathy evinced in the opening lines: \"\" (\"Today mum died. Or maybe yesterday, I don't know\").\nFyodor Dostoyevsky expresses a similar concern about anomie in his novel \"The Brothers Karamazov\". The Grand Inquisitor remarks that in the absence of God and immortal life, everything would be lawful. In other words, that any act becomes thinkable, that there is no moral compass, which leads to apathy and detachment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51068", "revid": "8454797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51068", "title": "Queer literary interpretation", "text": ""}
{"id": "51070", "revid": "14660971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51070", "title": "Conventional superconductor", "text": "Materials that display superconductivity as described by BCS theory or its extensions\nConventional superconductors are materials that display superconductivity as described by BCS theory or its extensions. This is in contrast to unconventional superconductors, which do not. Conventional superconductors can be either type-I or type-II.\nMost elemental superconductors are conventional. Niobium and vanadium are type-II, while most other elemental superconductors are type-I. Critical temperatures of some elemental superconductors:\nMost compound and alloy superconductors are type-II materials. The most commonly used conventional superconductor in applications is a niobium-titanium alloy - this is a type-II superconductor with a superconducting critical temperature of 11 K. The highest critical temperature so far achieved in a conventional superconductor was 39 K (-234 \u00b0C) in magnesium diboride.\nBKBO.\nBa0.6K0.4BiO3 is an unusual superconductor (a non-cuprate oxide) - but considered 'conventional' in the sense that the BCS theory applies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51071", "revid": "153128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51071", "title": "High-temperature superconductor", "text": ""}
{"id": "51072", "revid": "50888983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51072", "title": "Natural deduction", "text": "Kind of proof calculus\nIn logic and proof theory, natural deduction is a kind of proof calculus in which logical reasoning is expressed by inference rules closely related to the \"natural\" way of reasoning. This contrasts with Hilbert-style systems, which instead use axioms as much as possible to express the logical laws of deductive reasoning.\nHistory.\nNatural deduction grew out of a context of dissatisfaction with the axiomatizations of deductive reasoning common to the systems of Hilbert, Frege, and Russell (see, e.g., Hilbert system). Such axiomatizations were most famously used by Russell and Whitehead in their mathematical treatise \"Principia Mathematica\". Spurred on by a series of seminars in Poland in 1926 by \u0141ukasiewicz that advocated a more natural treatment of logic, Ja\u015bkowski made the earliest attempts at defining a more natural deduction, first in 1929 using a diagrammatic notation, and later updating his proposal in a sequence of papers in 1934 and 1935. His proposals led to different notations such as Fitch notation or Suppes' method, for which Lemmon gave a variant now known as Suppes\u2013Lemmon notation.\nNatural deduction in its modern form was independently proposed by the German mathematician Gerhard Gentzen in 1933, in a dissertation delivered to the faculty of mathematical sciences of the University of G\u00f6ttingen. The term \"natural deduction\" (or rather, its German equivalent \"nat\u00fcrliches Schlie\u00dfen\") was coined in that paper:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nGentzen was motivated by a desire to establish the consistency of number theory. He was unable to prove the main result required for the consistency result, the cut elimination theorem\u2014the Hauptsatz\u2014directly for natural deduction. For this reason he introduced his alternative system, the sequent calculus, for which he proved the Hauptsatz both for classical and intuitionistic logic. In a series of seminars in 1961 and 1962 Prawitz gave a comprehensive summary of natural deduction calculi, and transported much of Gentzen's work with sequent calculi into the natural deduction framework. His 1965 monograph \"Natural deduction: a proof-theoretical study\" was to become a reference work on natural deduction, and included applications for modal and second-order logic.\nIn natural deduction, a proposition is deduced from a collection of premises by applying inference rules repeatedly. The system presented in this article is a minor variation of Gentzen's or Prawitz's formulation, but with a closer adherence to Martin-L\u00f6f's description of logical judgments and connectives.\nHistory of notation styles.\nNatural deduction has had a large variety of notation styles, which can make it difficult to recognize a proof if you're not familiar with one of them. To help with this situation, this article has a section explaining how to read all the notation that it will actually use. This section just explains the historical evolution of notation styles, most of which cannot be shown because there are no illustrations available under a public copyright license \u2013 the reader is pointed to the https:// and https:// for pictures.\nNotation.\nHere is a table with the most common notational variants for logical connectives.\nGentzen's tree notation.\nGentzen, who invented natural deduction, had his own notation style for arguments. This will be exemplified by a simple argument below. Let's say we have a simple example argument in propositional logic, such as, \"if it's raining then it's cloudly; it is raining; therefore it's cloudy\". (This is in modus ponens.) Representing this as a list of propositions, as is common, we would have:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nformula_3\nIn Gentzen's notation, this would be written like this:\nformula_4\nThe premises are shown above a line, called the inference line, separated by a comma, which indicates \"combination\" of premises. The conclusion is written below the inference line. The inference line represents \"syntactic consequence\", sometimes called \"deductive consequence\", which is also symbolized with \u22a2. So the above can also be written in one line as formula_5. (The turnstile, for syntactic consequence, is of lower precedence than the comma, which represents premise combination, which in turn is of lower precedence than the arrow, used for material implication; so no parentheses are needed to interpret this formula.)\nSyntactic consequence is contrasted with \"semantic consequence\", which is symbolized with \u22a7. In this case, the conclusion follows \"syntactically\" because natural deduction is a syntactic proof system, which assumes inference rules as primitives.\nGentzen's style will be used in much of this article. Gentzen's discharging annotations used to internalise hypothetical judgments can be avoided by representing proofs as a tree of sequents \"\u0393\"\u00a0\u22a2\u00a0\"A\" instead of a tree of judgments that \"A\" (is true).\nSuppes\u2013Lemmon notation.\nMany textbooks use Suppes\u2013Lemmon notation, so this article will also give that \u2013 although as of now, this is only included for propositional logic, and the rest of the coverage is given only in Gentzen style. A proof, laid out in accordance with the Suppes\u2013Lemmon notation style, is a sequence of lines containing sentences, where each sentence is either an assumption, or the result of applying a rule of proof to earlier sentences in the sequence. Each line of proof is made up of a sentence of proof, together with its annotation, its assumption set, and the current line number. The assumption set lists the assumptions on which the given sentence of proof depends, which are referenced by the line numbers. The annotation specifies which rule of proof was applied, and to which earlier lines, to yield the current sentence. Here's an example proof:\nThis proof will become clearer when the inference rules and their appropriate annotations are specified \u2013 see .\nPropositional language syntax.\nThis section defines the formal syntax for a propositional logic language, contrasting the common ways of doing so with a Gentzen-style way of doing so.\nCommon definition styles.\nIn classical propositional calculus the formal language formula_6 is usually defined (here: by recursion) as follows:\nNegation (formula_14) is defined as implication to falsity\nformula_15,\nwhere formula_7 (falsum) represents a contradiction or absolute falsehood.\nOlder publications, and publications that do not focus on logical systems like minimal, intuitionistic or Hilbert systems, take negation as a primitive logical connective, meaning it is assumed as a basic operation and not defined in terms of other connectives. Some authors, such as Bostock, use formula_7 and formula_18, and also define formula_14 as primitives.\nGentzen-style definition.\nA syntax definition can also be given using , by writing well-formed formulas below the inference line and any schematic variables used by those formulas above it. For instance, the equivalent of rules 3 and 4, from Bostock's definition above, is written as follows:\nformula_20.\nA different notational convention sees the language's syntax as a categorial grammar with the single category \"formula\", denoted by the symbol formula_21. So any elements of the syntax are introduced by categorizations, for which the notation is formula_22, meaning \"formula_8 is an expression for an object in the category formula_21.\" The sentence-letters, then, are introduced by categorizations such as formula_25,\u2002formula_26,\u2002formula_27, and so on; the connectives, in turn, are defined by statements similar to the above, but using categorization notation, as seen below:\nIn the rest of this article, the formula_22 categorization notation will be used for any Gentzen-notation statements defining the language's grammar; any other statements in Gentzen notation will be inferences, asserting that a sequent follows rather than that an expression is a well-formed formula.\nGentzen-style propositional logic.\nGentzen-style inference rules.\nLet the propositional language formula_6 be inductively defined as formula_30.\nDefine negation as formula_31.\nThe following is a list of primitive inference rules for natural deduction in propositional logic:\nIn this table the Greek letters formula_32 are \"schemata\", which range over formulas rather than only over atomic propositions. The name of a rule is given to the right of its formula tree. For instance, the first introduction rule is named formula_33, which is short for \"conjunction introduction\".\nWithout the rules formula_35 and formula_36 the system defines minimal logic (as discussed by Johansson).\nWhen the rule formula_35 (principle of explosion) is added to the rules for minimal logic, the system defines intuitionistic logic.\nThe statement formula_39 is valid (already in minimal logic, see example 1 below), unlike the reverse implication which would entail the law of excluded middle.\nWhen all listed natural deduction rules are admitted, the system defines classical logic.\nGentzen-style example proofs.\nExample 1: Proof, within minimal logic, of formula_41.\nGoal: formula_42\nProof:\nformula_43\nExample 2: Proof, within minimal logic, of formula_44:\nformula_45\nFitch-style propositional logic.\nFitch developed a system of natural deduction which is characterized by\nLater logicians and educators such as Patrick Suppes and E. J. Lemmon rebranded Fitch's system. While they introduced graphical changes\u2014such as replacing indentation with vertical bars\u2014the underlying structure of Fitch-style natural deduction remained intact. These variations are often referred to as the Suppes\u2013Lemmon format, though they are fundamentally based on Fitch's original notation.\nSuppes\u2013Lemmon-style propositional logic.\nSuppes\u2013Lemmon-style inference rules.\nThe linear presentation used in Fitch- and Suppes\u2013Lemmon-style proofs \u2014 with line numbers and vertical alignment/assumption sets \u2014 makes subproofs clearly visible. Fitch (sparingly and cautiously) used derived rules. Suppes\u2013Lemmon went further and added derived rules to the toolbox of natural deduction rules.\nSuppes introduced natural deduction using Gentzen-style rules.\nLemmon formalized more derived rules. He as well defined negation as implication to falsity: formula_47. This is not stated as a formal definition in \"Beginning Logic\", but it is implicitly assumed throughout the system. Here's how we know:\n This only works if formula_50 is understood as formula_52.\n This requires treating formula_50 as formula_52, so that modus ponens yields contradiction.\nIn the table below, based on Lemmon (1978) and Allen &amp; Hand (2022), Lemmon's derived rules are highlighted. They can be derived from the (non-highlighted) Gentzen rules.\nThere are nine primitive rules of proof, which are the rule \"assumption\", plus four pairs of introduction and elimination rules for the binary connectives, and the rules of \"double negation\" and \"reductio ad absurdum\", of which only one is needed. \"Disjunctive Syllogism\" can be used as an easier alternative to the proper \u2228-elimination, and MTT is a commonly given rule, although it is not primitive.\nThe kinds of proofs generated in the sequent calculus are therefore rather different from those of natural deduction. The sequent calculus produces proofs in what is known as the \"\u03b2-normal \u03b7-long\" form, which corresponds to a canonical representation of the normal form of the natural deduction proof. If one attempts to describe these proofs using natural deduction itself, one obtains what is called the \"intercalation calculus\" (first described by John Byrnes), which can be used to formally define the notion of a \"normal form\" for natural deduction.\nThe substitution theorem of natural deduction takes the form of a structural rule or structural theorem known as \"cut\" in the sequent calculus.\n \"If\" \u0393 \u21d2 \u03c01 : \"A\" \"and\" \u0393, \"u\":\"A\" \u21d2 \u03c02 : \"C\", \"then\" \u0393 \u21d2 [\u03c01/u] \u03c02 : \"C\".\nCut (substitution).\nIn most well behaved logics, cut is unnecessary as an inference rule, though it remains provable as a meta-theorem; the superfluousness of the cut rule is usually presented as a computational process, known as \"cut elimination\". This has an interesting application for natural deduction; usually it is extremely tedious to prove certain properties directly in natural deduction because of an unbounded number of cases. For example, consider showing that a given proposition is \"not\" provable in natural deduction. A simple inductive argument fails because of rules like \u2228E or E which can introduce arbitrary propositions. However, we know that the sequent calculus is complete with respect to natural deduction, so it is enough to show this unprovability in the sequent calculus. Now, if cut is not available as an inference rule, then all sequent rules either introduce a connective on the right or the left, so the depth of a sequent derivation is fully bounded by the connectives in the final conclusion. Thus, showing unprovability is much easier, because there are only a finite number of cases to consider, and each case is composed entirely of sub-propositions of the conclusion. A simple instance of this is the \"global consistency\" theorem: \"\u22c5 \u22a2 \u22a5\" is not provable. In the sequent calculus version, this is manifestly true because there is no rule that can have \"\u22c5 \u21d2 \u22a5\" as a conclusion! Proof theorists often prefer to work on cut-free sequent calculus formulations because of such properties.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\n"}
{"id": "51073", "revid": "21140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51073", "title": "Literary interpretation", "text": ""}
{"id": "51074", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51074", "title": "Peter Kropotkin", "text": "Russian anarchist (1842\u20131921)\nPyotr Alexeyevich Kropotkin (1842\u00a0[O.S. ]\u00a0\u2013 8February 1921) was a Russian anarchist and geographer known as a proponent of anarchist communism.\nBorn into an aristocratic land-owning family, Kropotkin attended the Page Corps and later served as an officer in Siberia, where he participated in several geological expeditions. He was imprisoned for his activism in 1874 and managed to escape two years later. He spent the next 41 years in exile in Switzerland, France (where he was imprisoned for almost four years), and England. While in exile, he gave lectures and published widely on anarchism and geography. Kropotkin returned to Russia after the Russian Revolution in 1917, but he was disappointed by the Bolshevik state.\nKropotkin was a proponent of the idea of decentralized communist society free from central government and based on voluntary associations of self-governing communities and worker-run enterprises. He wrote many books, pamphlets and articles, the most prominent being \"The Conquest of Bread\" (1892) and \"Fields, Factories, and Workshops\" (1899), with \"\" (1902) being his principal scientific offering. He contributed the article on anarchism to the eleventh edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" and left an unfinished work on anarchist ethical philosophy.\nEarly life.\nKropotkin was born in Moscow on 9 December 1842, in the (\"Equerries\") district. His father, Alexander, was a typical royal officer who owned serfs in three provinces and whose family descended from the princes of Smolensk. His mother, Ekatarina Sulima, was the daughter of General Nikolai Sulima and a descendant of a Zaporozhian Cossack leader. Peter, the youngest of her four children, was three years old when she died of tuberculosis. Kropotkin's father remarried two years later. This stepmother was indifferent towards the Kropotkin children and had a streak of jealous vindictiveness, going to great lengths to remove the memory of Kropotkin's mother.\nWith his father mostly absent, Kropotkin and his older brother, Alexander, were raised by their German nurse. Kropotkin developed an enduring compassion for the estate's servants and serfs who cared for him and relayed stories of his mother's kindness. He was raised in the family's Moscow mansion and an estate in , outside Moscow.\nAt the age of eight, Kropotkin attended Tsar Nicholas I's Royal Ball. Commending the child's costume, the tsar chose Kropotkin for his Page Corps, an elite school in St. Petersburg that combined military and court education and produced the tsar's imperial attendants. Kropotkin joined the Page Corps as a teenager and began a 14-year epistolary relationship with his brother that charts his intellectual and emotional development. By the time of his arrival, Kropotkin had already shown a populist position towards the emancipation of serfs and a nature of revolt against his father and the school's hazing. Kropotkin began his first underground revolutionary writings at the school, where he advocated for a Russian constitution. He developed an interest in science, reading, and opera. As a top student, Kropotkin became a sergeant-major in 1861 and was thrust into court life, serving as the emperor's personal Page de Chambre. His views of the tsar and court life soured as imperial policy changed over the next year. Privately, he was preoccupied with the need to live a societally useful life.\nSiberia.\nFor his tour of service, in 1862, he chose the Amur Cossacks in east Siberia, an undesirable post that would let him study the technical mathematics of artillery, travel, live in nature, and achieve financial independence from his father. He developed a firm worldview of compassion for the poor and contrasted the pride and dignity of the yeoman peasant farmers against the indignities of serfdom. He wrote approvingly of the cultivated Transbaikalia governor-general Boleslav Kukel, to whom Kropotkin reported. Kukel engaged Kropotkin in prison reform and city self-governance projects that the central government ultimately denied. The exiled poet and political prisoner Mikhail Larionovitch Mikhailov introduced Kropotkin to anarchism by recommending he read an essay by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. Kropotkin's brother came to live with him in Irkutsk. \nAfter Kukel's ouster in early 1863, Kropotkin found solace in geographical work. He led a disguised reconnaissance expedition to find a direct route through Manchuria from Chita to Vladivostok the next year. He explored the East Siberian Mountains in the north the year after. The mountain measurements from his 1866 Olekminsk-Vitimsk expedition confirmed his Manchurian hypothesis that the Siberian area from the Ural Mountains to the Pacific Ocean was a plateau and not a plain. This discovery of the Patom and Vitim Plateaus won him a gold medal from the Russian Geographical Society and led to the commercialization of the Lena gold fields. A range of mountains in this region was later named for him.\nKropotkin covered Siberia for St. Petersburg newspapers since his arrival, including the condition of the Polish political exiles who participated in the unsuccessful 1866 Baikal Insurrection. Kropotkin secured a promise from the governor-general to suspend the prisoners' death sentences, which was reneged upon. Disillusioned, Kropotkin and his brother resolved to leave the military. His time in Siberia taught him to appreciate peasant social organization and convinced him that administrative reform was an ineffectual means to improve social conditions.\nAfter five years in Siberia, Kropotkin and his brother moved to St. Petersburg, where they continued their schooling and academic work. Kropotkin took a position with the Russian interior ministry with no duties. He studied mathematics, physics, and geography at the university. After presenting his Vitim expedition findings, Kropotkin accepted the Russian Geographical Society's part-time offer of its Physical Geography section Secretaryship. Kropotkin translated Herbert Spencer's work for additional income. He continued to develop a theory, which he considered his best scientific contribution, that the East Siberian mountains were part of a large plateau and not independent ridges. Kropotkin participated in a 1870 polar expedition plan that postulated the existence of what was later discovered as the Franz Josef Land Arctic archipelago.\nIn early 1871, he was commissioned to study the Ice Age in Scandinavian geography, in which Kropotkin developed theories of the glaciation of Europe and the glacial lakes of its northeast. His father died later that year, and Kropotkin inherited a wealthy estate in Tambov. Kropotkin turned down the Geographical Society's offer of its general secretary position, instead choosing to work on his Ice Age data and interest in bettering the lives of peasants.\nAnarchism.\nWhile Kropotkin became increasingly revolutionary in his writings, he was not known for activism. He was spurred by the 1871 Paris Commune and the trial of Sergey Nechayev. He and his brother attended meetings on the Franco-Prussian War and revolutionism. Likely at the encouragement of a Swiss extended family member and his own desire to see the socialist workers' movement, Kropotkin set out to see Switzerland and Western Europe in February 1872. Over three months, he met Mikhail Sazhin in Zurich, worked and fell out with Nikolai Utin's Marxist group in Geneva, and was introduced to the Jura Federation's James Guillaume and Adh\u00e9mar Schwitzgu\u00e9bel. The Jura were the main internal opposition to the Marxist-controlled First International, as followers of Mikhail Bakunin. Kropotkin was quickly impressed and was instantly converted to anarchism by the group's egalitarianism and independence of expression, but narrowly missed meeting the leading anarchist, Bakunin, while there. Kropotkin visited Belgium's movement before returning to Russia in May with contraband literature.\nBack in St. Petersburg, Kropotkin joined the Chaikovsky Circle, a group of revolutionaries that Kropotkin considered more educational than revolutionary in their activities. Kropotkin believed in the inevitability of social revolution and the need for stateless social organization. His populist revolutionary program for the group emphasized the role of urban workers and peasants, whereas the group's moderates concentrated on students. Partially for this reason, he declined to contribute his personal wealth to the group. He viewed professionals as unlikely to forgo their privileges and judged them to not live societally useful lives. His program emphasized federated agrarian communes and a revolutionary party. While he could speak powerfully, Kropotkin was not a successful organizer.\nKropotkin's first political memo in November 1873 covered his basic plan for stateless social reconstruction, including common property, worker control of factories, shared physical labor towards societal need, and labor vouchers in lieu of money. He emphasized living among commoners and using propaganda to focus mass dissatisfaction. He rejected the Nechayev conspiracy model. Members of the circle began to be arrested in late 1873, and the Third Section secret police came for Kropotkin in March 1874.\nHis arrest for agitation, as a former \"page de chambre\" and officer, was scandalous. Kropotkin had just filed his Ice Age report and had been recently elected president of the Geographical Society's Physical and Mathematical Department. At the society's request, the tsar granted Kropotkin books to finish his glaciation report. Kropotkin was held in the Peter and Paul Fortress. His brother, who had also been radicalized as a follower of Lavrov, was also arrested and exiled in Siberia, where he committed suicide about a decade later.\nKropotkin was moved to the House of Detention prison military hospital in St. Petersburg for poor health, with the help of his sister. With assistance from friends, he escaped from the minimum-security prison in June 1876. By way of Scandinavia and England, Kropotkin arrived in Switzerland by the end of the year, where he met Italian anarchists Carlo Cafiero and Errico Malatesta. He visited Belgium and Zurich, where he met French geographer \u00c9lis\u00e9e Reclus, who became a close friend.\nExile.\nKropotkin associated with the Jura Federation and began editing its publication. There he met Ukrainian Jewish student Sofia Ananieva-Rabinovich, and the two were married in 1878. In 1879, he started \"Le R\u00e9volt\u00e9\", a revolutionary fortnightly, in Geneva that published his personal articulation of anarchist communism, the idea of distributing work product communally based on need rather than by work. He became the philosophy's most prominent proponent, despite not creating it. The philosophy became part of the Jura program in 1880 at Kropotkin's advocacy. \"Le R\u00e9volt\u00e9\" also published Kropotkin's best-known pamphlet, \"An Appeal to the Young\", in 1880. \nSwitzerland expelled Kropotkin at Russia's behest after the assassination of Alexander II in early 1881. He moved to Thonon-les-Bains, France, near Geneva, so that his wife could finish her Swiss education. Upon learning that the Holy League, a tsarist group, intended to kill him for his alleged association with the assassination, he moved to London, but could only bear to live there for a year. Upon his return in late 1882, the French arrested him for agitation, partly to appease Russia. He was sentenced to five years in Lyon. In early 1883, he was transferred to the Clairvaux Prison, where he continued his academic work. A public campaign of intellectuals and French legislators called for his release. Reclus published \"Words of a Rebel\", a compilation of Kropotkin's \"R\u00e9volt\u00e9\" writings while he was in prison, which became a main source of Kropotkin's thoughts on revolution. As Kropotkin's health worsened from scurvy and malaria, France released him in early 1886. He would stay in England through 1917, settling in Harrow, London, apart from brief trips to other European countries.\nIn London in late 1886, he co-founded \"Freedom\", an anarchist monthly and the first English anarchist periodical, which he continued to support for almost three decades. His first and only child, Alexandra Kropotkin, was born the next year. He published multiple books over the coming years, including \"In Russian and French Prisons\" and \"The Conquest of Bread\". His intellectual circle in London included William Morris and W. B. Yeats as well as old Russian friends Sergey Stepnyak-Kravchinsky and Nikolai Tchaikovsky. Kropotkin contributed to the \"Geographical Journal\" and \"Nature\".\nAfter 1890, according to biographers George Woodcock and Ivan Avakumovi\u0107, Kropotkin became more of a scholarly recluse and less of a propagandist. His works' revolutionary zeal subsided as he turned to social, ethical, and scientific questions. He joined the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He continued to contribute to \"Freedom\" but was no longer an editor.\nSeveral of Kropotkin's books began as journal articles. His writings on anarchist communist social life were printed in the French successor to \"Le R\u00e9volt\u00e9\" and later revised into \"The Conquest of Bread\" in 1892. Kropotkin's writings on decentralizing production and industry against the countervailing trend of centralized industrialization were compiled into his \"Fields, Factories, and Workshops\" in 1899. His research throughout the 1890s on the animal instinct for cooperation as a counterpoint to Darwinism became a series of articles in \"Nineteenth Century\" and, later, the book \"Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution\", which was widely translated.\nFollowing a scientific congress in Toronto in 1897, Kropotkin toured Canada. His experience there led him to advise the Russian Doukhobors who sought to immigrate there. He helped facilitate their emigration in 1899. Kropotkin entered the United States and met Johann Most, Emma Goldman, and Benjamin Tucker. American publishers published his \"Memoirs of a Revolutionist\" and \"Fields, Factories, and Workshops\" by the end of the decade. He visited the United States again in 1901 at the invitation of the Lowell Institute to give lectures on Russian literature that were later published. He published \"The Great French Revolution\" (1909), \"The Terror in Russia\" (1909), and \"Modern Science and Anarchism\" (1913). His 70th birthday in 1912 had celebratory gatherings in London and Paris.\nKropotkin's support for Western entry into World War I, siding with Britain and France, divided the anarchist movement, which had been anti-war, and damaged his esteem as a luminary of socialism. He exacerbated this by insisting, with returning to Russia, that Russians support the war as well.\nReturn to Russia.\nWith the outbreak of the Russian Revolution, Kropotkin returned to Russia in June 1917. He refused the Petrograd Provisional Government's offer of a cabinet seat. In August, he advocated for defending Russia and the revolution at the National State Conference. Kropotkin applied for a residence in Moscow in 1918, which was personally approved by Vladimir Lenin, head of the Soviet government. Months later, finding life in Moscow difficult in his old age, Kropotkin moved with his family to a friend's home in the nearby town of Dmitrov.\nIn 1919, Emma Goldman visited his family there. Kropotkin met Lenin in Moscow and corresponded by mail to discuss political questions of the day. He advocated for workers' cooperatives and argued against the Bolsheviks' hostage policy and centralization of authority, while simultaneously encouraging Western comrades to stop their governments' military interventions in Russia. Kropotkin ultimately had little impact on the Russian revolution, but his advocacy work for political and anarchist prisoners in Russia, and for the anti-interventionist Russian Revolution, during the last four years of his life replenished some of the goodwill he had lost due to his support for the Western powers in World War I.\nKropotkin died of pneumonia on 8 February 1921. His family refused an offer of a state funeral. With his Moscow funeral, the Bolsheviks permitted the diminished Russian anarchist movement an official, restrained occasion to memorialize their figurehead. It was the last major anarchist demonstration of the period in Russia, because the movement and Kropotkin's writings were fully suppressed later that year.\nPhilosophy.\nCritique of capitalism.\nKropotkin critiqued what he considered to be the fallacies of the economic systems of feudalism and capitalism. He believed they create poverty and artificial scarcity and promote privilege. As an alternative, he proposed a more decentralized economic system based on mutual aid and voluntary cooperation. He argued that the tendencies for this kind of organization already exist, both in evolution and in human society.\nKropotkin disagreed in part with the Marxist critique of capitalism, including the labor theory of value, believing there was no necessary link between work performed and the values of commodities. His attack on the institution of wage labor was based more on the power employers exerted over employees, and not only on the extraction of surplus value from their labor. Kropotkin claimed this power was made possible by the state's protection of private ownership of productive resources. However, Kropotkin believed the possibility of surplus value was itself the problem, holding that a society would still be unjust if the workers of a particular industry kept their surplus to themselves, rather than redistributing it for the common good.\nCritique of state socialism.\nKropotkin believed that a communist society could be established only by a social revolution, which he described as, \"... the taking possession by the people of all social wealth. It is the abolition of all the forces which have so long hampered the development of Humanity\". However, he criticized forms of revolutionary methods (like those proposed by Marxism and Blanquism) that retained the use of state power, arguing that any central authority was incompatible with the dramatic changes needed by a social revolution. Kropotkin believed that the mechanisms of the state were deeply rooted in maintaining the power of one class over another, and thus could not be used to emancipate the working class. Instead, Kropotkin insisted that both private property and the state needed to be abolished together.\nThe economic change which will result from the Social Revolution will be so immense and so profound, it must so change all the relations based today on property and exchange, that it is impossible for one or any individual to elaborate the different social forms, which must spring up in the society of the future. [...] Any authority external to it will only be an obstacle, only a trammel on the organic labor which must be accomplished, and beside that a source of discord and hatred.\nKropotkin believed that any post-revolutionary government would lack the local knowledge to organize a diverse population. Their vision of society would be limited by their own vindictive, self-serving, or narrow ideals. To ensure order, preserve authority, and organize production the state would need to use violence and coercion to suppress further revolution, and control workers. The workers would be reliant on the state bureaucracy to organize them, so they would never develop the initiative to self-organize as they needed. This would lead to the re-creation of classes, an oppressed workforce, and eventually another revolution. Thus, Kropotkin wrote that maintaining the state would paralyze any true social revolution, making the idea of a \"revolutionary government\" a contradiction in terms:\nWe know that Revolution and Government are incompatible; one must destroy the other, no matter what name is given to government, whether dictator, royalty, or parliament. We know that what makes the strength and the truth of our party is contained in this fundamental formula \u2014 \"Nothing good or durable can be done except by the free initiative of the people, and every government tends to destroy it;\" and so the very best among us, if their ideas had not to pass through the crucible of the popular mind, before being put into execution, and if they should become masters of that formidable machine \u2014 the government \u2014 and could thus act as they chose, would become in a week fit only for the gallows. We know whither every dictator leads, even the best intentioned, \u2014 namely to the death of all revolutionary movement.\nRather than a centralized approach, Kropotkin stressed the need for decentralized organization. He believed that dissolving the state would cripple counter-revolution without reverting to authoritarian methods of control, writing, \"In order to conquer, something more than guillotines are required. It is the revolutionary idea, the truly wide revolutionary conception, which reduces its enemies to impotence by paralyzing all the instruments by which they have governed hitherto.\" He believed this was possible only through a widespread \"Boldness of thought, a distinct and wide conception of all that is desired, constructive force arising from the people in proportion as the negation of authority dawns; and finally\u2014the initiative of all in the work of reconstruction\u2014this will give to the revolution the Power required to conquer.\"\nKropotkin applied this criticism to the Bolsheviks' rule following the October Revolution. Kropotkin summarized his thoughts in a 1919 letter to the workers of Western Europe, promoting the possibility of revolution, but also warning against the centralized control in Russia, which he believed had condemned them to failure. Kropotkin wrote to Lenin in 1920, describing the desperate conditions that he believed to be the result of bureaucratic organization, and urging Lenin to allow for local and decentralized institutions. Following an announcement of executions later that year, Kropotkin sent Lenin another furious letter, admonishing him for the terror which Kropotkin saw as needlessly destructive.\nCooperation and competition.\nIn 1902, Kropotkin published his book \"\", which gave an alternative view of animal and human survival. At the time, some proponents of \"social Darwinism\" such as Francis Galton proffered a theory of interpersonal competition and natural hierarchy. Instead, Kropotkin argued that \"it was an evolutionary emphasis on cooperation instead of competition in the Darwinian sense that made for the success of species, including the human\". In the last chapter, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the animal world we have seen that the vast majority of species live in societies, and that they find in association the best arms for the struggle for life: understood, of course, in its wide Darwinian sense \u2013 not as a struggle for the sheer means of existence, but as a struggle against all natural conditions unfavourable to the species. The animal species [...] in which individual struggle has been reduced to its narrowest limits [...] and the practice of mutual aid has attained the greatest development [...] are invariably the most numerous, the most prosperous, and the most open to further progress. The mutual protection which is obtained in this case, the possibility of attaining old age and of accumulating experience, the higher intellectual development, and the further growth of sociable habits, secure the maintenance of the species, its extension, and its further progressive evolution. The unsociable species, on the contrary, are doomed to decay.\nContrary to popular belief, he did not deny the existence of selfishness or competitive struggle among organisms in nature, that is, \"mutual struggle\". He viewed cooperation and sociability among members of the same species as the best means to survive.\nBiologist Stephen Jay Gould argued that Kropotkin's view was consistent with modern biological understanding. He agrees with Kropotkin's observations, noting that while Kropotkin did not deny the concept of competitive struggle, he believed that cooperative interactions were too often overlooked within it. He also points out that if cooperation increases the survival rate of an individual, there is no reason why it should be ruled out by natural selection, but rather, as he said, encouraged.\nKropotkin did not deny the presence of competitive urges in humans, but did not consider them the driving force of human history. He believed that seeking out conflict proved to be socially beneficial only in attempts to destroy injustice, as well as authoritarian institutions such as the state or the Russian Orthodox Church, which he saw as stifling human creativity and impeding human instinctual drive towards cooperation.\nKropotkin claimed that the benefits arising from mutual organization incentivize humans more than mutual strife. His hope was that in the long run, mutual organization would drive individuals to produce. Anarcho-primitivists and anarcho-communists believe that a gift economy can break the cycle of poverty. They rely on Kropotkin, who believed that the hunter-gatherers he had visited implemented mutual aid. \nMutual aid.\nIn his 1892 book \"The Conquest of Bread\", Kropotkin proposed a system of economics based on mutual exchanges made in a system of voluntary cooperation. He believed that in a society that is socially, culturally, and industrially developed enough to produce all the goods and services it needs, there would be no obstacle, such as preferential distribution, pricing, or monetary exchange, to prevent everyone from taking what they need from the social product. He supported the eventual abolition of money or tokens of exchange for goods and services.\nKropotkin believed that Mikhail Bakunin's collectivist economic model was just a wage system by a different name and that such a system would breed the same type of centralization and inequality as a capitalist wage system. He stated that it is impossible to determine the value of an individual's contributions to the products of labor and thought that anyone who was placed in a position of trying to make such determinations would wield authority over those whose wages they determined.\nAccording to Kirkpatrick Sale, \"[w]ith \"Mutual Aid\" especially, and later with \"Fields, Factories, and Workshops\", Kropotkin was able to move away from the absurdist limitations of individual anarchism and no-laws anarchism that had flourished during this period and provide instead a vision of communal anarchism, following the models of independent cooperative communities he discovered while developing his theory of mutual aid. It was an anarchism that opposed centralized government and state-level laws as traditional anarchism did, but understood that at a certain small scale, communities and communes and co-ops could flourish and provide humans with a rich material life and wide areas of liberty without centralized control.\"\nSelf-sufficiency.\nKropotkin's focus on local production led to his view that a country should strive for self-sufficiency by manufacturing its own goods and growing its own food, thus lessening the need to rely on imports. To these ends, he advocated irrigation and greenhouses to boost local food production.\nReligion.\nAlthough in the past he harshly criticized religious morality, Kropotkin recognized the Christian anarchism of Leo Tolstoy as one of the four schools of thought in anarchism. Kropotkin and Tolstoy maintained, despite never meeting in person, a relationship of mutual respect. Kropotkin saw the origins of anarchism in Europe as found in various Christian movements, such as the Anabaptists and Hussites, mentioning figures such as the Italian Catholic bishop Marco Girolamo Vida and the German Anabaptist theologian Hans Denck.\nKropotkin admired Christianity and Buddhism, along with the figures of Jesus Christ and Buddha and their ethical teachings. Kropotkin did not see that Christianity introduced anything new in its defense of brotherhood and mutual aid, but considered Christian (and Buddhist) teaching on forgiveness to have been an innovation. In contrast with the ethics of vengeful pre-Christian cultures, the doctrine of Christ repudiates persecution and revenge. In the view of Kropotkin, \"the true greatness of Christianity\" lies in the words \"do not take revenge on your enemies.\" Kropotkin also saw the Christian God as an improvement over the pagan gods, whom he considered vengeful and requiring submission on the part of the believer. Kropotkin's \"Ethics\" stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the case of Christianity the love of the divine teacher for men, \u2013 for all men without distinction of nation or condition, and especially for the lowest, \u2013 led to the highest heroic sacrifice \u2013 to death on the cross for the salvation of humanity from the power of evil.\nPersonal life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was no cleavage between the man and his world. He spoke and acted in all things as he felt and believed and wrote. Kropotkin was a whole man.\nRudolf Rocker \nKropotkin married Sofia, a Ukrainian Jewish student, in Switzerland in October 1878. She was over a decade younger than Kropotkin. Kropotkin references her as a primary source of criticism and feedback. Her published story, \"The Wife of Number 4,237\", was based on her own experience with her husband at Clairvaux prison. She created an archive in Moscow dedicated to his works before her death in 1941. Their only child, Alexandra, was born in London in 1887. Kropotkin was reserved about his private life.\nAs an individual, Kropotkin was known for having exceptional integrity and moral character that matched his beliefs. Henry Hyndman, an ideological adversary, recalled Kropotkin's charm and sincerity. These traits, wrote Stepnyak-Kravchinsky, contributed to Kropotkin's power as a public speaker. As a thinker, Kropotkin focused more acutely on issues of morality than of economics or politics and carried himself according to his own principles without imposition on others. In practice, this made him more of a \"revolutionary humanitarian\" than a revolutionist by deed. He was also known for being exceptionally kind and for forgoing material comforts to live a revolutionary, principled life by example. Gerald Runkle wrote that \"Kropotkin with his scholarly and saintly ways ... almost brought respectability to the movement.\"\nLegacy.\nAs the anarchists' leading theorist in his lifetime, Kropotkin wrote their most systematic doctrine in an accessible way; and led the development of anarchist-communist social doctrine. His works, inventive and pragmatic, were the most read anarchist books and pamphlets, with translations into major European and Eastern languages that influenced revolutionaries (e.g., Nestor Makhno and Emiliano Zapata) and non-anarchist reformers alike (e.g., Patrick Geddes, Ebenezer Howard), as well as a wide range of intellectuals (including the writers Ba Jin and James Joyce). Much of Kropotkin's impact was in his intellectual writings prior to 1914. He had little influence on the Russian revolution, despite returning for it.\nEmma Goldman regarded Kropotkin as her \"great teacher\" and as among the greatest minds and personalities of the 19th century. \"Historian Paul Avrich sees Kropotkin as the foremost libertarian theorist and most venerated figure of the anarchist movement ... Historian Alexander Gray maintained that Kropotkin was ... 'probably the most representative, as he is certainly the most attractive and engaging, of the modern anarchists'\".\nAfter Kropotkin's 1921 death, the Bolsheviks permitted Kropotkin's Moscow house to become a Kropotkin Museum. This closed in 1938 with his wife's death.\nKropotkin is the namesake for multiple regional entities. The Konyushennaya district in Moscow, where Kropotkin was born, is now known by his name, as the Kropotkinsky district, including the Kropotkinskaya metro station. He is the namesake for a large town in the North Caucasus (southwest Russia) and a small town in Siberia. The Kropotkin Range he was first to cross in the Siberian Patom Highlands was named for him, as was a peak in East Antarctica.\nWorks.\nPamphlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51077", "revid": "46376176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51077", "title": "Be (verb)", "text": ""}
{"id": "51078", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51078", "title": "Thalidomide", "text": "Immunomodulatory drug which can cause birth defects\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThalidomide, sold under the brand names Contergan and Thalomid among others, is an oral administered medication used to treat a number of cancers (e.g., multiple myeloma), graft-versus-host disease, and many skin disorders (e.g., complications of leprosy such as skin lesions). Thalidomide has been used to treat conditions associated with HIV: aphthous ulcers, HIV-associated wasting syndrome, diarrhea, and Kaposi's sarcoma, but increases in HIV viral load have been reported.\nCommon side effects include sleepiness, rash, and dizziness. Severe side effects include tumor lysis syndrome, blood clots, and peripheral neuropathy. Thalidomide is a known human teratogen and carries an extremely high risk of severe, life-threatening birth defects if administered or taken during pregnancy. It causes skeletal deformities such as amelia (absence of legs and/or arms), absence of bones, and phocomelia (malformation of the limbs). A single dose of thalidomide, regardless of dosage, is enough to cause teratogenic effects.\nThalidomide was first marketed in 1957 in West Germany, where it was available as an over-the-counter drug. When first released, thalidomide was promoted for anxiety, trouble sleeping, \"tension\", and morning sickness. While it was initially thought to be safe in pregnancy, thalidomide was found to cause birth defects, resulting in its removal from the market in Europe in 1961. The total number of infants severely harmed by thalidomide use during pregnancy is estimated at over 10,000, possibly 20,000, of whom about 40% died around the time of birth. Those who survived had limb, eye, urinary tract, and heart problems. Its initial entry into the US market was prevented by Frances Kelsey, a reviewer at the FDA. The birth defects caused by thalidomide led to the development of greater drug regulation and monitoring in many countries.\nIt was approved in the United States in 1998 for use as a treatment for cancer. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It is available as a generic medication.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nThalidomide is used as a first-line treatment for multiple myeloma in combination with dexamethasone or with melphalan and prednisone to treat acute episodes of erythema nodosum leprosum, as well as for maintenance therapy.\nThe bacterium that causes tuberculosis (TB) is related to leprosy. Thalidomide may be helpful in some cases where standard TB drugs and corticosteroids are not sufficient to resolve severe inflammation in the brain.\nIt is used as a second-line treatment to manage graft-versus-host disease and aphthous stomatitis in children and has been prescribed for other conditions in children, including actinic prurigo and epidermolysis bullosa; the evidence for these uses is weak. It is recommended only as a third line treatment in graft-versus-host-disease in adults because of lack of efficacy and side effects observed in clinical trials.\nContraindications.\nPrescriptions of thalidomide are accompanied by strict measures to avoid any possibility of use during pregnancy, and thalidomide should be avoided in women wanting to conceive. In the United States, the prescribing doctor is required to ensure that contraception is being used and that regular pregnancy tests are taken.\nAdverse effects.\nThalidomide causes birth defects. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other regulatory agencies have approved marketing of the drug only with an auditable risk evaluation and mitigation strategy that ensures that people using the drug are aware of the risks and avoid pregnancy; this applies to both men and women, as the drug can be transmitted in semen.\nThere is a high risk that thalidomide can cause excessive blood clots. There is also a high risk that thalidomide can interfere with the production of several types of new blood cells, creating a risk of infection via neutropenia, leukopenia, and lymphopenia, and risks that blood will not clot via thrombocytopenia. There is also a risk of anemia via lack of red blood cells. The drug can also damage nerves, causing potentially irreversible peripheral neuropathy.\nThalidomide has several adverse cardiovascular effects, including risk of heart attacks, pulmonary hypertension, and changes in heart rhythm, such as syncope, bradycardia, and atrioventricular block.\nThalidomide can cause liver damage and severe skin reactions like Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome. It tends to make people sleepy, which creates risk when driving and operating other machinery. As it kills cancer cells, it can cause tumor lysis syndrome. Thalidomide can prevent menstruation.\nIn addition, very common (reported in more than 10% of people) adverse effects include tremor, dizziness, tingling, numbness, constipation, and peripheral edema.\nCommon adverse effects (reported by 1\u201310% of people) include confusion, depressed mood, reduced coordination, heart failure, difficulty breathing, interstitial lung disease, lung inflammation, vomiting, dry mouth, rashes, dry skin, fever, weakness, and a sense of unwellness.\nInteractions.\nThere are no expected pharmacokinetic interactions between thalidomide and other medicines due to its neutral effects on P-glycoprotein and the cytochrome P450 family. It may interact with sedatives due to its sedative action and bradycardic agents, like beta-blockers, due to its bradycardia-inducing effects. The risk of peripheral neuropathy may be increased by concomitant treatment of thalidomide with other agents known to cause peripheral neuropathy. The risk of venous thromboembolisms with thalidomide seems to be increased when patients are treated with oral contraceptives or other cytotoxic agents (including doxorubicin and melphalan) concurrently. Thalidomide may interfere with various contraceptives, and hence it is advised that women of reproductive age use at least two different means of contraception to ensure that no child will be conceived while they are taking thalidomide.\nOverdose.\nAs of 2013, eighteen cases of overdoses had been reported with doses of up to 14.4\u00a0grams, none of them fatal. No specific antidote for overdose exists and treatment is purely supportive.\nPharmacology.\nThe precise mechanism of action for thalidomide was not known until the twenty-first century, although efforts to identify thalidomide's teratogenic action generated more than 2,000 research papers and the proposal of 15 or 16 plausible mechanisms by 2000. The primary mechanism of action of thalidomide and its analogs in both their anti-cancer and teratogenic effects is now known to be as cereblon E3 ligase modulators.\nThalidomide also binds to and acts as an antagonist of the androgen receptor and hence is a nonsteroidal antiandrogen of some capacity. In accordance, it can produce gynecomastia and sexual dysfunction as side effects in men.\nChirality and biological activity.\nThalidomide is provided as a racemic mixture of two enantiomers; while there are reports that only one of the enantiomers may cause birth defects, the body converts each enantiomer into the other through mechanisms that are not well understood. The (R)-enantiomer has the desired sedative effect while the (S)-enantiomer harbors embryo-toxic and teratogenic effects. The use of \"R\"-thalidomide does not remove the risk of birth defects, as it was demonstrated that the \"safe\" \"R\"-thalidomide undergoes an \"in vivo\" chiral inversion to the teratogenic \"S\"-thalidomide. Under biological conditions, the enantiomers interconvert (\"bidirectional chiral inversion\" \u2013 (R)- to (S)- and vice versa).\nChemistry.\nThalidomide is a chiral molecule, and when synthesized is formed as racemic; while \"S\"-thalidomide is the bioactive form of the molecule, the individual enantiomers can racemize to each other due to the acidic hydrogen at the chiral centre, which is the carbon of the glutarimide ring bonded to the phthalimide substituent. The racemization process can occur \"in vivo\". The process of conversion of one enantiomer to its mirror-image version with no other change in the molecule is called chiral inversion.\nCelgene Corporation originally synthesized thalidomide using a three-step sequence starting with -glutamic acid treatment, but this has since been reformed by the use of -glutamine. As shown in the image below, \"N\"-carbethoxyphthalimide (1) can react with -glutamine to yield \"N\"-phthaloyl--glutamine (2). Cyclization of \"N\"-phthaloyl--glutamine occurs using carbonyldiimidazole, which then yields thalidomide (3). Celgene Corporation's original method resulted in a 31% yield of \"S\"-thalidomide, whereas the two-step synthesis yields 85\u201393% product that is 99% pure.\nIn 2023, it is reported that phthalic anhydride and -glutamine under suitable conditions can react directly to form thalidomide. In the procedure, phthalic anhydride and -glutamine are grounded and added into toluene solvent. The solution, along with triethylamine and acetic anhydride, is refluxed at ~110\u00b0C for 9 hours; after that the solution goes through a simple vacuum filtration procedure to obtain the product.\nHistory.\nIn 1952, thalidomide was synthesised by Chemical Industry Basel, but was found \"to have no effect on animals\" and was discarded on that basis. In 1957, it was acquired by Chemie Gr\u00fcnenthal in Germany. The German company had been established as a soap maker after World War II ended, to address the urgent market need for antibiotics. Heinrich M\u00fcckter was appointed to head the discovery program based on his experience working with the German army's antiviral research. While preparing reagents for the work, Mueckter's assistant Wilhelm Kunz isolated a by-product that was recognized by pharmacologist Herbert Keller as an analog of glutethimide, a sedative. The medicinal chemistry work turned to improving the lead compound into a suitable drug: the result was thalidomide. The toxicity was examined in several animals, and the drug was introduced in 1956 as a sedative, but it was never tested on pregnant women.\nResearchers at Chemie Gr\u00fcnenthal found that thalidomide was a particularly effective antiemetic that had an inhibitory effect on morning sickness. On 1 October 1957, the company launched thalidomide and began marketing it under the trade name Contergan. It was proclaimed a \"wonder drug\" for insomnia, coughs, colds and headaches.\nDuring that period, the use of medications during pregnancy was not strictly controlled, and drugs were not thoroughly tested for potential harm to the fetus. Thousands of pregnant women took the drug to relieve their symptoms. At the time of the drug's development, scientists did not believe any drug taken by a pregnant woman could pass across the placental barrier and harm the developing fetus. There soon appeared reports of abnormalities in children being born to mothers using thalidomide. In late 1959, it was noticed that peripheral neuritis developed in patients who took the drug over a period of time, and it was only after this point that thalidomide ceased to be provided over the counter.\nWhile initially considered safe, the drug was responsible for teratogenic deformities in children born after their mothers used it during pregnancies, prior to the third trimester. In November 1961, thalidomide was taken off the market due to massive pressure from the press and public. Experts estimate that thalidomide led to the death of approximately 2,000 children and serious birth defects in more than 10,000 children, with over half of them in West Germany. The regulatory authorities in East Germany never approved thalidomide. One reason for the initially unobserved side effects of the drug and the subsequent approval in West Germany was that at that time drugs did not have to be tested for teratogenic effects. They were tested for toxicity on rodents only, as was usual at the time.\nIn the UK, the British pharmaceutical company The Distillers Company (Biochemicals) Ltd, a subsidiary of Distillers Co. Ltd (now part of Diageo plc), marketed thalidomide throughout the UK, Australia, and New Zealand, under the brand name Distaval, as a remedy for morning sickness. Their advertisement claimed that \"Distaval can be given with complete safety to pregnant women and nursing mothers without adverse effect on mother or child ... Outstandingly safe Distaval has been prescribed for nearly three years in this country.\" Globally, more pharmaceutical companies started to produce and market the drug under license from Chemie Gr\u00fcnenthal. Thalidomide was available in 46 countries under many different brand names.\nIn the US, representatives from Chemie Gr\u00fcnenthal approached Smith, Kline &amp; French (SKF), now GlaxoSmithKline, with a request to market and distribute the drug in North America. A memorandum, rediscovered in 2010 in the archives of the FDA, shows that in 1956\u201357, as part of its in-licensing approach, Smith, Kline and French conducted animal tests and ran a clinical trial of the drug in the US involving 875 people, including pregnant women. In 1956, researchers involved in clinical trials at SKF noted that, even when used in very high doses, thalidomide could not induce sleep in mice. When administered at doses 50 to 650 times larger than that claimed by Chemie Gr\u00fcnenthal to be \"sleep-inducing\", the researchers could still not achieve the hypnotic effect in animals that it had on humans. After completion of the trial, and based on reasons kept hidden for decades, SKF declined to commercialize the drug. In 1958, Chemie Gr\u00fcnenthal reached an agreement with the William S. Merrell Company in Cincinnati, Ohio (later Richardson-Merrell, now part of Sanofi), to market and distribute thalidomide throughout the US.\nThe US FDA refused to approve thalidomide for marketing and distribution. However, the drug was distributed in large quantities for testing purposes, after the American distributor and manufacturer Richardson-Merrell had applied for its approval in September 1960. The official in charge of the FDA review, Frances Oldham Kelsey, did not rely on information from the company, which did not include any test results. Richardson-Merrell was called on to perform tests and report the results. The company demanded approval six times and was refused each time. The distribution for \"testing\" resulted in 17 children born in the US with thalidomide-induced malformations. Oldham Kelsey was awarded the President's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service by President Kennedy in 1962 for not allowing thalidomide to be approved for sale in the US. She was also inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in 2000.\nCanada's Food and Drug Directorate approved the sale of thalidomide by prescription in November 1960. There were many different forms sold: Kevadon, produced by the William S. Merrell Company seeking approval for its thalidomide product, was released on the market in April 1961, and the most common variant (Horner's Talimol) was put on the market on October 23 of the same year. Two months after Talimol went on sale, pharmaceutical companies sent physicians letters warning about the risk of birth defects. It was not until March 1962 that both drugs were banned from the Canadian market by the directorate, and soon afterward physicians were warned to destroy their supplies.\nLeprosy treatment.\nIn 1964, Israeli physician Jacob Sheskin administered thalidomide to a patient critically ill with leprosy. The patient exhibited erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL), a painful skin condition, one of the complications of leprosy. The treatment was attempted despite the ban on thalidomide's use, and the results were favourable: the patient slept for hours and was able to get out of bed without aid upon awakening. A clinical trial studying the use of thalidomide in leprosy soon followed.\nThalidomide has been used by Brazilian physicians as the drug of choice for the treatment of severe ENL since 1965, and by 1996, at least 33 cases of thalidomide embryopathy were recorded in people born in Brazil after 1965. Since 1994, the production, dispensing, and prescription of thalidomide have been strictly controlled, requiring women to use two forms of birth control and submit to regular pregnancy tests. Despite this, cases of thalidomide embryopathy continue, with at least 100 cases identified in Brazil between 2005 and 2010. Nearly 6 million thalidomide pills were distributed throughout Brazil in this time period, and these cases have occurred despite the controls.\nIn 1998, the FDA approved the drug's use in the treatment of ENL. Because of thalidomide's potential for causing birth defects, the drug may be distributed only under tightly controlled conditions. The FDA required that Celgene Corporation, which planned to market thalidomide under the brand name \"Thalomid\", establish a system for thalidomide education and prescribing safety (STEPS) oversight program. The conditions required under the program include limiting prescription and dispensing rights to authorized prescribers and pharmacies only, keeping a registry of all patients prescribed thalidomide, providing extensive patient education about the risks associated with the drug, and providing periodic pregnancy tests for women who take the drug.\nIn 2010, the World Health Organization stated that it did not recommend thalidomide for leprosy due to the difficulty of adequately controlling its use, and due to the availability of clofazimine.\nCancer treatment.\nShortly after the teratogenic properties of thalidomide were recognized in the mid-1960s, its anti-cancer potential was explored and two clinical trials were conducted in people with advanced cancer, including some people with multiple myeloma; the trials were inconclusive.\nLittle further work was done with thalidomide in cancer until the 1990s.\nJudah Folkman pioneered studies into the role of angiogenesis (the proliferation and growth of blood vessels) in the development of cancer, and in the early 1970s had shown that solid tumors could not expand without it. In 1993 he surprised the scientific world by hypothesizing the same was true of blood cancers, and the next year he published work showing that a biomarker of angiogenesis was higher in all people with cancer, but especially high in people with blood cancers, and other evidence emerged as well. Meanwhile, a member of his lab, Robert D'Amato, who was looking for angiogenesis inhibitors, discovered in 1994 that thalidomide inhibited angiogenesis and was effective in suppressing tumor growth in rabbits. Around that time, the wife of a man who was dying of multiple myeloma and whom standard treatments had failed, called Folkman asking him about his anti-angiogenesis ideas. Folkman persuaded the patient's doctor to try thalidomide, and that doctor conducted a clinical trial of thalidomide for people with multiple myeloma in which about a third of the subjects responded to the treatment. The results of that trial were published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 1999.\nAfter further work was done by Celgene and others, in 2006 the US\u00a0Food and Drug Administration granted accelerated approval for thalidomide in combination with dexamethasone for the treatment of newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients.\nIt was also evaluated whether thalidomide can be combined with melphalan and prednisone for patients with multiple myeloma. This combination of drugs probably increases the overall survival.\nSociety and culture.\nBirth defect crisis.\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, more than 10,000 children in 46 countries were born with deformities, such as phocomelia, as a consequence of thalidomide use. The severity and location of the deformities depended on how many days into the pregnancy the mother was before beginning treatment, with the time-sensitive window occurring approximately between day 20 and day 36 post-fertilisation. Thalidomide taken on the 20th day of pregnancy caused central brain damage, day 22 the ears and face, day 24 the arms, and leg damage would occur if taken up to day 28.\nIt is not known exactly how many worldwide victims of the drug there have been, although estimates range from 10,000 to 20,000. Despite the side effects, thalidomide was sold in pharmacies in Canada until 1962.\nChange in drug regulations.\nThe disaster prompted many countries to introduce tougher rules for the testing and licensing of drugs, such as the 1962 Kefauver Harris Amendment (US), 1965 Directive 65/65/EEC1 (EU), and the Medicines Act 1968 (UK). In the United States, the new regulations strengthened the FDA, among other ways, by requiring applicants to prove efficacy and to disclose all side effects encountered in testing. The FDA subsequently initiated the Drug Efficacy Study Implementation to reclassify drugs already on the market.\nImpact on research involving women.\nIn 1977 the US Federal Drug Administration published a clinical trial guideline that excluded women of \"childbearing potential\" from the early phases of most clinical trials, which in practice led to their exclusion from later trial phases as well. This 1977 FDA guideline was implemented in response to a protectionist climate caused by the thalidomide tragedy. In the 1980s, a US task force on women's health concluded that a lack of women's health research (in part due to the FDA guideline) had compromised the amount and quality of information available about diseases and treatments affecting women. This led to the National Institute of Health policy that women should, when beneficial, be included in clinical trials.\nQuality of life.\nIn the 1960s, thalidomide was successfully marketed as a safer alternative to barbiturates. Due to a successful marketing campaign, thalidomide was widely used by pregnant women during the first trimester of pregnancy. However, thalidomide is a teratogenic substance, and a proportion of children born during the 1960s had thalidomide embryopathy (TE). Of these babies born with TE, \"about 40% of them died before their first birthday\". The surviving individuals are now middle-aged and they report experiencing challenges (physical, psychological, and socioeconomic) related to TE.\nIndividuals born with TE frequently experience a wide variety of health problems secondary to their TE. These health conditions include both physical and psychological conditions. When compared to individuals of similar demographic profiles, those born with TE report less satisfaction with their quality of life and their overall health. Access to healthcare services can also be a challenge for these people, and women, in particular, have experienced difficulty in locating healthcare professionals who can understand and embrace their needs.\nBrand names.\nBrand names include Contergan, Thalomid, Talidex, Talizer, Neurosedyn, Distaval, and many others.\nResearch.\nResearch efforts have been focused on determining how thalidomide causes birth defects and its other activities in the human body, efforts to develop safer analogs, and efforts to find further uses for thalidomide.\nThalidomide analogs.\nThe exploration of the antiangiogenic and immunomodulatory activities of thalidomide has led to the study and creation of thalidomide analogs. Celgene has sponsored numerous clinical trials with analogues to thalidomide, such as lenalidomide, that are substantially more powerful and have fewer side effects\u00a0\u2014 except for greater myelosuppression. In 2005, Celgene received FDA approval for lenalidomide (Revlimid) as the first commercially useful derivative. Revlimid is available only in a restricted distribution setting to avoid its use during pregnancy. Further studies are being conducted to find safer compounds with useful qualities. Another more potent analog, pomalidomide, is now FDA-approved. Additionally, apremilast was approved by the FDA in March 2014. These thalidomide analogs can be used to treat different diseases, or used in a regimen to fight two conditions.\nInterest turned to pomalidomide, a derivative of thalidomide marketed by Celgene. It is a very active anti-angiogenic agent and also acts as an immunomodulator. Pomalidomide was approved in February 2013 by the FDA as a treatment for relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma. It received a similar approval from the European Commission in August 2013, and is expected to be marketed in Europe under the brand name Imnovid.\nClinical research.\nThere is no conclusive evidence that thalidomide or lenalidomide is useful to bring about or maintain remission in Crohn's disease.\nThalidomide was studied in a Phase II trial for Kaposi's sarcoma, a rare soft-tissue cancer most commonly seen in the immunocompromised, that is caused by the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51079", "revid": "45366078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51079", "title": "Magnet", "text": "Object that has a magnetic field\nA magnet is a material or object that produces a magnetic field. This magnetic field is invisible but is responsible for the most notable property of a magnet: a force that pulls on other ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, steel, nickel, cobalt, etc. and attracts or repels other magnets.\nA permanent magnet is an object made from a material that is magnetized and creates its own persistent magnetic field. An everyday example is a refrigerator magnet used to hold notes on a refrigerator door. Materials that can be magnetized, which are also the ones that are strongly attracted to a magnet, are called ferromagnetic (or ferrimagnetic). These include the elements iron, nickel and cobalt and their alloys, some alloys of rare-earth metals, and some naturally occurring minerals such as lodestone. Although ferromagnetic (and ferrimagnetic) materials are the only ones attracted to a magnet strongly enough to be commonly considered magnetic, all other substances respond weakly to a magnetic field, by one of several other types of magnetism.\nFerromagnetic materials can be divided into magnetically \"soft\" materials like annealed iron, which can be magnetized but do not tend to stay magnetized, and magnetically \"hard\" materials, which do. Permanent magnets are made from \"hard\" ferromagnetic materials such as alnico and ferrite that are subjected to special processing in a strong magnetic field during manufacture to align their internal microcrystalline structure, making them very hard to demagnetize. To demagnetize a saturated magnet, a certain magnetic field must be applied, and this threshold depends on coercivity of the respective material. \"Hard\" materials have high coercivity, whereas \"soft\" materials have low coercivity. The overall strength of a magnet is measured by its magnetic moment or, alternatively, the total magnetic flux it produces. The local strength of magnetism in a material is measured by its magnetization.\nAn electromagnet is made from a coil of wire that acts as a magnet when an electric current passes through it but stops being a magnet when the current stops. Often, the coil is wrapped around a core of \"soft\" ferromagnetic material such as mild steel, which greatly enhances the magnetic field produced by the coil.\nDiscovery and development.\nAncient people learned about magnetism from lodestones (or magnetite) which are naturally magnetized pieces of iron ore. The word \"magnet\" was adopted in Middle English from Latin \"magnetum\" \"lodestone\", ultimately from Greek (\"magn\u0113tis [lithos]\") meaning \"[stone] from Magnesia\", a place in Anatolia where lodestones were found (today Manisa in modern-day Turkey). Lodestones, suspended so they could turn, were the first magnetic compasses. The earliest known surviving descriptions of magnets and their properties are from Anatolia, India, and China around 2,500 years ago. The properties of lodestones and their affinity for iron were written of by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia \"Naturalis Historia\" in the 1st century AD.\nIn 11th century China, it was discovered that quenching red hot iron that was aligned with the Earth's magnetic field would leave the iron permanently magnetized. This led to the development of the navigational compass, as described in Dream Pool Essays in 1088. By the 12th to 13th centuries AD, magnetic compasses were used in navigation in China, Europe, the Arabian Peninsula and elsewhere.\nA straight iron magnet tends to demagnetize itself by its own magnetic field. To overcome this, the horseshoe magnet was invented by Daniel Bernoulli in 1743. A horseshoe magnet avoids demagnetization by returning the magnetic field lines to the opposite pole.\nIn 1820, Hans Christian \u00d8rsted discovered that a compass needle is deflected by a nearby electric current. In the same year Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re showed that iron can be magnetized by inserting it in an electrically fed solenoid. This led William Sturgeon to develop an iron-cored electromagnet in 1824. Joseph Henry further developed the electromagnet into a commercial product in 1830\u20131831, giving people access to strong magnetic fields for the first time. In 1831 he built an ore separator with an electromagnet capable of lifting .\nPhysics.\nMagnetic field.\nThe magnetic flux density (also called magnetic B field or just magnetic field, usually denoted by B) is a vector field. The magnetic B field vector at a given point in space is specified by two properties:\nIn SI units, the strength of the magnetic B field is given in teslas.\nMagnetic moment.\nA magnet's magnetic moment (also called magnetic dipole moment and usually denoted \u03bc) is a vector that characterizes the magnet's overall magnetic properties. For a bar magnet, the direction of the magnetic moment points from the magnet's south pole to its north pole, and the magnitude relates to how strong and how far apart these poles are. In SI units, the magnetic moment is specified in terms of A\u00b7m2 (amperes times meters squared).\nA magnet both produces its own magnetic field and responds to magnetic fields. The strength of the magnetic field it produces is at any given point proportional to the magnitude of its magnetic moment. In addition, when the magnet is put into an external magnetic field, produced by a different source, it is subject to a torque tending to orient the magnetic moment parallel to the field. The amount of this torque is proportional both to the magnetic moment and the external field. A magnet may also be subject to a force driving it in one direction or another, according to the positions and orientations of the magnet and source. If the field is uniform in space, the magnet is subject to no net force, although it is subject to a torque.\nA wire in the shape of a circle with area \"A\" and carrying current \"I\" has a magnetic moment of magnitude equal to \"IA\".\nMagnetization.\nThe magnetization of a magnetized material is the local value of its magnetic moment per unit volume, usually denoted M, with units A/m. It is a vector field, rather than just a vector (like the magnetic moment), because different areas in a magnet can be magnetized with different directions and strengths (for example, because of domains, see below). A good bar magnet may have a magnetic moment of magnitude 0.1\u00a0A\u00b7m2 and a volume of 1\u00a0cm3, or 1\u00d710\u22126\u00a0m3, and therefore an average magnetization magnitude is 100,000\u00a0A/m. Iron can have a magnetization of around a million amperes per meter. Such a large value explains why iron magnets are so effective at producing magnetic fields.\nModelling magnets.\nTwo different models exist for magnets: magnetic poles and atomic currents.\nAlthough for many purposes it is convenient to think of a magnet as having distinct north and south magnetic poles, the concept of poles should not be taken literally: it is merely a way of referring to the two different ends of a magnet. The magnet does not have distinct north or south particles on opposing sides. If a bar magnet is broken into two pieces, in an attempt to separate the north and south poles, the result will be two bar magnets, \"each\" of which has both a north and south pole. However, a version of the magnetic-pole approach is used by professional magneticians to design permanent magnets.\nIn this approach, the divergence of the magnetization \u2207\u00b7M inside a magnet is treated as a distribution of magnetic monopoles. This is a mathematical convenience and does not imply that there are actually monopoles in the magnet. If the magnetic-pole distribution is known, then the pole model gives the magnetic field H. Outside the magnet, the field B is proportional to H, while inside the magnetization must be added to H. An extension of this method that allows for internal magnetic charges is used in theories of ferromagnetism.\nAnother model is the Amp\u00e8re model, where all magnetization is due to the effect of microscopic, or atomic, circular bound currents, also called Amp\u00e8rian currents, throughout the material. For a uniformly magnetized cylindrical bar magnet, the net effect of the microscopic bound currents is to make the magnet behave as if there is a macroscopic sheet of electric current flowing around the surface, with local flow direction normal to the cylinder axis. Microscopic currents in atoms inside the material are generally canceled by currents in neighboring atoms, so only the surface makes a net contribution; shaving off the outer layer of a magnet will \"not\" destroy its magnetic field, but will leave a new surface of uncancelled currents from the circular currents throughout the material. The right-hand rule tells which direction positively-charged current flows. However, current due to negatively-charged electricity is far more prevalent in practice.\nPolarity.\nThe north pole of a magnet is defined as the pole that, when the magnet is freely suspended, points towards the Earth's North Magnetic Pole in the Arctic (the magnetic and geographic poles do not coincide, see magnetic declination). Since opposite poles (north and south) attract, the North Magnetic Pole is actually the \"south\" pole of the Earth's magnetic field. As a practical matter, to tell which pole of a magnet is north and which is south, it is not necessary to use the Earth's magnetic field at all. For example, one method would be to compare it to an electromagnet, whose poles can be identified by the right-hand rule. The magnetic field lines of a magnet are considered by convention to emerge from the magnet's north pole and reenter at the south pole.\nMagnetic materials.\nThe term \"magnet\" is typically reserved for objects that produce their own persistent magnetic field even in the absence of an applied magnetic field. Only certain classes of materials can do this. Most materials, however, produce a magnetic field in response to an applied magnetic field \u2013 a phenomenon known as magnetism. There are several types of magnetism, and all materials exhibit at least one of them.\nThe overall magnetic behavior of a material can vary widely, depending on the structure of the material, particularly on its electron configuration. Several forms of magnetic behavior have been observed in different materials, including:\nThere are various other types of magnetism, such as spin glass, superparamagnetism, superdiamagnetism, and metamagnetism.\nShape.\nThe shape of a permanent magnet has a large influence on its magnetic properties. When a magnet is magnetized, a demagnetizing field will be created inside it. As the name suggests, the demagnetizing field will work to demagnetize the magnet, decreasing its magnetic properties. The strength of the demagnetizing field formula_1 is proportional to the magnet's magnetization formula_2 and shape, according to\nformula_3\nHere, formula_4 is called the demagnetizing factor, and has a different value depending on the magnet's shape. For example, if the magnet is a sphere, then formula_5.\nThe value of the demagnetizing factor also depends on the direction of the magnetization in relation to the magnet's shape. Since a sphere is symmetrical from all angles, the demagnetizing factor only has one value. But a magnet that is shaped like a long cylinder will yield two different demagnetizing factors, depending on if it's magnetized parallel to or perpendicular to its length.\nMedical issues and safety.\nBecause human tissues have a very low level of susceptibility to static magnetic fields, there is little mainstream scientific evidence showing a health effect associated with exposure to static fields. Dynamic magnetic fields may be a different issue, however; correlations between electromagnetic radiation and cancer rates have been postulated due to demographic correlations (see Electromagnetic radiation and health).\nIf a ferromagnetic foreign body is present in human tissue, an external magnetic field interacting with it can pose a serious safety risk.\nA different type of indirect magnetic health risk exists involving pacemakers. If a pacemaker has been embedded in a patient's chest (usually for the purpose of monitoring and regulating the heart for steady electrically induced beats), care should be taken to keep it away from magnetic fields. It is for this reason that a patient with the device installed cannot be tested with the use of a magnetic resonance imaging device.\nChildren sometimes swallow small magnets from toys, and this can be hazardous if two or more magnets are swallowed, as the magnets can pinch or puncture internal tissues.\nMagnetic imaging devices (e.g. MRIs) generate enormous magnetic fields, and therefore rooms intended to hold them exclude ferrous metals. Bringing objects made of ferrous metals (such as oxygen canisters) into such a room creates a severe safety risk, as those objects may be powerfully thrown about by the intense magnetic fields.\nMagnetizing ferromagnets.\nFerromagnetic materials can be magnetized in the following ways:\nDemagnetizing ferromagnets.\nMagnetized ferromagnetic materials can be demagnetized (or degaussed) in the following ways:\nTypes of permanent magnets.\nMagnetic metallic elements.\nMany materials have unpaired electron spins, and the majority of these materials are paramagnetic. When the spins interact with each other in such a way that the spins align spontaneously, the materials are called ferromagnetic (what is often loosely termed as magnetic). Because of the way their regular crystalline atomic structure causes their spins to interact, some metals are ferromagnetic when found in their natural states, as ores. These include iron ore (magnetite or lodestone), cobalt and nickel, as well as the rare earth metals gadolinium and dysprosium (when at a very low temperature). Such naturally occurring ferromagnets were used in the first experiments with magnetism. Technology has since expanded the availability of magnetic materials to include various man-made products, all based, however, on naturally magnetic elements.\nComposites.\nCeramic, or ferrite, magnets are made of a sintered composite of powdered iron oxide and barium/strontium carbonate ceramic. Given the low cost of the materials and manufacturing methods, inexpensive magnets (or non-magnetized ferromagnetic cores, for use in electronic components such as portable AM radio antennas) of various shapes can be easily mass-produced. The resulting magnets are non-corroding but brittle and must be treated like other ceramics.\nAlnico magnets are made by casting or sintering a combination of aluminium, nickel and cobalt with iron and small amounts of other elements added to enhance the properties of the magnet. Sintering offers superior mechanical characteristics, whereas casting delivers higher magnetic fields and allows for the design of intricate shapes. Alnico magnets resist corrosion and have physical properties more forgiving than ferrite, but not quite as desirable as a metal. Trade names for alloys in this family include: \"Alni, Alcomax, Hycomax, Columax\", and \"Ticonal\".\nInjection-molded magnets are a composite of various types of resin and magnetic powders, allowing parts of complex shapes to be manufactured by injection molding. The physical and magnetic properties of the product depend on the raw materials, but are generally lower in magnetic strength and resemble plastics in their physical properties.\nFlexible magnet.\nFlexible magnets are composed of a high-coercivity ferromagnetic compound (usually ferric oxide) mixed with a resinous polymer binder. This is extruded as a sheet and passed over a line of powerful cylindrical permanent magnets. These magnets are arranged in a stack with alternating magnetic poles facing up (N, S, N, S...) on a rotating shaft. This impresses the plastic sheet with the magnetic poles in an alternating line format. No electromagnetism is used to generate the magnets. The pole-to-pole distance is on the order of 5\u00a0mm, but varies with manufacturer. These magnets are lower in magnetic strength but can be very flexible, depending on the binder used.\nFor magnetic compounds (e.g. Nd2Fe14B) that are vulnerable to a grain boundary corrosion problem it gives additional protection.\nRare-earth magnets.\nRare earth (lanthanoid) elements have a partially occupied \"f\" electron shell (which can accommodate up to 14 electrons). The spin of these electrons can be aligned, resulting in very strong magnetic fields, and therefore, these elements are used in compact high-strength magnets where their higher price is not a concern. The most common types of rare-earth magnets are samarium\u2013cobalt and neodymium\u2013iron\u2013boron (NIB) magnets.\nSingle-molecule magnets (SMMs) and single-chain magnets (SCMs).\nIn the 1990s, it was discovered that certain molecules containing paramagnetic metal ions are capable of storing a magnetic moment at very low temperatures. These are very different from conventional magnets that store information at a magnetic domain level and theoretically could provide a far denser storage medium than conventional magnets. In this direction, research on monolayers of SMMs is currently under way. Very briefly, the two main attributes of an SMM are:\nMost SMMs contain manganese but can also be found with vanadium, iron, nickel and cobalt clusters. More recently, it has been found that some chain systems can also display a magnetization that persists for long times at higher temperatures. These systems have been called single-chain magnets.\nNano-structured magnets.\nSome nano-structured materials exhibit energy waves, called magnons, that coalesce into a common ground state in the manner of a Bose\u2013Einstein condensate.\nRare-earth-free permanent magnets.\nThe United States Department of Energy has identified a need to find substitutes for rare-earth metals in permanent-magnet technology, and has begun funding such research. The Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E) has sponsored a Rare Earth Alternatives in Critical Technologies (REACT) program to develop alternative materials. In 2011, ARPA-E awarded 31.6 million dollars to fund Rare-Earth Substitute projects. Iron nitrides are promising materials for rare-earth free magnets.\nCosts.\nThe current[ [update]] cheapest permanent magnets, allowing for field strengths, are flexible and ceramic magnets, but these are also among the weakest types. The ferrite magnets are mainly low-cost magnets since they are made from cheap raw materials: iron oxide and Ba- or Sr-carbonate. However, a new low cost magnet, Mn\u2013Al alloy, has been developed and is now dominating the low-cost magnets field. It has a higher saturation magnetization than the ferrite magnets. It also has more favorable temperature coefficients, although it can be thermally unstable.\nNeodymium\u2013iron\u2013boron (NIB) magnets are among the strongest. These cost more per kilogram than most other magnetic materials but, owing to their intense field, are smaller and cheaper in many applications.\nTemperature.\nTemperature sensitivity varies, but when a magnet is heated to a temperature known as the Curie point, it loses all of its magnetism, even after cooling below that temperature. The magnets can often be remagnetized, however.\nAdditionally, some magnets are brittle and can fracture at high temperatures.\nThe maximum usable temperature is highest for alnico magnets at over , around for ferrite and SmCo, about for NIB and lower for flexible ceramics, but the exact numbers depend on the grade of material.\nElectromagnets.\nAn electromagnet, in its simplest form, is a wire that has been coiled into one or more loops, known as a solenoid. When electric current flows through the wire, a magnetic field is generated. It is concentrated near (and especially inside) the coil, and its field lines are very similar to those of a magnet. The orientation of this effective magnet is determined by the right hand rule. The magnetic moment and the magnetic field of the electromagnet are proportional to the number of loops of wire, to the cross-section of each loop, and to the current passing through the wire.\nIf the coil of wire is wrapped around a material with no special magnetic properties (e.g., cardboard), it will tend to generate a very weak field. However, if it is wrapped around a soft ferromagnetic material, such as an iron nail, then the net field produced can result in a several hundred- to thousandfold increase of field strength.\nUses for electromagnets include particle accelerators, electric motors, junkyard cranes, and magnetic resonance imaging machines. Some applications involve configurations more than a simple magnetic dipole; for example, quadrupole and sextupole magnets are used to focus particle beams.\nUnits and calculations.\nFor most engineering applications, MKS (rationalized) or SI (Syst\u00e8me International) units are commonly used. Two other sets of units, Gaussian and CGS-EMU, are the same for magnetic properties and are commonly used in physics.\nIn all units, it is convenient to employ two types of magnetic field, B and H, as well as the magnetization M, defined as the magnetic moment per unit volume.\nMaterials that are not permanent magnets usually satisfy the relation M\u00a0= \"\u03c7H in SI, where \"\u03c7\" is the (dimensionless) magnetic susceptibility. Most non-magnetic materials have a relatively small \"\u03c7\" (on the order of a millionth), but soft magnets can have \"\u03c7\" on the order of hundreds or thousands. For materials satisfying M\u00a0= \"\u03c7H, we can also write B\u00a0= \"\u03bc\"0(1\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03c7\")H\u00a0= \"\u03bc\"0\"\u03bc\"rH\u00a0= \"\u03bcH, where \"\u03bc\"r\u00a0= 1\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03c7\" is the (dimensionless) relative permeability and \u03bc\u00a0=\u03bc0\u03bcr is the magnetic permeability. Both hard and soft magnets have a more complex, history-dependent, behavior described by what are called hysteresis loops, which give either B vs. H or M vs. H. In CGS, M\u00a0= \"\u03c7H, but \"\u03c7\"SI\u00a0= 4\"\u03c0\u03c7\"CGS, and \u03bc\u00a0=\u00a0\u03bcr.\nCaution: in part because there are not enough Roman and Greek symbols, there is no commonly agreed-upon symbol for magnetic pole strength and magnetic moment. The symbol \"m\" has been used for both pole strength (unit A\u2022m, where here the upright m is for meter) and for magnetic moment (unit A\u2022m2). The symbol \"\u03bc\" has been used in some texts for magnetic permeability and in other texts for magnetic moment. We will use \"\u03bc\" for magnetic permeability and \"m\" for magnetic moment. For pole strength, we will employ \"q\"\"m\". For a bar magnet of cross-section \"A\" with uniform magnetization \"M\" along its axis, the pole strength is given by \"qm\"\u00a0= \"MA\", so that \"M\" can be thought of as a pole strength per unit area.\nFields of a magnet.\nFar away from a magnet, the magnetic field created by that magnet is almost always described (to a good approximation) by a dipole field characterized by its total magnetic moment. This is true regardless of the shape of the magnet, so long as the magnetic moment is non-zero. One characteristic of a dipole field is that the strength of the field falls off inversely with the cube of the distance from the magnet's center.\nCloser to the magnet, the magnetic field becomes more complicated and more dependent on the detailed shape and magnetization of the magnet. Formally, the field can be expressed as a multipole expansion: A dipole field, plus a quadrupole field, plus an octupole field, etc.\nAt close range, many different fields are possible. For example, for a long, skinny bar magnet with its north pole at one end and south pole at the other, the magnetic field near either end falls off inversely with the square of the distance from that pole.\nCalculating the magnetic force.\nPull force of a single magnet.\nThe strength of a given magnet is sometimes given in terms of its \"pull force\" \u2014 its ability to pull ferromagnetic objects. The pull force exerted by either an electromagnet or a permanent magnet with no air gap (i.e., the ferromagnetic object is in direct contact with the pole of the magnet) is given by the Maxwell equation:\nformula_6,\nwhere:\nThis result can be easily derived using Gilbert model, which assumes that the pole of magnet is charged with magnetic monopoles that induces the same in the ferromagnetic object.\nIf a magnet is acting vertically, it can lift a mass \"m\" in kilograms given by the simple equation:\nformula_7\nwhere g is the gravitational acceleration.\nForce between two magnetic poles.\nClassically, the force between two magnetic poles is given by:\nformula_8\nwhere\n\"F\" is force (SI unit: newton)\n\"q\"\"m\"1 and \"q\"\"m\"2 are the magnitudes of magnetic poles (SI unit: ampere-meter)\n\"\u03bc\" is the permeability of the intervening medium (SI unit: tesla meter per ampere, henry per meter or newton per ampere squared)\n\"r\" is the separation (SI unit: meter).\nThe pole description is useful to the engineers designing real-world magnets, but real magnets have a pole distribution more complex than a single north and south. Therefore, implementation of the pole idea is not simple. In some cases, one of the more complex formulae given below will be more useful.\nForce between two nearby magnetized surfaces of area \"A\".\nThe mechanical force between two nearby magnetized surfaces can be calculated with the following equation. The equation is valid only for cases in which the effect of fringing is negligible and the volume of the air gap is much smaller than that of the magnetized material:\nformula_9\nwhere:\n\"A\" is the area of each surface, in m2\n\"H\" is their magnetizing field, in A/m\n\"\u03bc\"0 is the permeability of space, which equals 4\u03c0\u00d710\u22127\u00a0T\u2022m/A\n\"B\" is the flux density, in T.\nForce between two bar magnets.\nThe force between two identical cylindrical bar magnets placed end to end at large distance formula_10 is approximately:,\nformula_11\nwhere:\n\"B0\" is the magnetic flux density very close to each pole, in T,\n\"A\" is the area of each pole, in m2,\n\"L\" is the length of each magnet, in m,\n\"R\" is the radius of each magnet, in m, and\n\"z\" is the separation between the two magnets, in m.\nformula_12 relates the flux density at the pole to the magnetization of the magnet.\nNote that all these formulations are based on Gilbert's model, which is usable in relatively great distances. In other models (e.g., Amp\u00e8re's model), a more complicated formulation is used that sometimes cannot be solved analytically. In these cases, numerical methods must be used.\nForce between two cylindrical magnets.\nFor two cylindrical magnets with radius formula_13 and length formula_14, with their magnetic dipole aligned, the force can be asymptotically approximated at large distance formula_10 by,\nformula_16\nwhere formula_2 is the magnetization of the magnets and formula_18 is the gap between the magnets.\nA measurement of the magnetic flux density very close to the magnet formula_19 is related to formula_2 approximately by the formula\nformula_21\nThe effective magnetic dipole can be written as\nformula_22\nWhere formula_23 is the volume of the magnet. For a cylinder, this is formula_24.\nWhen formula_25, the point dipole approximation is obtained,\nformula_26\nwhich matches the expression of the force between two magnetic dipoles.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51082", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51082", "title": "Richmond", "text": "Richmond most often refers to:\nRichmond may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51083", "revid": "40774701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51083", "title": "Mikael Agricola", "text": "16th-century Finnish clergyman and the official founder of literary Finnish\nMikael Agricola (; c. 1510 \u2013 9 April 1557) was a Finnish Lutheran clergyman who became the de facto founder of literary Finnish and a prominent proponent of the Protestant Reformation in Sweden, including Finland, which was a Swedish territory at the time. He is often called the \"father of literary Finnish\".\nAgricola was consecrated as the bishop of Turku (\u00c5bo) in 1554, without papal approval. He continued the reform of the Finnish church (then a part of the Church of Sweden) along Lutheran lines. He translated the New Testament into Finnish and also produced the prayer book and hymns used in Finland's new Lutheran Church. This work set the rules of orthography that are the basis of modern Finnish spelling. His thorough work is particularly remarkable in that he accomplished it in only three years.\nHe died of sudden illness while returning from a trip during which he assisted in negotiating the Treaty of Novgorod with the Tsardom of Russia.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nMichael Olaui or Mikael Olofsson (Finnish \"Mikael Olavinpoika\") was born in c. 1510 in the village of Torsby in Pern\u00e5 (\"Pernaja\"), Nyland (\"Uusimaa\"), in what now is part of Finland but then was part of Sweden. He was named after the patron saint of Pern\u00e5's church. The exact date of his birth, like most details of his life, is unknown. His family was a quite wealthy gentry family according to the local bailiff's accounting. He had three sisters, but their names are not known. His teachers apparently recognized his aptitude for languages and his rector Bartholomeus sent him to Viborg (Fi. \"Viipuri\"; now Vyborg, Russia) for Latin school and some priestly training, where he attended the school of Erasmus. It is not known whether his first language was Finnish or Swedish; Pern\u00e5 was mostly a Swedish-speaking district, but the language he used in his works indicates that he was a native speaker of Finnish. However, he mastered both languages like a native speaker and was possibly a bilingual child.\nStudies.\nWhen Michael studied in Viborg (Viipuri) he assumed the surname Agricola (\"farmer\" gv. \"agriculture\"); surnames based on one's father's status and occupation were common for first-generation scholars at the time. It was probably in Viipuri where he first came in touch with the Reformation and Humanism. The Viipuri castle was ruled by a German count, Johann, who had served the king of Sweden, Gustav Vasa. The count was a supporter of the Reformation, and they already held Lutheran services.\nIn 1528 Agricola followed his teacher to Turku (\u00c5bo), then the center of the Finnish side of the Swedish realm and the capital of the bishopric. There Agricola became a scribe in bishop Martinus Skytte's office. While in Turku Agricola met Martin Luther's first Finnish student Petrus S\u00e4rkilahti, who eagerly spread the idea of the Reformation. S\u00e4rkilahti died in 1529, and it was up to Agricola to continue S\u00e4rkilahti's work. Agricola was ordained for priesthood sometime in the early 1530s.\nIn 1536 the bishop of Turku sent Agricola to study in Wittenberg in Germany. He concentrated on the lectures of Philipp Melanchthon, who was an expert in Greek, the original language of the New Testament. In Wittenberg Agricola studied under Luther. Agricola got recommendations to Swedish King Gustav Vasa from both of the reformers. He sent two letters to Gustav, asking for a confirmation for a stipend. When the confirmation came, Agricola bought books (for example, the complete works of Aristotle). In 1537 he started translating the New Testament into Finnish.\nRector and ordinarius.\nIn 1539 Agricola returned to Turku and ended up as the rector of Turku (Cathedral) School. He did not like his job, calling his students \"untamed animals\". At the time Gustav Vasa had confiscated the property of the church when he was consolidating his power but he also drove the Reformation. In 1544 Agricola received an order from the crown to send several talented young men to Stockholm's taxing offices. For some reason, Agricola did not obey until the order was sent again the next year, with a more menacing tone. This episode probably affected their relations negatively.\nIn 1546 Agricola lost his home and school in the Fire of Turku. On 22 February 1548, Gustav Vasa ordered Agricola to retire from his position as a rector. At this time Agricola was already married, but history knows his wife only by her name: Pirjo Olavintyt\u00e4r (Bridget, \"daughter of Olavi\"; Birgitta Olafsdotter, Brigida Olaui). His only son, Christian Agricola (Christianus Michaelis Agricola), was born 11 December 1550, and became the bishop of Tallinn in 1584.\nWhen an old bishop died in 1554, Gustav Vasa had Agricola consecrated as the \"ordinarius\" of Turku parish \u2013 for all practical purposes Bishop of Turku and by extension the first Lutheran bishop for all Finland. Agricola was not a particularly strict or dedicated reformer, although he did remove the Canon of the Mass.\nDeath.\nIn 1557, Agricola headed a delegation going to Russia on a diplomatic mission, and was in Moscow from 21 February to 24 March negotiating a peace treaty, the Treaty of Novgorod (1557). On 9 April he fell ill and died on Kyr\u00f6nniemi peninsula near the Uusikirkko (now Polyane) village on the Karelian Isthmus. This day is also Elias L\u00f6nnrot's birthday and it is celebrated in Finland as the day of the Finnish language. Agricola was probably buried inside Viipuri's church, but the exact location of the grave is not known.\nLiterary achievements.\n\"Abckiria\".\nAgricola had thought about translating the New Testament in his early years of study. At the time, however, there was no standard written form of Finnish, so he started developing it. His first book, \"Abckiria\", which is nowadays known as the \"ABC-kirja\" or ABC book, was a primer for reading and a catechism. It was first printed in 1543. The catechism was included because only very few people could afford the whole Bible at the time. The first printing contained 16 pages.\nA second printing was released in 1551 with 24 pages.\nIn 1966 \u00c5ke \u00c5bergin, a librarian, discovered parts, while repairing book bindings, from an as yet unknown (likely the third) edition of the \"ABC-kirja\" that included the name of the printer, Amund Lauritsanpoika, and fortuitously the publishing date of 1559 (two years after the author's death) of the final as yet undiscovered 8 pages. The pages were likely the result of an imposing error and relegated to padding paper.\n\"Rucouskiria\".\nAgricola's \"Rucouskiria Bibliasta\" (contemporary Finnish spelling: Rukouskirja; literally, \"Prayer Book from the Bible\") was printed in March 1544. At the beginning of the book, Agricola wrote about many topics concerning all-round education and the Reformation's effects in Finland. The book includes four prefaces and about 700 prayers on many topics; it even has twelve structurally different kinds of prayers, instead of the usual two or three. It is the most independent work by Agricola and contains approximately 900 pages. His sources include the works of Luther, Melanchthon, and Erasmus.\nNew Testament translation.\nAgricola's most prominent book is the first Finnish-language translation of the New Testament. The manuscript was completed in 1548. It contains 718 pages and many illustrations.\nLiturgical books.\nWhile Agricola was in Wittenberg, he translated three smaller liturgical books into Finnish. These books were printed in 1549.\n\"K\u00e4sikirja Castesta ia muista Christikunnan Menoista\" includes forms for christening, marriage and burial, as well as speeches for the sick, mourning and dying. It is translated from Olaus Petri's corresponding work except for the christening and marriage portions, which are from Luther. It also contains minor elements translated from works of Caspar Huberinus.\n\"Messu eli Herran echtolinen\" includes the form for a service. It is also based on Olaus Petri's work and a few Finnish manuscripts. In this book Agricola revealed his next mission: the translation of the Old Testament.\n\"Se meiden Herran Jesusen Christusen Pina, ylesnousemus ia tauiaisen Astumus, niste Neliest Euangelisterist coghottuon\" tells about Jesus Christ's suffering. It is collected from all four gospels. This book was influenced heavily by Johannes Bugenhagen, a teacher in Wittenberg. It was mainly translated from the German version, but some parts are influenced by the Swedish version and Agricola's own translation of the New Testament.\nCommemorations.\nThe Evangelical Lutheran Church in America remembers Bishop Agricola annually on 10 April.\nMikael Agricola Church in Helsinki is named after Agricola. As well the https:// memorializes his namesake in Toronto Canada. An asteroid 3212 Agricola is named after Agricola.\nIn 2007, 450 years after his death, Agricola was selected as the main motif for a commemorative coin, the \u20ac10 Mikael Agricola and Finnish language commemorative coin. This collector coin was issued to honor Agricola's life work as a contributor to the Protestant reformation in Finland and as the father of the Finnish written language. The reverse side depicts a quill to reference the writer, while the coin's obverse side contains an artistic interpretation of a human figure.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51084", "revid": "1315446374", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51084", "title": "Unconventional superconductor", "text": "Superconductive materials not explained by existing established theories\nUnconventional superconductors are materials that display superconductivity which is not explained by the usual BCS theory or its extension, the Eliashberg theory. The pairing in unconventional superconductors may originate from some other mechanism than the electron\u2013phonon interaction. Alternatively, a superconductor is unconventional if the superconducting order parameter transforms according to a non-trivial irreducible representation of the point group or space group of the system. Per definition, superconductors that break additional symmetries to \"U\" (1) symmetry are known as unconventional superconductors. \nHistory.\nThe superconducting properties of CeCu2Si2, a type of\nheavy fermion material, were reported in 1979 by Frank Steglich. For a long time it was believed that CeCu2Si2 was a singlet d-wave superconductor, but since the mid-2010s, this notion has been strongly contested. In the early eighties, many more unconventional, heavy fermion superconductors were discovered, including UBe13, UPt3 and URu2Si2. In each of these materials, the anisotropic nature of the pairing was implicated by the power-law dependence of the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation rate and specific heat capacity on temperature. The presence of nodes in the superconducting gap of UPt3 was confirmed in 1986 from the polarization dependence of the ultrasound attenuation.\nThe first unconventional triplet superconductor, organic material (TMTSF)2PF6, was discovered by Denis Jerome, Klaus Bechgaard and coworkers in 1980 (TMTSF = Tetramethyltetraselenafulvalenium, see Fulvalene). Experimental works by Paul Chaikin's and Michael Naughton's groups as well as theoretical analysis of their data by Andrei Lebed have firmly confirmed unconventional nature of superconducting pairing in (TMTSF)2X (X=PF6, ClO4, etc.) organic materials.\nHigh-temperature singlet d-wave superconductivity was discovered by J.G. Bednorz and K.A. M\u00fcller in 1986, who also discovered that the lanthanum-based cuprate perovskite material LaBaCuO4 develops superconductivity at a critical temperature (\"T\"c) of approximately 35\u00a0K (-238 degrees Celsius). This was well above the highest critical temperature known at the time (\"T\"c = 23\u00a0K), and thus the new family of materials was called high-temperature superconductors. Bednorz and M\u00fcller received the Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery in 1987. Since then, many other high-temperature superconductors have been synthesized.\nLSCO (La2\u2212\"x\"Sr\"x\"CuO4) was discovered the same year (1986). Soon after, in January 1987, yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO) was discovered to have a \"T\"c of 90\u00a0K, the first material to achieve superconductivity above the boiling point of liquid nitrogen (77\u00a0K). This was highly significant from the point of view of the technological applications of superconductivity because liquid nitrogen is far less expensive than liquid helium, which is required to cool conventional superconductors down to their critical temperature. In 1988 bismuth strontium calcium copper oxide (BSCCO) with \"T\"c up to 107\u00a0K, and thallium barium calcium copper oxide (TBCCO) (T=thallium) with \"T\"c of 125\u00a0K were discovered. The current record critical temperature is about \"T\"c\u00a0= 133\u00a0K (\u2212140\u00a0\u00b0C) at standard pressure, and somewhat higher critical temperatures can be achieved at high pressure. Nevertheless, at present it is considered unlikely that cuprate perovskite materials will achieve room-temperature superconductivity.\nOn the other hand, other unconventional superconductors have been discovered. These include some that do not superconduct at high temperatures, such as strontium ruthenate Sr2RuO4, but that, like high-temperature superconductors, are unconventional in other ways. (For example, the origin of the attractive force leading to the formation of Cooper pairs may be different from the one postulated in BCS theory.) In addition to this, superconductors that have unusually high values of \"T\"c but that are not cuprate perovskites have been discovered. Some of them may be extreme examples of conventional superconductors (this is suspected of magnesium diboride, MgB2, with \"T\"c = 39\u00a0K). Others could display more unconventional features.\nIn 2008 a new class that does not include copper (layered oxypnictide superconductors), for example LaOFeAs, was discovered. An oxypnictide of samarium seemed to have a \"T\"c of about 43\u00a0K, which was higher than predicted by BCS theory. Tests at up to 45\u00a0T suggested the upper critical field of LaFeAsO0.89F0.11 to be around 64\u00a0T. Some other iron-based superconductors do not contain oxygen.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], the highest-temperature superconductor (at ambient pressure) is mercury barium calcium copper oxide (HgBa2Ca2Cu3O\"x\"), at 138\u00a0K and is held by a cuprate-perovskite material, possibly 164 K under high pressure.\nOther unconventional superconductors not based on cuprate structure have too been found. Some have unusually high values of the critical temperature, \"T\"c, and hence they are sometimes also called high-temperature superconductors.\nGraphene.\nIn 2017, scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy experiments on graphene proximitized to the electron-doped (non-chiral) \"d\"-wave superconductor Pr2\u2212\"x\"Ce\"x\"CuO4 (PCCO) revealed evidence for an unconventional superconducting density of states induced in graphene. Publications in March 2018 provided evidence for unconventional superconducting properties of a graphene bilayer where one layer was offset by a \"magic angle\" of 1.1\u00b0 relative to the other.\nOngoing research.\nWhile the mechanism responsible for conventional superconductivity is well described by the BCS theory, the mechanism for unconventional superconductivity is still unknown. After more than twenty years of intense research, the origin of high-temperature superconductivity is still not clear, being one of the major unsolved problems of theoretical condensed matter physics. It appears that unlike conventional superconductivity driven by \"electron-phonon\" attraction, genuine \"electronic\" mechanisms (such as antiferromagnetic correlations) are at play. Moreover, d-wave pairing, rather than s-wave, is significant.\nOne goal of much research is room-temperature superconductivity.\nDespite intensive research and many promising leads, an explanation has so far eluded scientists. One reason for this is that the materials in question are generally very complex, multi-layered crystals (for example, BSCCO), making theoretical modeling difficult.\nPossible mechanisms.\nThe most controversial topic in condensed matter physics has been the mechanism for high-\"T\"c superconductivity (HTS). There have been two representative theories on the HTS : (See also Resonating valence bond theory )\nWeak-coupling theory.\nFirstly, it has been suggested that the HTS emerges by antiferromagnetic spin fluctuation in a doped system. According to this weak-coupling theory, the pairing wave function of the HTS should have a \"d\"\"x\"2\u2212\"y\"2 symmetry. Thus, whether the symmetry of the pairing wave function is the \"d\" symmetry or not is essential to demonstrate on the mechanism of the HTS in respect of the spin fluctuation. That is, if the HTS order parameter (pairing wave function) does not have \"d\" symmetry, then a pairing mechanism related to spin fluctuation can be ruled out. The \"tunnel experiment\" (see below) seems to detect \"d\" symmetry in some HTS.\nInterlayer coupling model.\nSecondly, there is the interlayer coupling model, according to which a layered structure consisting of BCS-type (s symmetry) superconductor can enhance the superconductivity by itself. By introducing an additional tunneling interaction between each layer, this model successfully explained the anisotropic symmetry of the order parameter in the HTS as well as the emergence of the HTS.\nSuperexchange.\nPromising experimental results from various researchers in September 2022, including Weijiong Chen, J.C. S\u00e9amus Davis and H. Eisiaki revealed that superexchange of electrons is possibly the most probable reason for high-temperature superconductivity.\nPrevious studies on the symmetry of the HTS order parameter.\nThe symmetry of the HTS order parameter has been studied in nuclear magnetic resonance measurements and, more recently, by angle-resolved photoemission and measurements of the microwave penetration depth in a HTS crystal. NMR measurements probe the local magnetic field around an atom and hence reflect the susceptibility of the material. They have been of special interest for the HTS materials because many researchers have wondered whether spin correlations might play a role in the mechanism of the HTS.\nNMR measurements of the resonance frequency on YBCO indicated that electrons in the copper oxide superconductors are paired in spin-singlet states. This indication came from the behavior of the Knight shift, the frequency shift that occurs when the internal field is different from the applied field: In a normal metal, the magnetic moments of the conduction electrons in the neighborhood of the ion being probed align with the applied field and create a larger internal field. As these metals go superconducting, electrons with oppositely directed spins couple to form singlet states. In the anisotropic HTS, perhaps NMR measurements have found that the relaxation rate for copper depends on the direction of the applied static magnetic field, with the rate being higher when the static field is parallel to one of the axes in the copper oxide plane. While this observation by some group supported the d symmetry of the HTS, other groups could not observe it.\nAlso, by measuring the \"penetration depth\", the symmetry of the HTS order parameter can be studied. The microwave penetration depth is determined by the superfluid density responsible for screening the external field. In the s wave BCS theory, because pairs can be thermally excited across the gap \u0394, the change in superfluid density per unit change in temperature goes as exponential behavior, exp(-\u0394/\"k\"B\"T\"). In that case, the penetration depth also varies exponentially with temperature \"T\". If there are nodes in the energy gap as in the \"d\" symmetry HTS, electron pair can more easily be broken, the superfluid density should have a stronger temperature dependence, and the penetration depth is expected to increase as a power of T at low temperatures. If the symmetry is specially \"d\"\"x\"2-\"y\"2 then the penetration depth should vary linearly with \"T\" at low temperatures. This technique is increasingly being used to study superconductors and is limited in application largely by the quality of available single crystals.\nPhotoemission spectroscopy also could provide information on the HTS symmetry. By scattering photons off electrons in the crystal, one can sample the energy spectra of the electrons. Because the technique is sensitive to the angle of the emitted electrons one can determine the spectrum for different wave vectors on the Fermi surface. However, within the resolution of the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), researchers could not tell whether the gap goes to zero or just gets very small. Also, ARPES are sensitive only to the magnitude and not to the sign of the gap, so it could not tell if the gap goes negative at some point. This means that ARPES cannot determine whether the HTS order parameter has the \"d\" symmetry or not.\nJunction experiment supporting the \"d-wave\" symmetry.\nThere was a clever experimental design to overcome the muddy situation. An experiment based on pair tunneling and flux quantization in a three-grain ring of YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) was designed to test the symmetry of the order parameter in YBCO.\n Such a ring consists of three YBCO crystals with specific orientations consistent with the d-wave pairing symmetry to give rise to a spontaneously generated half-integer quantum vortex at the tricrystal meeting point. Furthermore, the possibility that junction interfaces can be in the clean limit (no defects) or with maximum zig-zag disorder was taken into account in this tricrystal experiment.\nA proposal of studying vortices with half magnetic flux quanta in heavy-fermion superconductors in three polycrystalline configurations was reported in 1987 by V. B. Geshkenbein, A. Larkin and A. Barone in 1987.\nIn the first tricrystal pairing symmetry experiment, the spontaneous magnetization of half flux quantum was clearly observed in YBCO, which convincingly supported the \"d-wave\" symmetry of the order parameter in YBCO. Because YBCO is orthorhombic, it might inherently have an admixture of s-wave symmetry. So, by tuning their technique further, it was found that there was an admixture of s-wave symmetry in YBCO within about 3%. Also, it was demonstrated by Tsuei, Kirtley et al. that there was a pure \"d\"\"x\"2-\"y\"2 order parameter symmetry in the tetragonal Tl2Ba2CuO6.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51086", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51086", "title": "Jefferson County", "text": "Jefferson County may refer to the following counties in the United States:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "51089", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51089", "title": "919", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 919 (CMXIX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51090", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51090", "title": "918", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 918 (CMXVIII) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51091", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51091", "title": "917", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 917 (CMXVII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51092", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51092", "title": "916", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\nYear 916 (CMXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51093", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51093", "title": "915", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 915 (CMXV) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51094", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51094", "title": "914", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 914 (CMXIV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51096", "revid": "1291493053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51096", "title": "912", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 912 (CMXII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51097", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51097", "title": "Kurt Weill", "text": "German composer (1900\u20131950)\nKurt Julian Weill (; ; March 2, 1900\u00a0\u2013 April 3, 1950) was a German-born American composer active from the 1920s in his native country, and in his later years in the United States. He was a leading composer for the stage who was best known for his fruitful collaborations with Bertolt Brecht. With Brecht, he developed productions such as his best-known work, \"The Threepenny Opera\", which included the ballad \"Mack the Knife\". Weill held the ideal of writing music that served a socially useful purpose, \"Gebrauchsmusik\". He also wrote several works for the concert hall and a number of works on Jewish themes. He became a United States citizen in 1943.\nFamily and childhood.\nWeill was born on March 2, 1900, the third of four children to Albert Weill (1867\u20131950) and Emma Weill (n\u00e9e Ackermann; 1872\u20131955). He grew up in a religious Jewish family in the \"Sandvorstadt\", the Jewish quarter in Dessau in Saxony, where his father was a cantor. At the age of twelve, Weill started taking piano lessons and made his first attempts at writing music; his earliest preserved composition was written in 1913 and is titled \"\"Mi Addir\": Jewish Wedding Song\".\nIn 1915, Weill started taking private lessons with Albert Bing, kapellmeister at the \"Herzogliches Hoftheater zu Dessau\", who taught him piano, composition, music theory, and conducting. Weill performed publicly on piano for the first time in 1915, both as an accompanist and soloist. The following years he composed numerous lieder to the lyrics of poets such as Joseph von Eichendorff, Arno Holz, and Anna Ritter, as well as a cycle of five songs titled \"Ofrahs Lieder\" to a German translation of a text by Yehuda Halevi.\nWeill graduated with an Abitur from the \"Oberrealschule\" of Dessau in 1918, and enrolled at the Berliner Hochschule f\u00fcr Musik at the age of 18, where he studied composition with Engelbert Humperdinck, conducting with Rudolf Krasselt, and counterpoint with Friedrich E. Koch, and also attended philosophy lectures by Max Dessoir and Ernst Cassirer. The same year, he wrote his first string quartet (in B minor).\nMusical career.\nEarly work and compositions.\nWeill's family experienced financial hardship in the aftermath of World War I, and in July 1919, Weill abandoned his studies and returned to Dessau, where he was employed as a r\u00e9p\u00e9titeur at the Friedrich-Theater under the direction of the new Kapellmeister, Hans Knappertsbusch. During this time, he composed an orchestral suite in E-flat major, a symphonic poem on Rainer Maria Rilke's \"The Lay of the Love and Death of Cornet Christopher Rilke\", and \"Schilflieder\" (\"Reed Songs\"), a cycle of five songs to poems by Nikolaus Lenau. In December 1919, through the help of Humperdinck, Weill was appointed as Kapellmeister at the newly founded Stadttheater in L\u00fcdenscheid, where he directed opera, operetta, and singspiel for five months. He subsequently composed a cello sonata and \"Ninon de Lenclos\", a now lost one-act operatic adaptation of a 1905 play by Ernst Hardt. From May to September 1920, Weill spent a few months in Leipzig, where his father had become the director of a Jewish orphanage, residing in the Gottschedstrasse. Before he returned to Berlin, in September 1920, he composed \"Sulamith\", a choral fantasy for soprano, female choir, and orchestra.\nStudies with Busoni.\nBack in Berlin, Weill had an interview with Ferruccio Busoni in December 1920. After examining some of Weill's compositions, Busoni accepted him as one of five master students in composition at the Preussische Akademie der K\u00fcnste in Berlin.\nFrom January 1921 to December 1923, Weill studied music composition with him and also counterpoint with Philipp Jarnach in Berlin. During his first year he composed his first symphony, \"Sinfonie in einem Satz\", as well as the lieder \"Die Bekehrte\" (Goethe) and two \"Rilkelieder\" for voice and piano. Busoni, then approaching the end of his life, was a major influence on Weill. Where Weill's early compositions reflect the post-Wagnerian Romanticism and Expressionism common in German classical music of that era, Busoni was a Neoclassicist. Busoni's influence can be seen especially in Weill's vocal and stage works, which moved steadily away from having the music reflect the characters' emotions to have it function as (often ironic) commentary. This was Weill's own path to some of the same notions of Epic theater and the \"Verfremdungseffekt\" (distancing effect) advocated by his future collaborator Brecht.\nTo support his family in Leipzig, Weill also worked as a pianist in a Bierkeller tavern. In 1922, Weill joined the November Group's music faction. That year he composed a psalm, a divertimento for orchestra, and \"Sinfonia Sacra: Fantasia, Passacaglia, and Hymnus for Orchestra\". On November 18, 1922, his children's pantomime \"Die Zaubernacht\" (\"The Magic Night\") premiered at the Theater am Kurf\u00fcrstendamm; it was the first public performance of any of Weill's works in the field of musical theatre.\nOut of financial need, Weill taught music theory and composition to private students from 1923 to 1925. Among his students were Claudio Arrau, Maurice Abravanel, Heinz Jolles (later known as Henry Jolles), Nikos Skalkottas, and Esther Zweig. Arrau, Abravanel, and Jolles remained members of Weill's circle of friends thereafter, and Jolles's sole surviving composition predating the rise of the Nazi regime in 1933 is a fragment of a work for four pianos he and Weill wrote jointly.\nWeill's compositions during his last year of studies included \"Quodlibet\", an orchestral suite version of \"Die Zaubernacht\"; \"Frauentanz\", seven medieval poems for soprano, flute, viola, clarinet, French horn, and bassoon; and \"Recordare\" for choir and children's choir to words from the Book of Lamentations. Further premieres that year included a performance of his \"Divertimento for Orchestra\" by the Berlin Philharmonic under the direction of Heinz Unger on April 10, 1923, and the Hindemith-Amar Quartet's rendering of Weill's \"String Quartet\", Op. 8, on June 24, 1923. In December 1923, Weill finished his studies with Busoni.\nSuccess in the 1920s and early 1930s.\nIn 1922 he joined the \"Novembergruppe\", a group of leftist Berlin artists that included Hanns Eisler and Stefan Wolpe. In February 1924 the conductor Fritz Busch introduced him to the dramatist Georg Kaiser, with whom Weill would have a long-lasting creative partnership resulting in several one-act operas. At Kaiser's house in Gr\u00fcnheide, Weill first met the singer and actress Lotte Lenya in the summer of 1924. The couple were married twice: in 1926 and again in 1937 (after their divorce in 1933). She took great care to support Weill's work, and after his death she took it upon herself to increase awareness of his music, forming the Kurt Weill Foundation. From November 1924 to May 1929, Weill wrote hundreds of reviews for the influential and comprehensive radio program guide \"Der deutsche Rundfunk\"; Hans Siebert von Heister had already worked with Weill in the November Group, and offered Weill the job shortly after becoming editor-in-chief.\nAlthough he had some success with his first mature non-stage works (such as the String Quartet, Op. 8, and the Concerto for Violin and Wind Orchestra, Op. 12), which were influenced by Gustav Mahler, Arnold Schoenberg and Igor Stravinsky, Weill tended more and more towards vocal music and musical theatre. His musical theatre work and his songs were extremely popular in Germany in the late 1920s and early 1930s. Weill's music was admired by composers such as Alban Berg, Alexander von Zemlinsky, Darius Milhaud and Stravinsky, but it was also criticized by others: Schoenberg, who later revised his opinion, and Anton Webern.\nHis best-known work is \"The Threepenny Opera\" (1928), a reworking of John Gay's \"The Beggar's Opera\", written in collaboration with Bertolt Brecht. Engel directed the original production of \"The Threepenny Opera\" in 1928. It contains Weill's most famous song, \"Mack the Knife\" (\"\"). Textually \"Threepenny Opera\"\u2014like the \"Beggar's Opera\" before it\u2014is satire and social commentary; but for Weill, coming from a musical perspective, it was something else as well: \"It gives us the opportunity to make opera the subject matter for an evening in the theater\", part of what Weill saw as a lifelong process to \"reform\" opera for the modern stage. The stage success was filmed by G. W. Pabst in two language versions: \"Die 3-Groschen-Oper\" and \"L'op\u00e9ra de quat' sous\". Weill and Brecht tried to stop the film adaptation through a well publicized lawsuit\u2014which Weill won and Brecht lost.\nWeill continued to work with Brecht on the musical \"Happy End\" (1929), best known for the songs \"Surabaya Johnny\", \"Bilbao Song\", and \"Sailor's Tango\"; the children's opera \"Der Jasager\" (1930); and the opera \"Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny\" (1930), best known for \"Alabama Song\" (later recorded by The Doors, among many others). Weill's working association with Brecht, although successful, came to an end over politics in 1930. Though Weill associated with socialism, after Brecht tried to push their work even further in a left-wing direction, Weill commented, according to his wife Lotte Lenya, that he was unable to \"set the \"Communist Manifesto\" to music.\"\nWhile in Germany in the early 1930s, Weill also collaborated with the American virtuoso banjoist Mike Danzi in an early production of his opera \"Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny\". During a rehearsal, Weill congratulated Danzi for his accurate interpretation of the chords found in his score while noting that most other banjoists had complained that they were not actually written for the banjo at all.\nLife in Paris and New York.\nWeill fled Nazi Germany in March 1933. A prominent and popular Jewish composer, Weill was officially denounced for his political views and sympathies, and became a target of the Nazi authorities, who criticized and interfered with performances of his later stage works, such as \"Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny\" (\"Aufstieg und Fall der Stadt Mahagonny\", 1930), (1932), and \"Der Silbersee\" (1933). With no option but to leave Germany, he went first to Paris, where he worked once more with Brecht (after a project with Jean Cocteau failed) on the ballet \"The Seven Deadly Sins\".\nOn April 13, 1933, his musical \"The Threepenny Opera\" was given its premiere on Broadway, but closed after 13 performances to mixed reviews. In 1934 he completed his Symphony No. 2, his last purely orchestral work, conducted in Amsterdam and New York by Bruno Walter, and also the music for Jacques Deval's play \"Marie Galante\". A production of his operetta \"Der Kuhhandel\" (\"A Kingdom for a Cow\") took him to London in 1935, and later that year he went to the United States in connection with \"The Eternal Road\", a \"Biblical Drama\" by Franz Werfel that had been commissioned by members of New York's Jewish community and was premiered in 1937 at the Manhattan Opera House, running for 153 performances.\nHe and Lotte moved to New York City on September 10, 1935, living first at the St. Moritz Hotel before moving to an apartment at 231 East 62nd Street, between Third and Second Avenues. They rented an old house with Paul Green during the summer of 1936 near Pine Brook Country Club in Nichols, Connecticut, the summer home of the Group Theatre, while finishing \"Johnny Johnson\". Some of the other artists who summered there in 1936 were Elia Kazan, Harry Morgan, John Garfield, Lee J. Cobb, Will Geer, Clifford Odets, Howard da Silva and Irwin Shaw.\nRather than continue to write in the same style that had characterized his European compositions, Weill made a study of American popular and stage music. His American output contains individual songs and entire shows that not only became highly respected and admired, but have been seen as seminal works in the development of the American musical. In 1939 he wrote the music for \"Railroads on Parade,\" a musical spectacular put on at the 1939 World's Fair in New York to celebrate the American railroad industry (book by Edward Hungerford). Unique among Broadway composers of the time, Weill insisted on writing his own orchestrations (with some very few exceptions, such as the dance music in \"Street Scene\"). He worked with writers such as Maxwell Anderson and Ira Gershwin, and wrote a film score for Fritz Lang (\"You and Me\", 1938). Weill himself strove to find a new way of creating an American opera that would be both commercially and artistically successful. The most interesting attempt in this direction is \"Street Scene\", based on a play by Elmer Rice, with lyrics by Langston Hughes. For his work on \"Street Scene\" Weill was awarded the inaugural Tony Award for Best Original Score.\nIn the 1940s Weill lived in downstate New York near the New Jersey border and made frequent trips both to New York City and to Hollywood for his work for theatre and film. Weill was active in political movements encouraging American entry into World War II, and after America joined the war in 1941, Weill enthusiastically collaborated in numerous artistic projects supporting the war effort both abroad and on the home front. He and Maxwell Anderson also joined the volunteer civil service by working as air raid wardens on High Tor Mountain between their homes in New City, New York and Haverstraw, New York in Rockland County. Weill became a naturalized citizen of the United States on August 27, 1943.\nWeill had ideals of writing music that served a socially useful purpose. In the US, he wrote \"Down in the Valley\", an opera including the song of the same name and other American folk songs. He also wrote a number of songs in support of the American war effort, including the satirical \"Schickelgruber\" (with lyrics by Howard Dietz), \"Buddy on the Nightshift\" (with Oscar Hammerstein) and \u2013 with Brecht again as in his earlier career \u2013 the \"Ballad of the Nazi Soldier's Wife\" (\"Und was bekam des Soldaten Weib?\"). Intended for broadcast to Germany, the song chronicled the progress of the Nazi war machine through the gifts sent to the proud wife at home by her man at the front: furs from Oslo, a silk dress from Paris etc., until finally, from Russia, she receives her widow's veil.\nApart from \"Mack the Knife\" and \"Pirate Jenny\" from \"The Threepenny Opera\", his most famous songs include \"Alabama Song\" (from \"Mahagonny\"), \"Surabaya Johnny\" (from \"Happy End\"), \"Speak Low\" (from \"One Touch of Venus\"), \"Lost in the Stars\" (from the musical of that name), \"My Ship\" (from \"Lady in the Dark\"), and \"September Song\" (from \"Knickerbocker Holiday\").\nDeath.\nWeill suffered a heart attack shortly after his 50th birthday and died on April 3, 1950, in New York City. He was buried in Mount Repose Cemetery in Haverstraw, New York. The text and music on his gravestone come from the song \"A Bird of Passage\" from \"Lost in the Stars\", itself adapted from a quotation from the Venerable Bede:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 1.67em;\"&gt;This is the life of men on earth:\nOut of darkness we come at birth\nInto a lamplit room, and then \u2013\nGo forward into dark again.\n(lyric: Maxwell Anderson)&lt;/poem&gt;\nAn excerpt from Maxwell Anderson's eulogy for Weill read:\nI wish, of course, that he had been lucky enough to have had a little more time for his work. I could wish the times in which he lived had been less troubled. But these things were as they were \u2013 and Kurt managed to make thousands of beautiful things during the short and troubled time he had ...\nInfluence.\nWeill's music continues to be performed both in popular and classical contexts. In Weill's lifetime, his work was most associated with the voice of his wife, Lotte Lenya, but shortly after his death \"Mack the Knife\" was established by Louis Armstrong and Bobby Darin as a jazz standard. His music has since been recorded by many performers, ranging from Nina Simone, Judy Garland, Frank Sinatra, The Doors, Ella Fitzgerald, David Bowie, Robbie Williams, Judy Collins, John Zorn, Dagmar Krause, Steeleye Span, The Young Gods, and PJ Harvey to New York's Metropolitan Opera and the Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra. Singers as varied as Teresa Stratas, Ute Lemper, Gisela May, Anne Sofie von Otter, Max Raabe, Heinz Karl Gruber, Dee Dee Bridgewater and Marianne Faithfull have recorded entire albums of his music.\nIn 1985, Hal Willner produced \"\", a tribute album in which Weill's songs were interpreted by a variety of artists, including Todd Rundgren, Tom Waits, Lou Reed, Charlie Haden and Sting.\nAmanda Palmer, singer-pianist of the Brechtian Punk Cabaret duo The Dresden Dolls, has Kurt Weill's name on the front of her keyboard (a pun on the name of the instrument maker Kurzweil) as a tribute to the composer. In 1991, the seminal Swiss industrial band The Young Gods released an album of Kurt Weill songs, \"The Young Gods Play Kurt Weill\". Weill has also been often cited as an influence on Goldfrapp's \"Felt Mountain\". In 2008, Weill's songs were performed by Canadian musicians (including Sarah Slean and Mary Margaret O'Hara) in a tribute concert as part of the first annual Canwest Cabaret Festival in Toronto. In 2009 Duke Special released an EP, \"Huckleberry Finn\", of five songs from an unfinished musical by Kurt Weill based on the novel by Mark Twain.\nKurt Weill is a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame.\nKurt Weill Centre.\nThe Kurt Weill Centre (German:\"Kurt-Weill-Zentrum\") in Dessau was founded in 1993. It provides a museum, library, archive and media centre and organises an annual festival celebrating the composer's work. It is housed in the Feininger house, a house designed by the architect Walter Gropius which was originally lived in by the artist Lyonel Feininger. The property is part of the World Heritage site the Bauhaus and its Sites in Weimar, Dessau and Bernau. The centre, with its collection of material on Weill, is listed as a cultural memorial of national importance. The centre is one of the \"Beacons of light\" of the Konferenz Nationaler Kultureinrichtungen (Conference of National Cultural Institutions), a union of cultural institutions in the new states of Germany i.e. area that was formerly East Germany.\nKurt Weill Foundation for Music.\nFounded by Lotte Lenya in 1962, the non-profit, private foundation is dedicated to promoting understanding of Weill's life and works and preserving the legacies of Weill and Lenya. The foundation administers the internationally recognized Lotte Lenya Competition, a grant program, various sponsorships and fellowships, the Weill-Lenya Research Center, and the Kurt Weill Prize, and publishes the \"Kurt Weill Edition\" and the \"Kurt Weill Newsletter\". Trustees of the New York-based organization have included Harold Prince, Victoria Clark, Jeanine Tesori, Tazewell Thompson, and Teresa Stratas.\nRelatives.\nWeill's grandmother was Jeanette Hochstetter of Liedolsheim in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. Weill was one of four members of the same Hochstetter family to lead distinguished careers in the fields of music and literature. His first cousin once removed was Caesar Hochstetter (born January 12, 1863, in Ladenburg, a suburb of Mannheim \u2013 his date and place of death are unknown but this was probably during The Holocaust), a composer and arranger who collaborated with Max Reger and who dedicated \"Aquarelles\", Op. 25, to him.\nCaesar's younger brother was Gustav Hochstetter (born May 12, 1873, Mannheim \u2013 died 1942, Theresienstadt concentration camp), Professor of Literature at the University of Brussels, writer and poet and friend of Wilhelm Busch. His second cousin was the childhood prodigy pianist, Lisy Fischer (born August 22, 1900, Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland \u2013 died June 6, 1999, Newcastle upon Tyne, England).\nNotes and references.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "51098", "revid": "2278355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51098", "title": "895", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 895 (DCCCXCV) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nMusic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51100", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51100", "title": "894", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 894 (DCCCXCIV) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nJapan.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51101", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51101", "title": "3 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 3 BC was a common year starting on Wednesday or Thursday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Tuesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Messalla (or, less frequently, year 751 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 3 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51102", "revid": "8629330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51102", "title": "4 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 4 BC was a common year starting on Tuesday or Wednesday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Monday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sabinus and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 750 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 4 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51103", "revid": "1591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51103", "title": "Macro-economics", "text": ""}
{"id": "51104", "revid": "44867196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51104", "title": "110s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 119 BC \u2013 110 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51105", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51105", "title": "951", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 951 (CMLI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\nAfrica \n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51106", "revid": "3206409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51106", "title": "Francis Walsingham", "text": "English spy and politician (c. 1532\u20131590)\nSir Francis Walsingham (c.\u20091532\u00a0\u2013 6\u00a0April 1590) was principal secretary to Queen Elizabeth I of England from 20 December 1573 until his death and is popularly remembered as her \"spymaster\".\nBorn to a well-connected family of gentry, Walsingham attended Cambridge University and travelled in continental Europe before embarking on a career in law at the age of twenty. A committed Protestant, during the reign of the Catholic Queen Mary I of England he joined other expatriates in exile in Switzerland and northern Italy until Mary's death and the accession of her Protestant half-sister, Elizabeth.\nWalsingham rose from relative obscurity to become one of the small coterie who directed the Elizabethan state, overseeing foreign, domestic and religious policy. He served as English ambassador to France in the early 1570s and witnessed the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre. As principal secretary, he supported exploration, colonisation, the development of the navy, and the plantation of Ireland. He worked to bring Scotland and England together. His foreign policy demonstrated a new understanding of the role of England as a maritime Protestant power with intercontinental trading ties. He oversaw operations that penetrated Spanish military preparation, gathered intelligence from across Europe, disrupted a range of plots against Elizabeth and secured the execution of Mary, Queen of Scots.\nOrigins and early life.\nFrancis Walsingham was born around 1532, probably at Foots Cray, near Chislehurst in Kent, the only son of William Walsingham (died 1534), a successful and well-connected London lawyer who served as a member of the commission appointed to investigate the estates of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey in 1530. William's elder brother was Sir Edmund Walsingham, Lieutenant of the Tower of London.\nFrancis's mother was Joyce Denny, a daughter of the courtier Sir Edmund Denny of Cheshunt in Hertfordshire, and a sister of the courtier Sir Anthony Denny, the principal Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to King Henry VIII. After the death of her first husband she married the courtier Sir John Carey in 1538. Carey's brother William was the husband of Mary Boleyn, the elder sister of Anne Boleyn, the second wife of King Henry VIII.\nOf Francis's five siblings, Mary married Sir Walter Mildmay, who was Chancellor of the Exchequer for over 20 years, and Elizabeth married the parliamentarian Peter Wentworth.\nFrancis Walsingham matriculated at King's College, Cambridge, in 1548 with many other Protestants but as an undergraduate of high social status did not sit for a degree. From 1550 or 1551, he travelled in continental Europe, returning to England by 1552 to enrol at Gray's Inn, one of the qualifying bodies for English lawyers.\nUpon the death in 1553 of Henry VIII's successor, Edward VI, Edward's Catholic half-sister Mary became queen. Many wealthy Protestants, such as John Foxe and John Cheke, fled England, and Walsingham was among them. He continued his studies in law at the universities of Basel and Padua, where he was elected to the governing body by his fellow students in 1555.\nRise to power.\nMary I died in November 1558 and was succeeded by her Protestant half-sister Elizabeth. Walsingham returned to England and through the support of one of his fellow former exiles, Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford, he was elected to Elizabeth's first parliament as the member for Bossiney, Cornwall, in 1559. At the subsequent election in 1563, he was returned for both Lyme Regis, Dorset, another constituency under Bedford's influence, and Banbury, Oxfordshire. He chose to sit for Lyme Regis. In January 1562 he married Anne, daughter of Sir George Barne, Lord Mayor of London in 1552\u20133, and widow of wine merchant Alexander Carleill. Anne died two years later leaving her son Christopher Carleill in Walsingham's care. In 1566, Walsingham married Ursula St. Barbe, widow of Sir Richard Worsley, and Walsingham acquired her estates of Appuldurcombe and Carisbrooke Priory on the Isle of Wight. The following year, they had a daughter, Frances. Walsingham's other two stepsons, Ursula's sons John and George, were killed in a gunpowder accident at Appuldurcombe in 1567.\nIn the following years, Walsingham became active in soliciting support for the Huguenots in France and developed a friendly and close working relationship with Nicholas Throckmorton, his predecessor as MP for Lyme Regis and a former ambassador to France. By 1569, Walsingham was working with William Cecil to counteract plots against Elizabeth. He was instrumental in the collapse of the Ridolfi plot, which hoped to replace Elizabeth with the Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots. He is credited with writing propaganda decrying a conspiratorial marriage between Mary and Thomas Howard, 4th Duke of Norfolk, and Roberto di Ridolfi, after whom the plot was named, was interrogated at Walsingham's house.\nIn 1570, the Queen chose Walsingham to support the Huguenots in their negotiations with Charles IX of France. Later that year, he succeeded Sir Henry Norris as English ambassador in Paris. One of his duties was to continue negotiations for a marriage between Elizabeth and Charles IX's younger brother Henry, Duke of Anjou. The marriage plan was eventually dropped on the grounds of Henry's Catholicism. A substitute match with the youngest brother, Francis, Duke of Alen\u00e7on, was proposed but Walsingham considered him ugly and \"void of a good humour\". Elizabeth was 20 years older than Alen\u00e7on, and was concerned that the age difference would be seen as absurd. Walsingham believed that it would serve England better to seek a military alliance with France against Spanish interests. The defensive Treaty of Blois was concluded between France and England in 1572, but the treaty made no provision for a royal marriage and left the question of Elizabeth's successor open.\nThe Huguenots and other European Protestant interests supported the nascent revolt in the Spanish Netherlands, which were provinces of Habsburg Spain. When Catholic opposition to this course in France resulted in the death of Huguenot leader Gaspard de Coligny and the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, Walsingham's house in Paris became a temporary sanctuary for Protestant refugees, including Philip Sidney. Ursula, who was pregnant, escaped to England with their four-year-old daughter. She gave birth to a second girl, Mary, in January 1573 while Walsingham was still in France. He returned to England in April 1573, having established himself as a competent official whom the Queen and Cecil could trust. He cultivated contacts throughout Europe, and a century later his dispatches would be published as \"The Complete Ambassador\".\nIn the December following his return, Walsingham was appointed to the Privy Council of England and was made joint principal secretary (the position which later became \"Secretary of State\") with Sir Thomas Smith. Smith retired in 1576, leaving Walsingham in effective control of the privy seal, though he was not formally invested as Lord Privy Seal. Walsingham acquired a Surrey county seat in Parliament from 1572 that he retained until his death, but he was not a major parliamentarian. He was knighted on 1 December 1577, and held the sinecure posts of Recorder of Colchester, \"custos rotulorum\" of Hampshire, and High Steward of Salisbury, Ipswich and Winchester. He was appointed Chancellor of the Order of the Garter from 22 April 1578 until succeeded by Sir Amias Paulet in June 1587, when he became Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in addition to principal secretary.\nSecretary of State.\nThe duties of the principal secretary were not defined formally, but as he handled all royal correspondence and determined the agenda of council meetings, he could wield great influence in all matters of policy and in every field of government, both foreign and domestic. During his term of office, Walsingham supported the use of England's maritime power to open new trade routes and explore the New World, and was at the heart of international affairs. He was involved directly with English policy towards Spain, the Netherlands, Scotland, Ireland and France, and embarked on several diplomatic missions to neighbouring European states.\nClosely linked to the mercantile community, he actively supported trade promotion schemes and invested in the Muscovy Company and the Levant Company. He supported the attempts of John Davis and Martin Frobisher to discover the Northwest Passage and exploit the mineral resources of Labrador, and encouraged Humphrey Gilbert's exploration of Newfoundland. Gilbert's voyage was largely financed by recusant Catholics and Walsingham favoured the scheme as a potential means of removing Catholics from England by encouraging emigration to the New World. Walsingham was among the promoters of Francis Drake's profitable 1578\u20131581 circumnavigation of the world, correctly judging that Spanish possessions in the Pacific were vulnerable to attack. The venture was calculated to promote the Protestant interest by embarrassing and weakening the Spanish, as well as to seize Spanish treasure. The first edition of Richard Hakluyt's \"Principal Navigation, Voyages and Discoveries of the English Nation\" was dedicated to Walsingham.\nWalsingham advocated direct intervention in the Netherlands in support of the Protestant revolt against Spain, on the grounds that although wars of conquest were unjust, wars in defence of religious liberty and freedom were not. Cecil was more circumspect and advised a policy of mediation, a policy that Elizabeth endorsed. Walsingham was sent on a special embassy to the Netherlands in 1578, to sound out a potential peace deal and gather military intelligence.\nCharles IX died in 1574 and the Duke of Anjou inherited the French throne as Henry III. Between 1578 and 1581 the Queen resurrected attempts to negotiate a marriage with Henry III's youngest brother, the Duke of Alen\u00e7on, who had put himself forward as a protector of the Huguenots and a potential leader of the Dutch. Walsingham was sent to France in mid-1581 to discuss an Anglo-French alliance, but the French wanted the marriage agreed first and Walsingham was under instruction to obtain a treaty before committing to the marriage. He returned to England without an agreement. Personally, Walsingham opposed the marriage, perhaps to the point of encouraging public opposition. Alen\u00e7on was a Catholic and as his elder brother, Henry III, was childless, he was heir presumptive to the French throne. Elizabeth was past the age of childbearing and had no clear successor. If she died while married to him, her realms could fall under French control. By comparing the match of Elizabeth and Alen\u00e7on with the match of the Protestant Henry of Navarre and the Catholic Margaret of Valois, which occurred in the week before the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, the \"most horrible spectacle\" he had ever witnessed, Walsingham raised the spectre of religious riots in England in the event of the marriage proceeding. Elizabeth put up with his blunt, often unwelcome, advice, and acknowledged his strong beliefs in a letter, in which she called him \"her Moor [who] cannot change his colour\".\nThese were years of tension in policy towards France, with Walsingham sceptical of the unpredictable Henry III and distrustful of the English ambassador in Paris, Edward Stafford. Stafford, who was compromised by his gambling debts, was in the pay of the Spanish and passed vital information to Spain. Walsingham may have been aware of Stafford's duplicity, as he fed the ambassador false information, presumably in the hope of fooling or confusing the Spanish.\nThe pro-English Regent of Scotland James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton, whom Walsingham had supported, was overthrown in 1578. After the collapse of the Raid of Ruthven, another initiative to secure a pro-English government in Scotland, Walsingham reluctantly visited the Scottish court in August 1583, knowing that his diplomatic mission was unlikely to succeed. James VI dismissed Walsingham's advice on domestic policy saying he was an \"absolute King\" in Scotland. Walsingham replied with a discourse on the topic that \"young princes were many times carried into great errors upon an opinion of the absoluteness of their royal authority and do not consider, that when they transgress the bounds and limits of the law, they leave to be kings and become tyrants.\" According to James Melville of Halhill, James VI intended to give Walsingham a valuable diamond ring as a parting gift, but James Stewart, Earl of Arran, who Walsingham had ignored, substituted a ring of crystal. A mutual defence pact was eventually agreed in the Treaty of Berwick of 1586.\nWalsingham's cousin Edward Denny fought in Ireland during the rebellion of the Earl of Desmond and was one of the English settlers granted land in Munster confiscated from Desmond. Walsingham's stepson Christopher Carleill commanded the garrisons at Coleraine and Carrickfergus. Walsingham thought Irish farmland was underdeveloped and hoped that plantation would improve the productivity of estates. Tensions between the native Irish and the English settlers had lasting effects on the history of Ireland.\nWalsingham's younger daughter Mary died aged seven in July 1580; his elder daughter, Frances, married Sir Philip Sidney on 21 September 1583, despite the Queen's initial objections to the match (for unknown reasons) earlier in the year. As part of the marriage agreement, Walsingham agreed to pay \u00a31,500 of Sidney's debts and gave his daughter and son-in-law the use of his manor at Barn Elms in Surrey. A granddaughter born in November 1585 was named Elizabeth after the Queen, who was one of two godparents along with Sidney's uncle, Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester. The following year, Sidney was killed fighting the Spanish in the Netherlands and Walsingham was faced with paying off more of Sidney's extensive debts. His widowed daughter gave birth, in a difficult delivery, to a second child shortly afterward, but the baby, a girl, was stillborn.\nEspionage.\nWalsingham was driven by Protestant zeal to counter Catholicism, and sanctioned the use of torture against Catholic priests and suspected conspirators. Edmund Campion was among those tortured and found guilty on the basis of extracted evidence; he was hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyburn in 1581. Walsingham could never forget the atrocities against Protestants he had witnessed in France during the Bartholomew's Day massacre and believed a similar slaughter would occur in England in the event of a Catholic resurgence. Walsingham's brother-in-law Robert Beale, who was in Paris with Walsingham at the time of the massacre, encapsulated Walsingham's view: \"I think it time and more than time for us to awake out of our dead sleep, and take heed lest like mischief as has already overwhelmed the brethren and neighbours in France and Flanders embrace us which be left in such sort as we shall not be able to escape.\" Walsingham tracked down Catholic priests in England and supposed conspirators by employing informers, and intercepting correspondence. Walsingham's staff in England included the cryptographer Thomas Phelippes, who was an expert in forgery and deciphering letters, and Arthur Gregory, who was skilled at breaking and repairing seals without detection.\nIn May 1582, letters from the Spanish ambassador in England, Bernardino de Mendoza, to contacts in Scotland were found on a messenger by Sir John Forster, who forwarded them to Walsingham. The letters indicated a conspiracy among the Catholic powers to invade England and displace Elizabeth with Mary, Queen of Scots. By April 1583, Walsingham had a spy, identified as Giordano Bruno by historian John Bossy, deployed in the French embassy in London. Walsingham's contact reported that Francis Throckmorton, a nephew of Walsingham's old friend Nicholas Throckmorton, had visited the ambassador, Michel de Castelnau. In November 1583, after six months of surveillance, Walsingham had Throckmorton arrested and then tortured to secure a confession\u2014an admission of guilt that clearly implicated Mendoza. The Throckmorton plot called for an invasion of England along with a domestic uprising to liberate Mary, Queen of Scots, and depose Elizabeth. Throckmorton was executed in 1584 and Mendoza was expelled from England. Walsingham is often mentioned \u2013 negatively \u2013 in coded letters from Mary, Queen of Scots, to the French ambassador.\nEntrapment of Mary, Queen of Scots.\nAfter the assassination in mid-1584 of William the Silent, the leader of the Dutch revolt against Spain, English military intervention in the Low Countries was agreed in the Treaties of Nonsuch of 1585. The murder of William the Silent also reinforced fears for Queen Elizabeth's safety. Walsingham helped create the Bond of Association, the signatories of which promised to hunt down and kill anyone who conspired against Elizabeth. The Act for the Surety of the Queen's Person, passed by Parliament in March 1585, set up a legal process for trying any claimant to the throne implicated in plots against the Queen. The following month Mary, Queen of Scots, was placed in the strict custody of Sir Amias Paulet, a friend of Walsingham. At Christmas, she was moved to a moated manor house at Chartley. Walsingham instructed Paulet to open, read and pass to Mary unsealed any letters that she received, and to block any potential route for clandestine correspondence. In a successful attempt to entrap her, Walsingham arranged a single exception: a covert means for Mary's letters to be smuggled in and out of Chartley in a beer keg. Mary was misled into thinking these secret letters were secure, while in reality they were deciphered and read by Walsingham's agents. In July 1586, Anthony Babington wrote to Mary about an impending plot to free her and kill Elizabeth. Mary's reply was clearly encouraging and sanctioned Babington's plans. Walsingham had Babington and his associates rounded up; fourteen were executed in September 1586. In October, Mary was put on trial under the Act for the Surety of the Queen's Person in front of 36 commissioners, including Walsingham.\nDuring the presentation of evidence against her, Mary broke down and pointed accusingly at Walsingham saying, \"all of this is the work of Monsieur de Walsingham for my destruction\", to which he replied, \"God is my witness that as a private person I have done nothing unworthy of an honest man, and as Secretary of State, nothing unbefitting my duty.\" Mary was found guilty and the warrant for her execution was drafted, but Elizabeth hesitated to sign it, despite pressure from Walsingham. Walsingham wrote to Paulet urging him to find \"some way to shorten the life\" of Mary to relieve Elizabeth of the burden, to which Paulet replied indignantly, \"God forbid that I should make so foul a shipwreck of my conscience, or leave so great a blot to my poor posterity, to shed blood without law or warrant.\" Walsingham made arrangements for Mary's execution; Elizabeth signed the warrant on 1 February 1587 and entrusted it to William Davison, who had been appointed as junior Secretary of State in late September 1586. Davison passed the warrant to Cecil and a privy council convened by Cecil without Elizabeth's knowledge agreed to carry out the sentence as soon as was practical. Within a week, Mary was beheaded. On hearing of the execution, Elizabeth claimed not to have sanctioned the action and that she had not meant Davison to part with the warrant. Davison was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London. Walsingham's share of Elizabeth's displeasure was small because he was absent from court, at home ill, in the weeks just before and after the execution. Davison was eventually released in October 1588, on the orders of Cecil and Walsingham.\nSpanish Armada.\nFrom 1586, Walsingham received many dispatches from his agents in mercantile communities and foreign courts detailing Spanish preparations for an invasion of England. Walsingham's recruitment of Anthony Standen, a friend of the Tuscan ambassador to Madrid, was an exceptional intelligence triumph and Standen's dispatches were deeply revealing. Walsingham worked to prepare England for a potential war with Spain, in particular by supervising the substantial rebuilding of Dover Harbour, and encouraging a more aggressive strategy. On Walsingham's instructions, the English ambassador in Turkey, William Harborne, attempted unsuccessfully to persuade the Ottoman Sultan to attack Spanish possessions in the Mediterranean in the hope of distracting Spanish forces. Walsingham supported Francis Drake's raid of Cadiz in 1587, which wrought havoc with Spanish logistics. The Spanish Armada sailed for England in July 1588. Walsingham received regular dispatches from the English naval forces, and raised his own troop of 260 men as part of the land defences. On 18 August 1588, after the dispersal of the armada, naval commander Lord Henry Seymour wrote to Walsingham, \"you have fought more with your pen than many have in our English navy fought with their enemies\".\nIn foreign intelligence, Walsingham's extensive network of \"intelligencers\", who passed on general news as well as secrets, spanned Europe and the Mediterranean. While foreign intelligence was a normal part of the principal secretary's activities, Walsingham brought to it flair and ambition, and large sums of his own money. He cast his net more widely than others had done previously: expanding and exploiting links across the continent as well as in Constantinople and Algiers, and building and inserting contacts among Catholic exiles. Among his spies may have been the playwright Christopher Marlowe; Marlowe was in France in the mid-1580s and was acquainted with Walsingham's kinsman Thomas Walsingham.\nDeath and legacy.\nFrom 1571 onwards, Walsingham complained of ill health and often retired to his country estate for periods of recuperation. He complained of \"sundry carnosities\", pains in his head, stomach and back, and difficulty in passing urine. Suggested diagnoses include cancer, kidney stones, urinary infection, and diabetes. He died on 6 April 1590, at his house in Seething Lane. Historian William Camden wrote that Walsingham died from \"a carnosity growing \"intra testium tunicas\" [testicular cancer]\". He was buried privately in a simple ceremony at 10 pm on the following day, beside his son-in-law, in Old St Paul's Cathedral. The grave and monument were destroyed in the Great Fire of London in 1666. His name appears on a modern monument in the crypt listing the important graves lost.\nIn his will, dated 12 December 1589, Walsingham complained of \"the greatness of my debts and the mean state [I] shall leave my wife and heirs in\", but the true state of his finances is unclear. He received grants of land from the Queen, grants for the export of cloth and leases of customs in the northern and western ports. His primary residences, apart from the court, were in Seething Lane by the Tower of London (now the site of a Victorian office building called Walsingham House), at Barn Elms in Surrey and at Odiham in Hampshire. Nothing remains of any of his houses. He spent much of his own money on espionage in the service of the Queen and the Protestant cause. In 1586, he funded a lectureship in theology at Oxford University for the Puritan John Rainolds. He had underwritten the debts of his son-in-law, Sir Philip Sidney, had pursued the Sidney estate for recompense unsuccessfully and had carried out major land transactions in his later years. After his death, his friends reflected that poor bookkeeping had left him further in the Crown's debt than was fair. In 1611, the Crown's debts to him were calculated at over \u00a348,000, but his debts to the Crown were calculated at over \u00a343,000 and a judge, Sir Julius Caesar, ordered both sets of debts cancelled \"quid pro quo\". Walsingham's surviving daughter Frances received a \u00a3300 annuity, and married the Earl of Essex. Ursula, Lady Walsingham, continued to live at Barn Elms with a staff of servants until her death in 1602.\nProtestants lauded Walsingham as \"a sound pillar of our commonwealth and chief patron of virtue, learning and chivalry\". He was part of a Protestant intelligentsia that included Philip Sidney, Edmund Spenser and John Dee: men who promoted an expansionist and nationalist English Renaissance. Spenser included a dedicatory sonnet to Walsingham in the \"Faerie Queene\", likening him to Maecenas who introduced Virgil to the Emperor Augustus. After Walsingham's death, Sir John Davies composed an acrostic poem in his memory and Watson wrote an elegy, \"Meliboeus\", in Latin. On the other hand, Jesuit Robert Persons thought Walsingham \"cruel and inhumane\" in his persecution of Catholics. Catholic sources portray a ruthless, devious man driven by religious intolerance and an excessive love for intrigue. Walsingham attracts controversy still. Although he was ruthless, his opponents on the Catholic side were no less so; the treatment of prisoners and suspects by Tudor authorities was typical of European governments of the time. Walsingham's personal, as opposed to his public, character is elusive; his public papers were seized by the government while many of his private papers, which might have revealed much, were lost. The fragments that do survive demonstrate his personal interest in gardening and falconry.\nPortrayal in fiction.\nFictional portrayals of Walsingham tend to follow Catholic interpretations, depicting him as sinister and Machiavellian. He features in conspiracy theories surrounding the death of Christopher Marlowe, whom he predeceased. Charles Nicholl examined (and rejected) such theories in \"The Reckoning: The Murder of Christopher Marlowe\" (1992), which was used as a source by Anthony Burgess for his novel \"A Dead Man in Deptford\" (1993).\nThe 1998 film \"Elizabeth\" gives considerable, although sometimes historically inaccurate, prominence to Walsingham (portrayed by Geoffrey Rush). It portrays him as irreligious and sexually ambiguous, merges chronologically distant events, and inaccurately suggests that he murdered Mary of Guise. Rush reprised the role in the 2007 sequel, \"\". Both Stephen Murray in the 1971 BBC series \"Elizabeth R\" and Patrick Malahide in the 2005 Channel Four miniseries \"Elizabeth I\" play him as a dour official.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51108", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51108", "title": "Poison", "text": "Substance that causes death, injury or harm to organs\nIn science, poison is one of the chemical substances that is harmful or lethal to a living organism. The term of poison is used in a wide range of scientific fields and industries, where it is often specifically defined. It may also be applied colloquially or figuratively, with a broad sense. \nThe symptoms and effects of poisoning in humans can mimic those of other medical conditions and vary depending on the type of poison and the system of the body affected. Common symptoms include alterations in consciousness, abnormal body temperature, irregular heart rate, and changes in respiration. The severity and specific presentation of symptoms often depend on the nature and dose of the poison involved.\nCertain poisons, particularly caustic or irritating substances, can cause direct injury to mucous membranes in the mouth, throat, gastrointestinal tract, and lungs. These injuries may result in symptoms such as pain, coughing, vomiting, and shortness of breath.\nThe term poisoning refers to the harmful physiological effects that result from the exposure to a toxic substance, typically through ingestion, inhalation, injection, or skin absorption. It is derived from the word \"poison\" and is commonly used in medical, biochemical, and toxicological contexts to describe adverse interactions between a substance and a living organism.\nPoisoning is sometimes used as a method of self-harm and of suicide, particularly in cases of intentional self-poisoning among individuals experiencing suicidal ideation. According to \"Time Magazine\", self-poisoning is one of the leading methods of suicide attempts among adolescents, and has been identified as the third-leading cause of suicide-related deaths in this age group. A study published in the \"Journal of Pediatrics\" found that suicide attempts by poisoning among individuals under the age of 19 doubled between 2000 and 2018, increasing from nearly 40,000 cases to almost 80,000.\nDuring the COVID-19 lockdowns, reports indicated a 37% increase in cases of deliberate self-poisoning among adolescent girls. In biology, a poison is a chemical substance causing death, injury or harm to organisms or their parts. In medicine, poisons are a kind of toxin that are delivered passively, not actively. In industry the term may be negative, something to be removed to make a thing safe, or positive, an agent to limit unwanted pests. In ecological terms, poisons introduced into the environment can later cause unwanted effects elsewhere, or in other parts of the food chain.\nEtymology.\nThe word poison was first recorded in English around the year 1200, meaning \"a deadly potion or substance\". It derives from the Old French \"poison\" or \"puison\" (12th century; Modern French: \"poison\"), originally meaning \"a drink\", particularly a medicinal one. By the 14th century, the term had come to signify \"a (magic) potion\" or \"poisonous drink\". These uses trace back to the Latin word \"potionem\" (nominative: \"potio\"), meaning \"a drinking\" or \"a drink\", and more specifically \"a poisonous drink\", as seen in the writings of Cicero. The Latin root comes from the verb \"potare\", meaning \"to drink\". \nThe use of \"poison\" as an adjective in the form \"poisonous\" dates back to the 1520s. The practice of using \"poison\" in combination with plant names began in the 18th century. For example, the term poison oak was first recorded in 1743, and poison ivy appeared in usage by 1784. The expression poison gas was first used during World War I in 1915.\nTerminology.\nThe term poison is often used colloquially to describe any harmful substance, especially corrosive substances, carcinogens, mutagens, teratogens, and harmful pollutants. In everyday language, it is sometimes used to exaggerate the perceived danger of certain chemicals. The 16th-century physician Paracelsus (1493\u20131541), regarded as the father of toxicology, famously stated: \"Everything is poison, there is poison in everything. Only the dose makes a thing not a poison.\" (See: LD50).\nThe term is also used in a figurative sense\u2014for example: \"His brother's presence poisoned the atmosphere at the party.\" In contrast, legal definitions of \"poison\" tend to be narrower. Some substances that are not legally required to carry a \"poison\" label may still cause medical conditions associated with poisoning.\nSome poisons are also classified as toxins, which are toxic substances produced by living organisms. Examples include bacterial proteins responsible for conditions such as tetanus and botulism. While a distinction exists between \"poison\" and \"toxin\", the terms are often used interchangeably, even in scientific contexts. Related adjectives include \"toxic\" and \"poisonous\", which are generally considered synonymous.\nPoisonous substances introduced into the body by sting or bite are known as venoms. In everyday usage, a poisonous organism is one that causes harm when ingested or touched, while a venomous organism uses venom actively to incapacitate prey or deter predators. Although rare, some organisms may be both poisonous and venomous.\nAll living organisms produce substances to defend themselves from being eaten. However, the term \"poison\" typically refers to substances that are toxic to humans. Substances that are toxic primarily to pathogens and not to humans are generally classified as antibiotics. For instance, \"Penicillium chrysogenum\" produces compounds toxic to bacteria, but not to humans, making them effective as antibacterial drugs. Similarly, human antimicrobial peptides, which are toxic to viruses, fungi, bacteria, and cancerous cells; are considered part of the innate immune system.\nIn nuclear physics, the term nuclear poison refers to a substance that absorbs neutrons and interferes with a nuclear reaction.\nSubstances classified as environmentally hazardous are not always poisonous, and vice versa. For example, wastewater from food processing, such as potato juice or milk; can be environmentally damaging by depleting oxygen in aquatic ecosystems (leading to eutrophication), but it poses no direct toxic threat to humans and is not considered a poison.\nFrom a biological standpoint, virtually any substance can be toxic in sufficient quantity. Even something as essential as water can be fatal when consumed in excessive amounts; a condition known as water intoxication. Many drugs used in medicine, such as fentanyl, have a median lethal dose (LD50) only slightly higher than their effective dose (ED50), highlighting the thin margin between therapeutic benefit and toxicity. Some classification systems differentiate between lethal substances with therapeutic value and those without.\nModern definitions.\nIn broad metaphorical (colloquial) usage of the term, \"poison\" may refer to anything deemed harmful.\nIn biology, poisons are substances that can cause death, injury, or harm to organs, tissues, cells, and DNA usually by chemical reactions or other activity on the molecular scale, when an organism is exposed to a sufficient quantity.\nMedicinal fields (particularly veterinary medicine) and zoology often distinguish poisons from \"toxins\" and \"venoms\". Both poisons and venoms are toxins, which are toxicants produced by organisms in nature. The difference between venom and poison is the delivery method of the toxin. Venoms are toxins that are actively delivered by being injected via a bite or sting through a \"venom apparatus\", such as fangs or a stinger, in a process called envenomation, whereas poisons are toxins that are passively delivered by being swallowed, inhaled, or absorbed through the skin. \"Unantidoteable\" refers to toxins that cannot be neutralized by modern medical technology, regardless of their type.\nUses.\nIndustry, agriculture, and other sectors employ many poisonous substances, usually for reasons other than their toxicity to humans. Examples include medicines (e.g. anthelmintics used on chickens), solvents (e.g. rubbing alcohol, turpentine), cleaners (e.g. bleach, ammonia), coatings (e.g. arsenic wallpaper), and feedstocks. The toxicity itself sometimes has economic value, when it serves agricultural purposes such as weed control and pest control. \nMost poisonous industrial compounds have associated material safety data sheets and are classified as hazardous substances. Hazardous substances are subject to extensive regulation on production, procurement, and use in overlapping domains of occupational safety and health, public health, drinking water quality standards, air pollution, and environmental protection. Due to the mechanics of molecular diffusion, many poisonous compounds rapidly diffuse into biological tissues, air, water, or soil on a molecular scale. By the principle of entropy, chemical contamination is typically costly or infeasible to reverse, unless specific chelating agents or micro-filtration processes are available. Chelating agents are often broader in scope than the acute target, and therefore their ingestion necessitates careful medical or veterinarian supervision.\nPesticides are one group of substances whose prime purpose is their toxicity to various insects and other animals deemed to be pests (e.g., rats and cockroaches). Natural pesticides have been used for this purpose for thousands of years (e.g. concentrated table salt is toxic to many slugs and snails). Bioaccumulation of chemically-prepared agricultural insecticides is a matter of concern for the many species, especially birds, which consume insects as a primary food source. Selective toxicity, controlled application, and controlled biodegradation are major challenges in herbicide and pesticide development and in chemical engineering generally, as all lifeforms on earth share an underlying biochemistry; organisms exceptional in their environmental resilience are classified as extremophiles, these for the most part exhibiting radically different susceptibilities.\nEcological lifetime.\nA poison which enters the food chain\u2014whether of industrial, agricultural, or natural origin\u2014might not be immediately toxic to the first organism that ingests the toxin, but can become further concentrated in predatory organisms further up the food chain, particularly carnivores and omnivores, especially concerning fat soluble poisons which tend to become stored in biological tissue rather than excreted in urine or other water-based effluents.\nApart from food, many poisons readily enter the body through the skin and lungs. Hydrofluoric acid is a notorious contact poison, in addition to its corrosive damage. Naturally occurring sour gas is a fast-acting atmospheric poison, which can be released by volcanic activity or drilling rigs. Plant-based contact irritants, such as that possessed by poison ivy, are often classed as allergens rather than poisons; the effect of an allergen being not a poison as such, but to turn the body's natural defenses against itself. Poison can also enter the body through faulty medical implants, or by injection (which is the basis of lethal injection in the context of capital punishment).\nIn 2013, 3.3 million cases of unintentional human poisonings occurred. This resulted in 98,000 deaths worldwide, down from 120,000 deaths in 1990. In modern society, cases of suspicious death elicit the attention of the Coroner's office and forensic investigators.\nOf increasing concern since the isolation of natural radium by Marie and Pierre Curie in 1898\u2014and the subsequent advent of nuclear physics and nuclear technologies\u2014are radiological poisons. These are associated with ionizing radiation, a mode of toxicity quite distinct from chemically active poisons. In mammals, chemical poisons are often passed from mother to offspring through the placenta during gestation, or through breast milk during nursing. In contrast, radiological damage can be passed from mother or father to offspring through genetic mutation, which\u2014if not fatal in miscarriage or childhood, or a direct cause of infertility\u2014can then be passed along again to a subsequent generation. Atmospheric radon is a natural radiological poison of increasing impact since humans moved from hunter-gatherer lifestyles and cave dwelling to increasingly enclosed structures able to contain radon in dangerous concentrations. The 2006 poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko was a notable use of radiological assassination, presumably meant to evade the normal investigation of chemical poisons.\nPoisons widely dispersed into the environment are known as pollution. These are often of human origin, but pollution can also include unwanted biological processes such as toxic red tide, or acute changes to the natural chemical environment attributed to invasive species, which are toxic or detrimental to the prior ecology (especially if the prior ecology was associated with human economic value or an established industry such as shellfish harvesting).\nThe scientific disciplines of ecology and environmental resource management study the environmental life cycle of toxic compounds and their complex, diffuse, and highly interrelated effects.\nPoisoning.\nPoisoning can be either acute or chronic, and caused by a variety of natural or synthetic substances. Substances that destroy tissue but do not absorb, such as lye, are classified as corrosives rather than poisons.\nAcute.\nAcute poisoning is exposure to a poison on one occasion or during a short period of time. Symptoms develop in close relation to the exposure. Absorption of a poison is necessary for systemic poisoning. Furthermore, many common household medications are not labeled with skull and crossbones, although they can cause severe illness or even death. Poisoning can be caused by excessive consumption of generally safe substances, as in the case of water intoxication.\nAgents that act on the nervous system can paralyze in seconds or less, and include both biologically derived neurotoxins and so-called nerve gases, which may be synthesized for warfare or industry.\nInhaled or ingested cyanide, used as a method of execution in gas chambers, or as a suicide method, almost instantly starves the body of energy by inhibiting the enzymes in mitochondria that make ATP. Intravenous injection of an unnaturally high concentration of potassium chloride, such as in the execution of prisoners in parts of the United States, quickly stops the heart by eliminating the cell potential necessary for muscle contraction.\nMost biocides, including pesticides, are created to act as acute poisons to target organisms, although acute or less observable chronic poisoning can also occur in non-target organisms (secondary poisoning), including the humans who apply the biocides and other beneficial organisms. For example, the herbicide 2,4-D imitates the action of a plant hormone, which makes its lethal toxicity specific to plants. Indeed, 2,4-D is not a poison, but classified as \"harmful\" (EU).\nMany substances regarded as poisons are toxic only indirectly, by toxication. An example is \"wood alcohol\" or methanol, which is not poisonous itself, but is chemically converted to toxic formaldehyde and formic acid in the liver. Many drug molecules are made toxic in the liver, and the genetic variability of certain liver enzymes makes the toxicity of many compounds differ between individuals.\nExposure to radioactive substances can produce radiation poisoning, an unrelated phenomenon.\nTwo common cases of acute natural poisoning are theobromine poisoning of dogs and cats, and mushroom poisoning in humans. Dogs and cats are not natural herbivores, but a chemical defense developed by \"Theobroma cacao\" can be incidentally fatal nevertheless. Many omnivores, including humans, readily consume edible fungi, and thus many fungi have evolved to become decisively inedible, in this case as a direct defense.\nChronic.\nChronic poisoning is long-term repeated or continuous exposure to a poison where symptoms do not occur immediately or after each exposure. The person gradually becomes ill, or becomes ill after a long latent period. Chronic poisoning most commonly occurs following exposure to poisons that bioaccumulate, or are biomagnified, such as mercury, gadolinium, and lead.\nEpidemiology.\nIn 2010, poisoning resulted in about 180,000 deaths down from 200,000 in 1990. There were approximately 727,500 emergency department visits in the United States involving poisonings\u20143.3% of all injury-related encounters.\nApplications.\nPoisonous compounds may be useful either for their toxicity, or, more often, because of another chemical property, such as specific chemical reactivity. Poisons are widely used in industry and agriculture, as chemical reagents, solvents or complexing reagents, e.g. carbon monoxide, methanol and sodium cyanide, respectively. They are less common in household use, with occasional exceptions such as ammonia and methanol. For instance, phosgene is a highly reactive nucleophile acceptor, which makes it an excellent reagent for polymerizing diols and diamines to produce polycarbonate and polyurethane plastics. For this use, millions of tons are produced annually. However, the same reactivity makes it also highly reactive towards proteins in human tissue and thus highly toxic. In fact, phosgene has been used as a chemical weapon. It can be contrasted with mustard gas, which has only been produced for chemical weapons uses, as it has no particular industrial use.\nBiocides need not be poisonous to humans, because they can target metabolic pathways absent in humans, leaving only incidental toxicity. For instance, the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid is a mimic of a plant growth hormone, which causes uncontrollable growth leading to the death of the plant. Humans and animals, lacking this hormone and its receptor, are unaffected by this, and need to ingest relatively large doses before any toxicity appears. Human toxicity is, however, hard to avoid with pesticides targeting mammals, such as rodenticides.\nThe risk from toxicity is also distinct from toxicity itself. For instance, the preservative thiomersal used in vaccines is toxic, but the quantity administered in a single shot is negligible.\nHistory.\nThroughout human history, intentional application of poison has been used as a method of murder, pest-control, suicide, and execution. As a method of execution, poison has been ingested, as the ancient Athenians did (see Socrates), inhaled, as with carbon monoxide or hydrogen cyanide (see gas chamber), injected (see lethal injection), or even as an enema. Poison's lethal effect can be combined with its allegedly magical powers; an example is the Chinese \"gu\" poison. Poison was also employed in gunpowder warfare. For example, the 14th-century Chinese text of the \"Huolongjing\" written by Jiao Yu outlined the use of a poisonous gunpowder mixture to fill cast iron grenade bombs.\nWhile arsenic is a naturally occurring environmental poison, its artificial concentrate was once nicknamed inheritance powder. In Medieval Europe, it was common for monarchs to employ personal food tasters to thwart royal assassination, in the dawning age of the Apothecary.\nFigurative use.\nThe term poison is also used in a figurative sense. The slang sense of alcoholic drink is first attested 1805, American English (e.g., a bartender might ask a customer \"what's your poison?\" or \"Pick your poison\").\nFigurative use of the term dates from the late 15th century. Figuratively referring to persons as poison dates from 1910. The figurative term poison pen letter became well known in 1913 by a notorious criminal case in Pennsylvania, U.S.; the phrase dates to 1898.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51109", "revid": "50534610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51109", "title": "Charles VII, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1742 to 1745\nCharles VII (6 August 1697 \u2013 20 January 1745) was elector of Bavaria from 26 February 1726 and Holy Roman Emperor from 24 January 1742 to his death. He was also King of Bohemia (as Charles Albert) from 1741 to 1743. Charles was a member of the House of Wittelsbach, and his reign as Holy Roman Emperor thus marked the end of three centuries of uninterrupted Habsburg imperial rule, although he was related to the Habsburgs by both blood and marriage.\nCharles was the eldest son of Elector Maximilian\u00a0II Emanuel of Bavaria and the Polish princess Theresa Kunegunda Sobieska. He became elector following the death of his father in 1726. In 1722, Charles married Archduchess Maria Amalia of Austria, daughter of Holy Roman Emperor Joseph\u00a0I and niece of Emperor Charles\u00a0VI. The couple had seven children together. After Charles\u00a0VI died in 1740, Elector Charles claimed the Archduchy of Austria and briefly gained hold of the Bohemian throne. In 1742, he was elected emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. He ruled until his death three years later.\nEarly life and career.\nCharles (Albert) () was born in Brussels and the son of Maximilian II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, and Theresa Kunegunda Sobieska, daughter of King John III Sobieski of Poland.\nHis family was politically divided during the War of the Spanish Succession, and he spent many years under house arrest in Austria. The royal family had left Brussels and returned to Munich in 1701. His father, Maximilian Emanuel, fled to the Spanish Netherlands after he had been defeated at the Battle of Blenheim in August 1704, and Charles and his siblings stayed with their mother, the acting Regent, in Munich. In May 1705, after a stay in Venice, the Austrian authorities refused to allow the Electress to return to Bavaria and forced her into exile, which lasted ten years. Maximilian Emanuel went also into exile to Compi\u00e8gne after on 29 April 1706, an Imperial ban was imposed on him, as he again had been defeated at the Battle of Ramillies a few days earlier. Only in 1715 was the family reconciled. After reaching his majority in August 1715, Charles undertook an educational tour to Italy from 3 December 1715 to 24 August 1716. In 1717, he served among Bavarian auxiliaries in the Austro-Turkish War.\nOn 5 October 1722, Charles married Archduchess Maria Amalia of Austria, whom he had met at the imperial court in Vienna. She was the youngest daughter of the late Emperor Joseph I and his wife, Wilhelmine Amalia of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg. Bavaria had renounced all claims to the throne via the marriage, but it provided the legal basis to the inheritance of certain Austrian possessions.\nIn 1725, Charles visited Versailles during the wedding celebrations of Louis XV of France and established a personal contact with the French court.\nIn 1726, after his father had died, Charles became Duke of Bavaria and Elector Palatine and thus one of the prince-electors of the Holy Roman Empire, and he also inherited a debt of 26 million guilders. He maintained good relations with both his Habsburg relatives and France, continuing his father's policies.\nIn 1729, he instituted the knightly Order of St George and ordered the beginning of the construction of the Rothenberg Fortress.\nHoly Roman Emperor.\nIn continuance of the policy of his father, Charles aspired to an even higher rank. As son-in-law of Emperor Joseph I, Charles rejected the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 and claimed the German territories of the Habsburg dynasty against Maria Theresa, daughter of Emperor Charles VI, in 1740. By the Treaty of Nymphenburg, which was concluded in July 1741, Charles became allied with France and Spain against Austria.\nDuring the War of the Austrian Succession, Charles invaded Upper Austria in 1741 and planned to conquer Vienna, but his allied French troops under the Duc de Belle-Isle were instead redirected to Bohemia, capturing Prague in November 1741. That meant that Charles was crowned king of Bohemia in Prague on 19 December 1741, when the Habsburgs had not yet been defeated. He was unanimously elected king of Germany on 24 January 1742 and became Holy Roman emperor upon his coronation on 12 February 1742. His brother Clement August, the archbishop-elector of Cologne, generally sided with the Habsburg-Lorraine faction in the disputes over the Habsburg succession but cast his vote for him and personally crowned him emperor at Frankfurt. King George II of Great Britain, as the elector of Hanover, also voted to install Charles as emperor even though both Britain and Hanover were allied with Austria in the ongoing war. Charles VII was the second Wittelsbach emperor after Louis IV and the first Wittelsbach king of Germany since the reign of Rupert.\nShortly after his coronation, most of Charles's territories were overrun by the Austrians, and Bavaria was occupied by the troops of Maria Theresa. The Emperor fled Munich and resided for almost three years in the \"Palais Barckhaus\" in Frankfurt. Most of Bohemia was lost in December 1742, when the Austrians allowed the French under the Duc de Belle-Isle and the Duc de Broglie an honourable capitulation. Charles was mocked as an emperor who neither controlled his own realm nor was in effective control of the empire itself, but the institution of the Holy Roman emperor had largely become symbolic in nature and powerless by then. A popular Latin saying about him was \"et caesar et nihil\", meaning \"both emperor and nothing\", a word play on \"aut caesar aut nihil\", meaning \"either emperor or nothing\". Bavarian General Ignaz Felix, Count of T\u00f6rring-Jettenbach was compared to a drum, as people \"heard about him only when he was beaten\".\nCharles VII tried to boost his prestige from Frankfurt with numerous legal acts, such as granting imperial privilege to the University of Erlangen in 1743 and creating several new imperial nobles. Charles Eugene, Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg, was declared to be of full age in 1744, ahead of time. Alexander Ferdinand, 3rd Prince of Thurn and Taxis served as Principal Commissioner for Charles VII at the Perpetual Diet of Regensburg and in 1744 the Thurn und Taxis dynasty were appointed the hereditary Postmasters General of the Imperial Reichspost.\nThe new commander of the Bavarian army, Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorff, fought Austria in a series of battles in 1743 and 1744. In 1743, his troops and their allies took Bavaria, and Charles was able to return to Munich in April for some time before losing Bavaria again after his French allies were defeated and withdrew to the Rhine. Frederick II of Prussia's new campaign during the Second Silesian War finally forced the Austrian army to leave Bavaria and to retreat into Bohemia. In October 1744, Charles regained Munich and returned, this time for good. With former Vice-Chancellor Friedrich Karl von Sch\u00f6nborn as a go-between, the Emperor then sought to reach a compromise with Vienna but failed to get more military support from France.\nSuffering severely from gout, Charles died at Nymphenburg Palace in January 1745. He is buried in the crypt of the Theatinerkirche in Munich. His heart was separately buried in the Shrine of Our Lady of Alt\u00f6tting. Georg Philipp Telemann composed his requiem \"I was Hoping for Light\". King Frederick the Great of Prussia wrote in 1746, \"This death robbed me of the emperor, who was my friend\".\nCharles' brother Klemens August was more pro-Austrian, and Charles' son and successor Maximilian III Joseph made peace with Austria. With the Treaty of F\u00fcssen, Austria recognized the legitimacy of Charles's election as Holy Roman Emperor.\nCultural legacy.\nCharles VII's reign represented the height of the Bavarian Rococo era. The Nymphenburg Palace was completed during his reign. The Grand Circle (\"Schlossrondell\"), which is flanked by a string of elaborate Baroque mansions was initially planned as a basic blueprint for a new city (\"Carlstadt\"), but that was not achieved. Charles VII resided in Nymphenburg, and the palace became the favorite summer residence of the future rulers of Bavaria. Charles effected the building of the Ancestral Gallery and the Ornate Rooms at the Munich Residenz. He purchased the Palais Porcia in 1731 and had the mansion restored in Rococo style in 1736 for one of his mistresses, Countess Topor-Morawitzka. The mansion was named after her husband, Prince Porcia. He also ordered Fran\u00e7ois de Cuvilli\u00e9s, chief architect of the court, to build the Palais Holnstein for another one of his mistresses, Sophie Caroline von Ingenheim, Countess Holnstein, between 1733 and 1737. Cuvilli\u00e9s constructed the Amalienburg as well for Charles and his wife, Maria Amalia, an elaborate hunting lodge designed in the Rococo style between 1734 and 1739 in the Nymphenburg Palace Park.\nDuring Charles's reign, numerous accomplished Italian, French, Bavarian, and other German architects, sculptors, painters and artisans were employed in royal service, often for many years. Among them were Dominique Girard, Fran\u00e7ois de Cuvilli\u00e9s, Joseph Effner, Ignaz G\u00fcnther, Johann Michael Fischer, Cosmas Damian Asam and Egid Quirin Asam, Johann Michael Feuchtmayer, Matth\u00e4us G\u00fcnther, Johann Baptist Straub and Johann Baptist Zimmermann.\nChildren.\nCharles and his wife, Archduchess Maria Amalia of Austria, were parents of seven children:\nIllegitimate children.\nCharles Albert and his mistress Sophie Caroline von Ingenheim had a daughter and a son:\nTitles and Arms.\n\"Charles VII, by the grace of God elected Holy Roman Emperor, forever August, King in Germany and of Bohemia, Duke in the Upper and Lower Bavaria as well as the Upper Palatinate, Count-Palatine of the Rhine, Archduke of Austria, Prince-Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, Landgrave of Leuchtenberg, etc. etc.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "51111", "revid": "1963392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51111", "title": "Pipeline", "text": "Pumping fluids or gas through pipes\nA pipeline is a system of pipes for long-distance transportation of a liquid or gas, typically to a market area for consumption. Industry datasets indicate the length of the global trunk/transmission pipeline network is on the order of ~2.19 million km by 2025, with North America accounting for ~44%. The United States had 65%, Russia had 8%, and Canada had 3%, thus 76% of all pipeline were in these three countries. The main attribute to pollution from pipelines is caused by corrosion and leakage.\n\"Pipeline and Gas Journal\"'s worldwide survey figures indicate that of pipelines are planned and under construction. Of these, represent projects in the planning and design phase; reflect pipelines in various stages of construction. Liquids and gases are transported in pipelines, and any chemically stable substance can be sent through a pipeline.\nPipelines exist for the transport of crude and refined petroleum, fuels\u2014such as oil, natural gas and biofuels\u2014and other fluids including sewage, slurry, water, beer, hot water or steam for shorter distances and even pneumatic systems which allow for the generation of suction pressure for useful work and in transporting solid objects. Pipelines are useful for transporting water for drinking or irrigation over long distances when it needs to move over hills, or where canals or channels are poor choices due to considerations of evaporation, pollution, or environmental impact. Oil pipelines are made from steel or plastic tubes which are usually buried. The oil is moved through the pipelines by pump stations along the pipeline. Natural gas (and similar gaseous fuels) are pressurized into liquids known as natural gas liquids (NGLs). Natural gas pipelines are constructed of carbon steel. Hydrogen pipeline transport is the transportation of hydrogen through a pipe. Pipelines are one of the safest ways of transporting materials as compared to road or rail, and hence in war, pipelines are often the target of military attacks.\nOil and natural gas.\nThe first crude oil pipeline was built by the Oil Transport Association, which constructed a wrought iron pipeline over a track from an oil field in Pennsylvania to a railroad station in Oil Creek, in the 1860s. Some of the first major submarine pipelines were constructed across the English Channel in 1944 during Operation Pluto. These provided an estimated 8 per cent of all petroleum products used by the Allies on the Western Front between the Normandy landings and the end of Second World War.\nPipelines are generally the most economical way to transport large quantities of oil, refined oil products or natural gas over land. For example, in 2014, pipeline transport of crude oil cost about $5 per barrel, while rail transport cost about $10 to $15 per barrel. Trucking has even higher costs due to the additional labor required; employment on completed pipelines represents only \"1% of that of the trucking industry.\".\nIn the United States, 70% of crude oil and petroleum products are shipped by pipeline. (23% are by ship, 4% by truck, and 3% by rail) In Canada for natural gas and petroleum products, 97% are shipped by pipeline.\nNatural gas (and similar gaseous fuels) are lightly pressurized into liquids known as Natural Gas Liquids (NGLs). Small NGL processing facilities can be located in oil fields so the butane and propane liquid under light pressure of , can be shipped by rail, truck or pipeline. Propane can be used as a fuel in oil fields to heat various facilities used by the oil drillers or equipment and trucks used in the oil patch. EG: Propane will convert from a gas to a liquid under light pressure, 100 psi, give or take depending on temperature, and is pumped into cars and trucks at less than at retail stations. Pipelines and rail cars use about double that pressure to pump at .\nThe distance to ship propane to markets is much shorter, as thousands of natural-gas processing plants are located in or near oil fields. Many Bakken Basin oil companies in North Dakota, Montana, Manitoba and Saskatchewan gas fields separate the NGLs in the field, allowing the drillers to sell propane directly to small wholesalers, eliminating the large refinery control of product and prices for propane or butane.\nThe most recent major pipeline to start operating in North America is a TransCanada natural gas line going north across the Niagara region bridges. This gas line carries Marcellus shale gas from Pennsylvania and other tied in methane or natural gas sources into the Canadian province of Ontario. It began operations in the fall of 2012, supplying 16 percent of all the natural gas used in Ontario.\nThis new US-supplied natural gas displaces the natural gas formerly shipped to Ontario from western Canada in Alberta and Manitoba, thus dropping the government regulated pipeline shipping charges because of the significantly shorter distance from gas source to consumer. To avoid delays and US government regulation, many small, medium and large oil producers in North Dakota have decided to run an oil pipeline north to Canada to meet up with a Canadian oil pipeline shipping oil from west to east. This allows the Bakken Basin and Three Forks oil producers to get higher negotiated prices for their oil because they will not be restricted to just one wholesale market in the US. The distance from the biggest oil patch in North Dakota, in Williston, North Dakota, is only about 85 miles or 137 kilometres to the Canada\u2013US border and Manitoba. Mutual funds and joint ventures are the largest investors in new oil and gas pipelines. In the fall of 2012, the US began exporting propane to Europe, known as LPG, as wholesale prices there are much higher than in North America. Additionally, a pipeline is currently being constructed from North Dakota to Illinois, commonly known as the Dakota Access Pipeline.\nAs more North American pipelines are built, even more exports of LNG, propane, butane, and other natural gas products occur on all three US coasts. To give insight, North Dakota Bakken region's oil production has grown by 600% from 2007 to 2015. North Dakota oil companies are shipping huge amounts of oil by tanker rail car as they can direct the oil to the market that gives the best price, and rail cars can be used to avoid a congested oil pipeline to get the oil to a different pipeline in order to get the oil to market faster or to a different less busy oil refinery. However, pipelines provide a cheaper means to transport by volume.\nEnbridge in Canada is applying to reverse an oil pipeline going from east to west (Line 9) and expanding it and using it to ship western Canadian bitumen oil eastward. From a presently rated 250,000 barrels equivalent per day pipeline, it will be expanded to between 1.0 and 1.3 million barrels per day. It will bring western oil to refineries in Ontario, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Quebec and New York by early 2014. New Brunswick will also refine some of this western Canadian crude and export some crude and refined oil to Europe from its deep water oil ULCC loading port.\nAlthough pipelines can be built under the sea, that process is economically and technically demanding, so the majority of oil at sea is transported by tanker ships. Similarly, it is often more economically feasible to transport natural gas in the form of LNG; however, the break-even point between LNG and pipelines would depend on the volume of natural gas and the distance it travels.\nGrowth of market.\nThe market size for oil and gas pipeline construction experienced tremendous growth prior to the economic downturn in 2008. After faltering in 2009, demand for pipeline expansion and updating increased the following year as energy production grew. By 2012, almost of North American pipeline were being planned or under construction. When pipelines are constrained, additional pipeline product transportation options may include the use of drag reducing agents, or by transporting product via truck or rail.\nConstruction and operation.\nOil pipelines are made from steel or plastic tubes with inner diameter typically from . Most pipelines are typically buried at a depth of about . To protect pipes from impact, abrasion, and corrosion, a variety of methods are used. These can include wood lagging (wood slats), concrete coating, rockshield, high-density polyethylene, imported sand padding, sacrificial cathodes and padding machines.\nCrude oil contains varying amounts of paraffin wax and in colder climates wax buildup may occur within a pipeline. Often these pipelines are inspected and cleaned using pigging, the practice of using devices known as \"pigs\" to perform various maintenance operations on a pipeline. The devices are also known as \"scrapers\" or \"Go-devils\". \"Smart pigs\" (also known as \"intelligent\" or \"intelligence\" pigs) are used to detect anomalies in the pipe such as dents, metal loss caused by corrosion, cracking or other mechanical damage. These devices are launched from pig-launcher stations and travel through the pipeline to be received at any other station down-stream, either cleaning wax deposits and material that may have accumulated inside the line or inspecting and recording the condition of the line.\nFor natural gas, pipelines are constructed of carbon steel and vary in size from in diameter, depending on the type of pipeline. The gas is pressurized by compressor stations and is odorless unless mixed with a mercaptan odorant where required by a regulating authority.\nAmmonia.\nUntil damaged during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Russian\u2013Ukrainian \"Transammiak\" line was the longest ammonia pipeline in the world, at 2,500km. It connected the TogliattiAzot facility in Russia to the exporting Black Sea-port of Odesa in Ukraine.\nAlcohol fuels.\nPipelines have been used for transportation of ethanol in Brazil, and there are several ethanol pipeline projects in Brazil and the United States. The main problems related to the transport of ethanol by pipeline are its corrosive nature and tendency to absorb water and impurities in pipelines, which are not problems with oil and natural gas. Insufficient volumes and cost-effectiveness are other considerations limiting construction of ethanol pipelines.\nIn the US minimal amounts of ethanol are transported by pipeline. Most ethanol is shipped by rail, the main alternatives being truck and barge. Delivering ethanol by pipeline is the most desirable option, but ethanol's affinity for water and solvent properties require the use of a dedicated pipeline, or significant cleanup of existing pipelines.\nCoal and ore.\nSlurry pipelines are sometimes used to transport coal or ore from mines. The material to be transported is closely mixed with water before being introduced to the pipeline; at the far end, the material must be dried. One example is a slurry pipeline which is planned to transport iron ore from the Minas-Rio mine (producing 26.5 million tonnes per year) to the Port of A\u00e7u in Brazil. An existing example is the Savage River Slurry pipeline in Tasmania, Australia, possibly the world's first when it was built in 1967. It includes a bridge span at above the Savage River.\nHydrogen.\nHydrogen pipeline transport is a transportation of hydrogen through a pipe as part of the hydrogen infrastructure. Hydrogen pipeline transport is used to connect the point of hydrogen production or delivery of hydrogen with the point of demand. Most hydrogen is produced at the place of demand with every an industrial production facility. The 1938 Rhine-Ruhr hydrogen pipeline is still in operation. As of 2004[ [update]], there are of low-pressure hydrogen pipelines in the US and in Europe.\nIn steel pipelines, gaseous hydrogen can accelerate fatigue-crack growth and reduce the apparent fracture toughness of line-pipe and welds, so materials must be qualified for hydrogen service using fracture-mechanics criteria. ASME B31.12 for hydrogen piping and pipelines provides such a qualification route (e.g., threshold stress-intensity in hydrogen and optional fatigue-crack-growth data). Recent evaluations on API 5L X70 line-pipe show measurable toughness reductions and faster crack growth under blended-hydrogen conditions, while recent reviews summarize hydrogen uptake, trapping and mitigation specific to pipeline steels.\nWater.\nTwo millennia ago, the ancient Romans made use of large aqueducts to transport water from higher elevations by building the aqueducts in graduated segments that allowed gravity to push the water along until it reached its destination. Hundreds of these were built throughout Europe and elsewhere, and along with flour mills were considered the lifeline of the Roman Empire. The ancient Chinese also made use of channels and pipe systems for public works. The famous Han dynasty court eunuch Zhang Rang (d. 189\u00a0AD) once ordered the engineer Bi Lan to construct a series of square-pallet chain pumps outside the capital city of Luoyang. These chain pumps serviced the imperial palaces and living quarters of the capital city as the water lifted by the chain pumps was brought in by a stoneware pipe system.\nPipelines are useful for transporting water for drinking or irrigation over long distances when it needs to move over hills, or where canals or channels are poor choices due to considerations of evaporation, pollution, or environmental impact.\nThe Goldfields Water Supply Scheme in Western Australia using pipe and completed in 1903 was the largest water supply scheme of its time.\nExamples of significant water pipelines in South Australia are the Morgan-Whyalla pipeline (completed 1944) and Mannum-Adelaide pipeline (completed 1955) pipelines, both part of the larger Snowy Mountains scheme.\nTwo Los Angeles, California aqueducts, the Owens Valley aqueduct (completed 1913) and the Second Los Angeles Aqueduct (completed 1970), include extensive use of pipelines.\nThe Great Manmade River of Libya supplies of water each day to Tripoli, Benghazi, Sirte, and several other cities in Libya. The pipeline is over long, and is connected to wells tapping an aquifer over underground.\nOther systems.\nDistrict heating.\nDistrict heating or \"teleheating\" systems consist of a network of insulated feed and return pipes which transport heated water, pressurized hot water, or sometimes steam to the customer. While steam is hottest and may be used in industrial processes due to its higher temperature, it is less efficient to produce and transport due to greater heat losses. Heat transfer oils are generally not used for economic and ecological reasons. The typical annual loss of thermal energy through distribution is around 10%, as seen in Norway's district heating network.\nDistrict heating pipelines are normally installed underground, with some exceptions. Within the system, heat storage may be installed to even out peak load demands. Heat is transferred into the central heating of the dwellings through heat exchangers at heat substations, without mixing of the fluids in either system.\nBeer.\nBars in the Veltins-Arena, a major football ground in Gelsenkirchen, Germany, are interconnected by a beer pipeline. In Randers city in Denmark, the so-called Thor Beer pipeline was operated. Originally, copper pipes ran directly from the brewery, but when the brewery moved out of the city in the 1990s, Thor Beer replaced it with a giant tank.\nA three-kilometre beer pipeline was completed in Bruges, Belgium in September 2016 to reduce truck traffic on the city streets.\nBrine.\nThe village of Hallstatt in Austria, which is known for its long history of salt mining, claims to contain \"the oldest industrial pipeline in the world\", dating back to 1595. It was constructed from 13,000 hollowed-out tree trunks to transport brine from Hallstatt to Ebensee.\nMilk.\nBetween 1978 and 1994, a 15\u00a0km milk pipeline ran between the Dutch island of Ameland and Holwerd on the mainland, of which 8\u00a0km was beneath the Wadden Sea. Every day, 30,000 litres of milk produced on the island were transported to be processed on the mainland. In 1994, the pipeline was abandoned.\nPneumatic transport.\nRather than transporting fluids, pneumatic tubes are usually used to transport solids in a cylindrical container by compressed air or by partial vacuum. They were most popular in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and were used to transport small solid objects within a building, e.g. documents in an office or money in a bank. By the 21st century, pneumatic tube transport had been mostly superseded by digital solutions for transporting information, but is still used in cases where convenience and speed in a local environment are important. Hospitals, for example, use them to deliver drugs and specimens.\nMarine pipelines.\nIn places, a pipeline may have to cross water expanses, such as small seas, straits and rivers. In many instances, they lie entirely on the seabed. These pipelines are referred to as \"marine\" pipelines (also, \"submarine\" or \"offshore\" pipelines). They are used primarily to carry oil or gas, but transportation of water is also important. In offshore projects, a distinction is made between a \"flowline\" and a pipeline. The former is an \"intrafield\" pipeline, in the sense that it is used to connect subsea wellheads, manifolds and the platform \"within\" a particular development field. The latter, sometimes referred to as an \"export pipeline\", is used to bring the resource to shore. The construction and maintenance of marine pipelines imply logistical challenges that are different from those onland, mainly because of wave and current dynamics, along with other geohazards.\nFunctions.\nIn general, pipelines can be classified in three categories depending on purpose:\nDevelopment and planning.\nWhen a pipeline is built, the construction project not only covers the civil engineering work to lay the pipeline and build the pump/compressor stations, it also has to cover all the work related to the installation of the field devices that will support remote operation.\nThe pipeline is routed along what is known as a \"right of way\". Pipelines are generally developed and built using the following stages:\nRussia has \"Pipeline Troops\" as part of the Rear Services, who are trained to build and repair pipelines. Russia is the only country to have Pipeline Troops.\nThe US government, mainly through the EPA, the FERC and others, reviews proposed pipeline projects in order to comply with the Clean Water Act, the National Environmental Policy Act, other laws and, in some cases, municipal laws. The Biden administration has sought to permit the respective states and tribal groups to appraise and potentially block the proposed projects.\nOperation.\nField devices are instrumentation, data gathering units and communication systems. The field instrumentation includes flow, pressure, and temperature gauges/transmitters, and other devices to measure the relevant data required. These instruments are installed along the pipeline on some specific locations, such as injection or delivery stations, pump stations (liquid pipelines) or compressor stations (gas pipelines), and block valve stations.\nThe information measured by these field instruments is then gathered in local remote terminal units (RTU) that transfer the field data to a central location in real time using communication systems, such as satellite channels, microwave links, or cellular phone connections.\nPipelines are controlled and operated remotely, from what is usually known as the \"Main Control Room\". In this center, all the data related to field measurement is consolidated in one central database. The data is received from multiple RTUs along the pipeline. It is common to find RTUs installed at every station along the pipeline.\nThe SCADA system at the Main Control Room receives all the field data and presents it to the pipeline operator through a set of screens or Human Machine Interface, showing the operational conditions of the pipeline. The operator can monitor the hydraulic conditions of the line, as well as send operational commands (open/close valves, turn on/off compressors or pumps, change setpoints, etc.) through the SCADA system to the field.\nTo optimize and secure the operation of these assets, some pipeline companies are using what is called \"Advanced Pipeline Applications\", which are software tools installed on top of the SCADA system, that provide extended functionality to perform leak detection, leak location, batch tracking (liquid lines), pig tracking, composition tracking, predictive modeling, look ahead modeling, and operator training.\nTechnology.\nComponents.\nPipeline networks are composed of several pieces of equipment that operate together to move products from location to location. The main elements of a pipeline system are:\nLeak detection systems.\nSince oil and gas pipelines are an important asset of the economic development of almost any country, it has been required either by government regulations or internal policies to ensure the safety of the assets, and the population and environment where these pipelines run.\nPipeline companies face government regulation, environmental constraints and social situations. Government regulations may define minimum staff to run the operation, operator training requirements, pipeline facilities, technology and applications required to ensure operational safety. For example, in the State of Washington it is mandatory for pipeline operators to be able to detect and locate leaks of 8 percent of maximum flow within fifteen minutes or less. Social factors also affect the operation of pipelines. Product theft is sometimes also a problem for pipeline companies. In this case, the detection levels should be under two percent of maximum flow, with a high expectation for location accuracy.\nVarious technologies and strategies have been implemented for monitoring pipelines, from physically walking the lines to satellite surveillance. The most common technology to protect pipelines from occasional leaks is Computational Pipeline Monitoring or CPM. CPM takes information from the field related to pressures, flows, and temperatures to estimate the hydraulic behavior of the product being transported. Once the estimation is completed, the results are compared to other field references to detect the presence of an anomaly or unexpected situation, which may be related to a leak.\nThe American Petroleum Institute has published several articles related to the performance of CPM in liquids pipelines. The API Publications are:\nWhere a pipeline containing passes under a road or railway, it is usually enclosed in a protective casing. This casing is vented to the atmosphere to prevent the build-up of flammable gases or corrosive substances, and to allow the air inside the casing to be sampled to detect leaks. The \"casing vent\", a pipe protruding from the ground, often doubles as a warning marker called a \"casing vent marker\".\nImplementation.\nPipelines are generally laid underground because temperature is less variable. Because pipelines are usually metal, this helps to reduce the expansion and shrinkage that can occur with weather changes. However, in some cases it is necessary to cross a valley or a river on a pipeline bridge. Pipelines for centralized heating systems are often laid on the ground or overhead. Pipelines for petroleum running through permafrost areas as Trans-Alaska Pipeline are often run overhead in order to avoid melting the frozen ground by hot petroleum which would result in sinking the pipeline in the ground.\nMaintenance.\nMaintenance of pipelines includes checking cathodic protection levels for the proper range, surveillance for construction, erosion, or leaks by foot, land vehicle, boat, or air, and running cleaning pigs when there is anything carried in the pipeline that is corrosive.\nUS pipeline maintenance rules are covered in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) sections, 49 CFR 192 for natural gas pipelines, and 49 CFR 195 for petroleum liquid pipelines.\nRegulation.\nIn the US, onshore and offshore pipelines used to transport oil and gas are regulated by the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA). Certain offshore pipelines used to produce oil and gas are regulated by the Minerals Management Service (MMS). In Canada, pipelines are regulated by either the provincial regulators or, if they cross provincial boundaries or the Canada\u2013US border, by the National Energy Board (NEB). Government regulations in Canada and the United States require that buried fuel pipelines must be protected from corrosion. Often, the most economical method of corrosion control is by use of pipeline coating in conjunction with cathodic protection and technology to monitor the pipeline. Above ground, cathodic protection is not an option. The coating is the only external protection.\nPipelines and geopolitics.\nPipelines for major energy resources (petroleum and natural gas) are not merely an element of trade. They connect to issues of geopolitics and international security as well, and the construction, placement, and control of oil and gas pipelines often figure prominently in state interests and actions. A notable example of pipeline politics occurred at the beginning of the year 2009, wherein a dispute between Russia and Ukraine ostensibly over pricing led to a major political crisis. Russian state-owned gas company Gazprom cut off natural gas supplies to Ukraine after talks between it and the Ukrainian government fell through. In addition to cutting off supplies to Ukraine, Russian gas flowing through Ukraine\u2014which included nearly all supplies to Southeastern Europe and some supplies to Central and Western Europe\u2014was cut off, creating a major crisis in several countries heavily dependent on Russian gas as fuel. Russia was accused of using the dispute as leverage in its attempt to keep other powers, and particularly the European Union, from interfering in its \"near abroad\".\nHazard identification.\nBecause the solvent fraction of dilbit typically comprises volatile aromatics such as naptha and benzene, reasonably rapid carrier vaporization can be expected to follow an above-ground spill\u2014ostensibly enabling timely intervention by leaving only a viscous residue that is slow to migrate. Effective protocols to minimize exposure to petrochemical vapours are well-established, and oil spilled from the pipeline would be unlikely to reach the aquifer unless incomplete remediation were followed by the introduction of another carrier (e.g. a series of torrential downpours).\nThe introduction of benzene and other volatile organic compounds (collectively BTEX) to the subterranean environment compounds the threat posed by a pipeline leak. Particularly if followed by rain, a pipeline breach would result in BTEX dissolution and equilibration of benzene in water, followed by percolation of the admixture into the aquifer. Benzene can cause many health problems and is carcinogenic with EPA Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL) set at 5 \u03bcg/L for potable water. Although it is not well studied, single benzene exposure events have been linked to acute carcinogenesis. Additionally, the exposure of livestock, mainly cattle, to benzene has been shown to cause many health issues, such as neurotoxicity, fetal damage and fatal poisoning.\nThe entire surface of an above-ground pipeline can be directly examined for material breach. Pooled petroleum is unambiguous, readily spotted, and indicates the location of required repairs. Because the effectiveness of remote inspection is limited by the cost of monitoring equipment, gaps between sensors, and data that requires interpretation, small leaks in buried pipe can sometimes go undetected.\nPipeline developers do not always prioritize effective surveillance against leaks. Buried pipes draw fewer complaints. They are insulated from extremes in ambient temperature, they are shielded from ultraviolet rays, and they are less exposed to photodegradation. Buried pipes are isolated from airborne debris, electrical storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, hail, and acid rain. They are protected from nesting birds, rutting mammals, and stray buckshot. Buried pipe is less vulnerable to accident damage (e.g. automobile collisions) and less accessible to vandals, saboteurs, and terrorists.\nExposure.\nPrevious work has shown that a 'worst-case exposure scenario' can be limited to a specific set of conditions. Based on the advanced detection methods and pipeline shut-off SOP developed by TransCanada, the risk of a substantive or large release over a short period of time contaminating groundwater with benzene is unlikely. Detection, shutoff, and remediation procedures would limit the dissolution and transport of benzene. Therefore, the exposure of benzene would be limited to leaks that are below the limit of detection and go unnoticed for extended periods of time. Leak detection is monitored through a SCADA system that assesses pressure and volume flow every 5 seconds. A pinhole leak that releases small quantities that cannot be detected by the SCADA system (&lt;1.5% flow) could accumulate into a substantive spill. Detection of pinhole leaks would come from a visual or olfactory inspection, aerial surveying, or mass-balance inconsistencies. It is assumed that pinhole leaks are discovered within the 14-day inspection interval; however, snow cover and location (e.g. remote, deep) could delay detection. Benzene typically makes up 0.1 to 1.0% of oil and will have varying degrees of volatility and dissolution based on environmental factors.\nEven with pipeline leak volumes within SCADA detection limits, sometimes pipeline leaks are misinterpreted by pipeline operators to be pump malfunctions, or other problems. The Enbridge Line 6B crude oil pipeline failure in Marshall, Michigan, on July 25, 2010, was thought by operators in Edmonton to be from column separation of the dilbit in that pipeline. The leak in wetlands along the Kalamazoo River was only confirmed 17 hours after it happened by a local gas company employee.\nSpill frequency-volume.\nAlthough the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) has standard baseline incident frequencies to estimate the number of spills, TransCanada altered these assumptions based on improved pipeline design, operation, and safety. Whether these adjustments are justified is debatable as these assumptions resulted in a nearly ten-fold decrease in spill estimates. Given that the pipeline crosses 247 miles of the Ogallala Aquifer, or 14.5% of the entire pipeline length, and the 50-year life of the entire pipeline is expected to have between 11 and 91 spills, approximately 1.6 to 13.2 spills can be expected to occur over the aquifer. An estimate of 13.2 spills over the aquifer, each lasting 14 days, results in 184 days of potential exposure over the 50-year lifetime of the pipeline.\nIn the reduced-scope worst-case exposure scenario, the volume of a pinhole leak at 1.5% of max flow-rate for 14 days has been estimated at 189,000 barrels or 7.9 million gallons of oil. According to PHMSA's incident database, only 0.5% of all spills in the last ten years were more than 10,000 barrels.\nBenzene fate and transport.\nBenzene is considered a light aromatic hydrocarbon with high solubility and high volatility. It is unclear how temperature and depth would impact the volatility of benzene, so assumptions have been made that benzene in oil (1% weight by volume) would not volatilize before equilibrating with water.\nUsing the octanol-water partition coefficient and a 100-year precipitation event for the area, a worst-case estimate of 75\u00a0mg/L of benzene is anticipated to flow toward the aquifer. The actual movement of the plume through groundwater systems is not well described, although one estimate is that up to 4.9 billion gallons of water in the Ogallala Aquifer could become contaminated with benzene at concentrations above the MCL. The Final Environmental Impact Statement from the State Department does not include a quantitative analysis because it assumed that most benzene will volatilize.\nPrevious dilbit spill remediation difficulties.\nOne of the major concerns over dilbit is the difficulty in cleaning it up. When the aforementioned Enbridge Line 6B crude oil pipeline ruptured in Marshall, Michigan in 2010, at least 843,000 gallons of dilbit were spilled. After detection of the leak, booms and vacuum trucks were deployed. Heavy rains caused the river to overtop existing dams, and carried dilbit 30 miles downstream before the spill was contained. Remediation work collected over 1.1 million gallons of oil and almost 200,000 cubic yards of oil-contaminated sediment and debris from the Kalamazoo River system. However, oil was still being found in affected waters in October 2012.\nAccidents and dangers.\nPipelines can help ensure a country's economic well-being and as such present a likely target of terrorists or wartime adversaries.\nFossil fuels can be transported by pipeline, rail, truck or ship, though natural gas requires compression or liquefaction to make vehicle transport economical. For transport of crude oil via these four modes, various reports rank pipelines as proportionately causing less human death and property damage than rail and truck and spilling less oil than truck.\nAccidents.\nPipelines conveying flammable or explosive material, such as natural gas or oil, pose special safety concerns. While corrosion, pressure, and equipment failure are common causes, excavation damage is also a leading accident type that can be avoided by calling 811 before digging near pipelines. \nAs targets.\nPipelines can be the target of vandalism, sabotage, or even terrorist attacks. For example, between early 2011 and July 2012, a natural gas pipeline connecting Egypt to Israel and Jordan was attacked 15 times. In 2019, a fuel pipeline north of Mexico City exploded after fuel thieves tapped into the line. At least sixty-six people were reported to have been killed. In war, pipelines are often the target of military attacks, as destruction of pipelines can seriously disrupt enemy logistics. On 26 September 2022, a series of explosions and subsequent major gas leaks occurred on the Nord Stream 1 and Nord Stream 2 pipelines that run to Europe from Russia under the Baltic Sea. The leaks are believed to have been caused by an act of sabotage.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51112", "revid": "3556578", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51112", "title": "William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley", "text": "English statesman and chief adviser to Queen Elizabeth I (1520\u20131598)\nWilliam Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley (13 September 1520\u00a0\u2013 4 August 1598), was an English statesman, the chief adviser of Queen Elizabeth I for most of her reign, twice Secretary of State (1550\u20131553 and 1558\u20131572) and Lord High Treasurer from 1572. In his description in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition, A.F. Pollard wrote, \"From 1558 for forty years the biography of Cecil is almost indistinguishable from that of Elizabeth and from the history of England.\" He was raised to the peerage as Baron Burghley in February 1571.\nCecil set as the main goal of English policy the creation of a united and Protestant British Isles. His methods were to complete the control of Ireland, and to forge an alliance with Scotland. Protection from invasion required a powerful Royal Navy. While he was not fully successful, his successors agreed with his goals. In 1587, Cecil persuaded the Queen to order the execution of the Roman Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots, after she was implicated in a plot to assassinate Elizabeth.\nHe was the father of Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, and founder of the Cecil dynasty (marquesses of Exeter and of Salisbury), which has produced many politicians, including two prime ministers.\nEarly life.\nCecil was born in Bourne, Lincolnshire, in 1520, the son of Sir Richard Cecil, owner of the Burghley estate (near Stamford, Lincolnshire), and his wife, Jane Heckington.\nPedigrees, elaborated by Cecil himself with the help of William Camden the antiquary, associated him with the Welsh Cecils or Seisyllts of Allt-Yr-Ynys, Walterstone, on the border of Herefordshire and Monmouthshire. \"Cecil\" is an anglicisation of the Welsh . Lord Burghley acknowledged that the family was from the Welsh Marches in a family pedigree painted at Theobalds.\nThe Lord Treasurer's grandfather, David Cecil, had moved to Stamford. David Cecil secured the favour of the first Tudor king, Henry VII, to whom he was yeoman of the chamber. He was elected Member of Parliament for Stamford five times, between 1504 and 1523. He was Sergeant-of-Arms to Henry VIII in 1526, Sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1532, and a Justice of the Peace for Rutland. He, according to Burghley's enemies, kept the best inn in Stamford. His eldest son, Richard, Yeoman of the Wardrobe (died 1554), married Jane, daughter of William Heckington of Bourne, and was father of three daughters and the future Lord Burghley.\nWilliam, the only son, was put to school at The King's School, Grantham, and then Stamford School, which he later saved and endowed. In May 1535, at the age of fourteen, he went to St John's College, Cambridge, where he was brought into contact with the foremost scholars of the time, Roger Ascham and John Cheke, and acquired an unusual knowledge of Greek. He also acquired the affections of Cheke's sister, Mary, and was in 1541 removed by his father to Gray's Inn, without having taken a degree, as was common at the time for those not intending to enter the Church. The precaution proved useless and four months later Cecil committed one of the rare rash acts of his life in marrying Mary Cheke. The only child of this marriage, Thomas, the future Earl of Exeter, was born in May 1542, and in February 1543 Cecil's first wife died. On 21 December 1546 he married Mildred Cooke, who was ranked by Ascham with Lady Jane Grey as one of the two most learned ladies in the kingdom, (aside from another of Ascham's pupils, Elizabeth Tudor, who was later Elizabeth I) and whose sister, Anne, was the wife of Sir Nicholas Bacon and mother of Sir Francis Bacon.\nEarly career.\nWilliam Cecil's early career was spent in the service of the Duke of Somerset (a brother of the late queen, Jane Seymour), who was Lord Protector during the early years of the reign of his nephew, the young Edward VI. Cecil accompanied Somerset on his Pinkie campaign of 1547 (part of the \"Rough Wooing\"), being one of the two Judges of the Marshalsea. The other was William Patten, who states that both he and Cecil began to write independent accounts of the campaign, and that Cecil generously contributed his notes for Patten's narrative, \"The Expedition into Scotland\".\nCecil, according to his autobiographical notes, sat in Parliament in 1543; but his name does not occur in the imperfect parliamentary returns until 1547, when he was elected for the family borough of Stamford. In 1548, he was described as the Protector's Master of Requests, which apparently means that he was clerk or registrar of the court of requests which Somerset, possibly at Hugh Latimer's instigation, illegally set up in Somerset House to hear poor men's complaints. He also seems to have acted as private secretary to the Protector, and was in some danger at the time of the Protector's fall in October 1549. The lords opposed to Somerset ordered his detention on 10 October, and in November he was in the Tower of London.\nCecil ingratiated himself with John Dudley, then Earl of Warwick, and after less than three months he was out of the Tower. On 5 September 1550 Cecil was sworn in as one of King Edward's two secretaries of state. In April 1551, Cecil became chancellor of the Order of the Garter. But service under Warwick (by now the Duke of Northumberland) carried some risk, and decades later in his diary, Cecil recorded his release in the phrase \"\" (\"I was freed from this miserable court\").\nTo protect the Protestant government from the accession of a Catholic queen, Northumberland forced King Edward's lawyers to create an instrument setting aside the Third Succession Act on 15 June 1553. (The document, which Edward titled \"My Devise for the Succession\", barred both Elizabeth and Mary, the remaining children of Henry VIII, from the throne, in favour of Lady Jane Grey.) Cecil resisted for a while, in a letter to his wife, he wrote: \"Seeing great perils threatened upon us by the likeness of the time, I do make choice to avoid the perils of God's displeasure.\" However, at Edward's royal command he signed, not only the \"devise\", but also the bond among the conspirators and the letters from the council to Mary Tudor of 9 June 1553.\nYears afterwards, he pretended that he had only signed the devise as a witness, but in his apology to Queen Mary I, he did not venture to allege so flimsy an excuse; he preferred to lay stress on the extent to which he succeeded in shifting the responsibility on to the shoulders of his brother-in-law, Sir John Cheke, and other friends, and on his intrigues to frustrate the Queen to whom he had sworn allegiance.\nThere is no doubt that Cecil saw which way the wind was blowing, and disliked Northumberland's scheme; but he had not the courage to resist the duke to his face. As soon as the duke had set out to meet Mary, however, Cecil became the most active intriguer against him, and to these efforts, of which he laid a full account before Queen Mary, he mainly owed his immunity. He had, moreover, had no part in the divorce of Catherine of Aragon or in the humiliation of Mary during Henry's reign, and he made no scruple about conforming to the Catholic reaction. He went to Mass, confessed, and in no particular official capacity went to meet Cardinal Pole on his return to England in December 1554, again accompanying him to Calais in May 1555.\nWilliam Cecil was elected to Parliament as knight of the shire for Lincolnshire in 1553 (probably), 1555 and 1559 and for Northamptonshire in 1563.\"\nIn January of that year, he wrote to Sir Thomas Smith: \"The Parliament is begun and I trust will be short, for matters of moment to pass are not many, reviving of some old laws for penalties of some felonies and the grant of a subsidy. I think somewhat will be attempted to ascertain the realm of a successor to this crown, but I fear the unwillingness of her Majesty to have such a person known will stay the matter.\"\nIt was rumoured in December 1554 that Cecil would succeed Sir William Petre as Secretary of State, an office which, with his chancellorship of the Garter, he had lost on Mary's accession to the throne. Probably the Queen had more to do with this rumour than Cecil, though he is said to have opposed, in the parliament of 1555 (in which he represented Lincolnshire), a bill for the confiscation of the estates of the Protestant refugees. The story, even as told by his biographer, does not represent Cecil's conduct as having been very courageous; and it is more revealing that he found no seat in the parliament of 1558, for which Mary had directed the return of \"discreet and good Catholic members\".\nReign of Elizabeth.\nThe Duke of Northumberland had employed Cecil in the administration of the lands of Princess Elizabeth. Before Mary died he was a member of the \"old flock of Hatfield\", and from the first, the new Queen relied on Cecil. He was the cousin of Blanche Parry, Elizabeth's longest serving gentlewoman and close confidante. Elizabeth appointed Cecil as Secretary of State. His tight control over the finances of the Crown, leadership of the Privy Council, and the creation of a capable intelligence service under the direction of Francis Walsingham made him the most important minister for the majority of Elizabeth's reign.\nForeign policy.\nDawson argues that Cecil's long-term goal was a united and Protestant British Isles, an objective to be achieved by completing the conquest of Ireland and by creating an Anglo-Scottish alliance. With the land border with Scotland safe, the main burden of defence would fall upon the Royal Navy, Cecil proposed to strengthen and revitalise the Navy, making it the centrepiece of English power. He did obtain a firm Anglo-Scottish alliance reflecting the common religion and shared interests of the two countries, as well as an agreement that offered the prospect of a successful conquest of Ireland. However, his strategy ultimately failed. His idea that England's safety required a united British Isles became an axiom of English policy by the 17th century.\nThough a Protestant, Cecil was not a religious purist; he aided the Protestant Huguenots and Dutch just enough to keep them going in the struggles which warded danger from England's shores. However, Cecil never developed that passionate aversion to decided measures which became a second nature to Elizabeth. His intervention in Scotland in 1559\u20131560 showed that he could strike hard when necessary; and his action over the execution of Mary, Queen of Scots, proved that he was willing to take on responsibilities from which the Queen shrank.\nGenerally he was in favour of more decided intervention on behalf of continental Protestants than Elizabeth would have liked, but it is not always easy to ascertain the advice he gave. He left endless memoranda lucidly (nevertheless sometimes bordering on the ridiculous) setting forth the pros and cons of every course of action; but there are few indications of the line which he actually recommended when it came to a decision. How far he was personally responsible for the Anglican Settlement, the Poor Laws, and the foreign policy of the reign, remains to a large extent a matter of conjecture. However, it is most likely that Cecil's views carried the day in the politics of Elizabethan England. The historian Hilaire Belloc contends that Cecil was the \"de facto\" ruler of England during his tenure as Secretary; pointing out that in instances where his and Elizabeth's wills diverged, it was Cecil's will that was imposed.\nLeimon and Parker argue that Cecil was the principal protector of Edward Stafford, the English ambassador to Paris and a paid spy who helped the Spanish at the time of the Spanish Armada. However, they do not claim Cecil knew of Stafford's treason.\nDomestic politics.\nWilliam Cecil's share in the Religious Settlement of 1559 was considerable, and it coincided fairly with his own Anglican religious views. Like the mass of the nation, he grew more Protestant as time wore on; he was happier to persecute Catholics than Puritans; and he had no love for ecclesiastical jurisdiction. His prosecution of the English Catholics made him a recurring character in the \"evil counsellor polemics\", written by Catholic exiles across the channel. In these pamphlets, polemicists painted a black picture of Burghley as a corrupting influence over the queen. \"The Queen will listen to none but unto him\", exiled Catholic intelligencer Richard Verstegan wrote, \"and somtymes, she is faine to come to his bedsyde to entreat him in some-things.\" He warmly remonstrated with John Whitgift, the Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury, over his persecuting Articles of 1583. The finest encomium was passed on him by the queen herself, when she said, \"This judgment I have of you, that you will not be corrupted with any manner of gifts, and that you will be faithful to the state.\"\nEconomic policy.\nWilliam Cecil sought to ensure that policy was commensurate with the royal finances, which often led him advocating a cautious policy. His economic ideas were influenced by the Commonwealthmen of Edward VI's reign: he believed in the necessity of safeguarding the social hierarchy, the just price and the moral duties due to labour. In his economic policy he was motivated by a variety of factors, including those of national independence and self-sufficiency, as well as seeking to balance the interests of the Crown and the subject. Cecil did not believe that economics and politics were separate or that there was a dichotomy between power and plenty. One of his biographers asserted that, for Burghley, \"power was for defence from external enemies; plenty for security at home. Cecil pursued both power and plenty. They were the foreign and domestic aspects of his economic nationalism\". He deplored the reliance on \"foreign corn\" and during an economic depression sought to ensure employment due to his fears of \"tumults\". Cecil used patronage to ensure the loyalty of the nobility.\nIn Parliament.\nWilliam Cecil represented Lincolnshire in the Parliament of 1555 and 1559, and Northamptonshire in that of 1563, and he took an active part in the proceedings of the House of Commons until his elevation to the peerage; but there seems no good evidence for the story that he was proposed as Speaker in 1563. In January 1561, he was given the lucrative office of Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries in succession to Sir Thomas Parry. As Master of the Court of Wards, Cecil supervised the raising and education of wealthy, aristocratic boys whose fathers had died before they reached maturity. These included: the 17th Earl of Oxford; the 3rd Earl of Southampton; the 2nd Earl of Essex; and the 5th Earl of Rutland. He is widely credited with reforming an institution notorious for its corruption, but the extent of his reforms has been disputed by some scholars.\nIn February 1559, he was elected Chancellor of Cambridge University in succession to Cardinal Pole; he was created M.A. of that university on the occasion of Elizabeth's visit in 1564, and M.A. of Oxford on a similar occasion in 1566. He was the first Chancellor of the University of Dublin, between 1592 and 1598.\nOn 25 February 1571, Queen Elizabeth elevated him as Baron Burghley. That Cecil continued to act as Secretary of State after his elevation illustrates the growing importance of the office, which under his son became a secretary of the ship of state. In 1572 Cecil privately admonished the queen for her \"doubtful dealing with the Queen of Scots\". He made a strong attack on everything he thought Elizabeth had done wrong as queen. In his view, Mary had to be executed because she had become a rallying cause for Catholics and played into the hands of the Spanish and of the pope, who excommunicated Elizabeth in 1570 and sent in Jesuits to organise a Catholic underground. Following the Harleyford Conference of July 1586 these missionaries would set up a highly effective underground system for the transport and support of priests arriving from the Continent. Elizabeth's indecision was maddening; finally in 1587 Elizabeth had Mary executed.\nTreasurer.\nIn 1572, Lord Winchester, who had been Lord High Treasurer under Edward, Mary and Elizabeth, died. His vacant post was offered to Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester, who declined it and proposed Burghley, stating that the latter was the more suitable candidate because of his greater \"learning and knowledge\". The new Lord Treasurer's hold over the queen strengthened with the years.\nBurghley, Cecil House and Theobalds.\nBurghley House, near the town of Stamford, was built for Cecil, between 1555 and 1587, and modelled on the privy lodgings of Richmond Palace. It was subsequently the residence of his descendants, the earls and marquesses of Exeter. The house is one of the principal examples of 16th-century Elizabethan architecture, reflecting the prominence of its founder, and the lucrative wool trade of the Cecil estates. \nCecil House was built as his London residence, an expansion of an existing building. Queen Elizabeth I supped with him there, in July 1561, \"before my house was fully finished\", Cecil recorded in his diary, calling the place \"my rude new cottage.\" Inherited by his elder son, Thomas Cecil, 1st Earl of Exeter, it was known as \"Exeter House\".\nA new Theobalds House in Cheshunt was built between 1564 and 1585 by the order of Cecil, intending to build a mansion partly to demonstrate his increasingly dominant status at the Royal Court, and to provide a palace fine enough to accommodate the Queen on her visits. The Queen visited there eight times, between 1572 and 1596. An entertainment for Elizabeth, the \"Hermit's Welcome at Theobalds\" in May 1591 alluded to Burghley's retirement from public life.\nPrivate life.\nWilliam Cecil's private life was upright; he was a faithful husband, a careful father and a dutiful master. A book-lover and antiquarian, he made a special hobby of heraldry and genealogy. It was the conscious and unconscious aim of the age to reconstruct a new landed aristocracy on the ruins of the old Catholic order. As such, Burghley was a great builder, planter and patron. All the arts of architecture and horticulture were lavished on Burghley House and Theobalds, which his son exchanged for Hatfield. \nCecil wrote more than 128 letters to his son Robert Cecil over the course of his life, containing words of guidance and perseverance. The collection of letters show the close direction and counsel he gave his son in seeking and obtaining the office of principal secretary, 1593\u20131598. They describe the task of receiving and crafting a wide and large array of papers on behalf of Queen Elizabeth I and her Privy Council; finance, administration, foreign policy, and religion figure prominently, as does the shift from continental war to Ireland. These letters reveal the intimate relationship between the father and son; Burghley's care for his family, his thoughts of death, and a unique record of illness and old age are framed by his political and spiritual anxieties for the future of the Queen and her realms.\nDeath.\nBurghley collapsed (possibly from a stroke or heart attack) in 1598. Before he died, Robert, his only surviving son by his second wife, was ready to step into his shoes as the Queen's principal adviser. Having survived all his children except Robert and Thomas, Burghley died at his London residence, Cecil House on 4 August 1598, and was buried in St Martin's Church, Stamford.\nDescendants.\nWilliam Cecil first married Mary Cheke (Cheek), daughter of Peter Cheke of Cambridge and Agnes Duffield (and sister of John Cheke), and they had issue:\nSecondly, he married Mildred Cooke, eldest daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke of Gidea, Essex and Anne Fitzwilliam, and they had the following issue:\nCecil's descendants include the Marquesses of Exeter, descended from his elder son Thomas; and the Marquesses of Salisbury, descended from his younger son Robert. One of the latter branch, Robert Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury (1830\u20131903), served three times as Prime Minister, under Queen Victoria and her son, King Edward VII. The latter's nephew Arthur Balfour, who succeeded Salisbury as Prime Minister, was also a descendant.\nPublic conduct.\nAlbert Pollard, in his article on Cecil in the \"Encyclopedia Britannica\", wrote:\"William Cecil's public conduct does not present itself in quite so amiable a light. As his predecessor, Lord Winchester, said of himself, he was sprung \"from the willow rather than the oak\". Neither Cecil nor Lord Winchester were men to suffer for the sake of obstinate convictions. The interest of the state was the supreme consideration for Burghley, and to it he had no hesitation in sacrificing individual consciences. He frankly disbelieved in toleration; \"that state\", he said, \"could never be in safety where there was a toleration of two religions. For there is no enmity so great as that for religion; and therefore they that differ in the service of their God can never agree in the service of their country\". With a maxim such as this, it was easy for him to maintain that Elizabeth's coercive measures were political and not religious. To say that he was Machiavellian is meaningless, for every statesman is so, more or less; especially in the 16th century men preferred efficiency to principle. On the other hand, principles are valueless without law and order; and Burghley's craft and subtlety prepared a security in which principles might find some scope.\"\nSir Nicholas White.\nThe most prolonged of Cecil's surviving personal correspondences, lasting from 1566 until 1590, is with Sir Nicholas White, an Irish judge. It is contained in the \"State Papers Ireland 63\" and \"Lansdowne MS. 102\", but receives hardly a mention in the literature on Cecil.\nWhite had been a tutor to Cecil's children during his student days in London, and the correspondence suggests that he was held in lasting affection by the family. In the end, White fell into a Dublin controversy over the confessions of an intriguing priest, which threatened the authority of the Queen's deputised government in Ireland; out of caution, Cecil withdrew his longstanding protection and the judge was imprisoned in London and died soon after.\nWhite's most remarked-upon service for Cecil is his report on his visit to Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1569, during the early years of her imprisonment. It was an acrimonious encounter in which he angrily refuted Mary's contention that Elizabeth was treating her harshly. However, he admitted in his subsequent letter to Cecil that despite his hostility towards Mary, he had found her to be somewhat alluring and advised that she be kept under strict confinement for fear that she would have a similar impact on others. Elizabeth was jealous of her Scottish rival and, although he was at pains to stress that Mary in no way surpassed her in charm and beauty, White could well have forfeited his recently acquired favour had this relation been communicated to his queen; Cecil seems to have kept it from his royal mistress.\nIn February 1581, White demonstrated his independence in council, refusing to sign a letter to the Queen regarding Sir Nicholas Malby's actions in the Munster rebellion since he was away in England during the deliberations of the meeting. Again, on 28 August 1582, White was accused of withholding his signature to conciliar deliberations on the actions of the deputy during the Pale rebellion. He continued to demonstrate his valuable insights to Burghley in regular correspondence throughout the period, including letters of December 1581 on the miseries of war, the need for temperate government, and his fear that the wild Irish were glad to see the weakness of English blood in Ireland. In a missive of 13 September 1582, White complained of the unfriendly dealings of Sir Lucas Dillon, his erstwhile companion and fellow Irish-born counsellor, stating they had been for a long time of 'contrary minds'. In spite of his sympathies for the native Irish he was apparently the author of an extraordinary trial by combat in September 1583 in which Teig MacGilpatrick O'Connor and Conor MacCormac O'Connor died. His usefulness as an Irish speaker and a nominal Protestant made White an essential Privy Counsellor for two decades.\nIn popular culture.\nCecil has been a character in many works of fiction connected with Elizabeth I's reign.\nHe has long been considered a likely model for the character of the King's calculating minister Polonius in William Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\".\nRichard Attenborough depicted him in the film \"Elizabeth\" (1998), although the portrayal was inaccurate in many ways, including in regards to age and length of service. He was played by Ben Webster in the 1935 film \"Drake of England\". He was a prominent supporting character in the 1937 film \"Fire Over England\", starring Laurence Olivier, Vivien Leigh, and Flora Robson; Burghley (spelled Burleigh in the film) was played by Morton Selten. He also appears in the 2005 television mini-series \"Elizabeth I\" with Helen Mirren, played by Ian McDiarmid; was portrayed by Ronald Hines in the 1971 TV series \"Elizabeth R\"; by Trevor Howard in the 1971 film \"Mary, Queen of Scots\"; and by Ian Hart in the 2005 miniseries \"The Virgin Queen\". He is portrayed by David Thewlis in Roland Emmerich's \"Anonymous\" (2011). Cecil is portrayed by Ben Willbond in the BAFTA Award-winning children's comedy television series \"Horrible Histories\"; in the spin-off film, \"Bill\" (2015), he was played by Mathew Baynton. In the BBC TV miniseries \"Elizabeth I's Secret Agents\" (2017, broadcast on PBS in 2018 as \"Queen Elizabeth's Secret Agents\"), he is played by Philip Rosch.\nAs a stage character Cecil features in Friedrich Schiller's verse drama \"Mary Stuart\" and Robert Bolt's \"Vivat! Vivat Regina!\". Bolt portrays him as intelligent, pragmatic, ruthless and driven by the interests of the State and the Crown.\nCecil appears as a character in the novels \"I, Elizabeth\" by Rosalind Miles, \"The Virgin's Lover\" and \"The Other Queen\" by Philippa Gregory, and is a prominent secondary character in several books by Bertrice Small. He is a prominent character in \"Legacy\", a novel of Elizabeth I by Susan Kay. He also appears in the alternative history \"Ruled Britannia\", by Harry Turtledove, in which he and his son Sir Robert Cecil are conspirators and patrons of William Shakespeare in an attempt to restore Elizabeth to power after a Spanish invasion and conquest of England. In addition, he is portrayed as a young man in \"Lamentation\" by C. J. Sansom. Burghley also appears in the espionage novels of Fiona Buckley, featuring Elizabeth I's half-sister, Ursula Blanchard.\nGuy Pearce portrays Cecil in the 2018 historical drama \"Mary Queen of Scots\", directed by Josie Rourke.\nWilliam Cecil appears as a character in Deborah Harkness' novel \"Shadow of Night\", which is the second instalment of her \"All Souls\" Trilogy. Cecil is portrayed by Adrian Rawlins in the television adaptation of the triogy, \"A Discovery of Witches\".\nThe Elizabethan-class Airspeed Ambassador G-ALZU that crashed in the 1958 Munich air disaster, was named \"Lord Burghley\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "51113", "revid": "159620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51113", "title": "Clemens August of Bavaria", "text": "Bavarian archbishop\nClemens August of Bavaria () (17 August 1700 \u2013 6 February 1761) was an 18th-century member of the Wittelsbach dynasty of Bavaria and Archbishop-Elector of Cologne.\nBiography.\nClemens August (Clementus Augustus) was born in Brussels, the son of Elector Maximilian II Emanuel of Bavaria and Theresa Kunegunda Sobieska and the grandson of King John III Sobieski of Poland. His family was split during the War of the Spanish Succession and was for many years under house arrest in Austria; only in 1715 did the family become re-united.\nHis uncle Joseph Clemens, Elector and Archbishop of Cologne, saw to it that Clemens August received several appointments in Alt\u00f6tting, the Diocese of Regensburg, and at the Prince-Provostry of Berchtesgaden, and he soon received papal confirmation as Bishop of Regensburg, and later of Cologne.\nAs Archbishop of Cologne, he was one of the Electors, a Prince-Bishop of M\u00fcnster, Hildesheim, and Osnabr\u00fcck, and a Grand Master of the Teutonic Order.\nAccording to Jan Swafford, Clemens August did not owe his position of power to his \"talent, intelligence or reason. In each of his exalted posts, Clemens August was splendidly brainless and incompetent, not in the least interested in governing anything. As Elector in Bonn, his attention would be given largely to pleasure in the form of ladies, music, dancing, and erecting monuments to his glory and munificence.\" (2014)\nClemens August, who mostly sided with the Austrian Habsburg-Lorraine side during the War of the Austrian Succession, personally crowned his brother Charles VII emperor at Frankfurt in 1742. After Charles's death in 1745, Clemens August then again leaned toward Austria. Over time, Clemens August changed more frequently the alliances, as of Allied of Austria or France, also under the influence of his frequently changing First Ministers and high donations.\nHe died in Schloss Philippsburg below the Festung Ehrenbreitstein in 1761. In March 1761, shortly after his death, Pope Clement XIII rejected the succession of Clemens August's brother Cardinal John Theodore of Bavaria as Archbishop and Prince-Elector of Cologne since the pope entertained some doubt on John Theodore's \"moral conduct\". This was the end of the reign of the Wittelsbach in Cologne after 178 years of continuous rule. In his will, Clemens August donated only to his successor as Elector and the court chamber of the Electorate of Cologne, but not the Elector of Bavaria. His nephew Maximilian III. Joseph then tried to challenge the will before the Supreme Court of Appeal, however, this failed on 23 January 1767.\nCultural legacy.\nClemens August patronised the arts; among others he ordered to build the palaces of Augustusburg and Falkenlust in Br\u00fchl, North Rhine-Westphalia, listed on the UNESCO cultural world heritage list, and the church of St Michael in Berg am Laim in Munich. Other palaces like Schloss Arnsberg or Schloss Herzogsfreude have been lost.\nLudwig van Beethoven's Flemish grandfather became a musician in Bonn during the reign of Clemens August.\nIllegitimate children.\nClemens August and his mistress Mechthild Brion had a daughter:\nBibliography.\nAlessandro Cont, \"La Chiesa dei principi. Le relazioni tra \"Reichskirche\", dinastie sovrane tedesche e stati italiani (1688-1763)\", preface of Elisabeth Garms-Cornides, Trento, Provincia autonoma di Trento, 2018, pp.\u00a057\u201392, https://www.academia.edu/38170694/La_Chiesa_dei_principi._Le_relazioni_tra_Reichskirche_dinastie_sovrane_tedesche_e_stati_italiani_1688-1763_prefazione_di_Elisabeth_Garms-Cornides_Trento_Provincia_autonoma_di_Trento_2018\nJan Swafford, 'Beethoven, anguish and triumph', Boston, 2014, p.\u00a06\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51114", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51114", "title": "Transport economics", "text": "Branch of economics\nTransport economics is a branch of economics founded in 1959 by American economist John R. Meyer that deals with the allocation of resources within the transport sector. It has strong links to civil engineering. Transport economics differs from some other branches of economics in that the assumption of a spaceless, instantaneous economy does not hold. People and goods flow over networks at certain speeds. Demands peak. Advance ticket purchase is often induced by lower fares. The networks themselves may or may not be competitive. A single trip (the final good, in the consumer's eyes) may require the bundling of services provided by several firms, agencies and modes.\nAlthough transport systems follow the same supply and demand theory as other industries, the complications of network effects and choices between dissimilar goods (e.g. car and bus travel) make estimating the demand for transportation facilities difficult. The development of models to estimate the likely choices between the goods involved in transport decisions (discrete choice models) led to the development of an important branch of econometrics, as well as a Nobel Prize for Daniel McFadden.\nIn transport, demand can be measured in number of journeys made or in total distance traveled across all journeys (e.g. passenger-kilometers for public transport or vehicle-kilometers of travel (VKT) for private transport). Supply is considered to be a measure of capacity. The price of the good (travel) is measured using the generalised cost of travel, which includes both money and time expenditure.\nThe effect of increases in supply (i.e. capacity) are of particular interest in transport economics (see induced demand), as the potential environmental consequences are significant (see \"externalities\" below).\nExternalities.\nIn addition to providing benefits to their users, transport networks impose both positive and negative externalities on non-users. The consideration of these externalities \u2013 particularly the negative ones \u2013 is a part of transport economics.\nPositive externalities of transport networks may include the ability to provide emergency services, increases in land value, and agglomeration benefits. Negative externalities are wide-ranging and may include local air pollution, noise pollution, light pollution, safety hazards, community severance and congestion. The contribution of transport systems to potentially hazardous climate change is a significant negative externality which is difficult to evaluate quantitatively, making it difficult (but not impossible) to include in transport economics-based research and analysis.\nCongestion is considered a negative externality by economists. An externality occurs when a transaction causes costs or benefits to third party, often, although not necessarily, from the use of a public good. For example, manufacturing or transportation cause air pollution imposing costs on others when making use of public air.\nTraffic congestion.\nTraffic congestion is a negative externality caused by various factors. A 2005 American study stated that there are seven root causes of congestion, and gives the following summary of their contributions: bottlenecks 40%, traffic incidents 25%, bad weather 15%, work zones 10%, poor signal timing 5%, and special events/other 5%. Within the transport economics community, congestion pricing is considered to be an appropriate mechanism to deal with this problem (i.e. to internalise the externality) by allocating scarce roadway capacity to users. Capacity expansion is also a potential mechanism to deal with traffic congestion, but is often undesirable (particularly in urban areas) and sometimes has questionable benefits (see induced demand). William Vickrey, winner of the 1996 Nobel Prize for his work on \"moral hazard\", is considered one of the fathers of congestion pricing, as he first proposed it for the New York City Subway in 1952.\nIn the road transportation arena these theories were extended by Maurice Allais, a fellow Nobel prize winner \"for his pioneering contributions to the theory of markets and efficient utilization of resources\", Gabriel Roth who was instrumental in the first designs and upon whose World Bank recommendation the first system was put in place in Singapore. Reuben Smeed, the deputy director of the Transport and Road Research Laboratory was also a pioneer in this field, and his ideas were presented to the British government in what is known as the Smeed Report.\nCongestion is not limited to road networks; the negative externality imposed by congestion is also important in busy public transport networks as well as crowded pedestrian areas, e.g. on the London Underground on a weekday or any urban train station, at peak times. There is the classical excess in demand compared to supply. This is because at peak times there is a large demand for trains, since people want to go home (i.e., a derived demand). However, space on the platforms and on the trains is limited and small compared to the demand for it. As a result, there are crowds of people outside the train doors and in the train station corridors. This increases delays for commuters, which can often cause a rise in stress or other problems. A possible solution for this is fare reduction for travel at off-peak times.\nCongestion pricing.\nCongestion pricing is an efficiency pricing strategy that requires the users to pay more for that public good, thus increasing the welfare gain or net benefit for society. Congestion pricing is one of a number of alternative demand side (as opposed to supply side) strategies offered by economists to address congestion. Congestion pricing was first implemented in Singapore in 1975, together with a comprehensive package of road pricing measures, stringent car ownership rules and improvements in mass transit. Thanks to technological advances in electronic toll collection, Singapore upgraded its system in 1998 (see Singapore's Electronic Road Pricing). Similar pricing schemes were implemented in Rome in 2001, as an upgrade to the manual zone control system implemented in 1998;\nLondon in 2003 and extended in 2007 (see London congestion charge); Stockholm in 2006, as seven-month trial, and then on a permanent basis since August 2007 (see Stockholm congestion tax).\nPollution pricing.\nFrom 2008 to 2011, Milan had a traffic charge scheme, Ecopass, that exempted higher emission standard vehicles (Euro IV) and other alternative fuel vehicles This was later replaced by a more conventional congestion pricing scheme, Area C.\nEven the transport economists who advocate congestion pricing have anticipated several practical limitations, concerns and controversial issues regarding the actual implementation of this policy. As summarized by noted regional planner Robert Cervero: \"True social-cost pricing of metropolitan travel has proven to be a theoretical ideal that so far has eluded real-world implementation. The primary obstacle is that except for professors of transportation economics and a cadre of vocal environmentalists, few people are in favor of considerably higher charges for peak-period travel. Middle-class motorists often complain they already pay too much in gasoline taxes and registration fees to drive their cars, and that to pay more during congested periods would add insult to injury. In the United States, few politicians are willing to champion the cause of congestion pricing in fear of reprisal from their constituents... Critics also argue that charging more to drive is elitist policy, pricing the poor off of roads so that the wealthy can move about unencumbered. It is for all these reasons that peak-period pricing remains a pipe dream in the minds of many.\"\nRoad space rationing.\nTransport economists consider road space rationing an alternative to congestion pricing, but road space rationing is considered more equitable, as the restrictions force all drivers to reduce auto travel, while congestion pricing restrains less those who can afford paying the congestion charge. Nevertheless, high-income users can avoid the restrictions by owning a second car. Moreover, congestion pricing (unlike rationing) acts \"to allocate a scarce resource to its most valuable use, as evinced by users' willingness to pay for the resource\". While some \"opponents of congestion pricing fear that tolled roads will be used only by people with high income. But preliminary evidence suggests that the new toll lanes in California are used by people of all income groups. The ability to get somewhere fast and reliably is valued in a variety of circumstances. Not everyone will need or want to incur a toll on a daily basis, but on occasions when getting somewhere quickly is necessary, the option of paying to save time is valuable to people at all income levels.\" Road space rationing based on license numbers has been implemented in cities such as Athens (1982), M\u00e9xico City (1989), S\u00e3o Paulo (1997), Santiago, Chile, Bogot\u00e1, Colombia, La Paz (2003), Bolivia, and San Jos\u00e9 (2005), Costa Rica.\nTradable mobility credits.\nA more acceptable policy on automobile travel restrictions, proposed by transport economists to avoid inequality and revenue allocation issues, is to implement a rationing of peak period travel but through revenue-neutral credit-based congestion pricing. This concept is similar to the existing system of emissions trading of carbon credits, proposed by the Kyoto Protocol to curb greenhouse emissions. Metropolitan area or city residents, or the taxpayers, will have the option to use the local government-issued mobility rights or congestion credits for themselves, or to trade or sell them to anyone willing to continue traveling by automobile beyond the personal quota. This trading system will allow direct benefits to be accrued by those users shifting to public transportation or by those reducing their peak-hour travel rather than the government.\nFunding and financing.\nMethods of funding and financing transport network maintenance, improvement and expansion are debated extensively and form part of the transport economics field.\nFunding issues relate to the ways in which money is raised for the supply of transport capacity. Taxation and user fees are the main methods of fund-raising. Taxation may be general (e.g. income tax), local (e.g. sales tax or land value tax) or variable (e.g. fuel tax), and user fees may be tolls, congestion charges or fares. The method of funding often attracts strong political and public debate.\nFinancing issues relate to the way in which these funds are used to pay for the supply of transport. Loans, bonds, public\u2013private partnerships and concessions are all methods of financing transport investment.\nRegulation and competition.\nRegulation of the supply of transport capacity relates to both safety regulation and economic regulation. Transport economics considers issues of the economic regulation of the supply of transport, particularly in relation to whether transport services and networks are provided by the public sector, by the private sector, or a mixture of both.\nTransport networks and services can take on any combination of regulated/deregulated and public/private provision. For example, bus services in the UK outside London are provided by both the public and private sectors in a deregulated economic environment (where no-one specifies which services are to be provided, so the provision of services is influenced by the market), whereas bus services within London are provided by the private sector in a regulated economic environment (where the public sector specifies the services to be provided and the private sector competes for the right to supply those services \u2013 i.e. franchising).\nThe regulation of public transport is often designed to achieve some social, geographic and temporal equity as market forces might otherwise lead to services being limited to the most popular travel times along the most densely settled corridors of development. National, regional or municipal taxes are often deployed to provide a network that is socially acceptable (e.g. extending timetables through the daytime, weekend, holiday or evening periods and intensifying the mesh of routes beyond that which a lightly regulated market would probably provide).\nFranchising may be used to create a supply of transport that balances the free-market supply outcome and the most socially desirable supply outcome.\nProject appraisal and evaluation.\nThe most sophisticated methods of project appraisal and evaluation have been developed and applied in the transport sector. The terms \"appraisal\" and \"evaluation\" are often confused in relation to the assessment of projects. Appraisal refers to \"ex ante\" (before the event) assessment and evaluation refers to \"ex post\" (after the event) assessment.\nAppraisal.\nThe appraisal of changes in the transport network is one of the most important applications of transport economics. In order to make an assessment of whether any given transport project should be carried out, transport economics can be used to compare the costs of the project with its benefits (both social and financial). Such an assessment is known as a cost-benefit analysis, and is usually a fundamental piece of information for decision-makers, as it places a value on the net benefits (or disbenefits) of schemes and generates a ratio of benefits to costs which may be used to prioritise projects when funding is constrained.\nA primary difficulty in project appraisal is the valuation of time. Travel time savings are often cited as a key benefit of transport projects, but people in different occupations, carrying out different activities and in different social classes value time differently.\nAppraising projects on the basis of their supposed reductions in travel times has come under scrutiny in recent years with the recognition that improvements in capacity generate trips that would not have been made (induced demand), partially eroding the benefits of reduced travel times. Therefore, an alternative method of appraisal is to measure changes in land value and consumer benefits from a transport project rather than the measuring benefits accruing to travellers themselves. However, this method of analysis is much more difficult to carry out.\nAnother problem is that many transport projects have impacts that cannot be expressed in monetary terms, such as impacts on, for example, local air quality, biodiversity and community severance. Whilst these impacts can be included in a detailed environmental impact assessment, a key issue has been how to present these assessments alongside estimates of those costs and benefits that can be expressed in monetary terms. Recent developments in transport appraisal practice in some European countries have seen the application of multi-criteria decision analysis based decision support tools. These build on existing cost-benefit analysis and environmental impact assessment techniques and help decision makers weigh up the monetary and non-monetary impacts of transport projects. In the UK, one such application, the New Approach to Appraisal has become a cornerstone of UK transport appraisal.\nEvaluation.\nThe evaluation of projects enables decision makers to understand whether the benefits and costs that were estimated in the appraisal materialised. Successful project evaluation requires that the necessary data to carry out the evaluation is specified in advance of carrying out the appraisal.\nThe appraisal and evaluation of projects form stages within a broader policy making cycle that includes:\nSocial effects on poverty.\nIn the US those with low income living in cities face a problem called \u201cpoverty transportation.\u201d The problem arises because many of the entry-level jobs which are sought out by those with little education are typically located in suburban areas. Those jobs are also not very accessible by public transportation because the transportation was often designed to move people around cities, which becomes a problem when the jobs are no longer located in the cities. Those who cannot afford cars inevitably suffer the worst, because they have no choice but to rely on public transport. The problem is illustrated by an estimation that 70% of entry-level jobs are located in the suburbs, while only 32% of those jobs are within a quarter mile of public transportation. More difficult (or more expensive) access to jobs and other goods &amp; services can act as a ghetto tax.\nAs a result of the transportation systems in use, but not adequately meeting the needs of those who rely on them, they tend to generate low revenue. And with minimal revenue or funding the transportation systems are forced to decrease service and increase fares, which causes those in poverty to face more inequality. Further those who live in cities with no public transportation become even more excluded from education and work. In places with no public transport a car is the only viable option and that creates unnecessary strain on the roads and environment.\nSince automobile use tends to be greater than public transportation use, it also becomes the norm for people to work towards car ownership. Private car ownership has led to a large allocation of resources towards road and bridge maintenance. But underfunding of public transportation prevents everyone who needs transportation from having access to it. And those who can choose between public transportation and private transportation will choose private transportation rather than face the inconveniences of public transportation. The lack of customers willing to use public transport creates a cycle that ultimately never leads to the transportation systems making significant progress. Another reason for low private vehicle ownership among welfare recipients are the established asset limitations. In the U.S. the asset limit is $1000 per vehicle. This forces welfare recipients to purchase old and sub standard vehicles in order not to lose their welfare funding.\nThere are a number of ways in which public transportation could be improved and for it to become a better and more enticing option for other people who do not necessarily depend on it. Some of these include creating networks of overlapping routes even among different operators to give people more choice in where and how they want to go somewhere. The system should also function as a whole, to prevent drivers from dangerously racing along routes to increase profit. Providing incentives to use public transportation can also be beneficial, as ridership increases the transportation systems can appropriately respond by increasing the frequency along those transportation routes. Even creating bus only lanes or priority lanes at intersections could improve service and speed.\nExperiments done in Africa (Uganda and Tanzania) and Sri Lanka on hundreds of households have shown that a bicycle can increase the income of a poor family by as much as 35%. Transport, if analyzed for the cost-benefit analysis for rural poverty alleviation, has given one of the best returns in this regard. For example, road investments in India were a staggering 3\u201310 times more effective than almost all other investments and subsidies in rural economy in the decade of the 1990s. What a road does at a macro level to increase transport, the bicycle supports at the micro level. Bicycle, in that sense, can be one of the best means to eradicate the poverty in poor nations.\nCar taxation.\nCar taxation is an instrument to influence the purchase decisions of consumers. Taxes can be differentiated to support the market introduction of fuel efficient and low carbon dioxide (CO2) emitting cars.\nThe European Union Commission has made a proposal for a Council Directive on passenger car taxation which is currently before the Council and Parliament.\nThe Commission encourages again Member States to adopt this proposal as soon as possible and to adapt their car taxation policies so as to promote the purchase of fuel efficient cars throughout the EU and help manufacturers respect the upcoming fuel efficiency framework, thus contributing their share to reducing the CO2 emissions of cars. Taxes differentiated over the whole range of cars on the market, so as to gradually induce a switch towards less emitting cars, would be an efficient way to reduce compliance costs for manufacturers.\nTax rates on acquisition.\nIn 2011, for a brand new VW Golf Trendline (80 PS, 5G 2T) the taxation rate (all inclusive, i.e. VAT+registration tax+any other taxes) on acquisition was as follows:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51115", "revid": "107439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51115", "title": "Alienation", "text": "Alienation may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51116", "revid": "15945745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51116", "title": "History of science and technology/Discovery of DNA", "text": ""}
{"id": "51117", "revid": "18168711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51117", "title": "Meissner effect", "text": "Expulsion of a magnetic field from a superconductor\nIn condensed-matter physics, the Meissner effect (or Mei\u00dfner\u2013Ochsenfeld effect) is the expulsion of a magnetic field from a superconductor during its transition to the superconducting state when it is cooled below the critical temperature. This expulsion will repel a nearby magnet.\nThe German physicists Walther Mei\u00dfner (anglicized \"Meissner\") and Robert Ochsenfeld discovered this phenomenon in 1933 by measuring the magnetic field distribution outside superconducting tin and lead samples. The samples, in the presence of an applied magnetic field, were cooled below their superconducting transition temperature, whereupon the samples cancelled nearly all interior magnetic fields. They detected this effect only indirectly because the magnetic flux is conserved by a superconductor: when the interior field decreases, the exterior field increases. The experiment demonstrated for the first time that superconductors were more than just perfect conductors and provided a uniquely defining property of the superconductor state. The ability for the expulsion effect is determined by the nature of equilibrium formed by the neutralization within the unit cell of a superconductor.\nExplanation.\nThe Meissner effect was given a phenomenological explanation by the brothers Fritz and Heinz London, who showed that the electromagnetic free energy in a superconductor is minimized provided\nformula_1\nwhere H is the magnetic field and \u03bb is the London penetration depth.\nThis equation, known as the London equation, predicts that the magnetic field in a superconductor decays exponentially from whatever value it possesses at the surface. This exclusion of magnetic field is a manifestation of the superdiamagnetism which emerges during the phase transition from conductor to superconductor, for example by reducing the temperature below critical temperature.\nIn a weak applied field (less than the critical field that breaks down the superconducting phase), a superconductor expels nearly all magnetic flux by setting up electric currents near its surface, as the magnetic field H induces magnetization M within the London penetration depth from the surface. These surface currents shield the internal bulk of the superconductor from the external applied field. As the field expulsion, or cancellation, does not change with time, the currents producing this effect (called persistent currents or screening currents) do not decay with time.\nNear the surface, within the London penetration depth, the magnetic field is not completely canceled. Each superconducting material has its own characteristic penetration depth.\nAny perfect conductor will prevent any change to magnetic flux passing through its surface due to ordinary electromagnetic induction at zero resistance. However, the Meissner effect is distinct from this: when an ordinary conductor is cooled so that it makes the transition to a superconducting state in the presence of a constant applied magnetic field, the magnetic flux is expelled during the transition. This effect cannot be explained by infinite conductivity, but only by the London equation. The placement and subsequent levitation of a magnet above an already superconducting material does not demonstrate the Meissner effect, while an initially stationary magnet later being repelled by a superconductor as it is cooled below its critical temperature does.\nThe persisting currents that exist in the superconductor to expel the magnetic field is commonly misconceived as a result of Lenz's Law or Faraday's Law. A reason this is not the case is that no change in flux was made to induce the current. Another explanation is that since the superconductor experiences zero resistance, there cannot be an induced emf in the superconductor. The persisting current therefore is not a result of Faraday's Law.\nPerfect diamagnetism.\nSuperconductors in the Meissner state exhibit perfect diamagnetism, or superdiamagnetism, meaning that the total magnetic field is very close to zero deep inside them (many penetration depths from the surface). This means that their volume magnetic susceptibility is formula_2 = \u22121. Diamagnetics are defined by the generation of a spontaneous magnetization of a material which directly opposes the direction of an applied field. However, the fundamental origins of diamagnetism in superconductors and normal materials are very different. In normal materials diamagnetism arises as a direct result of the orbital spin of electrons about the nuclei of an atom induced electromagnetically by the application of an applied field. In superconductors the illusion of perfect diamagnetism arises from persistent screening currents which flow to oppose the applied field (the Meissner effect); not solely the orbital spin.\nConsequences.\nThe discovery of the Meissner effect led to the phenomenological theory of superconductivity by Fritz and Heinz London in 1935. This theory explained resistanceless transport and the Meissner effect, and allowed the first theoretical predictions for superconductivity to be made. However, this theory only explained experimental observations\u2014it did not allow the microscopic origins of the superconducting properties to be identified. This was done successfully by the BCS theory in 1957, from which the penetration depth and the Meissner effect result. However, some physicists argue that BCS theory does not explain the Meissner effect.\nParadigm for the Higgs mechanism.\nThe Meissner superconductivity effect serves as an important paradigm for the generation mechanism of a mass \"M\" (i.e., a reciprocal \"range\", formula_3 where \"h\" is the Planck constant and \"c\" is the speed of light) for a gauge field. In fact, this analogy is an abelian example for the Higgs mechanism, which generates the masses of the electroweak and gauge particles in high-energy physics. The length formula_4 is identical with the London penetration depth in the theory of superconductivity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51118", "revid": "13467261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51118", "title": "Trigonmetic function", "text": ""}
{"id": "51119", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51119", "title": "Literary theory", "text": "Systematic study of the nature of literature\nLiterary theory is the systematic study of the nature of literature and of the methods for literary analysis. Since the 19th century, literary scholarship includes literary theory and considerations of intellectual history, moral philosophy, social philosophy, and interdisciplinary themes relevant to how people interpret meaning. In the humanities in modern academia, the latter style of literary scholarship is an offshoot of post-structuralism. Consequently, the word \"theory\" became an umbrella term for scholarly approaches to reading texts, some of which are informed by strands of semiotics, cultural studies, philosophy of language, and continental philosophy, often witnessed within Western canon along with some postmodernist theory.\nHistory.\nThe practice of literary theory became a profession in the 20th century, but it has historical roots that run as far back as ancient Greece (Aristotle's \"Poetics\" is an often cited early example), ancient India (Bharata Muni's \"Natya Shastra\"), and ancient Rome (Longinus's \"On the Sublime\"). In medieval times, scholars in the Middle East (Al-Jahiz's \"al-Bayan wa-'l-tabyin\" and \"al-Hayawan\", and ibn al-Mu'tazz's \"Kitab al-Badi\") and Europe built rules for poetry and rhetoric. The aesthetic theories of philosophers from ancient philosophy through the 18th and 19th centuries are important influences on current literary study. The theory and criticism of literature are tied to the history of literature.\nSome scholars refer to the 1980s-90s debates on the academic merits of theory as \"the theory wars\". A driving question of the theory wars was whether literary theory departments were primarily meant to train students in close reading and appreciation, or to interrogate culture and ideology through Marxism, feminism, deconstruction, and beyond.\nOverview.\nTheory begins when a culture asks what art is for. One of the fundamental questions of literary theory is \"What is literature?\" and \"How should or do we read?\". Some contemporary theorists and literary scholars believe either that \"literature\" cannot be defined or that it can refer to any use of language. Specific theories are distinguished not only by their methods and conclusions, but even by how they create meaning in a \"text\". However, some theorists acknowledge that these texts do not have a singular, fixed meaning which is deemed \"correct\".\nSince theorists of literature often draw on very heterogeneous traditions of Continental philosophy and the philosophy of language, any classification of their approaches is only an approximation. There are many types of literary theory, which take different approaches to texts. Broad schools of theory that have historically been important include historical and biographical criticism, New Criticism, formalism, Russian formalism, and structuralism, post-structuralism, Marxism or historical materialism, feminism and French feminism, post-colonialism, new historicism, deconstruction, reader-response criticism, narratology and psychoanalytic criticism.\nDifferences among schools.\nThe different interpretive and epistemological perspectives of different schools of theory often arise from, and so give support to, different moral and political commitments. For instance, the work of the New Critics often contained an implicit moral dimension, and sometimes even a religious one: a New Critic might read a poem by T. S. Eliot or Gerard Manley Hopkins for its degree of honesty in expressing the torment and contradiction of a serious search for belief in the modern world. Meanwhile, a Marxist critic might find such judgments merely ideological rather than critical; the Marxist would say that the New Critical reading did not keep enough. Or a post-structuralist critic might simply avoid the issue by understanding the religious meaning of a poem as an allegory of meaning, treating the poem's references to \"God\" by discussing their referential nature rather than what they refer to.\nSuch a disagreement cannot be easily resolved, because it is inherent in the radically different terms and goals (that is, the theories) of the critics. Their theories of reading derive from vastly different intellectual traditions: the New Critic bases his work on an East-Coast American scholarly and religious tradition, while the Marxist derives his thought from a body of critical social and economic thought, the post-structuralist's work emerges from twentieth-century Continental philosophy of language.\nIn the late 1950s, the Canadian literary critic Northrop Frye attempted to establish an approach for reconciling historical criticism and New Criticism while addressing concerns of early reader-response and numerous psychological and social approaches. His approach, laid out in his \"Anatomy of Criticism\", was explicitly structuralist, relying on the assumption of an intertextual \"order of words\" and universality of certain structural types. His approach held sway in English literature programs for several decades but lost favor during the ascendance of post-structuralism.\nFor some theories of literature (especially certain kinds of formalism), the distinction between \"literary\" and other sorts of texts is of paramount importance. Other schools (particularly post-structuralism in its various forms: new historicism, deconstruction, some strains of Marxism and feminism) have sought to break down distinctions between the two and have applied the tools of textual interpretation to a wide range of \"texts\", including film, non-fiction, historical writing, and even cultural events.\nMikhail Bakhtin argued that the \"utter inadequacy\" of literary theory is evident when it is forced to deal with the novel; while other genres are fairly stabilized, the novel is still developing.\nAnother crucial distinction among the various theories of literary interpretation is intentionality, the amount of weight given to the author's own opinions about and intentions for a work. For most pre-20th century approaches, the author's intentions are a guiding factor and an important determiner of the \"correct\" interpretation of texts. The New Criticism was the first school to disavow the role of the author in interpreting texts, preferring to focus on \"the text itself\" in a close reading. In fact, as much contention as there is between formalism and later schools, they share the tenet that the author's interpretation of a work is no more inherently meaningful than any other.\nArtificial intelligence writing has created new opportunities for examining literature, as N. Katherine Hayles' work, \"Bacteria to AI\" points out. Hayles calls for using \"literary-critical techniques\" to analyze meanings from AI-derived texts, such as ChatGPT. Ethical literary criticism also employs scientific methods to study how literature is created and to examine ethical implications of AI creating literature.\nSchools.\nListed below are some of the most commonly identified schools of literary theory, along with their major authors:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51122", "revid": "15945751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51122", "title": "Elizabethan period", "text": ""}
{"id": "51123", "revid": "43618068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51123", "title": "Literary criticism", "text": "Study, evaluation, and interpretation of literature\nA genre of arts criticism, literary criticism or literary studies is the study, evaluation, and interpretation of literature. Modern literary criticism is often influenced by literary theory, which is the philosophical analysis of literature's goals and methods. Although the two activities are closely related, literary critics are not always, and have not always been, theorists.\nWhether or not literary criticism should be considered a separate field of inquiry from literary theory is a matter of some controversy. For example, \"The Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory and Criticism\" draws no distinction between literary theory and literary criticism, and almost always uses the terms together to describe the same concept. Some critics consider literary criticism a practical application of literary theory, because criticism always deals directly with particular literary works, while theory may be more general or abstract.\nLiterary criticism is often published in essay or book form. Academic literary critics teach in literature departments and publish in academic journals, and more popular critics publish their reviews in broadly circulating periodicals such as \"The Times Literary Supplement\", \"The New York Times Book Review\", \"The New York Review of Books\", the \"London Review of Books\", the \"Dublin Review of Books\", \"The Nation\", \"Bookforum\", and \"The New Yorker\".\nHistory.\nClassical and medieval criticism.\nLiterary criticism is thought to have existed as far back as the classical period. In the 4th century BC Aristotle wrote the \"Poetics\", a typology and explanation along with understanding of literary forms with many specific criticisms of contemporary works of art. \"Poetics\" developed for the first time the concepts of mimesis and catharsis, which are still crucial in literary studies.\nLater classical and medieval criticism often focused on religious texts, and the several long religious traditions of hermeneutics and textual exegesis have had a profound influence on the study of secular texts. This was particularly the case for the literary traditions of the three Abrahamic religions: Jewish literature, Christian literature and Islamic literature.\nLiterary criticism was also employed in other forms of medieval Arabic literature and Arabic poetry from the 9th century, notably by Al-Jahiz in his \"al-Bayan wa-'l-tabyin\" and \"al-Hayawan\", and by Abdullah ibn al-Mu'tazz in his \"Kitab al-Badi\".\nRenaissance criticism.\nThe literary criticism of the Renaissance developed classical ideas of unity of form and content into literary neoclassicism, proclaiming literature as central to culture, entrusting the poet and the author with preservation of a long literary tradition. The birth of Renaissance criticism was in 1498, with the recovery of classic texts, most notably, Giorgio Valla's Latin translation of Aristotle's \"Poetics\". The work of Aristotle, especially \"Poetics\", was the most important influence upon literary criticism until the late eighteenth century. Lodovico Castelvetro was one of the most influential Renaissance critics who wrote commentaries on Aristotle's \"Poetics\" in 1570.\nBaroque criticism.\nThe seventeenth-century witnessed the first full-fledged crisis in modernity of the core critical-aesthetic principles inherited from classical antiquity, such as proportion, harmony, unity, decorum, that had long governed, guaranteed, and stabilized Western thinking about artworks. Although Classicism was very far from spent as a cultural force, it was to be gradually challenged by a rival movement, namely Baroque, that favoured the transgressive and the extreme, without laying claim to the unity, harmony, or decorum that supposedly distinguished both nature and its greatest imitator, namely ancient art. \nThe key concepts of the Baroque aesthetic, such as \"conceit' (\"concetto\"), \"wit\" (\"acutezza\", \"ingegno\"), and \"wonder\" (\"meraviglia\"), were not fully developed in literary theory until the publication of Emanuele Tesauro's \"Il Cannocchiale aristotelico\" (The Aristotelian Telescope) in 1654. This seminal treatise \u2013 inspired by Giambattista Marino's epic \"Adone\" and the work of the Spanish Jesuit philosopher Baltasar Graci\u00e1n \u2013 developed a theory of metaphor as a universal language of images and as a supreme intellectual act, at once an artifice and an epistemologically privileged mode of access to truth.\nEnlightenment criticism.\nIn the Enlightenment period (1700s\u20131800s), literary criticism became more popular. During this time literacy rates started to rise in the public; no longer was reading exclusive for the wealthy or scholarly. With the rise of the literate public, the swiftness of printing and commercialization of literature, criticism arose too. Reading was no longer viewed solely as educational or as a sacred source of religion; it was a form of entertainment. Literary criticism was influenced by the values and stylistic writing, including clear, bold, precise writing and the more controversial criteria of the author's religious beliefs. \nThese critical reviews were published in many magazines, newspapers, and journals. The commercialization of literature and its mass production had its downside. The emergent literary market, which was expected to educate the public and keep them away from superstition and prejudice, increasingly diverged from the idealistic control of the Enlightenment theoreticians so that the business of Enlightenment became a business with the Enlightenment. This development \u2013 particularly of emergence of entertainment literature \u2013 was addressed through an intensification of criticism. Many works of Jonathan Swift, for instance, were criticized including his book \"Gulliver's Travels\", which one critic described as \"the detestable story of the Yahoos\".\n19th-century Romantic criticism.\nThe British Romantic movement of the early nineteenth century introduced new aesthetic ideas to literary studies, including the idea that the object of literature need not always be beautiful, noble, or perfect, but that literature itself could enlighten and add to the knowledge of a common subject to the level of the sublime. German Romanticism, which followed closely after the late development of German classicism, emphasized an understanding and beauty of fragmentation that can appear startlingly modern to the reader of English literature, and valued \"Witz\" \u2013 that is, \"wit\" or \"humor\" of a certain sort \u2013 more highly than the serious Anglophone Romanticism. The late nineteenth century brought renown to authors known more for their literary criticism than for their own literary work, such as Matthew Arnold.\nThe New Criticism.\nHowever important all of these aesthetic movements were as antecedents, current ideas about literary criticism derive almost entirely from the new direction taken in the early twentieth century. Early in the century the school of criticism known as Russian Formalism, and slightly later the New Criticism in Britain and in the United States, came to dominate the study and discussion of literature in the English-speaking world. Both schools emphasized the close reading of texts, elevating it far above generalizing discussion and speculation about either authorial intention (to say nothing of the author's psychology or biography, which became almost taboo subjects) or reader response: together known as Wimsatt and Beardsley's intentional fallacy and affective fallacy. This emphasis on form and precise attention to \"the words themselves\" has persisted, after the decline of these critical doctrines themselves.\nTheory.\nIn 1957 Northrop Frye published the influential \"Anatomy of Criticism\". In his works Frye noted that some critics tend to embrace an ideology, and to judge literary pieces on the basis of their adherence to such ideology. This has been a highly influential viewpoint among modern conservative thinkers. E. Michael Jones, for example, argues in his \"Degenerate Moderns\" that Stanley Fish was influenced by his own adulterous affairs to reject classic literature that condemned adultery. J\u00fcrgen Habermas, in \"Erkenntnis und Interesse\" [1968] (\"Knowledge and Human Interests\"), described literary critical theory in literary studies as a form of hermeneutics: knowledge via interpretation to understand the meaning of human texts and symbolic expressions\u00a0\u2013 including the interpretation of texts which themselves interpret other texts.\nIn the British and American literary establishment, the New Criticism was more or less dominant until the late 1960s. Around that time Anglo-American university literature departments began to witness a rise of a more explicitly philosophical literary theory, influenced by structuralism, then post-structuralism, and other kinds of Continental philosophy. It continued until the 1990s when interest in \"concept\" peaked. Many later critics, though undoubtedly still influenced by theoretical work, have been comfortable simply interpreting literature rather than writing explicitly about methodology and philosophical presumptions.\nCurrent state.\nToday, approaches based in literary theory and continental philosophy largely coexist in university literature departments, while conventional methods, some informed by the New Critics, also remain active. Disagreements over the goals and methods of literary criticism, which characterized both sides taken by critics during the \"rise\" of theory, have declined.\nSome critics work largely with theoretical texts, while others read traditional literature; interest in the literary canon is still great, but many critics are also interested in nontraditional texts and women's literature, as elaborated on by certain academic journals such as \"Contemporary Women's Writing\", while some critics influenced by cultural studies read popular texts like comic books or pulp/genre fiction. Ecocritics have drawn connections between literature and the natural sciences. Darwinian literary studies studies literature in the context of evolutionary influences on human nature. And postcritique has sought to develop new ways of reading and responding to literary texts that go beyond the interpretive methods of critique. Many literary critics also work in film criticism or media studies.\nHistory of the book.\nRelated to other forms of literary criticism, the history of the book is a field of an inter-disciplinary inquiry drawing on the methods of bibliography, cultural history, history of literature, and media theory. Principally concerned with the production, circulation, and reception of texts and their material forms, book history seeks to connect forms of textuality with their material aspects.\nAmong the issues within the history of literature with which book history can be seen to intersect are: the development of authorship as a profession, the formation of reading audiences, the constraints of censorship and copyright, and the economics of literary form.\nKey texts.\nClassical and medieval periods.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEnlightenment period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n19th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n20th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51124", "revid": "50809915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51124", "title": "Pangolin", "text": "Mammals of the order Pholidota\nPangolins, sometimes known as scaly anteaters, are mammals of the order Pholidota (). The one extant family, the Manidae, has three genera: \"Manis\", \"Phataginus\", and \"Smutsia\". \"Manis\" comprises four species found in Asia, while \"Phataginus\" and \"Smutsia\" include two species each, all found in sub-Saharan Africa. These species range in size from . Several extinct pangolin species are also known. In September 2023, nine species were reported.\nPangolins have large, protective keratin scales, similar in material to fingernails and toenails, covering their skin; they are the only known mammals with this feature. Depending on the species, they live in hollow trees or burrows. Pangolins are nocturnal, and their diet consists of mainly ants and termites, which they capture using their long tongues. They tend to be solitary animals, meeting only to mate and produce a litter of one to three offspring, which they raise for about two years. Pangolins superficially resemble armadillos, though the two are not closely related; they have undergone convergent evolution.\nPangolins are threatened by poaching (for their meat and scales, which are used in traditional medicine) and heavy deforestation of their natural habitats, and are the most trafficked mammals in the world. As of January 2020[ [update]], there are eight species of pangolin whose conservation status is listed in the threatened tier. Three (\"Manis culionensis\", \"M. pentadactyla\" and \"M. javanica\") are critically endangered, three (\"Phataginus tricuspis\", \"Manis crassicaudata\" and \"Smutsia gigantea\") are endangered and two (\"Phataginus tetradactyla\" and \"Smutsia temminckii\") are vulnerable on the Red List of Threatened Species of the International Union for Conservation of Nature.\nEtymology.\nThe name of order Pholidota comes from Ancient Greek \u2013 \"clad in scales\" from \"phol\u00eds\" \"scale\".\nThe name \"pangolin\" comes from the Malay word \"pengguling\" meaning \"one who rolls up\" from \"guling\" or \"giling\" \"to roll\"; it was used for the Sunda pangolin (\"Manis javanica\"). However, the modern name is \"tenggiling\". In Javanese, it is \"terenggiling\"; and in the Philippine languages, it is \"goling\", \"tanggiling\", or \"balintong\" (with the same meaning).\nIn ancient India, according to Aelian, it was known as the \"phatt\u00e1ges\" (\u03c6\u03b1\u03c4\u03c4\u03ac\u03b3\u03b7\u03c2).\nDescription.\nThe physical appearance of a pangolin is marked by large, hardened, overlapping, plate-like scales, which are soft on newborn pangolins, but harden as the animal matures. They are made of keratin, the same material from which human fingernails and tetrapod claws are made, and are structurally and compositionally very different from the scales of reptiles. The pangolin's scaled body is comparable in appearance to a pine cone. It can curl up into a ball when threatened, with its overlapping scales acting as armor, while it protects its face by tucking it under its tail. The scales are sharp, providing extra defense from predators.\nPangolins can emit a noxious-smelling chemical from glands near the anus, similar to the spray of a skunk. They have short legs, with sharp claws which they use for burrowing into ant and termite mounds and for climbing.\nThe tongues of pangolins are extremely long, and like those of the giant anteater and the tube-lipped nectar bat, the root of the tongue is not attached to the hyoid bone but is in the thorax between the sternum and the trachea. Large pangolins can extend their tongues as much as , with a diameter of only about .\nBehaviour.\nMost pangolins are nocturnal animals which use their well-developed sense of smell to find insects. The long-tailed pangolin is also active by day, while other species of pangolins spend most of the daytime sleeping, curled up into a ball (\"volvation\").\nArboreal pangolins live in hollow trees, whereas the ground-dwelling species dig tunnels to a depth of .\nSome pangolins walk with their front claws bent under the foot pad, although they use the entire foot pad on their rear limbs. Furthermore, some exhibit a bipedal stance for some behavior, and may walk a few steps bipedally. Pangolins are also good swimmers.\nDiet.\nPangolins are insectivorous. Most of their diet consists of various species of ants and termites and may be supplemented by other insects, especially larvae. They are somewhat particular and tend to consume only one or two species of insects, even when many species are available. A pangolin can consume of insects per day. Pangolins are an important regulator of termite populations in their natural habitats.\nPangolins have very poor vision. They also lack teeth. They rely heavily on smell and hearing, and they have other physical characteristics to help them eat ants and termites. Their skeletal structure is sturdy and they have strong front legs used for tearing into termite mounds. They use their powerful front claws to dig into trees, soil, and vegetation to find prey, then proceed to use their long tongues to probe inside the insect tunnels and to retrieve their prey.\nThe structure of their tongue and stomach is key to aiding pangolins in obtaining and digesting insects. Their saliva is sticky, causing ants and termites to stick to their long tongues when they are hunting through insect tunnels. Without teeth, pangolins also cannot chew; but while foraging, they ingest small stones (gastroliths), which accumulate in their stomachs to help to grind up ants. This part of their stomach is called the gizzard, and it is also covered in keratinous spines. These spines further aid in the grinding up and digestion of the pangolin's prey.\nSome species, such as the tree pangolin, use their strong, prehensile tails to hang from tree branches and strip away bark from the trunk, exposing insect nests inside.\nReproduction.\nPangolins are solitary and meet only to reproduce, with mating typically taking place at night after the male and female pangolin meet near a watering hole. Males are larger than females, weighing up to 40% more. While the mating season is not defined, they typically mate once each year, usually during the summer or autumn. Rather than the males seeking out the females, males mark their location with urine or feces and the females find them. If competition over a female occurs, the males use their tails as clubs to fight for the opportunity to mate with her.\nGestation periods differ by species, ranging from roughly 70 to 140 days. African pangolin females usually give birth to a single offspring at a time, but the Asiatic species may give birth to from one to three. Weight at birth is , and the average length is . At the time of birth, the scales are soft and white. After several days, they harden and darken to resemble those of an adult pangolin. During the vulnerable stage, the mother stays with her offspring in the burrow, nursing it, and wraps her body around it if she senses danger. The young cling to the mother's tail as she moves about, although, in burrowing species, they remain in the burrow for the first two to four weeks of life. At one month, they first leave the burrow riding on the mother's back. Weaning takes place around three months of age, when the young begin to eat insects in addition to nursing. At two years of age, the offspring are sexually mature and are abandoned by the mother.\nClassification and phylogeny.\nPhylogeny.\nAmong placentals.\nThe order Pholidota was long considered to be the sister taxon to Xenarthra (neotropical anteaters, sloths, and armadillos), but recent genetic evidence indicates their closest living relatives are the carnivorans, with which they form a clade, the Ferae. Palaeanodonts are even closer relatives to pangolins, being classified with pangolins in the clade Pholidotamorpha. The split between carnivorans and pangolins is estimated to have occurred 79.47 Ma (million years) ago.\nAmong Manidae.\nThe first dichotomy in the phylogeny of extant Manidae separates Asian pangolins (\"Manis\") from African pangolins (\"Smutsia\" and \"Phataginus\"). Within the former, \"Manis pentadactyla\" is the sister group to a clade comprising \"M. crassicaudata\" and \"M. javanica\". Within the latter, a split separates the large terrestrial African pangolins of the genus \"Smutsia\" from the small arboreal African pangolins of the genus \"Phataginus\".\nAsian and African pangolins are thought to have diverged about 41.37 Ma ago. Moreover, the basal position of \"Manis\" within Pholidota suggests the group originated in Eurasia, consistent with their laurasiatherian phylogeny.\nThreats.\nPangolins are in high demand in southern China and Vietnam because their scales are believed to have medicinal properties in traditional Chinese and Vietnamese medicine. Their meat is also considered a delicacy. 100,000 are estimated to be trafficked a year to China and Vietnam, amounting to over one million over the past decade. This makes them the most trafficked animal in the world. This, coupled with deforestation, has led to a large decrease in the numbers of pangolins. Some species, such as \"Manis pentadactyla\" have become commercially extinct in certain ranges as a result of overhunting. \nIn November 2010, pangolins were added to the Zoological Society of London's list of evolutionarily distinct and endangered mammals. All eight species of pangolin are assessed as threatened by the IUCN, while three are classified as critically endangered. All pangolin species are currently listed under Appendix I of CITES which prohibits international trade, except when the product is intended for non-commercial purposes and a permit has been granted.\nChina had been the main destination country for pangolins until 2018, where it was surpassed by Vietnam. In 2019, Vietnam was reported to have seized the largest volumes of pangolin scales, surpassing Nigeria that year.\nPangolins are also hunted and eaten in Ghana and are one of the more popular types of bushmeat, while local healers use the pangolin as a source of traditional medicine. A 2025 study in \"Nature Ecology &amp; Evolution\" found that opportunistic hunting for meat, rather than hunting for scales used in traditional medicine, is the primary driver of pangolin population declines in Nigeria.\nThough pangolins are protected by an international ban on their trade, populations have suffered from illegal trafficking due to beliefs in East Asia that their ground-up scales can stimulate lactation or cure cancer or asthma. In the past decade, numerous seizures of illegally trafficked pangolin and pangolin meat have taken place in Asia. In one such incident in April 2013, of pangolin meat were seized from a Chinese vessel that ran aground in the Philippines. In another case in August 2016, an Indonesian man was arrested after police raided his home and found over 650 pangolins in freezers on his property. The same threat is reported in Nigeria, where the animal is on the verge of extinction due to overexploitation. The overexploitation comes from hunting pangolins for game meat and the reduction of their forest habitats due to deforestation caused by timber harvesting. The pangolin are hunted as game meat for both medicinal purposes and food consumption.\nVirology.\nCOVID-19 infection.\nThe nucleic acid sequence of a specific receptor-binding domain of the spike protein belonging to coronaviruses taken from pangolins was found to be a 99% match with SARS coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus which causes COVID-19 and is responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Researchers in Guangzhou, China, hypothesized that SARS-CoV-2 had originated in bats, and prior to infecting humans, was circulating among pangolins. The illicit Chinese trade of pangolins for use in traditional Chinese medicine was suggested as a vector for human transmission. However, whole-genome comparison found that the pangolin and human share only up to 92% of their RNA. Ecologists worried that the early speculation about pangolins being the source may have led to mass slaughters, endangering them further, which was similar to what happened to Asian palm civets during the SARS outbreak. It was later proved that the testing which suggested that pangolins were a potential host for the virus was flawed, when genetic analysis showed that the spike protein and its binding to receptors in pangolins had minimal effect from the virus, and therefore were not likely mechanisms for COVID-19 infections in humans.\n\"Pestivirus\" and \"Coltivirus\".\nIn 2020, two novel RNA viruses distantly related to pestiviruses and coltiviruses have been detected in the genomes of dead \"Manis javanica\" and \"Manis pentadactyla\". To refer to both sampling site and hosts, they were named Dongyang pangolin virus (DYPV) and Lishui pangolin virus (LSPV). The DYPV pestivirus was also identified in \"Amblyomma javanense\" nymph ticks from a diseased pangolin.\nIn addition to pestiviruses and coltiviruses, genomic surveys of healthy pangolins have revealed the presence of multiple potentially zoonotic viruses, including coronaviruses, flaviviruses, and circoviruses, indicating that pangolins naturally harbor diverse viral communities without showing disease symptoms.\nFolk medicine.\nPangolin scales and flesh are used as ingredients for various traditional Chinese medicine preparations. While no scientific evidence exists for the efficacy of those practices, and they have no logical mechanism of action, their popularity still drives the black market for animal body parts, despite concerns about toxicity, transmission of diseases from animals to humans, and species extermination. The ongoing demand for parts as ingredients continues to fuel pangolin poaching, hunting and trading.\nThe first record of pangolin scales occurs in \"Ben Cao Jinji Zhu\" (\"Variorum of Shennong's Classic of Materia Medica\", 500 CE), which recommends pangolin scales for protection against ant bites; burning the scales as a cure for people crying hysterically during the night. During the Tang dynasty, a recipe for expelling evil spirits with a formulation of scales, herbs, and minerals appeared in 682, and in 752 CE the idea that pangolin scales could also stimulate milk secretion in lactating women, one of the main uses today, was recommended in the \"Wai Tai Mi Yao\" (\"Arcane Essentials from the Imperial Library\"). In the Song dynasty, the notion of penetrating and clearing blockages was emphasized in the \"Taiping sheng hui fan\" (\"Formulas from Benevolent Sages Compiled During the Era of Peace and Tranquility\"), compiled by Wang Huaiyin in 992.\nIn the 21st century, the main uses of pangolin scales are quackery practices based on unproven claims the scales dissolve blood clots, promote blood circulation, or help lactating women secrete milk. The supposed health effects of pangolin meat and scales claimed by folk medicine practitioners are based on their consumption of ants, long tongues, and protective scales. The \"Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China\" included Chinese pangolin scales as an ingredient in traditional Chinese medicine formulations. Pangolins were removed from the \"Pharmacopoeia\" starting from the first half of 2020. Although pangolin scales have been removed from the list of raw ingredients, the scales are still listed as a key ingredient in various medicines.\nPangolin parts are also used for medicinal purposes in other Asian countries such as India, Nepal and Pakistan. In some parts of India and Nepal, locals believe that wearing the scales of a pangolin can help prevent pneumonia. Pangolin scales have also been used for medicinal purposes in Malaysia, Indonesia and northern Myanmar. Indigenous people in southern Palawan, Philippines, have held the belief that elders could avoid prostate illnesses by wearing belts made with the scales.\nConservation.\nAs a result of increasing threats to pangolins, mainly in the form of illegal, international trade in pangolin skin, scales, and meat, these species have received increasing conservation attention in recent years. As of January 2020[ [update]], the IUCN considered all eight species of pangolin on its Red List of Threatened Species as threatened. The IUCN SSC Pangolin Specialist Group launched a global action plan to conserve pangolins, dubbed \"Scaling up Pangolin Conservation\", in July 2014. This action plan aims to improve all aspects of pangolin conservation with an added emphasis on combating poaching and trafficking of the animal while educating communities on its importance. \nAnother suggested approach to fighting pangolin (and general wildlife) trafficking consists in \"following the money\" rather than \"the animal\", which aims to disrupt smugglers' profits by interrupting money flows. Financial intelligence gathering could thus become a key tool in protecting these animals, although this opportunity is often overlooked. In 2018, a Chinese NGO launched the Counting Pangolins movement, calling for joint efforts to save the mammals from trafficking. Wildlife conservation group TRAFFIC has identified 159 smuggling routes used by pangolin traffickers and aims to shut these down.\nMany attempts have been made to breed pangolins in captivity, but due to their reliance on wide-ranging habitats and very particular diets, these attempts are often unsuccessful. Pangolins have significantly decreased immune responses due to a genetic dysfunction, making them extremely fragile. They are susceptible to diseases such as pneumonia and the development of ulcers in captivity, complications that can lead to an early death. In addition, pangolins rescued from illegal trade often have a higher chance of being infected with parasites such as intestinal worms, further lessening their chance for rehabilitation and reintroduction to the wild.\nThe idea of farming pangolins to reduce the number being illegally trafficked is being explored with little success. The third Saturday in February is promoted as World Pangolin Day by the conservation NPO Annamiticus. World Pangolin Day has been noted for its effectiveness in generating awareness about pangolins.\nIn 2017, Jackie Chan made a public service announcement called \"WildAid: Jackie Chan &amp; Pangolins (Kung Fu Pangolin)\".\nIn December 2020, a study found that it is \"not too late\" to establish conservation efforts for Philippine pangolins (\"Manis culionensis\"), a species that is only found on the island province of Palawan.\nTaiwan.\nTaiwan is one of the few conservation grounds for pangolins in the world after the country enacted the 1989 Wildlife Conservation Act. The introduction of Wildlife Rehabilitation Centers in places like Luanshan (Yanping Township) in Taitung and Xiulin townships in Hualien became important communities for protecting pangolins and their habitats and has greatly improved the survival of pangolins. These centers work with local aboriginal tribes and forest police in the National Police Agency to prevent poaching, trafficking, and smuggling of pangolins, especially to black markets in China. These centers have also helped to reveal the causes of death and injury among Taiwan's pangolin population. Today, Taiwan has the highest population density of pangolins in the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51125", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51125", "title": "Pholidota", "text": ""}
{"id": "51126", "revid": "44555953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51126", "title": "Pierrot", "text": "Stock character\nPierrot ( , ; ) is a stock character of pantomime and commedia dell'arte whose origins date back to the late 17th-century Italian troupe of players performing in Paris and known as the Com\u00e9die-Italienne. The name is a diminutive of \"Pierre\" (Peter), using the suffix \"-ot\" and derives from the Italian Pedrolino. His character in contemporary popular culture\u2014in poetry, fiction, and the visual arts, as well as works for the stage, screen, and concert hall\u2014is that of the sad clown, often pining for love of Columbine (who usually breaks his heart and leaves him for Harlequin). Performing unmasked, with a whitened face, he wears a loose white blouse with large buttons and wide white pantaloons. Sometimes he appears with a frilled collaret and a hat, usually with a close-fitting crown and wide round brim and, more rarely, with a conical shape like a dunce's cap.\nPierrot's character developed from that of a buffoon to become an avatar of the disenfranchised. Many cultural movements found him amenable to their respective causes: Decadents turned him into a disillusioned foe of idealism; Symbolists saw him as a lonely fellow-sufferer; Modernists made him into a silent, alienated observer of the mysteries of the human condition. Much of that mythic quality (\"I'm Pierrot,\" said David Bowie: \"I'm Everyman\") still adheres to the \"sad clown\" in the postmodern era.\nOrigins: 17th century.\nPierrot is sometimes said to be a French variant of the sixteenth-century Italian Pedrolino, but the two types have little but their names (\"Little Pete\") and social stations in common. Both are comic servants, but Pedrolino, as a so-called \"first\" Zanni, often acts with cunning and daring. an engine of the plot in the scenarios where he appears. Pierrot, on the other hand, as a \"second\"' Zanni, stands \"on the periphery of the action\". He dispenses advice and courts his master's young daughter, Columbine, bashfully.\nHis origins among the Italian players in France go back to Moli\u00e8re's peasant Pierrot in \"Don Juan, or The Stone Guest\" (1665). In 1673, the Com\u00e9die-Italienne made its own contribution to the Don Juan legend with an \"Addendum to \"The Stone Guest\"\", which included Moli\u00e8re's Pierrot. Thereafter the character\u2014sometimes a peasant, but more often now an Italianate \"second\" Zanni\u2014appeared fairly regularly in the Italians' offerings, his role always taken by one Giuseppe Giaratone (or Geratoni, fl. 1639-1697).\nAmong the French dramatists writing roles for Pierrot were Jean de Palaprat, Claude-Ignace Brugi\u00e8re de Barante, Antoine Houdar de la Motte, and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Regnard. They present him as an anomaly among busy social personalities around him. Columbine laughs at his advances; his masters who are in pursuit of pretty young wives brush off his warnings to act their age. His isolation bears the pathos of Watteau's portraits.\n18th century.\nFrance.\nAn Italian company was called back to Paris in 1716, and Pierrot was reincarnated by the actors Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Biancolelli (son of the Harlequin of the banished troupe of players) and, after Biancolelli abandoned the role, the celebrated Fabio Sticotti (1676\u20131741) and his son Antoine Jean (1715\u20131772). But the character seems to have been regarded as unimportant by this company, since he appears infrequently in its new plays.\nThe character appeared often in the 18th century on Parisian stages. Sometimes he spoke gibberish, sometimes the audience itself sang his lines, inscribed on placards held aloft. He could appear as a valet, a cook, or an adventurer; his character is not strictly defined.\nIn the 1720s, Pierrot came into his own. In plays such as \"Trophonius's Cave\" (1722) and \"The Golden Ass\" (1725), one meets an engaging Pierrot. The accomplished comic actor Jean-Baptiste Hamoche portrayed him with success. After 1733, he rarely appears in new plays.\nPierrot also appeared in the visual arts and in folksongs (\"Au clair de la lune\"). The art of Claude Gillot (\"Master Andr\u00e9's Tomb\" [c. 1717]), of Gillot's students Watteau (\"Italian Actors\" [c. 1719]) and Nicolas Lancret (\"Italian Actors near a Fountain\" [c. 1719]), of Jean-Baptiste Oudry (\"Italian Actors in a Park\" [c. 1725]), of Philippe Mercier (\"Pierrot and Harlequin\" [n.d.]), and of Jean-Honor\u00e9 Fragonard (\"A Boy as Pierrot\" [1776\u20131780]), features him prominently.\nEngland.\nAs early as 1673, just months after Pierrot had made his debut in the \"Addendum to \"The Stone Guest\"\", Scaramouche Tiberio Fiorilli and a troupe assembled from the Com\u00e9die-Italienne entertained Londoners with selections from their Parisian repertoire. And in 1717, Pierrot's name first appears in an English entertainment: a pantomime by John Rich entitled \"The Jealous Doctor; or, The Intriguing Dame\". Thereafter, until the end of the century, Pierrot appeared fairly regularly in English pantomimes (which were originally mute harlequinades; in the 19th century, the harlequinade was a \"play within a play\" during the pantomime), finding his most notable interpreter in Carlo Delpini (1740\u20131828). Delpini, according to the popular-theater historian, M. Willson Disher, \"kept strictly to the idea of a creature so stupid as to think that if he raised his leg level with his shoulder he could use it as a gun.\" Pierrot was later displaced by the English clown.\nDenmark.\nIn 1800, a troupe of Italian players led by Pasquale Casorti performed in Dyrehavsbakken. Casorti's son, Giuseppe (1749\u20131826), began appearing as Pierrot in pantomimes, which now had a formulaic plot structure. Pierrot is still a fixture at Bakken, at nearby Tivoli Gardens and Tivoli Friheden in Aarhus.\nGermany.\nLudwig Tieck's \"The Topsy-Turvy World\" (1798) is an early\u2014and highly successful\u2014example of the introduction of the commedia dell'arte characters into parodic metatheater (Pierrot is a member of the audience watching the play).\nSpain.\nThe penetration of Pierrot and his companions of the \"commedia\" into Spain is documented in a painting by Goya, \"Itinerant Actors\" (1793). It foreshadows the work of such Spanish successors as Picasso and Fernand Pelez, both of whom also showed strong sympathy with the lives of traveling saltimbancos.\n19th century.\nPantomime of Deburau at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Funambules.\nThe Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Funambules was a little theater licensed in its early years to present only mimed and acrobatic acts. It was the home, beginning in 1816, of Jean-Gaspard Deburau (1796\u20131846), the most famous Pierrot ever. He was immortalized by Jean-Louis Barrault in Marcel Carn\u00e9's film \"Children of Paradise\" (1945).\nDeburau, from the year 1825, was the only actor at the Funambules to play Pierrot, and he did so in several types of pantomime: rustic, melodramatic, \"realistic\", and fantastic. His style, according to Louis P\u00e9ricaud, formed \"an enormous contrast with the exuberance, the superabundance of gestures, of leaps, that ... his predecessors had employed\". He altered the costume: he dispensed with the frilled collaret, substituted a skullcap for a hat, and greatly increased the wide cut of both blouse and trousers. Deburau's Pierrot avoided the crude Pierrots\u2014timid, sexless, lazy, and greedy\u2014found in earlier pantomime.\nThe Funambules Pierrot appealed to audiences in the faery-tale style which incorporate the \"commedia\" types. The plot often hinged on Cassander's pursuit of Harlequin and Columbine, having to deal with a clever and ambiguous Pierrot. Deburau early\u2014about 1828\u2014caught the attention of the Romantics. In 1842, Th\u00e9ophile Gautier published a fake review of a \"Shakespeare\" pantomime he claimed to have seen at the Funambules. It placed Pierrot in the company of over-reachers in high literature such as Don Juan or Macbeth.\nPantomime after Baptiste: Charles Deburau, Paul Legrand, and their successors.\nDeburau's son, Jean-Charles (or, as he preferred, \"Charles\" [1829\u20131873]), assumed Pierrot's blouse the year after his father died. Another important Pierrot of mid-century was Charles-Dominique-Martin Legrand, known as Paul Legrand (1816\u20131898; see photo at top of page). He began appearing at the Funambules as Pierrot in 1845.\nLegrand left the Funambules in 1853 for the Folies-Nouvelles, which attracted the fashionable set, unlike the Funambules' working-class audiences. Legrand often appeared in realistic costume, his chalky face his only concession to tradition, leading some advocates of pantomime, such as Gautier, to lament that he was betraying the character of the type. Legrand's Pierrot influenced future mimes.\nPantomime and late 19th-century art.\nFrance.\nIn the 1880s and 1890s, the pantomime reached a type of apogee, and Pierrot became ubiquitous. Moreover, he acquired a female counterpart, Pierrette, who rivaled Columbine for his affections. A Cercle Funambulesque was founded in 1888, and Pierrot (sometimes played by female mimes, such as F\u00e9licia Mallet) dominated its productions until its demise in 1898. Sarah Bernhardt even donned Pierrot's blouse for Jean Richepin's \"Pierrot the Murderer\" (1883).\nBut French mimes and actors were not the only figures responsible for Pierrot's ubiquity: the English Hanlon brothers (sometimes called the Hanlon-Lees), gymnasts and acrobats who had been schooled in the 1860s in pantomimes from Baptiste's repertoire, traveled (and dazzled) the world well into the 20th century with their pantomimic sketches and extravaganzas featuring riotously nightmarish Pierrots. The Naturalists\u2014\u00c9mile Zola especially, who wrote glowingly of them\u2014were captivated by their art. Edmond de Goncourt modeled his acrobat-mimes in his \"The Zemganno Brothers\" (1879) upon them; J.-K. Huysmans (whose \"Against Nature\" [1884] would become Dorian Gray's bible) and his friend L\u00e9on Hennique wrote their pantomime \"\" (1881) after seeing them perform at the Folies Berg\u00e8re (and, in turn, Jules Laforgue wrote his pantomime \"Pierrot the Cut-Up\" [\"Pierrot fumiste\", 1882] after reading the scenario by Huysmans and Hennique). It was in part through the enthusiasm that they excited, coupled with the Impressionists' taste for popular entertainment, such as the circus and the music-hall, as well as the new bohemianism that then reigned in artistic quarters such as Montmartre (and which was celebrated by such denizens as Adolphe Willette, whose cartoons and canvases are crowded with Pierrots)\u2014it was through all this that Pierrot achieved almost unprecedented currency and visibility towards the end of the century.\nHe invaded the visual arts\u2014not only in the work of Willette, but also in the illustrations and posters of Jules Ch\u00e9ret; in the engravings of Odilon Redon (\"The Swamp Flower: A Sad Human Head\" [1885]); and in the canvases of Georges Seurat (\"Pierrot with a White Pipe [Aman-Jean]\" [1883]; \"The Painter Aman-Jean as Pierrot\" [1883]), L\u00e9on Comerre (\"Pierrot\" [1884], \"Pierrot Playing the Mandolin\" [1884]), Henri Rousseau (\"A Carnival Night\" [1886]), Paul C\u00e9zanne (\"Mardi gras [Pierrot and Harlequin]\" [1888]), Fernand Pelez (\"Grimaces and Miseries\" a.k.a. \"The Saltimbanques\" [1888]), Pablo Picasso (\"Pierrot and Columbine\" [1900]), Guillaume Seignac (\"Pierrot's Embrace\" [1900]), Th\u00e9ophile Steinlen (\"Pierrot and the Cat\" [1889]), and \u00c9douard Vuillard (\"The Black Pierrot\" [c. 1890]). The mime \"Tombre\" of Jean Richepin's novel \"Nice People\" (\"Braves Gens\" [1886]) turned him into a pathetic and alcoholic \"phantom\"; Paul Verlaine imagined him as a gormandizing na\u00eff in \"Pantomime\" (1869), then, like Tombre, as a lightning-lit specter in \"Pierrot\" (1868, pub. 1882). Laforgue put three of the \"complaints\" of his first published volume of poems (1885) into \"Lord\" Pierrot's mouth\u2014and dedicated his next book, \"The Imitation of Our Lady the Moon\" (1886), completely to Pierrot and his world (Pierrots were legion among the minor, now-forgotten poets: for samples, see Willette's journal \"The Pierrot\", which appeared between 1888 and 1889, then again in 1891). In the realm of song, Claude Debussy set both Verlaine's \"Pantomime\" and Banville's \"Pierrot\" (1842) to music in 1881 (not published until 1926)\u2014the only precedents among works by major composers being the \"Pierrot\" section of Telemann's \"Burlesque Overture\" (1717\u201322), Mozart's 1783 \"Masquerade\" (in which Mozart himself took the role of Harlequin and his brother-in-law, Joseph Lange, that of Pierrot), and the \"Pierrot\" section of Robert Schumann's \"Carnival\" (1835). Even the embryonic art of the motion picture turned to Pierrot before the century was out: he appeared, not only in early celluloid shorts (Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s's \"A Nightmare\" [1896], \"The Magician\" [1898]; Alice Guy's \"Arrival of Pierrette and Pierrot\" [1900], \"Pierrette's Amorous Adventures\" [1900]; Ambroise-Fran\u00e7ois Parnaland's \"Pierrot's Big Head/Pierrot's Tongue\" [1900], \"Pierrot-Drinker\" [1900]), but also in Emile Reynaud's Praxinoscope production of \"Poor Pierrot\" (1892), the first animated movie and the first hand-colored one.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium, F\u00e9licien Rops depicted a grinning Pierrot who witnesses an unromantic backstage scene (\"Blowing Cupid's Nose\" [1881]). James Ensor painted Pierrots obsessively, in various poses from prostrate to bowing his head in despondency, sometimes even with a smiling skeleton. The Belgian poet and dramatist Albert Giraud also identified with the Zanni: the fifty rondels of his \"Pierrot lunaire\" (\"Moonstruck Pierrot,\" 1884) inspired generations of composers (see Pierrot lunaire below), and his verse-play \"Pierrot-Narcissus\" (1887) offered a definitive portrait of the poet-dreamer. The choreographer Joseph Hansen staged the ballet \"Macabre Pierrot\" in 1884 in collaboration with the poet Th\u00e9o Hannon.\nEngland.\nPierrot figured prominently in the drawings of Aubrey Beardsley, and various writers referenced him in their poetry. Ethel Wright painted \"Bonjour, Pierrot!\" (a greeting to a dour clown sitting disconsolate with his dog) in 1893. The Pierrot of popular taste also spawned a uniquely English entertainment. In 1891, the singer and banjoist Clifford Essex, resolved to create a troupe of English Pierrot entertainers, and called them the seaside Pierrots who, as late as the 1950s, performed on the piers of Brighton, Margate, and Blackpool. They inspired the Will Morris Pierrots, named after their Birmingham founder. They originated in the Smethwick area in the late 1890s and played to large audiences in the Midlands. Walter Westley Russell committed these performers to canvas in \"The Pierrots\" (c. 1900).\nPierrot's mask claimed the attention of the great theater innovator Edward Gordon Craig. Craig's involvement with the figure grew with time. In 1897, Craig, dressed as Pierrot, gave a quasi-impromptu stage-reading of Hans Christian Andersen's story \"What the Moon Saw\" as part of a benefit performance for theater artists in need.\nAustria and Germany.\nAlthough he lamented that \"the Pierrot figure was inherently alien to the German-speaking world\", the playwright Franz Blei introduced him enthusiastically into his playlet \"The Kissy-Face: A Columbiade\" (1895), and his fellow-Austrians Richard Specht and Richard Beer-Hofmann made an effort to naturalize Pierrot\u2014in their plays \"Pierrot-Hunchback\" (1896) and \"Pierrot-Hypnotist\" (1892, first pub. 1984), respectively\u2014by linking his fortunes with those of Goethe's Faust. Still others among their countrymen simply sidestepped the issue of naturalization: Hermann Bahr took his inspiration for his \"Pantomime of the Good Man\" (1893) directly from his encounter with the exclusively French Cercle Funambulesque; Rudolf Holzer set the action of his \"Puppet Loyalty\" (1899), unapologetically, in a fabulous Paris; and Karl Michael von Levetzow settled his \"Two Pierrots\" (1900) in the birthplace of Pierrot's comedy, Italy.\nIn Germany, Frank Wedekind introduced the \"femme-fatale\" of his first \"Lulu\" play, \"Earth Spirit\" (1895), in a Pierrot costume. In a similar spirit, the painter Paul Hoecker put cheeky young men into Pierrot costumes to ape their complacent burgher elders in \"Pierrots with Pipes\" (c.\u20091900) and swilling champagne in \"Waiting Woman\" (c.\u20091895).\nItaly.\nCanio's Pagliaccio in the famous opera (1892) by Leoncavallo is close enough to a Pierrot to deserve a mention here. Much less well-known is the work of two other composers\u2014Mario Pasquale Costa and Vittorio Monti. Costa's pantomime \"L'Histoire d'un Pierrot\" (\"Story of a Pierrot\"), which debuted in Paris in 1893, was so admired in its day that it eventually reached audiences on several continents, was paired with \"Cavalleria Rusticana\" by New York's Metropolitan Opera Company in 1909, and was premiered as a film by Baldassarre Negroni in 1914. Its libretto, like that of Monti's \"mimodrama\" \"No\u00ebl de Pierrot\" a.k.a. \"A Clown's Christmas\" (1900), was written by Fernand Beissier, one of the founders of the Cercle Funambulesque. (Monti would go on to acquire his own fame by celebrating another spiritual outsider much akin to Pierrot\u2014the Gypsy. His \"Cs\u00e1rd\u00e1s\" [c. 1904], like \"Pagliacci\", has found a secure place in the standard musical repertoire).\nThe portrait and genre painter Vittorio Matteo Corcos produced \"Portrait of Boy in Pierrot Costume\" in 1897.\nSpain.\nIn 1895, the playwright and future Nobel laureate Jacinto Benavente wrote rapturously in his journal of a performance of the Hanlon-Lees, and three years later he published his only pantomime: \"The Whiteness of Pierrot\". A true fin de si\u00e8cle mask, Pierrot paints his face black to commit robbery and murder; then, after restoring his pallor, he hides himself, terrified of his own undoing, in a snowbank\u2014forever. Thus does he forfeit his union with Columbine (the intended beneficiary of his crimes) for a frosty marriage with the moon.\nNorth America.\nPierrot and his fellow masks were late in coming to the United States, which, unlike England, Russia, and the countries of continental Europe, had had no early exposure to commedia dell'arte. The Hanlon-Lees made their first U.S. appearance in 1858, and their subsequent tours, well into the 20th century, of scores of cities throughout the country accustomed their audiences to their fantastic, acrobatic Pierrots. But the Pierrot that would leave the deepest imprint upon the American imagination was that of the French and English Decadents, a creature who quickly found his home in the so-called little magazines of the 1890s (as well as in the poster-art that they spawned). One of the earliest and most influential of these in America, \"The Chap-Book\" (1894\u201398), which featured a story about Pierrot by the aesthete Percival Pollard in its second number, was soon host to Beardsley-inspired Pierrots drawn by E.B. Bird and Frank Hazenplug (the Canadian poet Bliss Carman should also be mentioned for his contribution to Pierrot's dissemination in mass-market publications such as \"Harper's\"). Like most things associated with the Decadence, such exotica discombobulated the mainstream American public, which regarded the little magazines in general as \"freak periodicals\" and declared, through one of its mouthpieces, \"Munsey's Magazine\", that \"each new representative of the species is, if possible, more preposterous than the last\". And yet the Pierrot of that species was gaining a foothold elsewhere. The composers Amy Beach and Arthur Foote devoted a section to Pierrot (as well as to Pierrette, his Decadent counterpart) in two ludic pieces for piano\u2014Beach's \"Children's Carnival\" (1894) and Foote's \"Five Bagatelles\" (1893).\nThe fin de si\u00e8cle world in which this Pierrot resided was clearly at odds with the reigning American Realist and Naturalist aesthetic (although such figures as Ambrose Bierce and John LaFarge were mounting serious challenges to it). It is in fact jarring to find the champion of American prose Realism, William Dean Howells, introducing \"Pastels in Prose\" (1890), a volume of French prose-poems containing a Paul Margueritte pantomime, \"The Death of Pierrot\", with words of warm praise (and even congratulations to each poet for failing \"to saddle his reader with a moral\"). So uncustomary was the French Aesthetic viewpoint that, when Pierrot made an appearance in \"Pierrot the Painter\" (1893), a pantomime by Alfred Thompson, set to music by the American composer Laura Sedgwick Collins, \"The New York Times\" covered it as an event, although it was only a student production. It was found to be \"pleasing\" because, in part, it was \"odd\". Not until the first decade of the next century, when the great (and popular) fantasist Maxfield Parrish worked his magic on the figure, would Pierrot be comfortably naturalized in America.\nOf course, writers from the United States living abroad\u2014especially in Paris or London\u2014were aberrantly susceptible to the charms of the Decadence. Such a figure was Stuart Merrill, who consorted with the French Symbolists and who compiled and translated the pieces in \"Pastels in Prose\". Another was William Theodore Peters, an acquaintance of Ernest Dowson and other members of the Rhymers' Club and a driving force behind the conception and theatrical realization of Dowson's \"Pierrot of the Minute\" (1897; see England above). Of the three books that Peters published before his death (of starvation) at the age of forty-two, his \"Posies out of Rings: And Other Conceits\" (1896) is most notable here: in it, four poems and an \"Epilogue\" for the aforementioned Dowson play are devoted to Pierrot (from the mouth of Pierrot \"loquitur\": \"Although this pantomime of life is passing fine,/Who would be happy must not marry Columbine\").\nAnother pocket of North-American sympathy with the Decadence\u2014one manifestation of what the Latin world called \"modernismo\"\u2014could be found in the progressive literary scene of Mexico, its parent country, Spain, having been long conversant with the commedia dell'arte. In 1897, , another Decadent who, at the age of twenty-two, died even more tragically young than Peters, embarked on a series of Pierrot-themed short\u2014\"Pierrot Enamored of Glory\" (1897), \"Pierrot and His Cats\" (1898), \"The Nuptials of Pierrot\" (1899), \"Pierrot's Gesture\" (1899), \"The Caprices of Pierrot\" (1900)\u2014culminating, after the turn of the century (and in the year of Couto's death), with \"Pierrot-Gravedigger\" (1901). For the Spanish-speaking world, according to scholar Emilio Peral Vega, Couto \"expresses that first manifestation of Pierrot as an alter ego in a game of symbolic otherness ...\".\nCentral and South America.\nInspired by the French Symbolists, especially Verlaine, Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo, the Nicaraguan poet widely acknowledged as the founder of Spanish-American literary modernism (\"modernismo\"), placed Pierrot (\"sad poet and dreamer\") in opposition to Columbine (\"fatal woman\", the arch-materialistic \"lover of rich silk garments, golden jewelry, pearls and diamonds\") in his 1898 prose-poem \"The Eternal Adventure of Pierrot and Columbine\".\nRussia.\nIn the last year of the century, Pierrot appeared in a Russian ballet, \"Harlequin's Millions\" a.k.a. \"Harlequinade\" (1900), its libretto and choreography by Marius Petipa, its music by Riccardo Drigo, its dancers the members of St. Petersburg's Imperial Ballet. It would set the stage for the later and greater triumphs of Pierrot in the productions of the Ballets Russes.\n19th-century legacy.\nThe Pierrot bequeathed to the 20th century had acquired a rich and wide range of personae. He was the na\u00efve butt of practical jokes and amorous scheming (Gautier); the prankish but innocent waif (Banville, Verlaine, Willette); the narcissistic dreamer clutching at the moon, which could symbolize many things, from spiritual perfection to death (Giraud, Laforgue, Willette, Dowson); the frail, neurasthenic, often doom-ridden soul (Richepin, Beardsley); the clumsy, although ardent, lover, who wins Columbine's heart, or murders her in frustration (Margueritte); the cynical and misogynistic dandy, sometimes dressed in black (Huysmans/Hennique, Laforgue); the Christ-like victim of the martyrdom that is Art (Giraud, Willette, Ensor); the androgynous and unholy creature of corruption (Richepin, Wedekind); the madcap master of chaos (the Hanlon-Lees); the purveyor of hearty and wholesome fun (the English pier Pierrots)\u2014and various combinations of these. Like the earlier masks of commedia dell'arte, Pierrot now knew no national boundaries. Thanks to the international gregariousness of modernism, he would soon be found everywhere.\nPierrot and modernism.\nPierrot played a seminal role in the emergence of modernism in the arts. He was a key figure in every art-form except architecture.\nWith respect to poetry, T. S. Eliot's \"breakthrough work\", \"The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock\" (1915), owed its existence to the poems of Jules Laforgue, whose \"ton 'pierrot'\" informed all of Eliot's early poetry. (Laforgue, he said, \"was the first to teach me how to speak, to teach me the poetic possibilities of my own idiom of speech.\") Prufrock is a Pierrot transplanted to America. Another prominent Modernist, Wallace Stevens, was undisguised in his identification with Pierrot in his earliest poems and letters\u2014an identification that he later complicated and refined through such avatars as Bowl (in \"Bowl, Cat and Broomstick\" [1917]), Carlos (in \"Carlos Among the Candles\" [1917]), and, most importantly, Crispin (in \"The Comedian as the Letter C\" [1923]).\nAs for fiction, William Faulkner began his career as a chronicler of Pierrot's amorous disappointments and existential anguish in such little-known works as his play \"The Marionettes\" (1920) and the verses of his \"Vision in Spring\" (1921), works that were an early and revealing declaration of the novelist's \"fragmented state\" (some critics have argued that Pierrot stands behind the semi-autobiographical Nick Adams of Faulkner's fellow-Nobel laureate Ernest Hemingway, and another contends that James Joyce's Stephen Dedalus, again an avatar of his own creator, also shares the same parentage).\nIn music, historians of modernism generally place Arnold Schoenberg's 1912 song-cycle \"Pierrot lunaire\" at the very pinnacle of high-modernist achievement. And in ballet, Igor Stravinsky's Petrushka (1911), in which the traditionally Pulcinella-like clown wears the heart of Pierrot, is often argued to have attained the same stature.\nStudents of modernist painting and sculpture are familiar with Pierrot (in many different attitudes, from the ineffably sad to the ebulliently impudent) through the masterworks of his acolytes, including Pablo Picasso, Juan Gris, Georges Rouault, Salvador Dal\u00ed, Max Beckmann, August Macke, Paul Klee, Jacques Lipchitz\u2014the list is very long (see Visual arts below).\nAs for the drama, Pierrot was a regular fixture in the plays of the Little Theatre Movement (Edna St. Vincent Millay's \"Aria da Capo\" [1920], Robert Emmons Rogers' \"Behind a Watteau Picture\" [1918], Blanche Jennings Thompson's \"The Dream Maker\" [1922]), which nourished the careers of such important Modernists as Eugene O'Neill, Susan Glaspell, and others.\nIn film, a beloved early comic hero was the Little Tramp of Charlie Chaplin, who conceived the character, in Chaplin's words, as \"a sort of Pierrot\".\nAs the diverse incarnations of the 19th-century Pierrot would predict, the hallmarks of the modernist Pierrot are his ambiguity and complexity.\nOne of his earliest appearances was in Alexander Blok's \"The Puppet Show\" (1906), called by one theater-historian \"the greatest example of the harlequinade in Russia\". Vsevolod Meyerhold, who both directed the first production and took on the role, dramatically emphasized the multifacetedness of the character: according to one spectator, Meyerhold's Pierrot was \"nothing like those familiar, falsely sugary, whining Pierrots. Everything about him is sharply angular; in a hushed voice he whispers strange words of sadness; somehow he contrives to be caustic, heart-rending, gentle: all these things yet at the same time impudent.\"\n\"Pierrot lunaire\".\nThe fifty poems that were published by Albert Giraud (born Emile Albert Kayenbergh) as \"Pierrot lunaire: Rondels bergamasques\" in 1884 were set to music several times. The best known version is by Arnold Schoenberg, i.e., his Opus 21: \"Dreimal sieben Gedichte aus Albert Girauds\" Pierrot lunaire (\"Thrice-Seven Poems from Albert Giraud's\" Pierrot lunaire\u2014Schoenberg was numerologically superstitious). This led, among other things, to ensemble groups' appropriating Pierrot's name, such as the English Pierrot Players (1967\u201370). The Pierrot behind those cycles has invaded worlds well beyond those of composers, singers, and ensemble-performers. Theatrical groups such as the Opera Quotannis have brought Pierrot's Passion to the dramatic stage; dancers such as Glen Tetley have choreographed it; poets such as Wayne Koestenbaum have derived original inspiration from it. It has been translated into still more distant media by painters, such as Paul Klee; fiction-writers, such as Helen Stevenson; filmmakers, such as Bruce LaBruce; and graphic-novelists, such as Antoine Dod\u00e9. A passionately sinister Pierrot Lunaire has even shadowed DC Comics' Batman. Pierrot is aptly honored in the title of a song by the British rock-group The Soft Machine: \"Thank You Pierrot Lunaire\" (1969).\nCarnivals.\nPierrot appears among the revelers at various international carnivals. His name suggests kinship with the Pierrot Grenade of Trinidad and Tobago Carnival, being a satire on the richer and more respectable Pierrot. Pierrot Grenade was a finely dressed masquerader and deeply supreme scholar/jester proud of his ability to spell any word in his own fashion and quoting Shakespearean characters as Julius Caesar, Mark Anthony, and Othello at length.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51128", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51128", "title": "James White (author)", "text": "Northern Irish science fiction author (1928\u20131999)\nJames White (7 April 1928 \u2013 23 August 1999) was a Northern Irish author of science fiction novellas, short stories and novels. He was born in Belfast and returned there after spending some early years in Canada. After a few years working in the clothing industry, he worked at Short Brothers Ltd., an aircraft company based in Belfast, from 1965 until taking early retirement in 1984 as a result of diabetes. White married Margaret Sarah Martin, another science fiction fan, in 1955 and the couple had three children. He died of a stroke.\nHe became a fan of science fiction in 1941 and co-wrote two fan magazines, from 1948 to 1953 and 1952 to 1965. Encouraged by other fans, White began publishing short stories in 1953, and his first novel was published in 1957. His best-known novels were the twelve of the Sector General series, the first published in 1962 and the last after his death. White also published nine other novels, two of which were nominated for major awards, unsuccessfully.\nWhite abhorred violence, and medical and other emergencies were the sources of dramatic tension in his stories. The \"Sector General\" series is regarded as defining the genre of medical science fiction, and as introducing a memorable crew of aliens. Although missing winning the most prestigious honours four times, White gained other awards for specific works and for contributions to science fiction. He was also Guest-of-Honour of several conventions.\nBiography.\nJames White was born to a Catholic family in Belfast, Northern Ireland, on 7 April 1928, and spent part of his early life in Canada. He was educated in Belfast at St. John's Primary School (1935\u20131941) and St. Joseph's Technical Secondary School (1942\u20131943). As a teenager he lived with foster parents. He wanted to study medicine but financial circumstances prevented this. Between 1943 and 1965 he worked for several Belfast tailoring firms and then as assistant manager of a Co-op department store. He married Margaret (\"Peggy\") Sarah Martin, another science fiction fan, in 1955 and the couple had three children: daughter Patricia, and sons Martin and Peter. White later worked for the aeroplane builders Short Brothers Ltd. as a technical clerk (1965\u20131966), publicity assistant (1966\u20131968), and publicity officer (1968\u20131984).\nHe became a science fiction fan in 1941, attracted particularly by the works of E. E. \"Doc\" Smith, which featured good aliens as well as evil ones, and of Robert A. Heinlein, many of whose stories concern ordinary people. In 1947 he met another Irish fan, Walter A. (\"Walt\") Willis, and the two helped to produce the fan magazines \"Slant\" (1948\u20131953) and \"Hyphen\" (1952\u20131965), which featured stories and articles by noted authors including John Brunner, A. Bertram Chandler, and Bob Shaw. In 2004 both White and Willis were nominated for the retrospective Hugo Award for Best Fan Writer of 1953, although neither won. White said that he started writing stories because the \"Slant\" team felt that \"Astounding Science Fiction\" was too dominated by prophecies of nuclear doom, and his friends dared him to write the kind of story that they all liked to read. He said that getting published was fairly easy during the 1950s, as the World War II restrictions on paper were ended, and there were at least 12\u00a0science magazines in Britain and about 40 in the United States. His first published short story, \"Assisted Passage\", a parody of 1950s Anglo-Australian emigration policies, appeared in the January 1953 edition of the magazine \"New Worlds\". Further stories appeared in \"New Worlds\" during the next few years, but White's attempt to access the more lucrative American market by submitting stories to \"Astounding Science Fiction\" stalled after the publication of \"The Scavengers\". White later said that his optimism about inter-species relations was unpalatable to \"Astounding\"'s xenophobic editor, John W. Campbell. As a result, White's work was little-known outside the UK until the 1960s.\nIn 1957, Ace Books published White's first novel, \"The Secret Visitors\", which included locations in Northern Ireland. The book had previously been serialised in \"New Worlds\" with the title \"Tourist Planet\". Ace Books' science fiction editor, Donald A. Wollheim, thought the original ending was too tame and suggested that White should insert an all-out space battle just after the climactic courtroom scene. In November the same year \"New Worlds\" published White's novelette \"Sector General\", and editor John (\"Ted\") Carnell requested more stories set in the same universe, founding the series for which White is known best. White gained \"a steady following\" for his \"scientifically accurate\" stories, which were examples of hard science fiction in \"New Worlds\", despite the magazine's promotion of literary \"New Wave\" science fiction during the 1960s.\nWhite kept his job with Short Brothers and wrote in the evenings, as his stories did not make enough money for him to become a full-time author. In 1980 he taught a literature course at a Belfast branch of the Workers Educational Association.\nWhen diabetes had severely impaired his eyesight, he took early retirement in 1984 and relocated to the north Antrim resort town of Portstewart, where he continued to write. For many years he was a Council Member of the British Science Fiction Association and, with Harry Harrison and Anne McCaffrey, a Patron of the Irish Science Fiction Association.\nWhite was also a strong pacifist. He died of a stroke on 23 August 1999, while his novels \"Double Contact\" and \"\" were being prepared for publication. His wife Peggy, son Martin, and daughter Patricia survived him.\nPublished works.\nSector General.\nThe Sector General series consists of 12 books published originally between 1962 (\"Hospital Station\") and 1999 (\"Double Contact\"). Additional short stories set in the Sector General Universe ('\"Countercharm\", \"Tableau\", \"Occupation: Warrior\", and \"Custom Fitting\") appear in other collections by White.\nSector General is a gigantic multi-species hospital space station founded as a peace-making project by two heroes from opposite sides of humanity's only full interstellar war. The hospital accommodates patients and staff from dozens of species, with different environmental requirements, behaviours and ailments. Initially most of the stories concern the career of Doctor Conway, who rises from junior surgeon to Diagnostician. In the fourth book the Galactic Federation decides that the emergency service which the hospital offers to victims of space accidents and planetary catastrophes is the most effective means of making peaceful contact with new spacefaring species, which allows the series to expand its range of plots, characters and settings. The seventh and later books each have a different and usually alien viewpoint character, which gave them \"considerable new pep\". They also expand the range of issues beyond purely medical, and in Mike Resnick's opinion treat issues such as guilt and forgiveness better than most science fiction.\nThe series defined the subgenre of multi-species medical stories, and was \"the first explicitly pacifist space opera\" series, when much of contemporary space opera from the United States was notably military.\nOther novels.\n\"Second Ending\" (1961), which White described as \"about the last man on Earth\" but with \"an upbeat ending\", was short-listed for a Hugo Award.\n\"The Escape Orbit\" (1964; titled \"Open Prison\" in the UK), which was short-listed for a Nebula Award, chronicles the efforts of human prisoners of war to survive after being dumped on a hostile planet without tools or weapons.\n\"All Judgement Fled\" (1968), which won the 1972 Europa Award, was described by Mike Resnick as his favourite among White's novels and as \"\"Rendezvous with Rama\" done right.\"\nWhite's other novels not part of the Sector General series are:\nCollections and short stories.\nThe title story of White's collection \"Deadly Litter\" (1964) anticipated the dangers of space debris although there had been only a few orbital missions. \"The White Papers\" was produced by NESFA (New England Science Fiction Association) to commemorate White's being the Guest-of-Honour at the 1996 Worldcon, and includes short stories and fan magazine articles by White, plus sections of Gary Louie's guide to the Sector General series. Among the stories, \"Custom Fitting\" (1976) was short-listed for a Hugo Award, and \"Sanctuary\" (1988) won an Analog Analytical Laboratory Award. His short story \"Un-Birthday Boy\", published in the magazine \"Analog\" in 1996 but not in a collection or anthology, was short-listed for a Hugo Award.\nOther collections include:\nCritical appraisal.\nPaul Kincaid described White as a second-rank writer who occasionally produced first-rank works, and attracted a devoted but not wide audience. Kincaid noted that his plots were often formulaic and his writing employed a predictable set of techniques and mannerisms, along with a \"studied quietness.\" On the other hand, John Clute wrote that \"in the depiction of goodness may lie the real genius of James White,\" Mike Resnick described the Sector General series' characters as \"the most memorable crew of aliens ever created,\" and Graham Andrews wrote that White's aliens are really alien, not just human minds with exotic biologies. Michael Ashley commented that the setting of the television series \"\" is reminiscent of Sector General, and Mark R. Leeper noted similarities between Sector General's setting and that of television's \"Babylon 5\". Chris Aylott wrote that White's plot construction and writing, including occasionally clumsy exposition, are typical of the Golden Age of science fiction in the 1930s, '40s, and '50s.\nAlgis Budrys concluded his review of \"The Watch Below\" with \"...\u00a0this is very nice writing when considered simply as prose and as an attempt to involve the reader's emotions.\" However, when reviewing \"All Judgment Fled\" he wrote, \"I suspect that he generates so much tension within himself while writing a book that he literally cannot bear to come to grips with crucial scenes.\"\nWhite said of his approach to producing stories, \"Of course, the plot idea must come first \u2013 but the characters soon take over,\" and compared it to using a compass rather than a map. He explained that he was drawn to medical themes by two factors: they offered opportunities for dramatic tension without war; and he had wanted to become a doctor, but had to go to work instead. His avoidance of violent themes is as strong in his non-medical stories as in the Sector General series.\nNone of White's works won Hugo or Nebula Awards, although four were short-listed. However, he won a Europa Prize in 1979, an \"Analog\" Analytical Laboratory Award in 1988 and a Science Fiction Chronicle Reader Award in 1996. In 1998, White received the NESFA (New England Science Fiction Association) Edward E. Smith Memorial Award (\"Skylark Award\") for contributions to science fiction, named after a story by one of his inspirations, E. E. \"Doc\" Smith, and appreciated this so much that he donated his complete collection of \"Slant\" magazines to NESFA. The next year he was inducted into the European Science Fiction Society's Hall of Fame. White was Guest-of-Honour at many conventions including: the 1971 and 1985 Novacons in the United Kingdom; three Beneluxcons (Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg); the 1998 Octocon (Ireland); a Nicon (Northern Ireland); and the 1996 Worldcon.\nSince 2000 the James White Award has been presented for the best short story by a non-professional writer. The judges are professional authors and editors, and have included Mike Resnick, Orson Scott Card, Lois McMaster Bujold, Peter F. Hamilton, Christopher Priest and Robert Sheckley.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51129", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51129", "title": "Nash embedding theorems", "text": "Every Riemannian manifold can be isometrically embedded into some Euclidean space\nThe Nash embedding theorems (or imbedding theorems), named after John Forbes Nash Jr., state that every Riemannian manifold can be isometrically embedded into some Euclidean space. Isometric means preserving the length of every path. For instance, bending but neither stretching nor tearing a page of paper gives an isometric embedding of the page into three-dimensional Euclidean space because curves drawn on the page retain the same arc length however the page is bent.\nThe first theorem is for continuously differentiable (\"C\"1) embeddings and the second for embeddings that are analytic or smooth of class \"C\"\"k\", 3 \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 \u221e. These two theorems are very different from each other. The first theorem has a very simple proof but leads to some counterintuitive conclusions, while the second theorem has a technical and counterintuitive proof but leads to a less surprising result.\nThe \"C\"1 theorem was published in 1954, and the \"C\"\"k\" theorem in 1956. The real analytic theorem was first treated by Nash in 1966; his argument was simplified considerably by . (A local version of this result was proved by \u00c9lie Cartan and Maurice Janet in the 1920s.) In the real analytic case, the smoothing operators (see below) in the Nash inverse function argument can be replaced by Cauchy estimates. Nash's proof of the \"C\"\"k\" case was later extrapolated into the h-principle and Nash\u2013Moser implicit function theorem. A simpler proof of the second Nash embedding theorem was obtained by who reduced the set of nonlinear partial differential equations to an elliptic system, to which the contraction mapping theorem could be applied.\nNash\u2013Kuiper theorem (\"C\"1 embedding theorem).\nGiven an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold (\"M\", \"g\"), an \"isometric embedding\" is a continuously differentiable topological embedding \"f\" : \"M\" \u2192 R\"n\" such that the pullback of the Euclidean metric equals g. In analytical terms, this may be viewed (relative to a smooth coordinate chart x) as a system of \"m\"(\"m\" + 1) many first-order partial differential equations for n unknown (real-valued) functions:\nformula_1\nIf n is less than \"m\"(\"m\" + 1), then there are more equations than unknowns. From this perspective, the existence of isometric embeddings given by the following theorem is considered surprising.\nNash\u2013Kuiper theorem. Let (\"M\", \"g\") be an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold and \"f\" : \"M\" \u2192 R\"n\" a short smooth embedding (or immersion) into Euclidean space R\"n\", where \"n\" \u2265 \"m\" + 1. This map is not required to be isometric. Then there is a sequence of continuously differentiable isometric embeddings (or immersions) \"M\" \u2192 R\"n\" of g which converge uniformly to f.\nThe theorem was originally proved by John Nash with the stronger assumption \"n\" \u2265 \"m\" + 2. His method was modified by Nicolaas Kuiper to obtain the theorem above.\nThe isometric embeddings produced by the Nash\u2013Kuiper theorem are often considered counterintuitive and pathological. They often fail to be smoothly differentiable. For example, a well-known theorem of David Hilbert asserts that the hyperbolic plane cannot be smoothly isometrically immersed into R3. Any Einstein manifold of negative scalar curvature cannot be smoothly isometrically immersed as a hypersurface, and a theorem of Shiing-Shen Chern and Kuiper even says that any closed m-dimensional manifold of nonpositive sectional curvature cannot be smoothly isometrically immersed in R2\"m\"\u20131. Furthermore, some smooth isometric embeddings exhibit rigidity phenomena which are violated by the largely unrestricted choice of f in the Nash\u2013Kuiper theorem. For example, the image of any smooth isometric hypersurface immersion of the round sphere must itself be a round sphere. By contrast, the Nash\u2013Kuiper theorem ensures the existence of continuously differentiable isometric hypersurface immersions of the round sphere which are arbitrarily close to (for instance) a topological embedding of the sphere as a small ellipsoid.\nAny closed and oriented two-dimensional manifold can be smoothly embedded in R3. Any such embedding can be scaled by an arbitrarily small constant so as to become short, relative to any given Riemannian metric on the surface. It follows from the Nash\u2013Kuiper theorem that there are continuously differentiable isometric embeddings of any such Riemannian surface where the radius of a circumscribed ball is arbitrarily small. By contrast, no negatively curved closed surface can even be smoothly isometrically embedded in R3. Moreover, for any smooth (or even \"C\"2) isometric embedding of an arbitrary closed Riemannian surface, there is a quantitative (positive) lower bound on the radius of a circumscribed ball in terms of the surface area and curvature of the embedded metric.\nIn higher dimension, as follows from the Whitney embedding theorem, the Nash\u2013Kuiper theorem shows that any closed m-dimensional Riemannian manifold admits an continuously differentiable isometric embedding into an \"arbitrarily small neighborhood\" in 2\"m\"-dimensional Euclidean space. Although Whitney's theorem also applies to noncompact manifolds, such embeddings cannot simply be scaled by a small constant so as to become short. Nash proved that every m-dimensional Riemannian manifold admits a continuously differentiable isometric embedding into R2\"m\"+1.\nAt the time of Nash's work, his theorem was considered to be something of a mathematical curiosity. The result itself has not found major applications. However, Nash's method of proof was adapted by Camillo De Lellis and L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Sz\u00e9kelyhidi to construct low-regularity solutions, with prescribed kinetic energy, of the Euler equations from the mathematical study of fluid mechanics. In analytical terms, the Euler equations have a formal similarity to the isometric embedding equations, via the quadratic nonlinearity in the first derivatives of the unknown function. The ideas of Nash's proof were abstracted by Mikhael Gromov to the principle of \"convex integration\", with a corresponding h-principle. This was applied by Stefan M\u00fcller and Vladim\u00edr \u0160ver\u00e1k to Hilbert's nineteenth problem, constructing minimizers of minimal differentiability in the calculus of variations.\n\"C\"\"k\" embedding theorem.\nThe technical statement appearing in Nash's original paper is as follows: if \"M\" is a given \"m\"-dimensional Riemannian manifold (analytic or of class \"C\"\"k\", 3 \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 \u221e), then there exists a number \"n\" (with \"n\" \u2264 \"m\"(3\"m\" + 11)/2 if \"M\" is a compact manifold, and with \"n\" \u2264 \"m\"(\"m\" + 1)(3\"m\" + 11)/2 if \"M\" is a non-compact manifold) and an isometric embedding \"f\" : \"M\" \u2192 R\"n\" (also analytic or of class \"Ck\"). That is \"f\" is an embedding of \"C\"\"k\" manifolds and for every point \"p\" of \"M\", the derivative d\"f\"\"p\" is a linear map from the tangent space \"T\"\"p\"\"M\" to R\"n\" that is compatible with the given inner product on \"T\"\"p\"\"M\" and the standard dot product of R\"n\" in the following sense:\n formula_2\nfor all vectors \"u\", \"v\" in \"T\"\"p\"\"M\". When n is larger than \"m\"(\"m\" + 1), this is an underdetermined system of partial differential equations (PDEs).\nThe Nash embedding theorem is a global theorem in the sense that the whole manifold is embedded into R\"n\". A local embedding theorem is much simpler and can be proved using the implicit function theorem of advanced calculus in a coordinate neighborhood of the manifold. The proof of the global embedding theorem relies on Nash's implicit function theorem for isometric embeddings. This theorem has been generalized by a number of other authors to abstract contexts, where it is known as Nash\u2013Moser theorem. The basic idea in the proof of Nash's implicit function theorem is the use of Newton's method to construct solutions. The standard Newton's method fails to converge when applied to the system; Nash uses smoothing operators defined by convolution to make the Newton iteration converge: this is Newton's method with postconditioning. The fact that this technique furnishes a solution is in itself an existence theorem and of independent interest. In other contexts, the convergence of the standard Newton's method had earlier been proved by Leonid Kantorovitch.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51130", "revid": "38355222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51130", "title": "College of Sorbonne", "text": "Former theological college of the University of Paris\nThe College of Sorbonne () was a theological college of the University of Paris, founded in 1253 (confirmed in 1257) by Robert de Sorbon (1201\u20131274), after whom it was named.\nThe Sorbonne was disestablished by decree of 5 April 1792, after the French Revolution, along with the other Paris colleges. It was restored in 1808, then closed finally in 1882.\nIn recent times the name \"Sorbonne\" came to refer to the group of liberal arts faculties of the University of Paris, in contrast to the vocational faculties of law and medicine. \"Sorbonne\" is also used to refer to the main building of the University of Paris in the 5th arrondissement of Paris, which houses several faculties created when the University was divided into thirteen autonomous universities in 1970.\nOverview.\nRobert de Sorbon was the son of peasants from the village of Sorbon in the Ardennes, who became a master of theology, a canon of the Cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, and the confessor and chaplain of King Louis IX (Saint Louis). At the time that he founded his college, the University of Paris had already been in existence for half a century, and already had thousands of students. Obtaining a higher degree in theology could take as long as twenty years, and therefore required considerable financial support. Students who belonged to the religious orders of the Franciscans and Dominicans, or from the large monasteries of Cluny or Citeaux, received housing and board from their religious orders, but independent students did not. Sorbon founded his college to provide housing and board for poorer students of theology who did not have such support.\nSorbon purchased several houses on Rue Coupe-Gueule (now Rue de la Sorbonne) and made them into lodging for students. The college was founded in 1253. Louis IX confirmed the foundation in 1257. Initially the college has about twenty students, called \"socii\". As the college grew, Sorbon provided a library containing over a thousand volumes by 1292, the largest in the university, and a chapel. \nThe Sorbonne became the most distinguished theological institution in France, and its doctors were frequently called upon to render opinions on important ecclesiastical and theological issues. In 1470, the Sorbonne had one of the first printing presses in France. It was particularly active in the effort to suppress heresy and the spread of Protestant doctrines. Its students included Cardinal Richelieu, who studied there from 1606 to 1607. Richelieu became Proviseur, or administrator of the college on 29 August 1622. Between 1635 and 1642, Richelieu renovated the Sorbonne; he consolidated the Sorbonne with two smaller colleges, and built a complex of new buildings, including a domed chapel, around a large courtyard. Richelieu left a large part of his fortune and his library to the Sorbonne, and he was buried in the chapel. Only the chapel remains of the Richelieu era buildings.\nThe Sorbonne was closed to students in 1791 during the French Revolution. For a brief time, under Robespierre, the chapel became a Temple of Reason. Napoleon turned the college buildings into studios for artists. In 1822, it became the home of the faculties of letters, sciences and theology of the University of Paris. In 1885, as part of the Third Republic policy of separation of church and state, the Faculty of Theology was officially closed. The old buildings of the Sorbonne, with the exception of the chapel, were demolished and the new Sorbonne building, designed by Henri Paul N\u00e9not, opened in 1889, the centenary of the French Revolution. It contained a large amphitheater, reception halls and meeting rooms, the offices of the rector of the University of Paris, and the faculties of arts and sciences. The chapel was no longer used for religious services, but only for official ceremonies and exhibitions.\nIn 1971, as a result of the riots of demonstrations of May 1968, the University of Paris was broken up into thirteen independent faculties. The New Sorbonne building became the home of the Universities of Paris I, III, IV, V, the \u00c9cole Nationale des Chartes, and the \u00c9cole pratique des hautes \u00e9tudes.\nFoundation.\nRobert de Sorbon, a native of Le R\u00e9thelois, was a distinguished professor and famous preacher who lived from 1201 till 1274. Sorbon found that there was a defect in the primitive organization of the University of Paris. The two principal mendicant orders\u2014the Dominicans and the Franciscans\u2014each had colleges at Paris where they delivered lectures which day students could attend without fee.\nRobert de Sorbon decided that the university should also provide free instruction, so that it could compete with the religious orders. Further, he believed the society of professors should follow the practices of the cenobitic life, except in vows. His important work was made possible by the high esteem in which de Sorbon was held at Paris, together with his intellectual brilliance, great generosity, and the assistance of his friends. The foundation dates from 1257 or the beginning of 1258. Guillaume de Saint-Amour, G\u00e9rard d'Abbeville, Henry of Ghent, Guillaume des Grez, Odo of Douai, Chr\u00e9tien de Beauvais, G\u00e9rard de Reims, Nicolas de Bar were among the most illustrious scholars connected either with the first chairs in the Sorbonne, or with the first association that constituted it. These savants were already attached to the university staff.\nOrganization.\nThe constitution of the society as conceived by De Sorbon was simple: an administrator (\"provisor\"), associates (\"socii\"), and guests (\"hospites\"). The provisor was the head; nothing could be done without consulting him; he installed the members selected by the society, and confirmed the statutes drawn up by it; he had to provide for everything.\nThe associates formed the body of the society. To be admitted to it, the candidate was required to have taught a course of philosophy. There were two kinds of associates, the and the . The latter paid forty (Paris) pounds a year; the former were provided for by the house. The burse could be granted only to persons not having an income of forty (Paris) pounds. There was a \"primus inter pares\", the prior, who presided over all internal affairs of the house.\nDoctors and bachelors were alike eligible, but, owing to the number of the latter, the custom rapidly grew up of selecting only bachelors. Other persons were candidates for admission to the society rather than members of it. From the material and intellectual point of view, they enjoyed the same privileges as the members: board, lodging, books, spiritual and scholastic exercises but they had no votes. When they had fulfilled the condition of teaching philosophy, they were admissible as members. The course of studies lasted ten years, during which time their burses continued; but if, at the end of ten years, they had not given proof of their ability, either as teachers or as preachers, they had to give up their burse.\nHistory.\nThe general lectures were open to the public, attracting students who were not affiliated with either division of the society. Doctors and bachelors were permitted to house other needy students. In addition to classroom instruction, there was an obligation to preach and work in the parishes. As part of their training for this role, members had to deliver sermons or discussions (collationes) to the community on designated days. The spiritual aspect of their duties was also emphasized. Conferences, usually delivered by the prior, on this important part of the Christian and priestly life were given especially to the interns.\nFor twenty years the ability of the administrator, or provisor, corresponded to the foreseeing devotedness of the founder. This stretch of time showed the effectiveness of the administrative measures which De Sorbon had adopted. He had written down the rules in thirty-eight articles. This rule was directed towards the maintenance of common life, from silence in the refectory, to simplicity of authorized dress. As circumstances permitted, about 1271 De Sorbon added a literary college: this was the Coll\u00e8ge de Calvi or the \"little Sorbonne\".\nThe constitution which Robert de Sorbon gave to his college lasted for centuries. If Claude H\u00e9m\u00e9r\u00e9 (1574\u20131650, librarian of the Sorbonne) saw in the project the conception of a powerful intellect, \"Hoc primus in lycaeo Parisiensi vidit Robertus\", its realization became a model college for others. The expression \"Pauvres ma\u00eetres et \u00e9tudiants en th\u00e9ologie\" seems to emphasize the two primary characteristics of the society: equality in poverty, an equality so perfect between masters and pupils that it designated them by a common name; the poverty of the pupils, since most of them were ; the poverty of the masters, since, content with what was strictly necessary, they renounced all other professional remuneration. This equality was always maintained with scrupulous care; the Sorbon repeated as an axiom, \"Omnes nos sumus socii et aequales\", and referred to the college as \"pauperem nostram Sorbonem\".From the outset the college enjoyed the favour of the Holy See. Pope Alexander IV (1259) urged the French bishops to support it, Urban IV (1262) recommended it to the goodwill of the whole Christian world, and Clement IV (1268) granted it papal approbation. Wealthy benefactors provided it with ample endowment. A high standard of scholarship was maintained and the severity of the \"actus Sorbonnicus\", or examination for degrees, including the defence of the \"thesis Robertina\", became proverbial. The professorial corps was highly respected. From all parts of Europe, theological and political questions were sent to it for solution.\nIn 1470, the Sorbonne introduced the art of printing into France by calling to Paris three of Gutenberg's associates, Gering, Friburger, and Crantz. Among its principal patrons and benefactors was Cardinal Richelieu, who held for a time the office of provisor and who, in 1635, laid the cornerstone of an edifice to be built at his expense for the use of the college. He was buried in the church of the Sorbonne, where his tomb is still preserved.The doctors of the college were loyal defenders of the Catholic faith against the inroads of Protestantism and the Enlightenment. As other teachers of theology in the university became members of the Sorbonne, by the beginning of the sixteenth century, its staff was practically identical with the university faculty. De Sorbon had created a library. It expanded rapidly, due to numerous gifts.\nOn the other hand, the professors gave their support to Gallicanism and obliged their members to subscribe to the \"four articles\". This attitude naturally weakened the prestige of the Sorbonne as a theological school. Ecclesiastical students had to seek their education in the seminaries. \nThe Sorbonne itself was disestablished by decree of 5 April 1792, after the French Revolution.\nIn 1808, Napoleon restored it as the Faculty of Theology of the newly organized university, the Imperial University of France. It did not, however, regain its former standing or influence, though it continued in existence until 1882, when it was finally suppressed. \nIn 1884, the construction of the present building was begun and it was completed in 1889. At the beginning of the 20th century, it was occupied by the Faculty of Humanities and by the various departments of letters and science which formed the \u00c9cole des Hautes Etudes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51131", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51131", "title": "Sir Joseph John Thomson", "text": ""}
{"id": "51134", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51134", "title": "Leonardo Bruni", "text": "Italian humanist historian (c. 1370\u20131444)\nLeonardo Bruni or Leonardo Aretino (c.\u20091370 \u2013 9 March 1444) was an Italian humanist, historian and statesman, often recognized as the most important humanist historian of the early Renaissance. He has been called the first modern historian. He was the earliest person to write using the three-period view of history: Antiquity, Middle Ages, and Modern. The dates Bruni used to define the periods are not exactly what modern historians use today, but he laid the conceptual groundwork for a tripartite division of history.\nBiography.\nLeonardo Bruni was born in Arezzo, Tuscany circa 1370. Bruni was the pupil of political and cultural leader Coluccio Salutati, whom he succeeded as Chancellor of Florence, and under whose tutelage he developed his ideation of civic humanism. He also served as apostolic secretary to four popes (1405\u20131414). Bruni's years as chancellor, 1410 to 1411 and again from 1427 to his death in 1444, were plagued by warfare. Though he occupied one of the highest political offices, Bruni was relatively powerless compared to the Albizzi and Medici families. Historian Arthur Field has identified Bruni as an apparent plotter against Cosimo de' Medici in 1437 (see below). Bruni died in 1444 in Florence and was succeeded in office by Carlo Marsuppini.\nSignificance.\nBruni's most notable work is \"Historiarum Florentini populi libri XII\" (History of the Florentine People, 12 Books), which has been called the first modern history book. While it probably was not Bruni's intention to secularise history, the three-period view of history is unquestionably secular, and so Bruni has been called the first modern historian. The foundation of Bruni's conception can be found with Petrarch, who distinguished the classical period from later cultural decline, or \"tenebrae\" (literally \"darkness\"). Bruni argued that Italy had revived in recent centuries and could therefore be described as entering a new age.\nOne of Bruni's most famous works is \"New Cicero\", a biography of the Roman statesman Cicero. He was also the author of biographies in Italian of Dante and Petrarch. It was Bruni who used the phrase \"studia humanitatis\", meaning the study of human endeavours, as distinct from those of theology and metaphysics, the source of the term humanists.\nAs a humanist, Bruni was essential in translating into Latin many works of Greek philosophy and history, such as Aristotle and Procopius. Bruni's translations of Aristotle's \"Politics\" and \"Nicomachean Ethics\", as well as the pseudo-Aristotelean \"Economics\", were widely distributed in manuscript and in print. His use of Aelius Aristides' \"Panathenicus (Panegyric to Athens)\" to buttress his republican theses in the \"Panegyric to the City of Florence\" (c.\u20091401) was instrumental in bringing the Greek historian to the attention of Renaissance political philosophers (see Hans Baron's \"The Crisis of the Early Italian Renaissance\" for details). He also wrote a short treatise in Greek on the Florentine constitution.\nBruni was one of the first Humanists to confront Plato's discussion of same-sex relationships.\nBruni died in Florence in 1444, and is buried in a wall tomb by Bernardo Rossellino in the Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51135", "revid": "1314613880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51135", "title": "Portland Institute for Contemporary Art", "text": "Contemporary performance and visual arts organization in Portland\nThe Portland Institute for Contemporary Art (PICA) is a contemporary performance and visual arts organization in Portland in the U.S. state of Oregon. PICA was founded in 1995 by Kristy Edmunds. Since 2003, it has presented the annual Time-Based Art Festival (TBA) every September in Portland, featuring contemporary and experimental visual art, dance, theatre, film/video, music, and educational and public programs from local, national, and international artists. As of 2023, it is led by Executive Director Reuben Roque\u00f1i and Artistic Directors Erin Boberg Doughton and Kristan Kennedy.\nHistory.\nPICA was founded in 1995 by Kristy Edmunds, at the time the Director of the Portland Art Museum's \"Art on the Edge\" program. The organization's exhibition and performance program was built largely around an itinerant model, utilizing vacant space or rented venues throughout the city of Portland rather than programming a single gallery or theatre year-round. The majority of PICA's performance programming was grouped into its annual performance seasons, which it produced for seven years before the organization began presenting the Time-Based Art Festival in 2003. The organization's signature event during this time was an annual costume party fundraiser known as the Dada Ball, which it held from 1996 until 2001 in a variety of vacant spaces throughout the city.\nPICA's offices were housed at Boora Architects from its founding until about 2001, and then moved to the headquarters of Wieden+Kennedy in Northwest Portland. PICA housed its offices within those of Wieden &amp; Kennedy until 2012, and operated an additional exhibition space in the building until 2004.\nIn September 2003, PICA began presenting its annual Time-Based Art Festival, a ten-day international festival of contemporary performance and visual art modeled after those in Edinburgh and Adelaide (Fringe or main Festival?). The TBA Festival built upon PICA's itinerant model of utilizing multiple venues around the city, including sites such as the former Washington High School building in Southeast Portland, which would later become Revolution Hall.\nIn 2012, PICA moved to a leased third floor space on Southwest 10th Avenue, allowing the organization's offices and resource library to also be used a gallery and performance space when programs required it.\nOn April 19, 2016, PICA announced that the organization was gifted a 20-year no-rent lease on a building along the North Williams Avenue corridor by donor Allie Furlotti and the Calligram Foundation. In September 2016, PICA began utilizing this space as a box office, performance venue, and gallery for their 2016 TBA Festival while maintaining offices in downtown Portland. In November 2017, PICA's offices were relocated to the renovated Northeast Portland space.\nLeadership.\nFounder Kristy Edmunds left PICA in 2005 to become artistic director for the Melbourne International Arts Festival. She is now Director at MASS MoCA in western Massachusetts. Mark Russell (producer of The Public Theater's Under the Radar Festival and former director of P.S.122) and Cathy Edwards (former director of programming for the International Festival of Arts and Ideas) operated as the organization's two guest artistic directors from 2006 until 2011. Victoria Frey was appointed PICA\u2019s Executive Director in 2004 and guided PICA through numerous transitions and astounding growth. Under her leadership, PICA presented thousands of artists from around the world; established a home and community hub at our flagship building in Northeast Portland; and developed deep and ongoing relationships with artists, audiences, foundations, partners, and neighbors. Angela Mattox, the former Performing Arts Curator at Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, was hired as the organization's permanent artistic director in 2011. Mattox left PICA in 2017 following the end of that year's Time-Based Art Festival, her sixth as artistic director.\nPICA announced on November 28, 2017, that long-time programming staff members Roya Amirsoleymani (previously Director of Community Engagement), Erin Boberg Doughton (previously Performing Arts Program Director), and Kristan Kennedy (previously Visual Art Curator) had been selected as the organization's Artistic Directors. In 2023, Reuben Roque\u00f1i was appointed Executive Director after serving nearly 20 years in arts philanthropy. He was formerly Director of Transformative Change Programs at the Native Arts and Cultures Foundation (NACF), a national organization headquartered in Portland, Oregon.\nProgramming.\nPerformance.\nPICA has presented works from performance artists and musicians such as Philip Glass, Laurie Anderson, Karen Finley, Spalding Gray, Marina Abramovi\u0107, Miranda July, Mike Daisey, and Reggie Watts, among others.\nSince its inception, PICA has programmed both performances and exhibitions, while also hosting educational events such as lectures, public conversations, and artist-led workshops. Its first performance series ran from 1995-1996. PICA ceased its seasonal performance series when it began presenting the Time-Based Art Festival in 2003, though still presents some performances during other parts of the year.\nVisual Art.\nPICA has presented work by visual artists such as William Pope.L, Matthew Day Jackson, Francis Al\u00ffs, Emily Roysdon, A.L. Steiner, Erika Vogt, Abigail DeVille, Carlos Motta and others. Since 2005, PICA's visual art programming has been curated by Kristan Kennedy.\nAs with PICA's itinerant model to performance presentation, the organization has not had a single exhibition space for most of its history. From 2000\u20132004, PICA did run a year-round gallery out of a corner of the Wieden+Kennedy Building in Northwest Portland's Pearl District, designed by early PICA supporter Brad Cloepfil. During that time, visual art curator Stuart Horodner presented work from artists such as Janine Antoni, Dana Schutz, and Melanie Manchot in the space. Horodner left the organization in 2004.\nThe Time-Based Art Festival has included visual art curated by Kennedy as part of its artistic program since 2006 under the \"On Sight\" program strand. On Sight exhibition programs often include performance-based or otherwise non-conventional visual art modes in addition to traditional gallery spaces. The exhibition-based visual art projects are generally exhibited for two to four weeks after the conclusion of each year's TBA. In 2016, the On Sight exhibition was titled \"Makeup on Empty Space\" and included a multi-channel video installation by A.K. Burns, a performance art piece by Keijaun Thomas, a performance by Dylan Mira, and an exhibition-turned-artist-residency by Bunny Brains and collaborators.\nCommunity Engagement, Education and Public Programs.\nPICA offers a variety of education, outreach, contextual and public programs, often presented in tandem with its artistic programs but sometimes independent of them. As part of the annual TBA Festival, PICA offers an education, engagement, and public programs strand called the \"Institute\" that brings festival artists, guest scholars, and writers into dialogue. Institute programming includes workshops, discussions, panels, lectures, and (since 2013) the Field Guide series, in which expert facilitates engage in focused workshops and dialogues with members of the public about a particular performance or program.\nPrecipice Fund.\nIn 2011, PICA announced that the organization had received money from the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts' Regional Regranting Program to create a regranting program for small, artist-led visual art projects that do not otherwise qualify for project support through traditional granting mechanisms. Dubbed the Precipice Fund, PICA began distributing its first round of grants in 2013. As of 2016, $225,000 has been redistributed over three grant periods to 57 projects in the region.\nResource Room.\nSince 2000, PICA's offices have included a public reference library known as the Resource Room. The PICA Resource Room collects a variety of art publications, housing over 4,000 books and periodicals on its shelves. The Resource Room also collects video documentation from the organization's 20-year history of artistic presentation. From 2012\u20132015, the Resource Room Residency gave artists the opportunity to engage with the space and collection of archival materials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51137", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51137", "title": "SoftICE", "text": "Kernel mode debugger\n \nSoftICE is a kernel mode debugger for DOS and Windows up to Windows XP. It is designed to run underneath Windows, so that the operating system is unaware of its presence. Unlike an application debugger, SoftICE is capable of suspending all operations in Windows when instructed. Due to its low-level capabilities, SoftICE is also popular as a software cracking tool. \nMicrosoft offers two kernel-mode debuggers, WinDbg and KD, without charges. However, the full capabilities of WinDbg and KD are available only when two interlinked computers are used. SoftICE, therefore, is an exceptionally useful tool for difficult driver-related development. The last released version was for Windows XP.\nOlder versions exist for DOS and compatible operating systems. SoftICE was originally produced by the company NuMega, and was subsequently acquired by Compuware in 1997, which in turn sold the property to Micro Focus in 2009. Currently, Micro Focus owns the source code and patents, but is not actively maintaining SoftICE. \nNaming.\n\"Soft\" refers to software, and \"ICE\" is an allusion to in-circuit emulator.\nHistory.\nThe original SoftICE for DOS was written in 1987 by NuMega founders Frank Grossman and Jim Moskun. The program, written in 80386 assembly language, played the role of an operating system and ran software in virtual 8086 mode. It sold for $386.\nSoftICE/W (for Windows) was developed in the 1990s, and was instrumental in the Writing of \"Undocumented Windows\", by Andrew Schulman, David Maxey and Matt Pietrek. SoftICE/W was derived from an earlier, lesser known product, SoftICE for NetWare (32-bit protected mode). One of the key advantages it had over Microsoft's debuggers is that it enabled single machine debugging, rather than requiring a second machine to be connected over a serial port.\nThe principal developers of SoftICE were Dom Basile ('Mr. SoftICE'), Tom Guinther (Kitchen Sink, Symbol Engine), Gerald Ryckman (Video drivers and \"Kitchen Sink\"), Ray Hsu (Video drivers for Windows 95), and Dan Babcock (SoftICE/NT 3.1/3.5: Universal video driver, symbol engine), with contributions by a variety of NuMega developers including Frank Grossman, Jim Moskun and Matt Pietrek.\nIn 1998, the codebase for SoftICE/95 was ported to run on the Windows NT platform.\nNewer versions of SoftICE patch deep into Microsoft Windows. As such, old versions of SoftICE are rarely compatible with new versions of Windows. Compuware therefore offered SoftICE as a subscription so that it could be kept up to date and in sync with the latest Microsoft Windows version.\nSoftICE was previously offered as part of Compuware's DriverStudio package, but was discontinued in April 2006.\nTermination.\nAs of April 3, 2006, the DriverStudio product family has been discontinued because of \"a variety of technical and business issues as well as general market conditions\". Maintenance support was offered until March 31, 2007.\nAnti-SoftICE measures.\nSoftware vendors have put in place a wide range of countermeasures to protect themselves from people employing SoftICE as a tool to analyse software.\nFor example, here is code some vendors used to detect the presence of SoftICE running in the same machine as an early countermeasure:\n mov eax, dword ptr [pIDT+2]; eax -&gt; IDT\n add eax, 8 ; eax -&gt; int 1 vector\n mov ebx, [eax] ; ebx == int 1 vector\n add eax, 16 ; eax -&gt; int 3 vector\n mov eax, [eax] ; eax == int 3 vector\n and eax, 0FFFFh ; strip the selector\n and ebx, 0FFFFh ; part of it\n sub eax, ebx ; find displacement\n cmp eax, 10h\njne HackedVector ; not equal, then chances are\n ; SoftICE had tampered with these vectors\nMore and better such measures have evolved since. While most of them can only deter the less experienced and determined hackers, SoftICE is no longer a tool of choice for someone new to analysing software.\nModern software anti-analysis methods are based on more sophisticated packers/protectors, e.g. Themida, Armadillo or ASProtect which pack the program code and tamper with entry point addresses so it is hard to find the program's original entry point (OEP). That is also true for the program's import address table (IAT). However, tools for hiding SoftICE are also available, such as IceStealth and IceExt for Windows NT, or Icedump and IcePatch for Windows 9x.\nReception.\nIn 1989, \"BYTE\" listed Soft-ICE among the \"Distinction\" winners of the BYTE Awards, stating that, \"If you're developing 8086-based applications on an 80386 machine, this is an essential and affordable tool\".\nAlternatives.\nA commercial kernel-level debugger called Syser claims to continue where SoftICE left off.\nA shareware debugger, but free to use, OllyDbg is a 32-bit assembler-level debugger from Oleh Yuschuk. However, it can only be used for user-mode debugging.\nAn open source kernel debugger similar to SoftICE named \"Rasta Ring 0 Debugger\" (RR0D) is available. It provides low-level debugging for Microsoft Windows, Linux, OpenBSD, NetBSD, and FreeBSD. This project does not seem to be actively maintained. As of \u00a02016[ [update]], the last change in its GitHub source code repository occurred in December 2008.\nA debugger called BugChecker is a 32-bit single-host kernel debugger for Windows 2000 and XP, developed and made available as open source for educational purposes. BugChecker allows users to trace into both user and kernel code, both on uniprocessor and multiprocessor versions of Windows 2000 and XP.\nA modern successor to SoftICE named BugChecker (unrelated to the one mentioned above) was released by Vito Plantamura in 2023. Unlike the other local kernel debuggers, it supports Windows XP to Windows 11, both 32-bit and 64-bit. To achieve this, the debugger spoofs the machine as being debugged by a second system by intercepting serial cable communication, and then and draws its display directly to the framebuffer. This method significantly improves stability and compatibility compared to previous approaches, including that of SoftICE itself.\nMany hypervisors allow debugging the kernel running in the virtual machine through exposing some kind of debugger interface that can control the virtualized processor directly. This allows debugging even if the kernel does not have native debugging facilities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51138", "revid": "2589826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51138", "title": "Mail", "text": "System for transporting documents and other small packages\nThe mail or post is a system for physically transporting postcards, letters, and parcels. A postal service can be private or public, though many governments place restrictions on private systems. Since the mid-19th century, national postal systems have generally been established as a government monopoly, with a fee on the article prepaid. Proof of payment is usually in the form of an adhesive postage stamp, but a postage meter is also used for bulk mailing.\nPostal authorities often have functions aside from transporting letters. In some countries, a postal, telegraph and telephone (PTT) service oversees the postal system, in addition to telephone and telegraph systems. Some countries' postal systems allow for savings accounts and handle applications for passports.\nThe Universal Postal Union (UPU), established in 1874, includes 192 member countries and sets the rules for international mail exchanges as a Specialized Agency of the United Nations.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"mail\" comes from the Middle English word , referring to a travelling bag or pack. It was spelled in that manner until the 17th century and is distinct from the word male. The French have a similar word, , for a trunk or large box, and is the Irish term for a bag. In the 17th century, the word \"mail\" began to appear as a reference for a bag that contained letters: \"bag full of letter\" (1654). Over the next hundred years the word \"mail\" began to be applied strictly to the letters themselves and the sack as the \"mailbag\". In the 19th century, the British typically used \"mail\" to refer to letters being sent abroad (i.e. on a ship) and \"post\" to refer to letters for domestic delivery. The word \"Post\" is derived from Old French , which ultimately stems from the past participle of the Latin verb 'to lay down or place'. So in the U.K., the Royal Mail delivers the \"post\", while in North America both the U.S. Postal Service and Canada Post deliver the \"mail\".\nThe term \"email\", short for \"electronic mail\", first appeared in the 1970s. The term \"snail mail\" is a retronym to distinguish it from the quicker email. Various dates have been given for its first use.\nHistory.\nThe practice of communication by written documents carried by an intermediary from one person or place to another almost certainly dates back nearly to the invention of writing. However, the development of formal postal systems occurred much later. The first documented use of an organized courier service for the dissemination of written documents is in Egypt, where Pharaohs used couriers to send out decrees throughout the territory of the state (2400 BCE). The earliest surviving piece of mail is also Egyptian, dating to 255 BCE.\nIran.\nThe first credible claim for the development of a real postal system comes from the Achaemenid Empire. The best-documented claim, by the Greek historian Xenophon, attributes the invention to the Persian king Cyrus the Great (550 BCE), who mandated that every province in his kingdom would organize reception and delivery of post to each of its citizens. Other writers credit his successor Darius the Great (521 BCE), who reorganized and rebuilt the Royal Road to facilitate the rapid travel of Persian couriers from Susa (now Iran) in the east to Sardis (now Turkey) in the west. Other sources claim much earlier dates for a postal system under the Assyrians, with credit given to Hammurabi (1700 BCE) and Sargon II (722 BCE). Mail may not have been the primary mission of this postal service, however. The role of the system as an intelligence-gathering apparatus is well documented, and the service was (later) called \"angariae\", a term that in time came to indicate a tax system. The Book of Esther in the Hebrew Bible makes mention of this system: Persian king Ahasuerus used couriers to relay his decisions across the Near East.\nThe Persian system worked using stations called \"Chapar Khaneh\" (), whence the message carrier (the \"Chapar\") would ride to the next post, whereupon he would swap his horse with a fresh one for maximum performance and delivery speed. The Greek historian Herodotus described the system in this way: \"It is said that as many days as there are in the whole journey, so many are the men and horses that stand along the road, each horse and man at the interval of a day's journey; and these are stayed neither by snow nor rain nor heat nor darkness from accomplishing their appointed course with all speed\". The verse prominently features on James Farley Post Office in New York City, although it uses the translation \"Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays these couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds\". The ancient Persian postal service system greatly influenced the Greco-Roman world such that its model was adapted by the Roman Empire as the cursus publicus.\nIndia.\nThe economic growth and political stability under the Mauryan Empire (322\u2013185 BCE) stimulated sustained development of civil infrastructure in ancient India. The Mauryans developed early Indian mail service as well as public wells, rest houses, and other facilities for the public. Common chariots called \"Dagana\" were sometimes used as mail chariots in ancient India. Couriers were used militarily by kings and local rulers to deliver information through runners and other carriers. The postmaster, the head of the intelligence service, was responsible for ensuring the maintenance of the courier system. Couriers were also used to deliver personal letters.\nIn South India, the Wodeyar dynasty (1399\u20131947) of the Kingdom of Mysore used mail service for espionage purposes thereby acquiring knowledge related to matters that took place at great distances.\nBy the end of the 18th century, a postal system in India was in operation. Later this system underwent complete modernization when the British Raj established its control over most of India. The \"Post Office Act XVII\" of 1837 provided that the Governor-General of India in Council had the exclusive right of conveying letters by post for hire within the territories of the East India Company. The mails were available to certain officials without charge, which became a controversial privilege as the years passed. On this basis the Indian Post Office was established on October 1, 1837.\nRome.\nThe first well-documented postal service was that of Rome. Organized at the time of Augustus Caesar (62 BCE \u2013 14 CE), the service was called \"cursus publicus\" and was provided with light carriages (\"rhed\u00e6\") pulled by fast horses. By the time of Diocletian, a parallel service was established with two-wheeled carts (\"birot\u00e6\") pulled by oxen. This service was reserved for government correspondence. Yet another service for citizens was later added.\nVietnam.\nIn 1802, the first Vietnamese postal service was established under the Nguyen dynasty, under the Ministry of Rites. During the Nguyen dynasty, official documents were transported by horse and other primitive means to stations built about 25\u201330 kilometers apart. In 1904, three wireless communication offices were established, and in early 1906 they were merged with the postal service to form the Post and Wireless Office. In 1945, after the August Revolution, the Post and Wireless Office was renamed the Post Office under the Ministry of Transportation. In 1955, the Post Office was upgraded to the Ministry of Post.\nChina.\nSome Chinese sources claim mail or postal systems dating back to the Xia or Shang dynasties, which would be the oldest mailing service in the world. The earliest credible system of couriers was initiated by the Han dynasty (206 BCE \u2013 220 CE), who had relay stations every 30 li (about 15\u00a0km) along major routes.\nThe Tang dynasty (618 to 907 AD) operated a recorded 1,639 posthouses, including maritime offices, employing around 20,000 people. The system was administered by the Ministry of War and private correspondence was forbidden from the network. The Ming dynasty (1368 to 1644) sought a postal system to deliver mail quickly, securely, and cheaply. Adequate speed was always a problem, because of the slow overland transportation system, and underfunding. Its network had 1,936 posthouses every 60 li along major routes, with fresh horses available every 10 li between them. The Qing operated 1,785 posthouses throughout their lands. More efficient, however, was the system linking the international settlements, centered around Shanghai and the Treaty ports. It was the main communication system for China's international trade.\nMongol Empire.\nGenghis Khan installed an empire-wide messenger and postal station system named \"\u00d6rt\u00f6\u00f6\" within the Mongol Empire. During the Yuan dynasty under Kublai Khan, this system also covered the territory of China. Postal stations were used not only for the transmission and delivery of official mail but were also available for travelling officials, military men, and foreign dignitaries. These stations aided and facilitated the transport of foreign and domestic tribute specifically and the conduct of trade in general.\nBy the end of Kublai Khan's rule, there were more than 1400 postal stations in China alone, which in turn had at their disposal about 50,000 horses, 1,400 oxen, 6,700 mules, 400 carts, 6,000 boats, more than 200 dogs, and 1,150 sheep.\nThe stations were apart and had reliable attendants working for the mail service. Foreign observers, such as Marco Polo, have attested to the efficiency of this early postal system.\nEach station was maintained by up to twenty five families. Work for postal service counted as military service. The system was still operational in 18th century when 64 stations were required for a message to cross Mongolia from the Altai Mountains to China.\nJapan.\nThe modern Japanese system was developed in the mid-19th century, closely copying European models. Japan was highly innovative in developing the world's largest and most successful postal savings system and later a postal life insurance system as well. Postmasters play a key role in linking the Japanese political system to local politics. A postmaster's position is in high prestige, and is often hereditary. To a large extent, the postal system generated the enormous funding necessary to rapidly industrialize Japan in the late 19th century.\nKorea.\nThe postal service was one of Korea's first attempts at modernization. The Joseon Post Office was established in 1884.\nOther systems.\nAnother important postal service was created in the Islamic world by the \"caliph\" Mu'awiyya; the service was called \"barid\", for the name of the towers built to protect the roads by which couriers travelled.\nBy 3000 BC, Egypt was using homing pigeons for pigeon post, taking advantage of a singular quality of this bird, which when taken far from its nest is able to find its way home due to a particularly developed sense of orientation. Messages were then tied around the legs of the pigeon, which was freed and could reach its original nest. By the 19th century, homing pigeons were used extensively for military communications.\nCharlemagne extended to the whole territory of his empire the system used by Franks in northern Gaul and connected this service with that of \"missi dominici\".\nIn the mid-11th century, flax traders known as the Cairo Geniza Merchants from Fustat, Egypt wrote about using a postal service known as the \"kutubi.\" The \"kutubi\" system managed routes between the cities of Jerusalem, Ramla, Tyre, Ascalon, Damascus, Aleppo, and Fustat with year-round, regular mail delivery.\nMany religious orders had a private mail service. Notably, the Cistercians had one which connected more than 6,000 abbeys, monasteries, and churches. The best organization, however, was created by the Knights Templar.\nIn 1716, Correos y Tel\u00e9grafos was established in Spain as public mail service, available to all citizens. Delivery postmen were first employed in 1756 and post boxes were installed firstly in 1762.\nThurn und Taxis.\nIn 1505, Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I established a postal system in the Empire, appointing Franz von Taxis to run it. This system, originally the \"Kaiserliche Reichspost\", is often considered the first modern postal service in the world, which initiated a revolution in communication in Europe. The system combined contemporary technical and organization means to create a stable transcontinental service which was also the first to offer (fee-based) public access.\n The Thurn und Taxis family, then known as Tassis, had operated postal services between Italian city-states from 1290 onward. For 500 years the postal business based in Brussels and in Frankfurt was passed from one generation to another. Following the abolition of the Empire in 1806, the Thurn-und-Taxis Post system continued as a private organization into the postage stamp era before being absorbed into the postal system of the new German Empire after 1871. 1 July 1867, the State of Prussia had to make a compensation payment of three million Thalers reinvested by Helene von Thurn &amp; Taxis, daughter-in-law of the last postmaster, Maximilian Karl, 6th Prince of Thurn and Taxis, into real estate, most of it continuing to exist today.\nPostal reforms.\nIn the United Kingdom, prior to 1840 letters were paid for by the recipient and the cost was determined by the distance from sender to recipient and the number of sheets of paper rather than by a countrywide flat rate with weight restrictions. Sir Rowland Hill reformed the postal system based on the concepts of penny postage and prepayment. In his proposal, Hill also called for official pre-printed envelopes and adhesive postage stamps as alternative ways of getting the sender to pay for the postage, at a time when prepayment was optional, which led to the invention of the postage stamp, the Penny Black.\nModern transport and technology.\nThe postal system was important in the development of modern transportation. Railways carried railway post offices. During the 20th century, air mail became the transport of choice for inter-continental mail. Postmen started to use mail trucks. The handling of mail became increasingly automated.\nThe Internet came to change the conditions for physical mail. Email (and in recent years social networking sites) became a fierce competitor to physical mail systems, but online auctions and Internet shopping opened new business opportunities as people often get items bought online through the mail.\nModern mail.\nModern mail is organized by national and privatized services, which are reciprocally connected by international regulations, organizations and international agreements. Paper letters and parcels can be sent to almost any country in the world relatively easily and cheaply. The Internet has made the process of sending letter-like messages nearly instantaneous, and in many cases and situations correspondents use email where they previously would have used letters. The volume of paper mail sent through the U.S. Postal Service has declined by more than 15% since its peak at 213\u00a0billion pieces per annum in 2006.\nOrganization.\nSome countries have organized their mail services as public limited liability corporations without a legal monopoly.\nThe worldwide postal system constituting the individual national postal systems of the world's self-governing states is coordinated by the Universal Postal Union, which among other things sets international postage rates, defines standards for postage stamps and operates the system of international reply coupons.\nIn most countries a system of codes has been created (referred to as \"ZIP codes\" in the United States, \"postcodes\" in the United Kingdom and Australia, \"eircodes\" in Ireland and \"postal codes\" in most other countries) in order to facilitate the automation of operations. This also includes placing additional marks on the address portion of the letter or mailed object, called \"bar coding\". Bar coding of mail for delivery is usually expressed either by a series of vertical bars, usually called POSTNET coding or a block of dots as a two-dimensional barcode. The \"block of dots\" method allows for the encoding of proof of payment of postage, exact routing for delivery, and other features.\nThe ordinary mail service was improved in the 20th century with the use of planes for a quicker delivery. The world's first scheduled airmail post service took place in the United Kingdom between the London suburbs of Hendon and Windsor, Berkshire, on 9 September 1911. Some methods of airmail proved ineffective, however, including the United States Postal Service's experiment with rocket mail.\nReceipt services were made available in order to grant the sender a confirmation of effective delivery.\nPayment.\nBefore about the mid-nineteenth century, in regions where postal systems existed, the payment models varied, but most mail was sent unpaid requiring the recipient to pay the postage fee. In some regions a partial payment was made by the sender. Today, worldwide, the most common method of prepaying postage is by buying an adhesive postage stamp to be applied to the envelope before mailing; a much less common method is to use a postage-prepaid envelope. Franking is a method of creating postage-prepaid envelopes under licence using a special machine. They are used by companies with large mail programs, such as banks and direct mail companies.\nIn 1998, the U.S. Postal Service authorised the first tests of a secure system of sending digital franks via the Internet to be printed out on a PC printer, obviating the necessity to license a dedicated franking machine and allowing companies with smaller mail programs to make use of the option; this was later expanded to test the use of personalized postage. The service provided by the U.S. Postal Service in 2003 allows the franks to be printed out on special adhesive-backed labels.\nIn 2004 the Royal Mail in the United Kingdom introduced its \"SmartStamp\" Internet-based system, allowing printing on ordinary adhesive labels or envelopes. Similar systems are being considered by postal administrations around the world.\nWhen the pre-paid envelope or package is accepted into the mail by an agent of the postal service, the agent usually indicates by means of a cancellation that it is no longer valid for pre-payment of postage. The exceptions are when the agent forgets or neglects to cancel the mailpiece, for stamps that are pre-cancelled and thus do not require cancellation and for, in most cases, metered mail. (The \"personalized stamps\" authorized by the USPS and manufactured by Zazzle and other companies are in fact a form of meter label and thus do not need to be cancelled.)\nPrivacy and censorship.\nDocuments should generally not be read by anyone other than the addressee; for example, in the United States of America it is a violation of federal law for anyone other than the addressee and the government to open mail. There are exceptions however: executives often assign secretaries or assistants the task of handling their mail; and postcards do not require opening and can be read by anyone. For mail contained within an envelope, there are legal provisions in some jurisdictions allowing the recording of identities of sender and recipient.\nThe privacy of correspondence is guaranteed by the constitutions of Mexico, Colombia, Brazil and Venezuela, and is alluded to in the European Convention on Human Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The control of the contents inside private citizens' mail is censorship and concerns social, political, and legal aspects of civil rights. International mail and packages are subject to customs control, with the mail and packages often surveyed and their contents sometimes edited out (or even in).\nThere have been cases over the millennia of governments opening and copying or photographing the contents of private mail. Subject to the laws in the relevant jurisdiction, correspondence may be openly or covertly opened, or the contents determined via some other method, by the police or other authorities in some cases relating to a suspected criminal conspiracy, although black chambers (largely in the past, though there is apparently some continuance of their use today) opened extralegally.\nThe mail service may be allowed to open the mail if neither addressee nor sender can be located, in order to attempt to locate either. Mail service may also open the mail to inspect if it contains materials that are hazardous to transport or violate local laws.\nWhile in most cases mail censorship is exceptional, military mail to and from soldiers is often subject to surveillance. The mail is censored to prevent leaking tactical secrets, such as troop movements or weather conditions. Depending on the country, civilian mail containing military secrets can also be monitored and censored.\nMail sent to and from inmates in jails or prisons within the United States is subject to opening and review by jail or prison staff to determine if the mail has any criminal action dictated or provides means for an escape. The only mail that is not able to be read is attorney-client mail, which is covered under the attorney-client confidentiality laws in the United States.\nRise of electronic correspondence.\nModern alternatives, such as the telegraph, telephone, telex, facsimile, and email, have reduced the attractiveness of paper mail for many applications. These modern alternatives have some advantages: in addition to their speed, they may be more secure, e.g., because the general public cannot learn the address of the sender or recipient from the envelope, and occasionally traditional items of mail may fail to arrive, e.g. due to vandalism to mailboxes, unfriendly pets, and adverse weather conditions. Mail carriers due to perceived hazards or inconveniences, may refuse, officially or otherwise, to deliver mail to a particular address (for instance, if there is no clear path to the door or mailbox). On the other hand, traditional mail avoids the possibility of computer malfunctions and malware, and the recipient does not need to print it out if they wish to have a paper copy, though scanning is required to make a digital copy.\nPhysical mail is still widely used in business and personal communications for such reasons as legal requirements for signatures, requirements of etiquette, and the requirement to enclose small physical objects.\nSince the advent of email, which is almost always much faster, the postal system has come to be referred to in Internet slang by the retronym \"snail mail\". Occasionally, the term \"white mail\" has also been used as a neutral term for postal mail.\nMainly during the 20th century, experimentation with hybrid mail has combined electronic and paper delivery. Electronic mechanisms include telegram, telex, facsimile (fax), email, and short message service (SMS). There have been methods which have combined mail and some of these newer methods, such as temporary emails, that combine facsimile transmission with overnight delivery. These vehicles commonly use a mechanical or electro-mechanical standardised writing (typing), that on the one hand makes for more efficient communication, while on the other hand makes impossible characteristics and practices that traditionally were in conventional mail, such as calligraphy.\nThis epoch is undoubtedly mainly dominated by mechanical writing, with a general use of no more of half a dozen standard typographic fonts from standard keyboards. However, the increased use of typewritten or computer-printed letters for personal communication and the advent of email have sparked renewed interest in calligraphy, as a letter has become more of a \"special event\". Long before email and computer-printed letters, however, decorated envelopes, rubber stamps and artistamps formed part of the medium of mail art.\nIn the 2000s (decade) with the advent of eBay and other online auction sites and online stores, postal services in industrialized nations have seen a major shift to item shipping. This has been seen as a boost to the system's usage in the wake of lower paper mail volume due to the accessibility of email.\nOnline post offices have emerged to give recipients a means of receiving traditional correspondence mail in a scanned electronic format.\nContinued drops in letter volume led PostNord to stop delivering letters in Denmark at the end of 2025, and remove mailboxes from streets.\nCollecting.\nPostage stamps are also object of a particular form of collecting. Stamp collecting has been a very popular hobby. In some cases, when demand greatly exceeds supply, their commercial value on this specific market may become enormously greater than face value, even after use. For some postal services the sale of stamps to collectors who will never use them is a significant source of revenue; for example, stamps from Tokelau, South Georgia &amp; South Sandwich Islands, Tristan da Cunha, Niuafo\u02bbou and many others. Stamp collecting is commonly known as philately, although strictly the latter term refers to the study of stamps.\nAnother form of collecting regards postcards, a document written on a single robust sheet of paper, usually decorated with photographic pictures or artistic drawings on one of the sides, and short messages on a small part of the other side, that also contained the space for the address. In strict philatelic usage, the postcard is to be distinguished from the postal card, which has a pre-printed postage on the card. The fact that this communication is visible by other than the receiver often causes the messages to be written in jargon.\nLetters are often studied as an example of literature, and also in biography in the case of a famous person. A portion of the New Testament of the Bible is composed of the Apostle Paul's epistles to Christian congregations in various parts of the Roman Empire. See below for a list of famous letters.\nA style of writing, called \"epistolary,\" tells a fictional story in the form of the correspondence between two or more characters.\nA makeshift mail method after stranding on a deserted island is a message in a bottle.\nDeregulation.\nNumerous countries, including Sweden (1 January 1993), New Zealand (1998 and 2003), Germany (2005 and 2007), Argentina and Chile opened up the postal services market to new entrants. In the case of New Zealand Post Limited, this included (from 2003) its right to be the sole New Zealand postal administration member of the Universal Postal Union, thus the ending of its monopoly on stamps bearing the name New Zealand.\nTypes.\nLetters.\nLetter-sized mail constitutes the bulk of the contents sent through most postal services. These are usually documents printed on A4 (210\u00d7297\u00a0mm), Letter-sized (8.5\u00d711\u00a0inches), or smaller paper and placed in envelopes.\nHandwritten correspondence, while once a major means of communications between distant people, is now used less frequently due to the advent of more immediate forms of communication, such as the telephone or email. Traditional letters, however, are often considered to hark back to a \"simpler time\" and are still used when someone wishes to be deliberate and thoughtful about their communication. An example would be a letter of sympathy to a bereaved person.\nBills and invoices are often sent through the mail, like regular billing correspondence from utility companies and other service providers. These letters often contain a self-addressed envelope that allows the receiver to remit payment back to the company easily. While still very common, many people now opt to use online bill payment services, which eliminate the need to receive bills through the mail. Paperwork for the confirmation of large financial transactions is often sent through the mail. Many tax documents are as well.\nNew credit cards and their corresponding personal identification numbers are sent to their owners through the mail. The card and number are usually mailed separately several days or weeks apart for security reasons.\nBulk mail is mail that is prepared for bulk mailing, often by presorting, and processing at reduced rates. It is often used in direct marketing and other advertising mail, although it has other uses as well. The senders of these messages sometimes purchase lists of addresses (which are sometimes targeted towards certain demographics) and then send letters advertising their product or service to all recipients. Other times, commercial solicitations are sent by local companies advertising local products, like a restaurant delivery service advertising to their delivery area or a retail store sending their weekly advertising circular to a general area. Bulk mail is also often sent to companies' existing subscriber bases, advertising new products or services.\nFirst-Class.\nFirst-Class Mail in the U.S. includes postcards, letters, and large envelopes (flats). Letters must weigh under 3.5 ounces and large envelopes must weigh under 13 ounces. USPS formerly offered First-Class delivery for small parcels under 1 pound up until July 2023, when First-Class Package Service was replaced by USPS Ground Advantage. Delivery is given priority over second-class (newspapers and magazines), third class (bulk advertisements), and fourth-class mail (books and media packages). First-Class Mail prices are based on both the shape and weight of the item being mailed. Pieces over 13 ounces can be sent as Priority Mail. As of 2011 42% of First-Class Mail arrived the next day, 27% in two days, and 31% in three. The USPS expected that changes to the service in 2012 would cause about 51% to arrive in two days and most of the rest in three. \nThe Canada Post counterpart is Lettermail.\nThe British Royal Mail's 1st Class, as it is styled, is simply a priority option over 2nd Class, at a slightly higher cost. Royal Mail aims (but does not guarantee) to deliver all 1st Class letters the day after posting.\nIn Austria priority delivery mail is called Prio, in Switzerland A-Post.\nRegistered and recorded mail.\nRegistered mail allows the location and in particular the correct delivery of a letter to be tracked. It is usually considerably more expensive than regular mail, and is typically used for valuable items. Registered mail is constantly tracked through the system.\nRecorded mail is handled just like ordinary mail with the exception that it has to be signed for on receipt. This is useful for legal documents where proof of delivery is required.\nIn the United Kingdom recorded delivery mail (branded as \"signed for\" by the Royal Mail) is covered by \"The Recorded Delivery Services Act 1962\". Under this legislation any document which its relevant law requires service by registered post can also be lawfully served by recorded delivery.\nRepositionable notes.\nThe United States Postal Service introduced a test allowing \"repositionable notes\" (for example, 3M's Post-it notes) to be attached to the outside of envelopes and bulk mailings, afterwards extending the test for an unspecified period. The repositionable note may be fixed directly to the address side of First-Class Mail and Standard Mail letter-size mailpieces. These mailpieces must meet the standards in 7.2 through 7.6. The note is included as an integral part of the mailpiece for weight and postage rate and must be accounted for in pricing.\nPostal cards and postcards.\nPostal cards and postcards are small message cards that are sent by mail unenveloped; the distinction often, though not invariably and reliably, drawn between them is that \"postal cards\" are issued by the postal authority or entity with the \"postal indicia\" (or \"stamp\") preprinted on them, while postcards are privately issued and require affixing an adhesive stamp (though there have been some cases of a postal authority's issuing non-stamped postcards). Postcards are often printed to promote tourism, with pictures of resorts, tourist attractions or humorous messages on the front and allowing for a short message from the sender to be written on the back. The postage required for postcards is generally less than postage required for standard letters; however, certain technicalities such as their being oversized or having cut-outs, may result in payment of the first-class rate being required.\nPostcards are also used by magazines for new subscriptions. Inside many magazines are postage-paid subscription cards that a reader can fill out and mail back to the publishing company to be billed for a subscription to the magazine. In this fashion, magazines also use postcards for other purposes, including reader surveys, contests or information requests.\nPostcards are sometimes sent by charities to their members with a message to be signed and sent to a politician (e.g. to promote fair trade or third world debt cancellation).\nOther mail services.\nSmall packets are usually less than 2\u00a0kg (4\u00a0lb).\nLarger envelopes are also sent through the mail. These are often composed of a stronger material than standard envelopes and are often used by businesses to transport documents that may not be folded or damaged, such as legal documents and contracts. Due to their size, larger envelopes are sometimes charged additional postage.\nPackages are often sent through some postal services, usually requiring additional postage than an average letter or postcard. Many postal services have limitations as to what a package may or may not contain, usually placing limits or bans on perishable, hazardous or flammable materials. Some hazardous materials in limited quantities may be shipped with appropriate markings and packaging, like an ORM-D label. Additionally, as a result of terrorism concerns, the U.S. Postal Service subjects their packages to numerous security tests, often scanning or x-raying packages for materials that might be found in biological materials or mail bombs.\nNewspapers and magazines are also sent through postal services. Many magazines are simply deposited in the mail like any other mailpiece. In the U.S., they are printed with a special Intelligent Mail barcode that acts as prepaid postage. Other magazines are now shipped in shrinkwrap to protect loose contents such as blow-in cards. During the second half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, newspapers and magazines were normally posted using wrappers with a stamp imprint.\nHybrid mail, sometimes referred to as L-mail, is the electronic lodgement of mail from the mail generator's computer directly to a Postal Service provider. The Postal Service provider is then able to use electronic means to have the mail piece sorted, routed and physically produced at a site closest to the delivery point. It is a type of mail growing in popularity with some Post Office operations and individual businesses venturing into this market. In some countries, these services are available to print and deliver emails to those who are unable to receive email, such as the elderly or infirm. Services provided by Hybrid mail providers are closely related to that of mail forwarding service providers.\nBusiness model.\nThe business model of modern postal operators can be broken down to four stages: (1) collection, (2) sorting, (3) transportation, and (4) delivery.\nCollection is the gathering of mailpieces from various locations such as customer premises, post boxes, and post offices. Newly collected mail is normally not sorted immediately upon receipt and is instead taken directly in its unsorted state to sorting centers.\nSorting is the process of segregating mailpieces into groups based on their type and destination, so that they can be loaded onto an appropriate mode of transportation headed in the general direction of their final destinations. Traditionally, mail was manually sorted by hand, but it is increasingly sorted by automatic sorting machines. The main dilemma faced by postal operators when organizing the sorting stage is whether to have a smaller number of large, centralized sorting centers (a spoke\u2013hub distribution paradigm) or a larger number of smaller sorting centers along with a larger number of direct connections between all of them (point-to-point transit).\nTransportation is the process of carrying mail from one place to another. A mailpiece usually has to be transported from one sorting center to another sorting center, where it is often sorted to another transportation segment headed towards its destination address, until it reaches the sorting center that directly serves that address.\nDelivery is the process of carrying mail to final destinations such as letter boxes. Sorting centers sort mailpieces destined for addresses in their immediate vicinity to carriers serving those addresses. Transporting mail to final destinations (the so-called last mile problem) is the most labor-intensive stage and accounts for up to 50% of postal operators' expenses. Depending upon the final destination, carriers often use vehicles, their own feet, or a combination of both. Postal operators try to control costs by presorting mail for carriers, so that they receive mail already arranged in the correct sequence for their designated routes; reducing the frequency of deliveries; or retiming deliveries so that they are spread throughout the day.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nComponents of a postal system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51141", "revid": "20319727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51141", "title": "Hampster", "text": ""}
{"id": "51142", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51142", "title": "William Riker", "text": "Fictional character from Star Trek\nWilliam Thomas \"Will\" Riker is a fictional character in the \"Star Trek\" universe appearing primarily as a main character in \",\" portrayed by Jonathan Frakes. Throughout the series and its accompanying films, he is the \"Enterprise\"'s first officer, and briefly captain, until he accepts command of the USS \"Titan\" at the end of \"\". He is the husband of Deanna Troi.\nCasting.\nFrakes went to seven auditions over six weeks before being cast as Riker. Frakes stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I started with the cattle call, then the casting director, the producer, then other directors, to Gene Roddenberry, and then through the Paramount execs, including the vice-president himself and the heads of television.Frakes was not the first choice for the part of Riker, Patrick Stewart was the number one choice when casting began. Michael O'Gorman, Ben Murphy, and Gregg Marx were also considered for the role.\nDepiction.\n\"Star Trek: The Next Generation\".\nRiker is usually referred to as \"Will\". He is also usually (and informally) called \"Number One\" by Captain Picard, because of his position as first officer on the \"Enterprise\".\nRiker was originally scripted as a much more serious, by-the-book officer, but by the middle episodes of the first season, it was felt that he was too \"official\", and his character was toned down and became more of a ladies' man. For the first two seasons, Riker is portrayed as a bold, confident and sometimes arrogant, ambitious young officer; however, over time he becomes more reserved, as experience teaches him the wisdom of a patient, careful approach. He becomes comfortable on the \"Enterprise\", repeatedly turning down offers of his own command, and he learns to cherish his fellow officers' company. Nonetheless, he retains a willingness to occasionally disregard the chain of command.\nAlthough Riker was clean-shaven for the first season, he grew a beard at the start of the second season that later became something of a trademark. Between sessions, Frakes grew a beard for his role in the Civil War miniseries \"North and South\", and Gene Roddenberry asked him to keep it because he thought it made Riker look more nautical. Because Frakes' beard coincided with what fans and critics perceived as an improvement of the show's writing quality, \"growing the beard\" has become an internet colloquialism for a once subpar television series achieving a dramatic level of improvement. Riker did shave his mustache and beard during the events of \"Star Trek Insurrection\", to the amusement of Data.\nRiker's background is first explored in the second-season episode \"The Icarus Factor\". In the episode, Riker's estranged father, Kyle, visits the \"Enterprise\" to offer his son the command of the USS \"Aries\", which Riker refuses. We learn that Riker grew up in Alaska; that his mother, Elizabeth (Betty), died when he was two; and that he was raised by his father until age 15, when he left home. In the episode, Riker had not spoken with his father for 15 years, but they manage to partially mend their relationship over a game of martial-arts sparring called Anbo-jitsu. In the episode \"\", a waiter at Ten Forward mistakenly states that Riker is Canadian, and in the same episode Riker clarifies that he grew up in Alaska. According to the \"Voyager\" episode \" (in which Riker made a guest appearance), Riker's distant ancestors also lived in the United States: During the American Civil War, his ancestor Colonel Thaddeus Riker fought on the Union side as an officer in the 102nd New York Infantry Regiment during the Atlanta campaign.\nIn the two-part episode \" Riker takes command of the \"Enterprise\", promoted to the rank of captain through a field promotion, and orchestrates Picard's rescue. This episode also explores the idea of Riker being unwilling to take chances since he had grown comfortable in his role as First Officer aboard the \"Enterprise\". By the end of the episode, when he orders the \"Enterprise\" to fire on former Captain Picard, now Locutus of Borg, Riker has grown into a more confident leader. The sixth-season episode \"\" reveals that Will Riker was duplicated long ago by a transporter malfunction. The \"second\" Riker takes the name \"Thomas\", which is revealed to be William Riker's middle name. In the seventh-season episode \"\", Riker must confront his former commanding officer, Admiral Erik Pressman, over a cover-up related to the destruction of the USS \"Pegasus\". The \"Pegasus\" had illegally developed a radically different type of cloaking device that also allowed it to phase through matter, resulting in it becoming fused within an asteroid when unstable power consumption forced the cloaking device offline. In the \"Enterprise\" series finale, Riker appears as a never before seen cook discussing matters of life, duty, and sacrifice with the crew. It is revealed that his presence is part of a holodeck simulation of historic events that Riker initiated to help himself make the decision to inform Captain Picard of the illegal research once conducted by Admiral Pressman aboard the \"Pegasus\".\nBefore the beginning of the series, Riker was involved in a romantic relationship with Counselor Troi on her home planet Betazed. They often refer to each other as \"imzadi\", a Betazoid term of endearment meaning \"soulmate\". The novel \"Imzadi\" takes place before the beginning of the series and explores the history of the relationship between the two characters. The two characters are close friends throughout the series, but their relationship does not resume until ', the third \"Star Trek\" film set in the \"Next Generation\" era, although Thomas Riker, the duplicate created by a transporter malfunction, attempts to respark their relationship in \"Second Chances\". The following movie, ', begins with their wedding reception on board the \"Enterprise\"-E. At the start of the film, Riker finally accepts a promotion to captain and an offer to command the USS \"Titan\"; during the movie's final scenes he bids Picard, and the \"Enterprise\", farewell.\n\"Star Trek: Voyager\".\nRiker guest-starred along with Q in the \" episode \".\n\"Star Trek: Enterprise\".\nFrakes reprised his role of Commander Riker in the 2005 \"\" series finale, \"These Are the Voyages...\".\n\"Star Trek: Picard\".\nRiker returns to the screen in the \"Nepenthe\" episode of \"\". In that episode, taking place in 2399, Riker is married to Deanna Troi; they have two children, Thad (now deceased) and Kestra. Picard and his gynoid companion Soji visit the Rikers' home, a National Parks-style lodge on the planet Nepenthe, and are welcomed with open arms. Will and Deanna are retired from Starfleet although Will describes his status as being on \"active reserve.\"\nRiker makes another \"Picard\" appearance in the Season 1 finale \"Et in Arcadia Ego, Part II\". In that episode, Riker has been reinstated to active duty. He is temporarily in command of the USS \"Zheng He\", the lead ship in a Starfleet squadron sent to the planet Coppelius to protect its inhabitants from imminent Romulan attack.\nRiker, along with other former members of the crew of the USS \"Enterprise\"-D, return for an extended story arc in the third and final season of \"Picard\", wherein they fight a rogue Changeling conspiracy against the Federation. Riker appears from the season premiere onward (as of the fourth episode), and is acting captain of the \u00a0\u2013 successor to at the end of ', continuing in '\u00a0\u2013 in the third and fourth episodes. While conducting a heist at the advanced research center the Daystrom Institute on Picard's behalf, Riker is captured by the rogue Changelings, and reunited with Deanna in the sixth episode. Riker had fallen into an existential crisis after Thad's death, and their relationship had turned into one of toxic codependency and longing for adventure, necessitating their temporary separation and Picard's help. Their former crewmate Worf rescues the couple and brings them aboard the \"Titan\" in the eighth episode, reuniting the crew of the \"Enterprise\".\n\"Star Trek: Lower Decks\".\nRiker appears in \"No Small Parts\", the 2020 finale of the first season of ', as captain of the USS \"Titan\" (NCC-80102) alongside his wife Deanna Troi\u00a0\u2013 continuing a posting announced in dialogue at the end of ' (2002). Riker appeared in the second season's first and second episodes.\nAlternate versions.\nFrakes appeared in dual roles in \"\", a \"TNG\" episode where it was established that a duplicate of him was created years earlier by a transporter malfunction. Frakes appeared as the duplicate, Thomas Riker, in the \" episode \", where Thomas impersonates William in order to commandeer the on behalf of the Maquis.\nPopular culture.\nIn 1993, mainframe software company Boole &amp; Babbage announced that it had signed a two-year licensing agreement, paying Paramount Pictures $75,000 a year, to use \"Star Trek\" imagery in advertising for its products. Boole &amp; Babbage's campaign used actor Jonathan Frakes, playing his character of Commander William Riker, in their \"Star Trek\"-themed advertisements.\nReception.\nIn 2009, \"IGN\" rated William Riker the 22nd best character of all \"Star Trek\" up to that time.\nIn 2016, \"Wired\" magazine ranked First Officer Riker as the 6th most important character of Starfleet within the \"Star Trek\" science fiction universe.\nIn 2017, IndieWire ranked Riker as the 2nd best character on \"Star Trek:The Next Generation\".\nIn March 2018, \"TheWrap\" placed William Riker as 5th out 39 in a ranking of main cast characters of the \"Star Trek\" franchise. In October 2018, CBR ranked Riker as the 12th best Starfleet character of \"Star Trek\".\nIn 2019, \"CinemaBlend\" ranked Riker the fifth best Starfleet character of all time. They point out he is good at his job as \"Number One\", first officer to Captain Picard on the starship USS \"Enterprise\" 1701-D.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51143", "revid": "34456821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51143", "title": "Giant-impact hypothesis", "text": "Hypothesis of the formation of the Moon\nThe giant-impact hypothesis, sometimes called the Theia Impact, is an astrogeology hypothesis for the formation of the Moon first proposed in 1946 by Canadian geologist Reginald Daly. The hypothesis suggests that the Proto-Earth collided with a Mars-sized co-orbital protoplanet likely from the L4 or L5 Lagrange points of the Earth's orbit approximately 4.5\u00a0billion years ago in the early Hadean eon (about 20 to 100\u00a0million years after the Solar System formed), and some of the ejected debris from the impact event later re-accreted to form the Moon. The impactor planet is sometimes called Theia, named after the mythical Greek Titan who was the mother of Selene, the goddess of the Moon.\nAnalysis of lunar rocks published in a 2016 report suggests that the impact might have been a direct hit, causing a fragmentation and thorough mixing of both parent bodies.\nThe giant-impact hypothesis is currently the favored hypothesis for lunar formation among astronomers. Evidence that supports this hypothesis includes:\nHowever, several questions remain concerning the best current models of the giant-impact hypothesis. The energy of such a giant impact is predicted to have heated Earth to produce a global magma ocean, and evidence of the resultant planetary differentiation of the heavier material sinking into Earth's mantle has been documented. However, there is no self-consistent model that starts with the giant-impact event and follows the evolution of the debris into a single moon.\nHistory.\nIn 1898, George Darwin made the suggestion that Earth and the Moon were once a single body. Darwin's hypothesis was that a molten Moon had been spun from Earth because of centrifugal forces, and this became the dominant academic explanation. Using Newtonian mechanics, he calculated that the Moon had orbited much more closely in the past and was drifting away from Earth. This drifting was later confirmed by American and Soviet experiments, using laser ranging targets placed on the Moon.\nNonetheless, Darwin's calculations could not resolve the mechanics required to trace the Moon back to the surface of Earth. In 1946, Reginald Aldworth Daly of Harvard University challenged Darwin's explanation, adjusting it to postulate that the creation of the Moon was caused by an impact rather than centrifugal forces. Little attention was paid to Professor Daly's challenge until a conference on satellites in 1974, during which the idea was reintroduced and later published and discussed in \"Icarus\" in 1975 by William K. Hartmann and Donald R. Davis. Their models suggested that, at the end of the planet formation period, several satellite-sized bodies had formed that could collide with the planets or be captured. They proposed that one of these objects might have collided with Earth, ejecting refractory, volatile-poor dust that could coalesce to form the Moon. This collision could potentially explain the unique geological and geochemical properties of the Moon.\nA similar approach was taken by Canadian astronomer Alastair G. W. Cameron and American astronomer William R. Ward, who suggested that the Moon was formed by the tangential impact upon Earth of a body the size of Mars. It is hypothesized that most of the outer silicates of the colliding body would be vaporized, whereas a metallic core would not. Hence, most of the collisional material sent into orbit would consist of silicates, leaving the coalescing Moon deficient in iron. The more volatile materials that were emitted during the collision probably would escape the Solar System, whereas silicates would tend to coalesce.\nEighteen months prior to an October 1984 conference on lunar origins, Bill Hartmann, Roger Phillips, and Jeff Taylor challenged fellow lunar scientists: \"You have eighteen months. Go back to your Apollo data, go back to your computer, and do whatever you have to, but make up your mind. Don't come to our conference unless you have something to say about the Moon's birth.\" At the 1984 conference at Kona, Hawaii, the giant-impact hypothesis emerged as the most favored hypothesis. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Before the conference, there were partisans of the three \"traditional\" theories, plus a few people who were starting to take the giant impact seriously, and there was a huge apathetic middle who didn't think the debate would ever be resolved. Afterward, there were essentially only two groups: the giant impact camp and the agnostics.\nTheia.\nThe name of the hypothesised protoplanet is derived from the mythical Greek titan Theia , who gave birth to the Moon goddess Selene. This designation was proposed initially by the English geochemist Alex N. Halliday in 2000 and has become accepted in the scientific community. According to modern theories of planet formation, Theia was part of a population of Mars-sized bodies that existed in the Solar System 4.5 billion years ago. Theia is hypothesized to have orbited in the L4 or L5 configuration presented by the Earth\u2013Sun system, where it would tend to remain. One of the attractive features of the giant-impact hypothesis is that the formation of the Moon and Earth align; during the course of its formation, Earth is thought to have experienced dozens of collisions with planet-sized bodies. The Moon-forming collision would have been only one such \"giant impact\" but certainly the last significant impactor event. The Late Heavy Bombardment by much smaller asteroids may have occurred later\u00a0\u2013 approximately 3.9 billion years ago.\nBasic model.\nAstronomers think the collision between Earth and Theia happened at about 4.4 to 4.45 billion years ago (bya); about 0.1 billion years after the Solar System began to form. In astronomical terms, the impact would have been of moderate velocity. Theia is thought to have struck Earth at an oblique angle when Earth was nearly fully formed. Computer simulations of this \"late-impact\" scenario suggest an initial impactor velocity below at \"infinity\" (far enough that gravitational attraction is not a factor), increasing as it approached to over at impact, and an impact angle of about 45\u00b0. However, oxygen isotope abundance in lunar rock suggests \"vigorous mixing\" of Theia and Earth, indicating a steep impact angle. Theia's iron core would have sunk into the young Earth's core, and most of Theia's mantle accreted onto Earth's mantle. However, a significant portion of the mantle material from both Theia and Earth would have been ejected into orbit around Earth (if ejected with velocities between orbital velocity and escape velocity) or into individual orbits around the Sun (if ejected at higher velocities).\nModelling has hypothesised that material in orbit around Earth may have accreted to form the Moon in three consecutive phases, accreting first from the bodies initially present outside Earth's Roche limit, which acted to confine the inner disk material within the Roche limit. The inner disk slowly and viscously spread back out to Earth's Roche limit, pushing along outer bodies via resonant interactions. After several tens of years, the disk spread beyond the Roche limit, and started producing new objects that continued the growth of the Moon, until the inner disk was depleted in mass after several hundreds of years. Material in stable Kepler orbits was thus likely to hit the Earth\u2013Moon system sometime later (because the Earth\u2013Moon system's Kepler orbit around the Sun also remains stable). Estimates based on computer simulations of such an event suggest that some twenty percent of the original mass of Theia would have ended up as an orbiting ring of debris around Earth, and about half of this matter coalesced into the Moon. Earth would have gained significant amounts of angular momentum and mass from such a collision. Regardless of the speed and tilt of Earth's rotation before the impact, it would have experienced a day some five hours long after the impact, and Earth's equator and the Moon's orbit would have become coplanar.\nNot all of the ring material need have been swept up right away: the thickened crust of the Moon's far side suggests the possibility that a second moon about in diameter formed in a Lagrange point of the Moon. The smaller moon may have remained in orbit for tens of millions of years. As the two moons migrated outward from Earth, solar tidal effects would have made the Lagrange orbit unstable, resulting in a slow-velocity collision that \"pancaked\" the smaller moon onto what is now the far side of the Moon, adding material to its crust.\nLunar magma cannot pierce through the thick crust of the far side, causing fewer lunar maria, while the near side has a thin crust displaying the large maria visible from Earth.\nAbove a high resolution threshold for simulations, a study published in 2022 finds that giant impacts can immediately place a satellite with similar mass and iron content to the Moon into orbit far outside Earth's Roche limit. Even satellites that initially pass within the Roche limit can reliably and predictably survive, by being partially stripped and then torqued onto wider, stable orbits. Furthermore, the outer layers of these directly formed satellites are molten over cooler interiors and are composed of around 60% proto-Earth material. This could alleviate the tension between the Moon's Earth-like isotopic composition and the different signature expected for the impactor. Immediate formation opens up new options for the Moon's early orbit and evolution, including the possibility of a highly tilted orbit to explain the lunar inclination, and offers a simpler, single-stage scenario for the origin of the Moon.\nComposition.\nIn 2001, a team at the Carnegie Institution of Washington reported that the rocks from the Apollo program carried an isotopic signature that was identical with rocks from Earth, and were different from almost all other bodies in the Solar System.\nIn 2014, a team in Germany reported that the Apollo samples had a slightly different isotopic signature from Earth rocks. The difference was slight, but statistically significant. One possible explanation is that Theia formed near Earth.\nThis empirical data showing close similarity of composition can be explained only by the standard giant-impact hypothesis, as it is extremely unlikely that two bodies prior to collision had such similar composition.\nEquilibration hypothesis.\nIn 2007, researchers from the California Institute of Technology showed that the likelihood of Theia having an identical isotopic signature as Earth was very small (less than 1 percent). They proposed that in the aftermath of the giant impact, while Earth and the proto-lunar disc were molten and vaporised, the two reservoirs were connected by a common silicate vapor atmosphere and that the Earth\u2013Moon system became homogenised by convective stirring while the system existed in the form of a continuous fluid. Such an \"equilibration\" between the post-impact Earth and the proto-lunar disc is the only proposed scenario that explains the isotopic similarities of the Apollo rocks with rocks from Earth's interior. For this scenario to be viable, however, the proto-lunar disc would have to endure for about 100 years. Work is ongoing to determine whether or not this is possible.\nDirect collision hypothesis.\nAccording to research (2012) to explain similar compositions of the Earth and the Moon based on simulations at the University of Bern by physicist Andreas Reufer and his colleagues, Theia collided directly with Earth instead of barely swiping it. The collision speed may have been higher than originally assumed, and this higher velocity may have totally destroyed Theia. According to this modification, the composition of Theia is not so restricted, making a composition of up to 50% water ice possible.\nSynestia hypothesis.\nOne effort, in 2018, to homogenise the products of the collision was to energise the primary body by way of a greater pre-collision rotational speed. This way, more material from the primary body would be spun off to form the Moon. Further computer modelling determined that the observed result could be obtained by having the pre-Earth body spinning very rapidly, so much so that it formed a new celestial object which was given the name 'synestia'. This is an unstable state that could have been generated by yet another collision to get the rotation spinning fast enough. Further modelling of this transient structure has shown that the primary body spinning as a doughnut-shaped object (the synestia) existed for about a century (a very short time) before it cooled down and gave birth to Earth and the Moon.\nTerrestrial magma ocean hypothesis.\nAnother model, in 2019, to explain the similarity of Earth and the Moon's compositions posits that shortly after Earth formed, it was covered by a sea of hot magma, while the impacting object was likely made of solid material. Modelling suggests that this would lead to the impact heating the magma much more than solids from the impacting object, leading to more material being ejected from the proto-Earth, so that about 80% of the Moon-forming debris originated from the proto-Earth. Many prior models had suggested 80% of the Moon coming from the impactor.\nEvidence.\nIndirect evidence for the giant impact scenario comes from rocks collected during the Apollo Moon landings, which show oxygen isotope ratios nearly identical to those of Earth. The highly anorthositic composition of the lunar crust, as well as the existence of KREEP-rich samples, suggest that a large portion of the Moon once was molten; and a giant impact scenario could easily have supplied the energy needed to form such a magma ocean. Several lines of evidence show that if the Moon has an iron-rich core, it must be a small one. In particular, the mean density, moment of inertia, rotational signature, and magnetic induction response of the Moon all suggest that the radius of its core is less than about 25% the radius of the Moon, in contrast to about 50% for most of the other terrestrial bodies. Appropriate impact conditions satisfying the angular momentum constraints of the Earth\u2013Moon system yield a Moon formed mostly from the mantles of Earth and the impactor, while the core of the impactor accretes to Earth. Earth has the highest density of all the planets in the Solar System; the absorption of the core of the impactor body explains this observation, given the proposed properties of the early Earth and Theia.\nComparison of the zinc isotopic composition of lunar samples with that of Earth and Mars rocks provides further evidence for the impact hypothesis. Zinc is strongly fractionated when volatilised in planetary rocks, but not during normal igneous processes, so zinc abundance and isotopic composition can distinguish the two geological processes. Moon rocks contain more heavy isotopes of zinc, and overall less zinc, than corresponding igneous Earth or Mars rocks, which is consistent with zinc being depleted from the Moon through evaporation, as expected for the giant impact origin.\nCollisions between ejecta escaping Earth's gravity and asteroids would have left impact heating signatures in stony meteorites; analysis based on assuming the existence of this effect has been used to date the impact event to 4.47 billion years ago, in agreement with the date obtained by other means.\nWarm silica-rich dust and abundant SiO gas, products of high velocity impacts\u00a0\u2013 over \u00a0\u2013 between rocky bodies, have been detected by the Spitzer Space Telescope around the nearby (29 pc distant) young (~12 My old) star HD 172555 in the Beta Pictoris moving group. A belt of warm dust in a zone between 0.25AU and 2AU from the young star HD 23514 in the Pleiades cluster appears similar to the predicted results of Theia's collision with the embryonic Earth, and has been interpreted as the result of planet-sized objects colliding with each other. A similar belt of warm dust was detected around the star BD+20\u00b0307 (HIP 8920, SAO 75016).\nOn 1 November 2023, scientists reported that, according to computer simulations, remnants of Theia could be still visible inside the Earth as two giant anomalies of the Earth's mantle.\nDifficulties.\nThis lunar origin hypothesis has some difficulties that have yet to be resolved. For example, the giant-impact hypothesis implies that a surface magma ocean would have formed following the impact. Yet there is no evidence that Earth ever had such a magma ocean and it is likely there exists material that has never been processed in a magma ocean.\nComposition.\nA number of compositional inconsistencies need to be addressed.\nLack of a Venusian moon.\nIf the Moon was formed by such an impact, it is possible that other inner planets also may have been subjected to comparable impacts. A moon that formed around Venus by this process would have been unlikely to escape. If such a moon-forming event had occurred there, a possible explanation of why the planet does not have such a moon might be that a second collision occurred that countered the angular momentum from the first impact. Another possibility is that the strong tidal forces from the Sun would tend to destabilise the orbits of moons around close-in planets. For this reason, if Venus's slow rotation rate began early in its history, any satellites larger than a few kilometers in diameter would likely have spiraled inwards and collided with Venus.\nSimulations of the chaotic period of terrestrial planet formation suggest that impacts like those hypothesised to have formed the Moon were common. For typical terrestrial planets with a mass of 0.5 to 1 Earth masses, such an impact typically results in a single moon containing 4% of the host planet's mass. The inclination of the resulting moon's orbit is random, but this tilt affects the subsequent dynamic evolution of the system. For example, some orbits may cause the moon to spiral back into the planet. Likewise, the proximity of the planet to the star will also affect the orbital evolution. The net effect is that it is more likely for impact-generated moons to survive when they orbit more distant terrestrial planets and are aligned with the planetary orbit.\nPossible origin of Theia.\nIn 2004, Princeton University mathematician Edward Belbruno and astrophysicist J. Richard Gott III proposed that Theia coalesced at the L4 or L5 Lagrangian point relative to Earth (in about the same orbit and about 60\u00b0 ahead or behind), similar to a trojan asteroid. Two-dimensional computer models suggest that the stability of Theia's proposed trojan orbit would have been affected when its growing mass exceeded a threshold of approximately 10% of Earth's mass (the mass of Mars). In this scenario, gravitational perturbations by planetesimals caused Theia to depart from its stable Lagrangian location, and subsequent interactions with proto-Earth led to a collision between the two bodies.\nIn 2008, evidence was presented that suggests that the collision might have occurred later than the accepted value of 4.53\u00a0Gya, at approximately 4.48\u00a0Gya. A 2014 comparison of computer simulations with elemental abundance measurements in Earth's mantle indicated that the collision occurred approximately 95\u00a0My after the formation of the Solar System.\nIt has been suggested that other significant objects might have been created by the impact, which could have remained in orbit between Earth and the Moon, stuck in Lagrangian points. Such objects might have stayed within the Earth\u2013Moon system for as long as 100 million years, until the gravitational tugs of other planets destabilised the system enough to free the objects. A study published in 2011 suggested that a subsequent collision between the Moon and one of these smaller bodies caused the notable differences in physical characteristics between the two hemispheres of the Moon. This collision, simulations have supported, would have been at a low enough velocity so as not to form a crater; instead, the material from the smaller body would have spread out across the Moon (in what would become its far side), adding a thick layer of highlands crust. The resulting mass irregularities would subsequently produce a gravity gradient that resulted in tidal locking of the Moon so that today, only the near side remains visible from Earth. However, mapping by the GRAIL mission has ruled out this scenario.\nIn 2019, a team at the University of M\u00fcnster reported that the molybdenum isotopic composition in Earth's primitive mantle originates from the outer Solar System, hinting at the source of water on Earth. One possible explanation is that Theia originated in the outer Solar System.\nAlternative hypotheses.\nOther mechanisms that have been suggested at various times for the Moon's origin are that the Moon was spun off from Earth's molten surface by centrifugal force; that it was formed elsewhere and was subsequently captured by Earth's gravitational field; or that Earth and the Moon formed at the same time and place from the same accretion disk. None of these hypotheses can account for the high angular momentum of the Earth\u2013Moon system.\nAnother hypothesis attributes the formation of the Moon to the impact of a large asteroid with Earth much later than previously thought, creating the satellite primarily from debris from Earth. In this hypothesis, the formation of the Moon occurs 60\u2013140 million years after the formation of the Solar System (as compared to hypothesized Theia impact at 4.527 \u00b1 0.010 billion years). The asteroid impact in this scenario would have created a magma ocean on Earth and the proto-Moon with both bodies sharing a common plasma metal vapor atmosphere. The shared metal vapor bridge would have allowed material from Earth and the proto-Moon to exchange and equilibrate into a more common composition.\nYet another hypothesis proposes that the Moon and Earth formed together, not from the collision of once-distant bodies. This model, published in 2012 by Robin M. Canup, suggests that the Moon and Earth formed from a massive collision of two planetary bodies, each larger than Mars, which then re-collided to form what is now called Earth. After the re-collision, Earth was surrounded by a disk of material which accreted to form the Moon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nAcademic articles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNon-academic books\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51144", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51144", "title": "Scat singing", "text": "Vocal improvisation with wordless vocables, nonsense syllables or without words at all\n Ella Fitzgerald is considered to be one of the greatest scat singers in jazz history\nOriginating in vocal jazz, scat singing or scatting is vocal improvisation with wordless vocables, nonsense syllables or without words at all. In scat singing, the singer improvises melodies and rhythms using the voice solely as an instrument rather than a speaking medium. This is different from vocalese, which uses recognizable lyrics that are sung to pre-existing instrumental solos.\nCharacteristics.\nStructure and syllable choice.\nThough scat singing is improvised, the melodic lines are often variations on scale and arpeggio fragments, stock patterns and riffs, as is the case with instrumental improvisers. As well, scatting usually incorporates musical structure. All of Ella Fitzgerald's scat performances of \"How High the Moon\", for instance, use the same tempo, begin with a chorus of a straight reading of the lyric, move to a \"specialty chorus\" introducing the scat chorus, and then the scat itself. Will Friedwald has compared Ella Fitzgerald to Chuck Jones directing his Roadrunner cartoon\u2014each uses predetermined formulas in innovative ways.\nThe deliberate choice of scat syllables is also a key element in vocal jazz improvisation. Syllable choice influences the pitch, articulation, coloration, and resonance of the performance. Syllable choice also differentiated jazz singers' personal styles: Betty Carter was inclined to use sounds like \"louie-ooie-la-la-la\" (soft-tongued sounds or liquids) while Sarah Vaughan would prefer \"shoo-doo-shoo-bee-ooo-bee\" (fricatives, plosives, and open vowels). The choice of scat syllables can also be used to reflect the sounds of different instruments. The comparison of the scatting styles of Ella Fitzgerald and Sarah Vaughan reveals that Fitzgerald's improvisation mimics the sounds of swing-era big bands with which she performed, while Vaughan's mimics that of her accompanying bop-era small combos.\nHumor and quotation.\nHumor is another important element of scat singing. Bandleader Cab Calloway exemplified the use of humorous scatting. Other examples of humorous scatting include Slim Gaillard, Leo Watson, and Bam Brown's 1945 song \"Avocado Seed Soup Symphony,\" in which the singers scat variations on the word \"avocado\" for much of the recording.\nIn addition to such nonsensical uses of language, humor is communicated in scat singing through the use of musical quotation. Leo Watson, who performed before the canon of American popular music, frequently drew on nursery rhymes in his scatting. This is called using a compression. Similarly, Ella Fitzgerald's scatting, for example, drew extensively on popular music. In her 1960 recording of \"How High the Moon\" live in Berlin, she quotes over a dozen songs, including \"The Peanut Vendor,\" \"Heat Wave,\" \"A-Tisket, A-Tasket,\" and \"Smoke Gets in Your Eyes.\"\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nImprovisational singing of nonsense syllables occurs in many cultures, such as diddling or lilting in Ireland, German yodeling, S\u00e1mi joik, and speaking in tongues in various religious traditions. \nAlthough Louis Armstrong's 1926 recording of \"Heebie Jeebies\" is often cited as the first modern song to employ scatting, there are many earlier examples. One early master of ragtime scat singing was Gene Greene who recorded scat choruses in his song \"King of the Bungaloos\" and several others between 1911 and 1917. Entertainer Al Jolson scatted through a few bars in the middle of his 1911 recording of \"That Haunting Melody.\" Gene Greene's 1917 \"From Here to Shanghai,\" which featured faux-Chinese scatting, and Gene Rodemich's 1924 \"Scissor Grinder Joe\" and \"Some of These Days\" also pre-date Armstrong. Cliff \"Ukulele Ike\" Edwards scatted an interlude on his 1923 \"Old Fashioned Love\" in lieu of using an instrumental soloist. One of the early female singers to use scat was Aileen Stanley, who included it at the end of a duet with Billy Murray in their hit 1924 recording of \"It Had To Be You\" (Victor 19373).\nJazz pianist Jelly Roll Morton credited Joe Sims of Vicksburg, Mississippi, as the creator of scat around the turn of the 20th century. In a conversation between Alan Lomax and Jelly Roll Morton, Morton recounted the history of scat:\nLomax: \"Well, what about some more scat songs, that you used to sing way back then?\"\nMorton: \"Oh, I'll sing you some scat songs. That was way before Louis Armstrong's time. By the way, scat is something that a lot of people don't understand, and they begin to believe that the first scat numbers was ever done, was done by one of my hometown boys, Louis Armstrong. But I must take the credit away, since I know better. The first man that ever did a scat number in history of this country was a man from Vicksburg, Mississippi, by the name of Joe Sims, an old comedian. And from that, Tony Jackson and myself, and several more grabbed it in New Orleans. And found it was pretty good for an introduction of a song.\"\nLomax: \"What does scat mean?\"\nMorton: \"Scat doesn't mean anything but just something to give a song a flavor.\"\nMorton also once boasted, \"Tony Jackson and myself were using scat for novelty back in 1906 and 1907 when Louis Armstrong was still in the orphan's home.\" Don Redman and Fletcher Henderson also featured scat vocals in their 1925 recording of \"My Papa Doesn't Two-Time No Time\" five months prior to Armstrong's 1926 recording of \"Heebie Jeebies.\"\nHeebie Jeebies.\nIt was Armstrong's February 1926 performance of \"Heebie Jeebies,\" however, that is considered the turning point for the medium. From the 1926 recording of \"Heebie Jeebies\" arose the techniques that would form the foundation of modern scat. In a possibly apocryphal story, Armstrong claimed that, when he was recording \"Heebie Jeebies\" with his band The Hot Five, his sheet music fell off the stand and onto the ground. Not knowing the lyrics to the song, he invented a gibberish melody to fill time, expecting the cut to be thrown out in the end, but that take of the song was the one released: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I dropped the paper with the lyrics\u2014right in the middle of the tune. . . And I did not want to stop and spoil the record which was moving along so wonderfully . . . So when I dropped the paper, I immediately turned back into the horn and started to scatting . . . Just as nothing had happened . . . When I finished the record I just knew the recording people would throw it out . . . And to my surprise they all came running out of the controlling booth and said\u2014'Leave That In.'\"\nArmstrong's \"Heebie Jeebies\" became a national bestseller and, consequently, the practice of scatting \"became closely associated with Armstrong.\" The song would serve as a model for Cab Calloway, whose 1930s scat solos inspired George Gershwin's use of the medium in his 1935 opera \"Porgy and Bess\".\nWidespread adoption.\nFollowing the success of Armstrong's \"Heebie Jeebies,\" a number of popular songs featured scat singing. In June 1927, Harry Barris and Bing Crosby of bandleader Paul Whiteman's \"The Rhythm Boys\" scatted on several songs including \"Mississippi Mud,\" which Barris had composed.\nOn October 26, 1927, Duke Ellington's Orchestra recorded \"Creole Love Call\" featuring Adelaide Hall singing wordlessly. Hall's wordless vocals and \"evocative growls\" were hailed as serving as \"another instrument.\" Although creativity must be shared between Ellington and Hall as he knew the style of performance he wanted, Hall was the one who was able to produce the sound. A year later, in October 1928, Ellington repeated the experiment in one of his versions of \"The Mooche,\" with Getrude \"Baby\" Cox singing scat after a muted similar trombone solo by Joe \"Tricky Sam\" Nanton.\nDuring the Great Depression, acts such as The Boswell Sisters regularly employed scatting on their records, including the high complexity of scatting at the same time, in harmony. An example is their version of \"It Don't Mean a Thing (If It Ain't Got That Swing).\" The Boswell Sisters' \"inventive use of scat singing was a source for Ella Fitzgerald.\" As a young girl, Fitzgerald often practiced imitating Connee Boswell's scatting for hours. \nFitzgerald herself would become a talented scat singer and later claimed to be the \"best vocal improviser jazz has ever had,\" and critics since then have been in almost universal agreement with her. During this 1930s era, other famous scat singers included Scatman Crothers\u2014who would go on to movie and television fame\u2014and British dance band trumpeter and vocalist Nat Gonella whose scat-singing recordings were banned in Nazi Germany.\nLater development.\nOver the years, as jazz music developed and grew in complexity, scat singing did as well. During the bop era of the 1940s, more highly developed vocal improvisation surged in popularity. Annie Ross, a bop singer, expressed a common sentiment among vocalists at the time: \"The [scat] music was so exciting, everyone wanted to do it.\" And many did: Eddie Jefferson, Betty Carter, Anita O'Day, Joe Carroll, Sarah Vaughan, Carmen McRae, Jon Hendricks, Babs Gonzales, Mel Torme and Dizzy Gillespie were all singers in the idiom. \nFree jazz and the influence of world musicians on the medium pushed jazz singing nearer to avant-garde art music. In the 1960s Ward Swingle was the product of an unusually liberal musical education. He took the scat singing idea and applied it to the works of Bach, creating The Swingle Singers. Scat singing was also used by Louis Prima and others in the song \"I Wan'na Be Like You\" in Disney's \"The Jungle Book\" (1967).\nThe bop revival of the 1970s renewed interest in bop scat singing, and young scat singers viewed themselves as a continuation of the classic bop tradition. The medium continues to evolve, and vocal improvisation now often develops independently of changes in instrumental jazz.\nDuring the mid-1990s, jazz artist John Paul Larkin (better known as Scatman John) renewed interest in the genre briefly when he began fusing jazz singing with pop music and eurodance, scoring a world-wide hit with the song \"Scatman (Ski Ba Bop Ba Dop Bop)\" in 1994. Vocal improviser Bobby McFerrin's performances have shown that \"wordless singing has traveled far from the concepts demonstrated by Louis Armstrong, Gladys Bentley, Cab Calloway, Anita O'Day, and Leo Watson.\"\nVocal bass.\nVocal bass is a form of scat singing that is intended to vocally simulate instrumental basslines that are typically performed by bass players. A technique most commonly used by bass singers in a cappella groups is to simulate an instrumental rhythm section, often alongside a vocal percussionist or beatboxer. Some notable vocal bass artists are Tim Foust, Adam Chance, Bobby McFerrin, Al Jarreau, Reggie Watts, Alvin Chea, Joe Santoni, Avi Kaplan, Matt Sallee, Chris Morey, Geoff Castellucci.\nUse in hip hop.\nMany hip hop artists and rappers use scat singing to come up with the rhythms of their raps. Tajai of the group Souls of Mischief states the following in the book \"How to Rap\": \"Sometimes my rhythms come from scatting. I usually make a scat kind of skeleton and then fill in the words. I make a skeleton of the flow first, and then I put words into it.\" The group Lifesavas describe a similar process. Rapper Tech N9ne has been recorded demonstrating exactly how this method works, and gangsta rapper Eazy-E used it extensively in his song \"Eazy Street.\"\nHistorical theories.\nSome writers have proposed that scat has its roots in African musical traditions. In much African music, \"human voice and instruments assume a kind of musical parity\" and are \"at times so close in timbre and so inextricably interwoven within the music's fabric as to be nearly indistinguishable.\" Dick Higgins likewise attributes scat singing to traditions of sound poetry in African-American music. In West African music, it is typical to convert drum rhythms into vocal melodies; common rhythmic patterns are assigned specific syllabic translations. However, this theory fails to account for the existence\u2014even in the earliest recorded examples of scatting\u2014of free improvisation by the vocalist. It is therefore more likely that scat singing evolved independently in the United States.\nOthers have proposed that scat singing arose from jazz musicians' practice of formulating riffs vocally before performing them instrumentally. (The adage \"If you can't sing it, you can't play it\" was common in the early New Orleans jazz scene.) In this manner, soloists like Louis Armstrong became able to double as vocalists, switching effortlessly between instrumental solos and scatting.\nScat singing also resembles the Irish/Scottish practice of lilting or diddling, a type of vocal music that involves using nonsensical syllables to sing non-vocal dance tunes.\nCritical assessment.\nScat singing can allow jazz singers to have the same improvisational opportunities as jazz instrumentalists: scatting can be rhythmically and harmonically improvisational without concern about the lyric. Especially when bebop was developing, singers found scat to be the best way to adequately engage in the performance of jazz.\nScatting may be desirable because it does not \"taint the music with the impurity of denotation.\" Instead of conveying linguistic content and pointing to something outside itself, scat music\u2014like instrumental music\u2014is self-referential and \"d[oes] what it mean[s].\" Through this wordlessness, commentators have written, scat singing can describe matters beyond words. Music critic Will Friedwald has written that Louis Armstrong's scatting, for example, \"has tapped into his own core of emotion,\" releasing emotions \"so deep, so real\" that they are unspeakable; his words \"bypass our ears and our brains and go directly for our hearts and souls.\"\nScat singing has never been universally accepted, even by jazz enthusiasts. Writer and critic Leonard Feather offers an extreme view; he once said that \"scat singing\u2014with only a couple exceptions\u2014should be banned.\" He also wrote the lyrics to the jazz song \"Whisper Not,\" which Ella Fitzgerald then recorded on her 1966 Verve release of the same name. Many jazz singers, including Bessie Smith, Billie Holiday, Jimmy Rushing, and Dinah Washington, have avoided scat entirely.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVideo examples:"}
{"id": "51146", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51146", "title": "Satchmo", "text": ""}
{"id": "51148", "revid": "1271976892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51148", "title": "John Wozniak", "text": "American musician\nJohn Keith Wozniak (born January 19, 1971) is an American musician best known as the lead singer, guitarist and songwriter of the band Marcy Playground.\nEarly life.\nWozniak was born and raised in Minneapolis. He learned how to play the guitar at the age of 14.\nCareer.\nWozniak's first solo effort was \"Zog BogBean \u2013 From the Marcy Playground\" recorded in his own home in 1990. In 1996 he recorded his second solo album, \"Leaving Wonderland...in a fit of rage\" (Produced by Jeff Dawson) and while searching for a label to release it on, decided to call it a Marcy Playground album and include new songs recorded with the rest of the band.\nAside from influences such as Neil Young, Paul Simon, and Van Morrison, an early influence in his life was his high school girlfriend from tenth grade until his freshman year in college, Sherry Fraser, of the band Two Ton Boa. She collaborated with Wozniak on Zog Bogbean, and on the song \"Ancient Walls of Flowers\" from Marcy Playground's self-titled album. The song \"Sherry Fraser\" was written about her.\nWozniak moved to Great Neck, Long Island, New York, in 1994 in order to collaborate with Jared Kotler, a multi-instrumentalist/music producer. Wozniak had written two albums worth of material and began recording what would become the eponymous \"Marcy Playground\" recordings at Sabella Recording Studio in Roslyn Heights, New York. More recording sessions followed with hiring Dylan Keefe as the band's bass player. Over two albums of material were recorded at Sebella by engineer Ken Goia, and these recordings brought the band to the attention of Capitol Records. The band was soon signed to Capitol and began a year-long series of club dates in New York City performing live in support of \"Marcy Playground\". The band then began a radio promotion tour of the U.S. following the release of the first single \"Poppies\".\nFollow-up single \"Sex and Candy\" was released shortly afterward. This song became very popular, rising to a then-record 15 weeks at number one on the U.S. Modern Rock Tracks chart. In 2012, \"Sex and Candy\" was named the fourth-best one-hit wonder of the 1990s by \"Rolling Stone\". \"Sex and Candy\" has been covered by Maroon 5, Prozak, Slothrust, and others.\nWozniak continues to regularly write, record and tour with Marcy Playground.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51149", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51149", "title": "Back beat", "text": ""}
{"id": "51150", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51150", "title": "Wilsons Promontory National Park", "text": "National park in Australia\nThe Wilsons Promontory National Park, commonly known as Wilsons Prom or The Prom, is a national park in the Gippsland region of Victoria, Australia, located approximately southeast of Melbourne.\nThe national park is the southernmost national park on mainland Australia, known for its rainforests, beaches and abundant wildlife. The national park covers the southern portion of Wilsons Promontory, a peninsula containing South Point, the southernmost point on the Australian mainland, and a number of islands. A lighthouse on the south-east corner of the peninsula is the southernmost lighthouse on mainland Australia and has operated continuously since 1859.\nThe Park is highly popular with bushwalkers and campers, and has a number of lodges and serviced camping near the mouth of Tidal River as well as a number of hike-in camping areas catering for bushwalkers.\nHistory.\nThe first Europeans to sight Wilsons Promontory are believed to be George Bass and Matthew Flinders in 1798.\nExtensive sealing took place at Sealer's Cove during the 19th Century, such that seals are no longer found there.\nLobbying by the Field Naturalists Club of Victoria (FNCV) and the Royal Society of Victoria (including Arthur Henry Shakespeare Lucas) led to the Victoria State Government temporarily reserving the area as National Park in 1898, made permanent in 1908. The original settlement in the Park was on the Darby River site, where a chalet existed. The FNCV has maintained a watching brief over the promontory for over 120 years.\nThe Wilsons Promontory was used as commando training area during World War II. A memorial to commandos who lost their lives in World War II is located at Tidal River.\nA large section of the park was burnt out in April 2005 by a bushfire caused by a controlled burn that breached containment lines because of warmer and windier conditions than were forecast for that day, causing the evacuation of six-hundred people.\nDuring the Black Saturday Fires of February 2009 throughout Victoria, trees in the Wilsons Promontory were struck by lightning, which then led to the loss of up to 50% of the national park through major fire damage.\nCamping.\nTidal River is the main location for accommodation and camping in Wilsons Promontory National Park. Tidal River Campground has 484 camping and caravan sites (including twelve powered sites) situated near the beach and river. There are also eleven remote walk-in sites located within the park.\nTidal River camping ground is nestled in sand dunes behind Norman Bay, on the western side of the peninsula. The only road open to visitors leads from Yanakie at the park entrance to Tidal River, a distance of 32 kilometres (20\u00a0mi). Yanakie is a dog friendly camp ground that can accommodate for large caravans as well as smaller tents. For those who wish to camp near Wilsons Promontory with their dog, it is a good alternative.\nWhen fully occupied, the settlement of Tidal River swells to over 2,000 people. There is a visitor centre open daily, a general store which serves basic supermarket and emergency items, fish and chips and takeaway food. The outdoor cinema, established in the late 1940s, is a nostalgic favourite amongst summer campers who will sometimes line up for over an hour before tickets can be bought so they can save a seat in the front row with a blanket.\nDuring summer, a ballot is held to allocate sites from Christmas until late January. Regardless of the time of year, all accommodation must be pre-booked.[3]\nWildlife.\nThe Wilsons Promontory National Park is home to a wide range of wildlife species, including kangaroos, wombats, echidnas, emus, a wide range of small marsupials, and numerous species of birds, most prominent among which are the rosellas. Generally, the wildlife around Tidal River is accustomed to human presence, and many of the animals and birds near the campsites will approach humans, accept food from them, or even enter their tents uninvited. It is, however, illegal to feed wildlife and if one is found to be feeding them you will be issued with a fine by Parks Victoria staff.\nOutside the camping area, the wildlife is less accustomed to humans, and may be more difficult to spot. Possums can be quite easily found with a torch at night, and kangaroos and emus are often seen in large numbers on either side of the road on the way in to the National Park. Swamp wallabies are frequently spotted on many of the walks, as are a variety of bird species. The northern section of the park is also home to an abundance of snakes.\nHiking.\nThe Prom has a number of different hiking trails. There are trails of differing levels of difficulty, including day hikes ranging from short strolls using beach access ramps up to longer two- or three-hour walks. There are also several overnight hiking options which can be combined into larger circuit hikes from 2 days upwards. There are also multi-day hikes in the northern section of the park which require walkers to have good navigational skills. A permit is required for all overnight hiking.\nA portion of the peninsula is warm temperate rainforest. These areas are generally traversed on boardwalks and bridges and the wildlife includes several bird species and swamp wallabies. There is also some mountainous terrain. Mount Oberon affords views that are only mildly marred by a radio aerial close by. An alternative walk-up Mount Bishop also has panoramic views of the Prom. The coastline is ruggedly and has indented coves and beaches interspersed amongst granite headlands, tors and cliffs. Beaches vary from broad sandy littoral plains to steep coves and rock pools. The northern part of the park comprises a great deal of the Yanakie Isthmus with sandy healthlands.\nMount Oberon.\nMount Oberon, located in Wilsons Promontory National Park, is a popular hiking destination. Hikers generally commence walking from Telegraph Saddle carpark, around halfway up the mountain from where Walkers follow a management vehicle track to Mount Oberon's summit. A short series of steps below the summit's rocky outcrops leads to views over Tidal River, the coast and islands offshore. It can be windy, cool and clouded over at the summit, even during summer . As of mid 2023 options for constructing a walking track linking Tidal River to Telegraph Saddle were being considered creating a hiking opportunity to the summit from sea level.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51151", "revid": "8372814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51151", "title": "Piero Sraffa", "text": "Italian economist (1898\u20131983)\nPiero Sraffa FBA (5 August 1898 \u2013 3 September 1983) was an influential Italian political economist who served as lecturer of economics at the University of Cambridge. His book \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\" is taken as founding the neo-Ricardian school of economics.\nEarly life.\nSraffa was born in Turin, Kingdom of Italy, to Angelo Sraffa (1865\u20131937) and Irma Sraffa (n\u00e9e Tivoli) (1873\u20131949), a wealthy Italian Jewish couple. His father was a professor in commercial law and later dean at the Bocconi University in Milan. Despite being raised as a practising Jew, Sraffa later became an agnostic.\nEarly career.\nDue to his father's activity, the young Piero followed him during his academic wanderings (University of Parma, University of Milan and University of Turin), where he met Antonio Gramsci (leader of Communist Party of Italy). They became close friends, partly due to their shared political views. Sraffa was also in contact with Filippo Turati, perhaps the most important leader of the Italian Socialist Party, whom he allegedly met and frequently visited in Rapallo, where his family had a holiday villa. At the age of 18, in the spring of 1917, he began military service as an officer of the Military Engineer Corps, under the command of the First Army as rear-guard. From the end of World War I (November 1918) until March 1920 he was a member of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the violations of the right of the people committed by the enemy. The military period corresponded to the \"university\" one; some anecdotes tell of exams done effortlessly wearing the officer uniform. He graduated in November 1920 with a thesis on inflation in Italy during the period of the Great War. His tutor was Luigi Einaudi, one of the most important Italian economists and later a president of the Italian Republic.\nFrom 1921 to 1922, he studied at the London School of Economics. During this period, at Cambridge, he met twice John Maynard Keynes, who invited him to a collaboration. This request led Sraffa to write two articles about the Italian banking system published in 1922, the first (\"The Bank Crisis in Italy\") in \"The Economic Journal\" (edited by Keynes) and the second (\"The current situation of Italian banks\") in the supplement of the newspaper \"Manchester Guardian\" (now \"The Guardian\"). Keynes also entrusted Sraffa with the Italian edition of his \"A Tract on Monetary Reform\". The meeting with Keynes was undoubtedly a fundamental turning point in Sraffa's career.\nIn 1922 Sraffa was appointed director of the provincial labour department in Milan, where he frequented socialist circles. In this period he made friends with Carlo Rosselli and Raffaele Mattioli, both assistants of Luigi Einaudi at the time.\nThe march on Rome, with the consequent seizure of power by Mussolini, was an event destined to affect deeply his future. His father Angelo was the target of aggression by a fascist squad and received two very threatening telegrams by Mussolini himself who required a public retraction by Piero on the content of the second article published in the \"Manchester Guardian\". Piero did not write a retraction. In May 1924 his friend Antonio Gramsci, who found himself stuck firstly in Moscow and then in Vienna due to the advent to power of fascism, returned to Rome on his election to Parliament. From now on the relations between the two intellectuals intensified. On 26 November 1926 Italian Parliament approved the law \"defence of the state\", thus giving rise to the totalitarian state. On 8 November 1926, Antonio Gramsci was arrested. During Gramsci's incarceration, Sraffa supplied books and the material, literally pens and paper, with which Gramsci would write his \"Prison Notebooks\".\nMajor works.\nThe laws of productivity under competitive conditions.\nIn 1925, Sraffa wrote about returns to scale and perfect competition. In the 1926 article, \"The Laws of Returns under Competitive Conditions\", published in \"The Economic Journal\", Sraffa resumes and develops his work of 1925 to show the inconsistency of the Marshallian theory of partial equilibrium, according to which, in competition for each good:\nSraffa notes that the law of decreasing returns and that of increasing returns have different origins and areas of application (and therefore cannot explain the shape of the same supply curve): the law of diminishing returns was originally applied to the entire economy and resulted from the scarcity of the agricultural land as a mean of production (the rent theory of David Ricardo); while the law of increasing returns applied to the individual firm and resulted from the benefits of division of labour. The first one allowed for the study of the laws of distribution, and the second those of production.\n\"Nobody, until comparatively recently \u2013 Sraffa writes \u2013 had thought of unifying these two tendencies in one single law of non-proportional productivity, and considering this as one of the bases of the theory of price\" Sraffa observes that the idea of considering the law of non-proportional returns as a basis for the price theory arose, for analogy, only after the study of decreasing utility had drawn attention to the relationship between the price and the quantity consumed. In fact, \"if the cost of production of every unit of the commodity under consideration did not vary with variations in quantity produced the symmetry would be broken, the price would be determined exclusively by the expenses of production and demand would be unable to have any influence on it at all\".\nThe difficulties of the system that could, in short, be defined as the cross of the supply and demand curves firstly depend on the heterogeneity of the assumptions on which these two different tendencies are based. Decreasing returns and increasing costs are caused by the limited availability of some input which prevents all inputs from varying in optimal proportion. In other words, if an input is limited in quantity, a rise in production levels brings about a less efficient proportion among inputs with a fall in productivity. By contrast, the tendency toward decreasing costs stems from variations in the quantity of all inputs, and therefore they may occur only when there are no constant factors.\nA second difficulty stems from the fact that, as Sraffa notes, in the neoclassical theory of prices the equilibrium of the individual firm is determined on the basis of cost variations deriving from small increases in its production (marginalist theory) and taking the situation unchanged in other companies of the same industry and the entire economy, following the hypothesis of \"ceteris paribus\", i.e. other conditions being equal.\nSraffa highlights that the possibility of applying the hypothesis of increasing costs to the supply curve is limited to the rare cases in which a considerable part of the supply of input is employed for the production of only one commodity. However, in general, each input is employed by a certain number of industries that produce different goods.\nAs for increasing returns and decreasing costs, Marshall himself notes that external economies can hardly be attributed clearly to a specific industry, but they are of considerable interest to groups, often of a large size, in related industries; consequently, it is not possible to hypothesize an increase in returns in just one company.\nIf in the partial equilibrium system of competitive prices, it is not possible to consider decreasing or increasing costs without contradicting the nature of the system, it follows, from this point of view, that production costs of goods produced in competition must be regarded as constant in respect of small variations in the quantity produced\" and that the long-run supply curve of an industry is horizontal. As a consequence, the price and the quantity of a good do not derive from the simultaneous action of the supply and demand curves: the price is determined by production costs, while the quantity produced is determined by the demand. The neoclassical symmetry between demand and supply is broken. The old theory that, in competition, \"makes the value of commodities dependent on the cost of production alone appears to hold its ground as the best available\" (1926b:540\u201341).\nFinally, Sraffa remarks that \"everyday experience shows that the majority of which produce manufactured consumers' goods operate in conditions of individual diminishing costs. If the limit to the firm's expansion does not arise from increasing costs, then it may arise from the difficulty in expanding the market share without changing any of these three aspects: improving the quality of the output, reducing its price, or increasing marketing expenses. These considerations were developed, in the 1930s, by the theory of imperfect competition.\nCambridge years.\nIn 1927, Sraffa's yet undiscussed theory of value, but also his friendship with Antonio Gramsci\u2014a risky and compromising endeavour in the context of the Italian fascist regime\u2014brought John Maynard Keynes to invite Sraffa to the University of Cambridge, where the Italian economist was initially assigned a lectureship.\nSraffa arrived in July of 1927 and remained there for life. In the shelter of the English city, he held courses about advanced value theory in his first three years. Then, again with the help of Keynes, he held a librarian position and could devote himself to study, intertwining relationships with a series of intellectuals destined to leave remarkable and lasting tracks.\nTogether with Frank P. Ramsey and Ludwig Wittgenstein, Sraffa joined the so-called cafeteria group, an informal club that discussed Keynes's theory of probability and Friedrich Hayek's theory of business cycles (see Sraffa\u2013Hayek debate).\nThe economists that should at least be remembered are Micha\u0142 Kalecki (1899\u20131970), Maurice Dobb (1900\u20131976), Joan Robinson (1903\u20131983) and Nicholas Kaldor (1908\u20131986). Among the philosophers, Frank Plumpton Ramsey (1903\u20131930) was helpful during the initial elaboration of the equations, datable in 1928, of the book \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\", which was published in 1960.\nIn the early thirties there was a controversy between Sraffa and Friedrich von Hayek, who published a criticism of Keynes's conclusions contained in \"A Treatise on Money\" (1930). After a first reply, Keynes asked Sraffa about writing a more detailed answer to Hayek's theses. Sraffa thoroughly analyzed the inconsistencies in the logic of Hayek's theory on the effect of forced capital savings caused by inflation and above all on the definition of natural interest rate. The debate continued with a reply by Hayek and a rejoinder by Sraffa.\nIn 1939, Sraffa was elected to a fellowship at Trinity College. Luigi Pasinetti identifies five stages of his work in Cambridge.\n\"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\".\nThe critique of neo-classical price theory based on the relations between cost and quantity produced leads Sraffa to abandon the analysis of partial equilibrium. Since the late 1920s, he began to work on a price theory that takes up the classical concepts of reproducibility, surplus, circularity of production, and freedom of entry. In his book, \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities,\" published only in 1960, Sraffa focuses on the analysis of relative prices and income distribution, assuming \"no changes in output and ... no changes in the proportions in which different means of production are used ..., so that no question arises as to the variation or constancy of returns\". As in classics, in Sraffa's 1960 book, relative prices are determined by the conditions of production and not on the basis of the functional connection between returns and quantity produced.\nSraffa's \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\" is proposed to perfect classical economics' theory of value as originally developed by Ricardo and others. He aimed to demonstrate flaws in the mainstream neoclassical theory of value and develop an alternative analysis.\nIn this important work, Sraffa analyzes a linear production model in which it is possible to determine the relative price structure and one of the two distributive variables (rate of profit or wage), exogenously given the other and the technology. The value of the capital employed can be known only together with the prices of the goods from which it is made. In essence, Sraffa shows that:\nSraffa's technique of aggregating capital as \"dated inputs of labour\" led to a debate known as the Cambridge capital controversy.\nSraffa's analytical apparatus was used by some followers for the solution to the Marxian problem of transforming values into prices of production and for the criticism of the Marxian theory of value. Moreover, as highlighted by Pasinetti, Sraffa's analysis overcomes the limits of the input-output system of Wassily Leontief, in particular with regard to the effects of technical change. Pasinetti's approach, based on Sraffa's theory, has recently been developed by Kurz and Salvadori.\nEconomists disagree on whether Sraffa's work refutes neoclassical economics. Many post-Keynesian economists use Sraffa's critique as justification for abandoning neoclassical analysis and exploring other models of economic behaviour. Others see his work as compatible with neoclassical economics as developed in modern general equilibrium models, or as unable to determine a long-period position, just like the Walrasian approach. Others still argue that the importance of Sraffa's economics is that it provides a new framing for how we understand capitalist economies that do not fall back on the arguably unrealistic assumptions of neoclassical economics.\nNonetheless, Sraffa's work, particularly his interpretation of Ricardo and his \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\" (1960), is seen as the starting point of the neo-Ricardian school in the 1960s.\nPersonal connections.\nSraffa was instrumental in securing Gramsci's prison notebooks from the Fascist authorities after the latter's death in 1937. In 1924, Gramsci published a letter from Sraffa \"Problems of Today and of Tomorrow\", Gramsci published 1924 a letter from Sraffa (without signing, signed S.). In the letter, Sraffa emphasizes the function of bourgeois opposition in the struggle against fascism and the importance of democratic institutions for the social and political development of the proletariat. Seeing the Italian Communist Party as weak, Sraffa recommended collaboration with the bourgeois opposition to fascism. In his answer, Gramsci rejected this suggestion, but he followed Sraffa's advice several years later.\nNorman Malcolm famously credits Sraffa with providing Ludwig Wittgenstein with the conceptual break that founded the \"Philosophical Investigations\", by means of a rude gesture on Sraffa's part:\nWittgenstein was insisting that a proposition and what it describes must have the same 'logical form', the same 'logical multiplicity'. Sraffa made a gesture, familiar to Neapolitans as meaning something like disgust or contempt, of brushing the underneath of his chin with an outward sweep of the fingertips of one hand. And he asked: 'What is the logical form of that?' \nIn the introduction to \"Philosophical Investigations\", Wittgenstein mentions discussions with Sraffa over many years and says: \"I am indebted to \"this\" stimulus for the most consequential ideas in this book\". However, Sraffa broke off his weekly conversations with Wittgenstein in 1946 despite the latter's protests; and when the philosopher said he would talk about anything Sraffa wanted, \"'Yes', Sraffa replied, 'but in \"your\" way'\".\nSraffa and Wittgenstein influenced each other deeply. While Wittgenstein made his famous turn from the \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" to the \"Philosophical Investigations\" wherein he jettisoned the previous idea that the world comprised an atomistic set of propositional facts for the notion that meaning derives from its use within a holistic self-enclosed system. Analogously, Sraffa was rebutting the neoclassical paradigm which was similarly atomistic and individualistic. While there are disputes about how to interpret Sraffa none dispute Sraffa's influence.\nAfter the publication of \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\", Sraffa's thought became the subject of a great debate. Sraffa was described as a shy and very reserved man who was devoted to study and books. His library contained more than 8,000 volumes, many of which are now in the Trinity College Library. A popular anecdote claims that Sraffa made successful long-term investments in Japanese government bonds that he bought the day after the nuclear bombing on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Another version of this is that Sraffa bought the bonds during the war when they were trading at distressed prices as he was convinced that Japan would honour its obligations (Nicholas Kaldor, pp.\u00a066\u201367). Records of Sraffa's investments in his Trinity College papers show that he had in fact begun his purchasing in 1946, during post-war debates over whether Japan would repay its external pre-war debts in order to return to normality; his modelled returns were large and Lonergan calculates that Sraffa likely realized an estimated annual return of 16% per annum from 1946\u20131983.\nIn 1961, before the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel had been created, he was awarded the S\u00f6derstr\u00f6mska Gold Medal by the Royal Swedish Academy of Science. In 1972, he was awarded an honorary doctorate by Sorbonne and in 1976 received another one from Madrid's Complutense university.\nSraffa was involved in Cambridge capital controversy, sometimes called \"the capital controversy\". It was a debate between prominent economists such as Joan Robinson and Piero Sraffa at the University of Cambridge in England and economists such as Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States.\nIn 1966, Paul Samuelson organized a symposium in the QJE, in which it was accepted by all parties, including Samuelson himself, that David Levhari had made a mistake and that Sraffa's proposition is, of course, robust. The proposition in question refuted the Clarkian-type neoclassical explanation of the rate of interest on capital on the basis of the \"marginal productivity of capital,\" which requires measurement of the \"intensity\" of capital independently of the rate of interest. Sraffa's \"re-switching\" proposition showed that, in general, there is no logical way by which the \"intensity of capital\" can be measured independently of the rate of interest \u2014 and hence the widely held neoclassical explanation of the distribution of income was logically untenable. This victory was well-known as the pinnacle of Sraffa's book.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51153", "revid": "27609825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51153", "title": "Islamabad", "text": "Capital city of Pakistan\nIslamabad (; , ) is the capital city of Pakistan. It is the country's tenth-most populous city with a population of over 1.1 million, and is federally administered by the Pakistani government as part of the Islamabad Capital Territory. Built as a planned city in the 1960s and established in 1967, it replaced Karachi as Pakistan's national capital. Islamabad is located north of the city of Rawalpindi, with which it forms a metropolitan area of over 5.7 million inhabitants.\nThe Greek architect Constantinos Apostolou Doxiadis developed Islamabad's master plan, in which he divided it into eight zones; the city comprises administrative, diplomatic enclave, residential areas, educational and industrial sectors, commercial areas, as well as rural and green areas administered by the Islamabad Metropolitan Corporation with support from the Capital Development Authority. Islamabad is known for its parks and forests, including the Margalla Hills National Park and the Shakarparian. It is home to several landmarks, including the country's flagship Faisal Mosque. Other prominent landmarks include the Pakistan Monument and Democracy Square.\nRated as Gamma + by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, Islamabad has one of the highest costs of living in Pakistan. The city's populace is dominated by both middle- and upper-middle-class citizens. Islamabad is home to more than twenty universities, including Bahria University, Quaid-e-Azam University, PIEAS, COMSATS University, and NUST. It is also rated as one of the safest cities in Pakistan and has an expansive RFID-enabled surveillance system with almost 2,000 active CCTV cameras.\nToponymy.\nThe name \"Islamabad\" means \"City of Islam\". It is derived from two words; \"Islam\" and \"abad\". The Arabic word \"Islam\" means \"submission [to God]\" as it refers to the religion of Islam, Pakistan's state religion, and the Persian suffix \"-abad\" means \"cultivated place\", indicating an inhabited place or city. During the course of early modern period, the name was used in the Mughal era, by the emperor Aurangzeb who named many towns in the Indian subcontinent after it. According to a history book by Muhammad Ismail Zabeeh, teacher and poet Qazi Abdur Rehman Amritsari proposed the name of the city.\nOccasionally in writing, Islamabad is colloquially abbreviated \"ISB\". Such usage originated in SMS language, in part due to the IATA location identifier for the Islamabad International Airport.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIslamabad Capital Territory, located on the Pothohar Plateau of the northern Punjab region, is considered one of the earliest sites of human settlement in Asia. Some of the earliest Stone Age artefacts in the world have been found on the plateau, dating from 100,000 to 500,000 years ago. Rudimentary stones recovered from the terraces of the Soan River testify to the endeavours of early man in the inter-glacial period. Items of pottery and utensils dating back to prehistory have been found.\nExcavations by Dr. Abdul Ghafoor Lone reveal evidence of a prehistoric culture in the area. Relics and human skulls have been found dating back to 5000 BCE that indicate the region was home to Neolithic peoples who settled on the banks of the Soan and who later developed small communities in the region around 3000 BCE.\nThe Indus Valley civilisation flourished in the region between the 23rd and 18th centuries BCE. Later the area was an early settlement of the Aryan community which migrated into the region from Central Asia. Many great armies such as those of Zahiruddin Babur, Genghis Khan, Timur and Ahmad Shah Durrani crossed the region during their invasions of the Indian subcontinent. In 2015\u201316, the Federal Department of Archaeology and Museums, with the financial support of National Fund for Cultural Heritage, carried out initial archaeological excavations and unearthed the remains of a Buddhist stupa at Ban Faqiran, near the Shah Allah Ditta caves. The stupa was dated to between the 2nd and 4th centuries CE.\nConstruction and development.\nWhen Pakistan gained independence in 1947, the southern port city of Karachi was its provisional national capital. In 1958, a commission was constituted to select a suitable site near Rawalpindi for the national capital with particular emphasis on location, climate, logistics, and defence requirements, along with other attributes. After extensive study, research, and a thorough review of potential sites, the commission recommended the area northeast of Rawalpindi in 1959 which was used as provisional capital from that year on. In the 1960s, Islamabad was constructed as a forward capital for several reasons. Karachi was also located at the southern end of the country along the Arabian Sea. Pakistan needed a capital that was easily accessible from all parts of the country. Karachi, a business centre, was also considered unsuitable partly because of intervention of business interests in government affairs. The newly selected location of Islamabad was closer to the army headquarters in Rawalpindi and the Pakistani-administered sectors of the disputed Kashmir in the north.\nA Greek firm of architects, led by Konstantinos Apostolos Doxiadis, designed the master plan of the city based on a grid plan which was triangular in shape with its apex towards the Margalla Hills. Islamabad was touted by Pakistani legislators as their counterpart to Chandigarh, whose modernism they envied and with which it shares conceptual similarities. The capital was not moved directly from Karachi to Islamabad; it was first shifted temporarily to Rawalpindi in the early 1960s and then to Islamabad when essential development work was completed in 1966. In 1981, Islamabad separated from Punjab province to form Capital Territory. Such world-renowned architects as Edward Durell Stone and Gio Ponti have been associated with the city's development.\nRecent history.\nIslamabad has attracted people from all over Pakistan, making it one of the most cosmopolitan and urbanised cities of Pakistan. As the capital city it has hosted numerous important meetings, such as the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit in 2004.\nThe city suffered damage from the 2005 Kashmir earthquake which had a magnitude of 7.6. Islamabad has experienced a series of terrorist incidents including the July 2007 Siege of Lal Masjid (Red Mosque), the June 2008 Danish embassy bombing, and the September 2008 Marriott bombing. In 2011, four terrorist incidents occurred in the city, killing four people, including the murder of the Punjab Governor Salmaan Taseer.\nConstruction of the Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus, the region's first mass transit line, began in February 2014 and was completed in March 2015. The Rawalpindi Development Authority built the project at a cost of approximately Rs. 24 billion, which was shared by both the Federal government and the provincial government of Punjab.\nGeography.\nIslamabad lies about above sea level at the northern edge of the Pothohar Plateau and at the foot of the Margalla Hills in Islamabad Capital Territory. The modern capital and the ancient Gakhar city of Rawalpindi form a conurbation and are commonly referred to as the Twin Cities.\nTo the northeast of the city lies the colonial era hill station of Murree, and to the north lies the Haripur District of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Kahuta lies on the southeast, Taxila, Wah Cantt, and Attock District to the northwest, Gujar Khan, Rawat, and Mandrah on the southeast, and the metropolis of Rawalpindi to the south and southwest. Islamabad is located southwest of Muzaffarabad, east of Peshawar and northwest of Lahore.\nIslamabad covers an area of . A further area is known as the Specified Area, with the Margala Hills in the north and northeast. The southern portion of the city is an undulating plain. It is drained by the Kurang River, on which the Rawal Dam is located.\nClimate.\nIslamabad has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cwa), with five seasons: Winter (November\u2013February), Spring (March and April), Summer (May and June), Rainy Monsoon (July and August) and Autumn (September and October). The hottest month is June, where average highs routinely exceed . The wettest month is July, with heavy rainfalls and evening thunderstorms with the possibility of cloudburst and flooding. The coolest month is January.\nIslamabad's micro-climate is regulated by three artificial reservoirs: Rawal, Simli, and Khanpur Dam. The latter is located on the Haro River near the town of Khanpur, about from Islamabad. Simli Dam is north of Islamabad. of the city consists of Margalla Hills National Park. Loi Bher Forest is situated along the Islamabad Highway, covering an area of . The highest monthly rainfall of was recorded during July 1995. Winters generally feature dense fog in the mornings and sunny afternoons. In the city, temperatures stay mild, with snowfall over the higher-elevation points on nearby hill stations, notably Murree and Nathia Gali. The temperatures range from in January to in June. The highest recorded temperature was on 23 June 2005 while the lowest temperature was on 17 January 1967. Light snowfall sometimes happens on the peaks of the hills visible from the city, though this is rare. Snowfall does not occur in the city itself. On 23 July 2001, Islamabad received a record-breaking of rainfall in just 10 hours. It was the heaviest rainfall in Islamabad in the past 100 years and the highest rainfall in 24 hours as well. Water supply is strained, leading to project proposals like the Ghazi Barotha water supply project.\nCityscape.\nCivil administration.\nThe Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) Administration, generally known as ICT Administration, is the civil administration as well as main law and order agency of the federal capital.\nThe local government authority of the city is the Islamabad Metropolitan Corporation (IMC) with some help from Capital Development Authority (CDA), which oversees the planning, development, construction, and administration of the city. Islamabad Capital Territory is divided into eight zones: Administrative Zone, Commercial District, Educational Sector, Industrial Sector, Diplomatic Enclave, Residential Areas, Rural Areas and Green Area. Islamabad city is divided into five major zones: Zone I, Zone II, Zone III, Zone IV, and Zone V. Out of these, Zone IV is the largest in area. Zone I consists mainly of all the developed residential sectors while Zone II consists of the under-developed residential sectors. Each residential sector is identified by a letter of the alphabet and a number, and covers an area of approximately 2\u00a0km\u00a0\u00d7 2\u00a0km (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20444\u00a0mi\u00a0\u00d7 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20444\u00a0mi). The sectors are lettered from A to I, and each sector is divided into four numbered sub-sectors.\nSectors.\nSeries A, B, and C are still underdeveloped. The D series has seven sectors (D-11 to D-17), of which only sector D-12 is completely developed. This series is located at the foot of Margalla Hills. The E Sectors are named from E-7 to E-17. Many foreigners and diplomatic personnel are housed in these sectors. In the revised Master Plan of the city, CDA has decided to develop a park on the pattern of Fatima Jinnah Park in sector E-14. Sectors E-8 and E-9 contain the campuses of Bahria University, Air University, and the National Defence University. The F and G series contains the most developed sectors. F series contains sectors F-5 to F-17; some sectors are still under-developed. F-5 is an important sector for the software industry in Islamabad, as the two software technology parks are located here. The entire F-9 sector is covered with Fatima Jinnah Park. The Centaurus complex is a major landmark of the F-8 sector. G sectors are numbered G-5 through G-17. Some important places include the Jinnah Convention Centre and Serena Hotel in G-5, the Lal Masjid in G-6, the Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences, the largest medical complex in the capital, located in G-8, and the Karachi Company shopping center in G-9.\nThe H sectors are numbered H-8 through H-17. The H sectors are mostly dedicated to educational and health institutions. National University of Sciences and Technology covers a major portion of sector H-12. The I sectors are numbered from I-8 to I-18. With the exception of I-8, which is a well-developed residential area, these sectors are primarily part of the industrial zone. Two sub-sectors of I-9 and one sub-sector of I-10 are used as industrial areas. CDA is planning to set up Islamabad Railway Station in Sector I-18 and Industrial City in sector I-17. Zone III consists primarily of the Margalla Hills and Margalla Hills National Park. Rawal Lake is in this zone. Zone IV and V consist of Islamabad Park, and rural areas of the city. The Soan River flows into the city through Zone V.\nIslamabad\u2013Rawalpindi metropolitan area.\nWhen the master plan for Islamabad was drawn up in 1960, Islamabad and Rawalpindi, along with the adjoining areas, was to be integrated to form a large metropolitan area called Islamabad/Rawalpindi Metropolitan Area. The area would consist of the developing Islamabad, the old colonial cantonment city of Rawalpindi, and Margalla Hills National Park, including surrounding rural areas. However, Islamabad city is part of the Islamabad Capital Territory, while Rawalpindi is part of Rawalpindi District, which is part of province of Punjab.\nInitially, it was proposed that the three areas would be connected by four major highways: Murree Highway, Islamabad Highway, Soan Highway, and Capital Highway. However, to date only two highways have been constructed: Kashmir Highway (the former Murree Highway) and Islamabad Highway. Plans of constructing Margalla Avenue are also underway. Islamabad is the hub all the governmental activities while Rawalpindi is the centre of all industrial, commercial, and military activities. The two cities are considered sister cities and are highly interdependent.\nArchitecture.\nIslamabad's architecture is a combination of modernity and old Islamic and regional traditions. The Saudi-Pak Tower is an example of the integration of modern architecture with traditional styles. The beige-coloured edifice is trimmed with blue tile works in Islamic tradition, and is one of Islamabad's tallest buildings. Other examples of intertwined Islamic and modern architecture include Pakistan Monument and Faisal Mosque. Other notable structures are: Secretariat Complex designed by Gio Ponti, Prime Minister's secretariat based on Mughal architecture and the National Assembly by Edward Durell Stone.\nThe murals on the inside of the large petals of Pakistan Monument are based on Islamic architecture. The Shah Faisal Mosque is a fusion of contemporary architecture with a more traditional large triangular prayer hall and four minarets, designed by Vedat Dalokay, a Turkish architect and built with the help of funding provided by King Faisal of Saudi Arabia. The architecture of Faisal Mosque is unusual as it lacks a dome structure. It is a combination of Arabic, Turkish, and Mughal architectural traditions. The Centaurus is an example of modern architecture under construction in Islamabad. The seven star hotel was designed by WS Atkins PLC.The newly built Islamabad Stock Exchange Towers is another example of modern architecture in the city.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to 2023 Pakistani census, there are 1,154,540 Punjabi, 415,838 Pashto, 358,922 Urdu, 140,780 Hindko, 51,920 Kashmiri, 46,270 Saraiki, 21,362 Sindhi, 10,315 Balti, 7,099 Shina, 5,016 Koshistani, 4,503 Balochi, 1,095 Mewati, 668 Brahvi, 182 Kalasha and 64,734 others, of total 2,283,244 speakers in Islamabad Capital Territory.\nLiteracy.\nAs of 2010, the majority of the population lies in the age group of 15\u201364 years, around 59.38%. Only 2.73% of the population is above 65 years of age; 37.90% is below the age of 15. Islamabad has the highest literacy rate in Pakistan, at 88%. 9.8% of the population has done intermediate education (equivalent to grades 11 and 12). 10.26% have a bachelor or equivalent degree while 5.2% have a master or equivalent degree. The labour force of Islamabad is 185,213 and the unemployment rate is 15.70%.\nReligion.\nIn the Islamabad Capital Territory, Islam is the largest religion in the city, with 95.55% of the population following it. Christianity is the second largest religion, with 4.26% of the population following it. The Christians are concentrated mainly in the urban areas. Hinduism is followed by 0.04% of the population according to the 2023 census.\nEconomy.\nIslamabad is a net contributor to the Pakistani economy, as whilst having only 0.8% of the country's population, it contributes 1% to the country's GDP. Islamabad Stock Exchange, founded in 1989, is Pakistan's third largest stock exchange after Karachi Stock Exchange and Lahore Stock Exchange, and was merged to form Pakistan Stock Exchange. The exchange had 118 members with 104 corporate bodies and 18 individual members. The average daily turnover of the stock exchange is over 1 million shares.\nAccording to the World Bank's \"Doing Business Report\" of 2010, Islamabad was ranked as the best place to start a business in Pakistan. Islamabad's businesses are Pakistan's most compliant for paying tax dues. As of 2012[ [update]], Islamabad LTU (Large Tax Unit) was responsible for Rs 371 billion in tax revenue, which amounts to 20% of all the revenue collected by Federal Board of Revenue.\nIslamabad has seen an expansion in information and communications technology with the addition two Software Technology Parks, which house numerous national and foreign technological and information technology companies. Awami Markaz IT Park houses 36 IT companies, while Evacuee Trust house 29 companies. Islamabad will see its third IT Park by 2020, which will be built with assistance from South Korea.\nCulture.\nIslamabad is home to many settlers from other regions of Pakistan and has a cultural and religious diversity of considerable antiquity. Due to its location on the Pothohar Plateau, remnants of ancient cultures and civilisations such as Aryan, Soanian, and Indus Valley civilisation can still be found in the region. A 15th-century Gakhar fort, Pharwala Fort is located near Islamabad. Rawat Fort in the region was built by the Gakhars in 16th century and contains the grave of the Gakhar chief, Sultan Sarang Khan.\nSaidpur village is supposedly named after Said Khan, the son of Sarang Khan. The 500-year-old village was converted into a place of Hindu worship by a Mughal commander, Raja Man Singh. He constructed a number of small ponds: Rama kunda, Sita kunda, Lakshaman kunda, and Hanuman kunda. The region is home to a small Hindu temple that is preserved, showing the presence of Hindu people in the region. The shrine of Sufi mystic Pir Meher Ali Shah is located at Golra Sharif, which has a rich cultural heritage of the pre-Islamic period. Archaeological remains of the Buddhist era can also still be found in the region. The shrine of Bari Imam was built by the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb. Thousands of devotees from across Pakistan attend the annual Urs of Bari Imam. The event is one of the largest religious gatherings in Islamabad. In 2004, the Urs was attended by more than 1.2\u00a0million people.\nThe Lok Virsa Museum in Islamabad preserves a wide variety of expressions of folk and traditional cultural legacy of Pakistan. It is located near the Shakarparian hills and boasts a large display of embroidered costumes, jewellery, musical instruments, woodwork, utensils and folkloristic objects from the region and other parts of Pakistan.\nTourism.\nThe Faisal Mosque, built in 1986, is an iconic cultural and religious landmark that attracts many tourists; both domestic and international due to its modern interpertation of Islamic architecture designed by the Turkish architect Vedat Dalokay, as well as its location at the foothills of the Margalla Hills. The mosque was named after Faisal bin Abdul Aziz, the then-King of Saudi Arabia to honour him for his role in financing the construction of the mosque. The mosque itself can host up to 74,000 worshippers at a time and its interior is decorated with Islamic calligraphy of verses from the Quran.\nOne of the landmarks for tourists is the Pakistan Monument built in 2007 located in Islamabad. This tourist attraction represents the patriotism and sovereignty of Pakistan. The design is shaped as a dome with petal-shaped walls that are engraved with arts portraying Pakistan's other tourist landmarks such as the Badshahi Mosque, Minar-e-Pakistan and Lahore Fort.\nIslamabad holds some of Pakistan's most prestigious museums such as Lok Virsa Museum, Institute of Folk and Traditional Heritage Shakarparian Park and prominent galleries such as the National Art Gallery and Gallery 6.\nThe Islamabad Museum contains many relics and artifacts dating back to the Gandhara period of the region, an intriguing fusion of Buddhist and Graeco-Roman styles. The living culture of Islamabad and Pakistan is best explored at Lok Virsa Museum, as well as the Institute of Folk and Traditional Heritage in Shakarparian Park.\nIslamabad is built upon civilisation and architecture that ranges from the 10th Century to the modern era. As Islamabad is situated on the Potohar Plateau, the remains of civilisation descending from stone-age era include the Acheulian and the Soanian traditions and these are tourist landmarks. Islamabad has an array of historic landmarks that reflect the Hindu civilisation that dates back to the 16th Century with examples such as Saidpur. Saidpur that is situated in Islamabad has progressed from a village to a sacred place that includes temples where the Hindu Mughal Commanders worshipped.\nMargalla Hills National Park is located in the North sector of Islamabad and is in close proximity to the Himalayas. The National Park is home to a range of wildlife, including Himalayan goral, Barking deer and leopards. Margalla Hills National Park also has accommodation and camping grounds for tourists.\nRecreation.\nLocated in the city, the Faisal Mosque is the largest mosque in South Asia and the sixth\u2013largest mosque in the world. Built in the year 1986, it was named after the late king of Saudi Arabia, Faisal Bin Abdul Aziz, who backed and financed the construction.\nThe most famous and oldest hiking track of Islamabad is Trail 3. It starts from the Margalla Road in sector F-6/3. Due to steep hills, the trail is exhausting to some extent. The course leads to the point where it goes up to the Viewpoint and is about a 30\u201350 minutes track. After the Viewpoint it continues for another easy-going 45 \u2013 60 minutes and reaches the Pir Sohawa, where there are two restaurants for food, \"The Monal\" and \"La Montana\". In total, it is approximately a one-hour and thirty minute walk.\nShah Allah Ditta village is a centuries-old village and a union council of the Islamabad Capital Authority. The village is named after a dervish who belonged to the Mughal era. It is estimated to be 650 years old approximately. It is also home to ancient caves that reflects the previous civilisations. The 2500-year-old Buddhist caves at the foot of Margalla Hills are located in west of Taxila, east of Islamabad and in the central area of Khanpur. A spring, a pond and a garden still exist near the Shah Allah Ditta Caves. There are some banyan trees in the garden, while all other fruit trees are gone. The water from the same spring was used to irrigate the garden adjoining the caves. During the Mughal period, when India was the centre of Sufism originating from Arabia and Central Asia, a saint named Shah Allah Ditta stayed in this garden and was entombed here. The place formerly attributed to sadhus, monks, or jogis is today known for the famous Sufi Shah Allah Ditta. A short distance from these caves is also an ancient baoli (stepwell) in the village of Kanthila, which is said to have been built by Sher Shah Suri.\nTransport.\nAerial transport.\nIslamabad is connected to major destinations around the world and domestically through Islamabad International Airport (IIAP). The airport is the largest in Pakistan and is located south-west of Islamabad. The new airport inaugurated on 20 April 2018, spreads over 19 square kilometers with 15 passenger boarding bridges. It also includes facilities to accommodate two double-decker Airbus A380s, 15 remote bays and 3 remote bays for Air cargo.\nPublic transport.\nThe Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus is a bus rapid transit system operating in the Islamabad-Rawalpindi metropolitan area. The Metrobus network's first phase was opened on 4 June 2015, and stretches 22.5 kilometres between Pak Secretariat, in Islamabad, and Saddar in Rawalpindi. The second stage stretches 25.6 kilometres between the Peshawar Morr Interchange and New Islamabad International Airport and was inaugurated on 18 April 2022. On 7 July 2022, the Green Line and Blue Lines were added to this Metrobus network. The system uses e-ticketing and an Intelligent Transportation System and is managed by the Punjab Mass Transit Authority. The metro buses are widely used for commuting purposes by the labour force and students.\nRailway.\nIslamabad railway station is located in sector I-9 in Islamabad, Capital Territory, Pakistan. The station appears as Margala on the Pakistan Railways website.\nPrivate transport.\nPeople use private transport like Taxis, Careem, Bykea, Indrive and Yango for local journeys.\nRoadways.\nM-2 Motorway is long and connects Islamabad and Lahore. M-1 Motorway connects Islamabad with Peshawar and is long. Islamabad is linked to Rawalpindi through the Faizabad Interchange, which has a daily traffic volume of about 48,000 vehicles.\nEducation.\nAs of 2010, Islamabad boasts the highest literacy rate in Pakistan at 98%, and has some of the most advanced educational institutes in the country. A large number of public and private sector educational institutes are present here. The higher education institutes in the capital are either federally chartered or administered by private organisations and almost all of them are recognised by the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan. High schools and colleges are either affiliated with the Federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education or with the UK universities education boards, O/A Levels, or IGCSE. According to the Academy of Educational Planning and Management's report, in 2009 there were a total of 913 recognized institutions in Islamabad (31 pre-primary, 2 religious, 367 primary, 162 middle, 250 high, 75 higher secondary and intermediate colleges, and 26 degree colleges). There are seven teacher training institutes in Islamabad with a total enrolment of 604,633 students and 499 faculty.\nThe Gender Parity Index in Islamabad is 0.93 compared to the 0.95 national average. There are 178 boys-only institutes, 175 girls-only, and 551 mixed institutes in Islamabad. Total enrolment of students in all categories is 267,992; 138,272 for boys and 129,720 for girls. There are 16 recognized universities in Islamabad with a total enrolment of 372,974 students and 30,144 teachers. Most of the top ranked universities; National University of Sciences and Technology, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology and Pakistan Institute of Engineering &amp; Applied Sciences, also have their headquarters in the capital. The world's second largest general university by enrolment, Allama Iqbal Open University is located in Islamabad for distance education. Other universities include Air University, Bahria University, Center for Advanced Studies in Engineering, Federal Urdu University of Arts, Science and Technology, Hamdard University, National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences, Capital University of Science &amp; Technology, National Defence University, Shifa Tameer-e-Millat University, National University of Modern Languages, Iqra University, International Islamic University, Virtual University of Pakistan, Muhammad Ali Jinnah University, The University of Lahore, Abasyn University, and The Millennium University College.\nHealthcare.\nIn 2008, Islamabad had the lowest rate of infant mortality in the country at 38 deaths per thousand compared to the national average of 78 deaths per thousand. Islamabad has both public and private medical centres. The largest hospital in Islamabad is Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) hospital. It was established in 1985 as a teaching and doctor training institute. PIMS functions as a National Reference Center and provides specialised diagnostic and curative services. The hospital has 30 major medical departments. PIMS is divided into five administrative branches. Islamabad Hospital is the major component with a 592-bed facility and 22 medical and surgical specialties.\nThe Children's Hospital is a 230-bed hospital completed in 1985. It contains six major facilities: Surgical and Allied Specialties, Medical and Allied Specialties, Diagnostic Facilities, Operation Theatre, Critical Care (NICU, PICU, Isolation &amp; Accident Emergency), and a Blood Bank. The Maternal and Child Health Care Center is a training institute with an attached hospital of 125 beds offering different clinical and operational services. PIMS consists of five academic institutes: Quaid-e-Azam Postgraduate Medical College, College of Nursing, College of Medical Technology, School of Nursing, and Mother and Child Health Center.\nPAEC General Hospital and teaching institute, established in 2006, is affiliated with the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission. The hospital consists of a 100-bed facility and 10 major departments: Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pediatric, General Medicine, General Surgery, Intensive Care Unit/Coronary Care Unit, Orthopedics, Ophthalmology, Pathology, Radiology, and Dental Department. Shifa International Hospital is a teaching hospital in Islamabad that was founded in 1987 and became a public company in 1989. The hospital has 70 qualified consultants in almost all specialties, 150 IPD beds and OPD facilities in 35 different specialisations. According to the Federal Bureau of Statistics of the Government of Pakistan, in 2008 there were 12 hospitals, 76 dispensaries, and five maternity and child welfare centers in the city with a total of 5,158 beds.\nSports.\nIslamabad has a multipurpose sports complex opposite Aabpara. It includes Liaquat Gymnasium for indoor games, Mushaf Squash Complex and Jinnah Sports Stadium for outdoor games, which is a venue for regular national and international events. 2004 SAF Games were held in the stadium. Some other sports venues of Islamabad include Diamond Club Ground, Shalimar Cricket Ground and Islamabad Golf Club.\nThere is another multipurpose sports complex in the F6 Markaz. It has tennis courts, a basketball court with fibre-glass boards and a Futsal ground which introduced artificial turf to the people of Islamabad.\nMajor sports in the city include cricket, football, squash, hockey, table tennis, rugby and boxing. The city is home to Islamabad United which won the first ever Pakistan Super League in 2016 and second title in 2018, and Islamabad All Stars, which participates in the Super Kabaddi League.\nIslamabad also has various rock climbing spots in the Margalla Hills.\nThe Pakistan Sports Complex has three swimming pools for children. These facilities attract a large gathering on weekends.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51154", "revid": "126457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51154", "title": "Apollo Moon landing", "text": ""}
{"id": "51155", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51155", "title": "Leicester", "text": "Leicester ( ) is a city, unitary authority area, and the county town of Leicestershire in the East Midlands of England. It is the largest city in the East Midlands with a population of 388,348 in 2024. The greater Leicester urban area had a population of 559,017 in 2021, making it the 11th most populous in England, and the 13th most populous in the United Kingdom. For three years running, the annual Good Growth for Cities Index has ranked Leicester as the best place to live and work in the East Midlands. The latest study, which is based on a range of economic factors, rated Leicester as the best performing city in the East Midlands in 2024 and 20th overall out of 52 other UK cities.\nThe city lies on the River Soar and is approximately north-northwest of London, east-northeast of Birmingham and northeast of Coventry. Nottingham and Derby lie around to the north and northwest respectively, whilst Peterborough is located to the east. Leicester is close to the eastern end of the National Forest.\nLeicester has a long history extending into ancient times. The site of an Iron Age oppidum, it developed into the Roman town of Ratae Corieltauvorum following the conquest. The ruins of Ratae were later settled by the Anglo-Saxons, and then captured by the Vikings who made it one of the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw. After the Norman Conquest the town came under the authority of the Beaumont and De Montfort Earls, most notably the famous rebel Simon de Montfort. After his death in 1265 the town passed to the House of Lancaster and Leicester Castle became one of their strongholds, a royal residence when the family came to the throne in 1399. Leicester therefore became an important town in the wider nation, the meeting place of the parliaments of 1318, 1414, and 1450, and a place frequently visited by the King and his court. Most famously King Richard III spent his last days in the town before his death at the Battle of Bosworth and was buried there in August 1485. In the Early Modern era Puritanism flourished in Leicester and the town was a supporter of the Parliamentarian cause in the Civil War. In the Victorian age the town became known for its hosiery and shoe manufacturing industries. It also rapidly expanded in population and size eventually gaining city status in 1919. Since the mid-20th century, immigration from countries of the British Commonwealth has seen Leicester become an ethnically diverse city, and one of the largest urban centres of the Midlands.\nLeicester is at the intersection of two railway lines: the Midland Main Line and the Birmingham to London Stansted Airport line. It is also at the confluence of the M1/M69 motorways and the A6/A46 trunk routes. Leicester Cathedral is home to the new tomb of Richard III who was reburied in the cathedral in 2015 after being discovered nearby in the foundations of the lost Greyfriars chapel, more than 500 years after his death. In sporting terms, the city of Leicester is home to football club Leicester City, rugby club Leicester Tigers, basketball team Leicester Riders, the Leicester City Hockey Club, and the Leicestershire County Cricket Club. In 1996, a statue was erected in the city centre to commemorate the success of the city's sporting teams in this year. In 2016, Leicester was named as the UK's Greatest Sporting City, and in 2008, it was named as a European City of Sport.\nName.\nThe name of Leicester comes from Old English. It is first recorded in Latinised form in the early ninth century as \"Legorensis civitatis\" and in Old English itself in an \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" entry for 924 as ' (and, in various spellings, frequently thereafter). In the \"Domesday Book\" of 1086, it is recorded as '.\nThe first element of the name is the name of a people, the \"Ligore\" (whose name appears in \"Ligera ceastre\" in the genitive plural form); their name came in turn from the river Ligor (now the River Soar), the origin of whose name is uncertain but thought to be from Brittonic (possibly cognate with the name of the Loire).\nThe second element of the name is the Old English word \"ceaster\" (\"(Roman) fort, fortification, town\", itself borrowed from Latin \"castrum\").\nA list of British cities in the ninth-century \"History of the Britons\" includes one \"Cair Lerion\"; Leicester has been proposed as the place to which this refers (and the Welsh name for Leicester is \"\"). But this identification is not certain.\nBased on the Welsh name (given as \"Kaerleir\"), Geoffrey of Monmouth proposed a king Leir of Britain as an eponymous founder in his \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (12th century).\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nLeicester is one of the oldest cities in England, with a history going back at least two millennia. The native Iron Age settlement encountered by the Romans at the site seems to have developed in the 2nd or 1st centuries BC, around a century or so before the arrival of the Romans. Little is known about this settlement or the condition of the River Soar at this time, although roundhouses from this era have been excavated and seem to have clustered along roughly of the east bank of the Soar. This area of the Soar was split into two channels: a main stream to the east and a narrower channel on the west, with a presumably marshy island between. The settlement seems to have controlled a ford across the larger channel. The later Roman name was a latinate form of the Brittonic word for \"ramparts\" (cf. Gaelic \"rath\" and the nearby villages of Ratby and Ratcliffe), suggesting the site was an oppidum. The plural form of the name suggests it was initially composed of several villages. The Celtic tribe holding the area was later recorded as the \"Coritanians\" but an inscription recovered in 1983 showed this to have been a corruption of the original \"Corieltauvians\". The Corieltauvians are believed to have ruled over roughly the area of the East Midlands.\nRoman.\nIt is believed that the Romans arrived in the Leicester area around AD 47, during their conquest of southern Britain. The Corieltauvian settlement lay near a bridge on the Fosse Way, a Roman road between the legionary camps at Isca (Exeter) and Lindum (Lincoln). It remains unclear whether the Romans fortified and garrisoned the location, but it slowly developed from around the year 50 onwards as the tribal capital of the Corieltauvians under the name Ratae Corieltauvorum. In the 2nd century, it received a forum and bathhouse. In 2013, the discovery of a Roman cemetery found just outside the old city walls and dating back to AD\u00a0300 was announced. The remains of the baths of Roman Leicester can be seen at the Jewry Wall; recovered artifacts are displayed at the adjacent museum.\nMedieval.\nKnowledge of the town following the Roman withdrawal from Britain is limited. It seems to have been continually occupied after Roman protection ceased through the 5th and 6th centuries, although with a significantly reduced population. Its memory was preserved as the \"Cair Lerion\" of the \"History of the Britons\". Following the Saxon invasion of Britain, Leicester was occupied by the Middle Angles and subsequently administered by the kingdom of Mercia. It was elevated to a bishopric in either 679 or 680; this see survived until the 9th century, when Leicester was captured by Danish Vikings. Their settlement became one of the Five Burghs of the Danelaw, although this position was short-lived. The Saxon bishop, meanwhile, fled to Dorchester-on-Thames and Leicester did not become a bishopric again until the parish church of St Martin became Leicester Cathedral in 1927. The settlement was recorded under the name \"Ligeraceaster\" in the early 10th century.\nFollowing the Norman conquest, Leicester was recorded by William's Domesday Book as \"Ledecestre\". It was noted as a city (\"civitas\") but lost this status in the 11th century owing to power struggles between the Church and the aristocracy and did not become a legal city again until 1919.\nGeoffrey of Monmouth composed his \"History of the Kings of Britain\" around the year 1136, naming a King Leir as an eponymous founder figure. According to Geoffrey's narrative, Cordelia had buried her father beneath the river in a chamber dedicated to Janus and his feast day was an annual celebration.\nWhen Simon de Montfort became Earl of Leicester in 1231, he gave the borough a grant to expel the Jewish population \"in my time or in the time of any of my heirs to the end of the world\". He justified his action as being \"for the good of my soul, and for the souls of my ancestors and successors\". Leicester's Jews were allowed to move to the eastern suburbs, which were controlled by de Montfort's great-aunt and rival, Margaret, Countess of Winchester, after she took advice from the scholar and cleric Robert Grosseteste, at that time Archdeacon of Leicester. It would appear, however, that the expulsion was largely effective, and there is no evidence of any Jews remaining in Leicester. De Montfort's acts of anti-Jewish persecution in Leicester and elsewhere were part of a wider pattern that led to the expulsion of the Jewish population from England in 1290.\nDuring the 14th century, the earls of Leicester and Lancaster enhanced the prestige of the town. Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster and of Leicester founded a hospital for the poor and infirm in the area to the south of the castle now known as The Newarke (the \"new work\"). Henry's son, the great Henry of Grosmont, 4th Earl of Lancaster and of Leicester, who was made first Duke of Lancaster, enlarged and enhanced his father's foundation, and built the collegiate Church of the Annunciation of Our Lady of The Newarke. This church (a little of which survives in the basement of the Hawthorn Building of De Montfort University) was destroyed during the reign of King Edward VI. It became an important pilgrimage site because it housed a thorn said to be from the Crown of Thorns, given to the Duke by the King of France. The church (described by Leland in the C16th as \"not large but exceeding fair\") also became, effectively, a Lancastrian mausoleum. Duke Henry's daughter Blanche of Lancaster married John of Gaunt and their son Henry Bolingbroke became King Henry IV when he deposed King Richard II. The Church of the Annunciation was the burial place of Duke Henry, who had earlier had his father re-interred here. Later it became the burial place of Constance of Castile, Duchess of Lancaster (second wife of John of Gaunt) and of Mary de Bohun, first wife of Henry Bolingbroke (Henry IV) and mother of King Henry V (she did not become queen because she died before Bolingbroke became king). John of Gaunt died at Leicester Castle in 1399. When his son became king, the Earldom of Leicester and the Duchy of Lancaster became royal titles (and the latter remains so).\nAt the end of the War of the Roses, King Richard III was buried in Leicester's Greyfriars Church a Franciscan Friary and Church which was demolished after its dissolution in 1538. The site of that church is now covered by King Richard III Visitor Centre (until 2012 by more modern buildings and a car park). There was a legend his corpse had been cast into the river, while some historians argued his tomb and remains were destroyed during the dissolution of the monasteries under Henry VIII. However, in September 2012, an archaeological investigation of the car park revealed a skeleton which DNA testing helped verify to be related to two descendants of Richard III's sister. It was concluded that the skeleton was that of Richard III because of the DNA evidence and the shape of the spine. In 2015 Richard III was reburied in pride of place near the high altar in Leicester Cathedral.\nModern.\nTudor.\nOn 4 November 1530, Cardinal Thomas Wolsey was arrested on charges of treason and taken from Yorkshire. On his way south to face dubious justice at the Tower of London, he fell ill. The group escorting him was concerned enough to stop at Leicester to rest at Leicester Abbey. There, Wolsey's condition quickly worsened. He died on 29 November 1530 and was buried at Leicester Abbey, now Abbey Park.\nLady Jane Grey, who claimed the English throne for nine days in June 1553, was born at Bradgate Park near Leicester around 1536.\nQueen Elizabeth I's intimate and former suitor, Robert Dudley, was given the Earldom of Leicester.\nStuart.\nAfter the Union of the Crowns, Anne of Denmark, Prince Henry, and Princess Elizabeth travelled to Leicester on 24 June 1603, after the courtier and usher Thomas Conway was assured that the town was free from infection or plague. Prince Charles, later King Charles I, travelled to London with his guardian Alexander Seton. The royal party stayed at Leicester for three days in August 1604 at the townhouse of William Skipwith.\nThe Corporation of Leicester opposed the efforts of Charles I to disafforest the nearby Leicester Forest, believing them to be likely to throw many of its residents into poverty and need of relief. Sir Miles Fleetwood was sent to commission the disafforestation and division of lands being used in common. Riots destroyed enclosures in spring 1627 and 1628, following a pattern of anti-enclosure disturbances found elsewhere including the Western Rising.\nPetitions challenging the enclosures were presented by the Corporation of Leicester and borough residents to the King and Privy Council. They were unsuccessful so petitioned the House of Lords in June 1628 who however supported Fleetwood but asked for proceedings made by the Crown against the rioters to be dropped. Compensation made to the legal residents of the forest was reasonably generous by comparison with other forests. The Corporation of Leicester received for relief of the poor.\nCivil War.\nLeicester was a Parliamentarian (colloquially called Roundhead) stronghold during the English Civil War. In 1645, King Charles I of England and Prince Rupert decided to attack the (then) town to draw the New Model Army away from the Royalist (colloquially called Cavaliers) headquarters of Oxford. Royalist guns were set up on Raw Dykes and, after an unsatisfactory response to a demand for surrender, the assault began at 3pm on 30 May 1645 by a Royalist battery opposite the Newarke. The town \u2013 which only had approximately 2,000 defenders opposed to the Royalist Army of approximately 10,000 combatants \u2013 was sacked on 31 May 1645, and hundreds of people were killed by Rupert's cavalry. It was reported that 120 houses had been destroyed and that 140 wagons of plunder were sent to the Royalist stronghold of Newark.\nFollowing the Parliamentarian victory over the Royalist Army at the Battle of Naseby on 14 June 1645, Leicester was recovered by Parliament on 18 June 1645.\nIndustrial era.\nThe construction of the Grand Union Canal in the 1790s linked Leicester to London and Birmingham. The first railway station in Leicester opened in 1832, in the form of the Leicester and Swannington Railway which provided a supply of coal to the town from nearby collieries. The Midland Counties Railway (running from Derby to Rugby) linked the town to the national network by 1840. A direct link to London St Pancras was established by the Midland Railway in the 1860s. These developments encouraged and accompanied a process of industrialisation which intensified throughout the reign of Queen Victoria. Factories began to appear, particularly along the canal and river, and districts such as Frog Island and Woodgate were the locations of numerous large mills. Between 1861 and 1901, Leicester's population increased from 68,100 to 211,600 and the proportion employed in trade, commerce, building, and the city's new factories and workshops rose steadily. Hosiery, textiles, and footwear became the major industrial employers: manufacturers such as N. Corah &amp; Sons and the Cooperative Boot and Shoe Company were opening some of the largest manufacturing premises in Europe. They were joined, in the latter part of the century, by engineering firms such as Kent Street's Taylor and Hubbard (crane makers and founders), Vulcan Road's William Gimson &amp; Company (steam boilers and founders), Martin Street's Richards &amp; Company (steel works and founders), and British United Shoe Machinery Co (manufacturer of footwear machinery and materials).\nThe politics of Victorian Leicester were lively and very often bitter. Years of consistent economic growth meant living standards generally increased, but Leicester was a stronghold of Radicalism. Thomas Cooper, the Chartist, kept a shop in Church Gate. There were serious Chartist riots in the town in 1842 and again six years later. The Leicester Secular Society was founded in 1851 but secularist speakers such as George Holyoake were often denied the use of speaking halls. It was not until 1881 that Leicester Secular Hall was opened. The second half of the 19th century also witnessed the creation of many other institutions, including the town council, the Royal Infirmary, and the Leicester Constabulary. It also benefited from general acceptance (and the Public Health Acts ) that municipal organisations had a responsibility to provide for the town's water supply, drainage, and sanitation. In 1853, backed with a guarantee of dividends by the Corporation of Leicester the Leicester Waterworks Company built a reservoir at Thornton for the supply of water to the town. This guarantee was made possible by the Public Health Act 1847 and an amending local Act of Parliament of 1851. In 1866 another amending Act enabled the Corporation of Leicester to take shares in the company to enable the construction of another reservoir at Cropston, completed in 1870. The Corporation of Leicester was later able to buy the waterworks and build another reservoir at Swithland, completed in the 1890s.\nLeicester became a county borough in 1889, although it was abolished in 1974 as part of the Local Government Act, and was reformed as a non-metropolitan district and city. The city regained its unitary status, being administered separately from Leicestershire, in 1997. The borough had been expanding throughout the 19th century, but grew most notably when it annexed Belgrave, Aylestone, North Evington, Knighton, and Stoneygate in 1892.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn 1900, the Great Central Railway provided another link to London, but the rapid population growth of the previous decades had already begun to slow by the time of Queen Victoria's death in 1901.\nWorld War I and the subsequent epidemics had further impacts. Nonetheless, Leicester was finally recognised as a legal city once more in 1919 in recognition of its contribution to the British war effort. Recruitment to the armed forces was lower in Leicester than in other English cities, partly because of the low level of unemployment and the need for many of its industries, such as clothing and footwear manufacturing, to supply the army. As the war progressed, many of Leicester's factories were given over to arms production; Leicester produced the first batch of Howitzer shells by a British company which was not making ammunition before the war. After the war, the city received a royal visit; the king and queen received a march-past in Victoria Park of thousands of serving and demobilised soldiers. Following the end of the war, a memorial arch\u2014the Arch of Remembrance\u2014was built in Victoria Park and unveiled in 1925. The arch, one of the largest First World War memorials in the UK, was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens, who also designed the Cenotaph in London and is a grade I listed building. A set of gates and lodges, again by Lutyens, were added in the 1930s, leading to the memorial from the University Road and London Road entrances to Victoria Park.\nIn 1927, Leicester again became a cathedral city on the consecration of St Martin's Church as the cathedral. A second major extension to the boundaries following the changes in 1892 took place in 1935, with the annexation of the remainder of Evington, Humberstone, Beaumont Leys, and part of Braunstone. A third major revision of the boundaries took place in 1966, with the net addition to the city of just over . The boundary has remained unchanged since that time.\nLeicester's diversified economic base and lack of dependence on primary industries meant it was much better placed than many other cities to weather the tariff wars of the 1920s and Great Depression of the 1930s. The Bureau of Statistics of the newly formed League of Nations identified Leicester in 1936 as the second-richest city in Europe and it became an attractive destination for refugees fleeing persecution and political turmoil in continental Europe. Firms such as Corah and Liberty Shoes used their reputation for producing high-quality products to expand their businesses. These years witnessed the growth in the city of trade unionism and particularly the co-operative movement. The Co-op became an important employer and landowner; when Leicester played host to the Jarrow March on its way to London in 1936, the Co-op provided the marchers with a change of boots. In 1938, Leicester was selected as the base for Squadron 1F, the first A.D.C.C (Air Defence Cadet Corp), the predecessor of the Air Training Corps.\nWorld War II.\nLeicester was bombed on 19 November 1940. Although only three bombs hit the city, 108 people were killed in Highfields.\nContemporary.\nThe years after World War II, particularly from the 1960s onwards, brought many social and economic challenges.\nUrban expansion; central rapprochement.\nMass housebuilding continued across Leicester for some 30 years after 1945. Existing housing estates such as Braunstone were expanded, while several completely new estates \u2013 of both private and council tenure \u2013 were built. The last major development of this era was Beaumont Leys in the north of the city, which was developed in the 1970s as a mix of private and council housing.\nThere was a steady decline in Leicester's traditional manufacturing industries and, in the city centre, working factories and light industrial premises have now been almost entirely replaced. Many former factories, including some on Frog Island and at Donisthorpe Mill, have been badly damaged by fire. Rail and barge were finally eclipsed by automotive transport in the 1960s and 1970s: the Great Central and the Leicester and Swannington both closed and the northward extension of the M1 motorway linked Leicester into England's growing motorway network. With the loss of much of the city's industry during the 1970s and 1980s, some of the old industrial jobs were replaced by new jobs in the service sector, particularly in retail. The opening of the Haymarket Shopping Centre in 1971 was followed by a number of new shopping centres in the city, including St Martin's Shopping Centre in 1984 and the Shire Shopping Centre in 1992. The Shires was subsequently expanded in September 2008 and rebranded as Highcross. By the 1990s, as well, Leicester's central position and good transport links had established it as a distribution centre; the southwestern area of the city has also attracted new service and manufacturing businesses.\nImmigration.\nSince World War II Leicester has experienced large scale immigration from across the world. Many Polish servicemen were prevented from returning to their homeland after the war by the communist regime, and they established a small community in Leicester. Economic migrants from the Irish Republic continued to arrive throughout the post war period. Immigrants from the Indian sub-continent began to arrive in the 1960s, their numbers boosted by Asians arriving from Kenya and Uganda in the early 1970s.\nIn 1972, Idi Amin announced that the entire Asian community in Uganda had 90 days to leave the country. Shortly thereafter, Leicester City Council launched a campaign aimed at dissuading Ugandan Asians from migrating to the city. The adverts did not have their intended effect, instead making more migrants aware of the possibility of settling in Leicester. Nearly a quarter of initial Ugandan refugees (around 5000 to 6000) settled in Leicester, and by the end of the 1970s around another quarter of the initially dispersed refugees had made their way to Leicester. Officially, the adverts were taken out for fear that immigrants to Leicester would place pressure on city services and at least one person who was a city councillor at the time says he believes they were placed for racist reasons. The initial advertisement was widely condemned, and taken as a marker of anti-Asian sentiment throughout Britain as a whole, although the attitudes that resulted in the initial advertisement were changed significantly in subsequent decades, not least because the immigrants included the owners of many of \"Uganda's most successful businesses.\"\nForty years later, Leicester's mayor Sir Peter Soulsby expressed his regret for the behaviour of the council at the time.\nIn the 1990s, a group of Dutch citizens of Somali origin settled in the city. Since the 2004 enlargement of the European Union a significant number of East European migrants have settled in the city. While some wards in the northeast of the city are more than 70% South Asian, wards in the west and south are all over 70% white. The Commission for Racial Equality (CRE) had estimated that by 2011 Leicester would have approximately a 50% ethnic minority population, making it the first city in Britain not to have a white British majority. This prediction was based on the growth of the ethnic minority populations between 1991 (Census 1991 28% ethnic minority) and 2001 (Census 2001 \u2013 36% ethnic minority). However, Professor Ludi Simpson at the University of Manchester School of Social Sciences said in September 2007 that the CRE had \"made unsubstantiated claims and ignored government statistics\" and that Leicester's immigrant and minority communities disperse to other places.\nThe Leicester Multicultural Advisory Group is a forum, set up in 2001 by the editor of the \"Leicester Mercury\", to co-ordinate community relations with members representing the council, police, schools, community and faith groups, and the media.\nCoronavirus.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic has brought many social and economic challenges across the country and across the world. Leicester has been particularly badly affected in the United Kingdom; from July 2020 during the imposition of the first local lockdown which saw all non-essential retail closed again and businesses such as public houses, restaurants and hairdressers unable to reopen. Businesses such as these in areas such as Glenfield and that part of Braunstone Town which outside of the formal city council area, have since been allowed to reopen following a more tightly defined lockdown area from 18 July 2020.\nGeography.\nThe Office for National Statistics has defined a Leicester Urban Area (LUA); broadly the immediate Leicester conurbation, although without administrative status. The LUA contains the unitary authority area and several towns, villages and suburbs outside the city's administrative boundaries.\nAreas and suburbs.\nSuburbs and districts of Leicester (ancient villages now incorporated into the city are shown in bold)\nClimate.\nLeicester experiences a maritime climate with mild to warm summers and cool winters, rain spread throughout the year, and low sunshine levels. The nearest official Weather Station was Newtown Linford, about northwest of Leicester city centre and just outside the edge of the urban area. However, observations stopped there in 2003. The current nearest weather station is Market Bosworth, about west of the city centre. \nThe highest temperature recorded at Newtown Linford was during August 1990, although a temperature of was achieved at Leicester University during August 2003. However, the highest temperature since records began in Leicester is on 15 July 1868. More typically the highest temperature would reach \u2013 the average annual maximum. 11.3 days of the year should attain a temperature of or above.\nThe lowest temperature recorded at Newtown Linford was during January 1963. Typically, 54.9\u00a0air frosts will be recorded during the course of the year.\nRainfall averages 684.4\u00a0mm per year, with 1\u00a0mm or more falling on 120.8\u00a0days. All averages refer to the period 1971\u20132000.\nGovernance.\nOn 5 May 2011, the directly elected Mayor of Leicester role came into effect after the inaugural election. This post exists in addition to that of Lord Mayor which goes back to the Middle Ages and is these days a ceremonial role.\nThe first mayor of Leicester was a Norman knight, Peter fitz Roger (\"Peter, son of Roger\") in 1251. Following the restoration of city status in 1919 this title was elevated to \"Lord Mayor.\" In 1987 the first Asian Mayor of Leicester was indirectly elected by the councillors, Councillor Gordhan Parmar. After institution of a directly elected mayor in 2011 the Lord Mayor of Leicester still exists as a ceremonial role under Leicester City Council.\nOn 1 April 1997, Leicester City Council became a unitary authority. Previously, local government had been a two-tier system: the city and county councils were responsible for different aspects of local-government services. That system is still in place in the rest of Leicestershire. Leicestershire County Council retained its headquarters at County Hall in Glenfield, just outside the city boundary but within the urban area. The administrative offices of Leicester City Council are in the centre of the city at City Hall in Charles Street, having moved from Welford Place. The 1970s council offices at Welford Place were declared unsafe in 2010 and demolished on 22 February 2015. In 2018 a newly built New Walk Centre was completed as a privately funded mix of offices, shops and flats, alongside tree-lined open spaces. Some services (particularly the police and the ambulance service) still cover the whole of the city and county, but for the most part the councils are independent.\nLeicester is divided into 21 electoral wards: Abbey, Aylestone, Beaumont Leys, Belgrave, Braunstone Park &amp; Rowley Fields, Castle, Evington, Eyres Monsell, Fosse, Humberstone &amp; Hamilton, Knighton, North Evington, Rushey Mead, Saffron, Spinney Hills, Stoneygate, Thurncourt, Troon, Westcotes, Western, and Wycliffe.\nPolitical control.\nThe current directly elected mayor is Sir Peter Soulsby of the Labour Party.\nAfter a long period of Labour administration (since 1979), the city council from May 2003 was run by a Liberal Democrat/Conservative coalition under Roger Blackmore, which collapsed in November 2004. The minority Labour group ran the city until May 2005, under Ross Willmott, when the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives formed a new coalition, again under the leadership of Roger Blackmore.\nIn the local government elections of 3 May 2007, Leicester's Labour Party once again took control of the council in what can be described as a landslide victory. Gaining 18 new councillors, Labour polled on the day 38 councillors, creating a governing majority of +20. Significantly however, the Green Party gained its first councillors in the Castle Ward, after losing on the drawing of lots in 2003, though one of these subsequently resigned and the seat was lost to Labour in a by-election on 10 September 2009. The Conservative Party saw a decrease in their representation. The Liberal Democrat Party was the major loser, dropping from 25 councillors in 2003 to only 6 in 2007. This was in part due to the local party splitting, with a number of councillors standing for the Liberal Party.\nIn the local government elections of 5 May 2011 and those of May 2015, Labour won 52 of the city's 54 seats, with the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats winning one seat each. In the 2019 local elections, the Labour Party gained the sole Conservative held ward of Knighton leaving Nigel Porter of the Liberal Democrats as the only opposition member on the city council.\nThe current composition of Leicester City Council is as follows:\nThere have been four changes in party affiliation since the last full council election in May 2023. Councillor Diane Cank left the Labour group in August 2023. Councillor Sanjay Modhwadia, the Conservative Party candidate in the 2024 Leicester mayoral election, was suspended from the Conservative Party following an argument with group leader Deepak Bajaj in a public car park over who should be the next group leader. Conservative group leader Deepak Bajaj subsequently defected to the Labour Party on 8 April, lambasting a culture of violence, racism, religious divides, threats and bullying within the Conservative Party in Leicester. The conservative group was further reduced in June 2024 when councillor Nagarjun \"Nags\" Agath quit the party to stand as an independent candidate in Leicester East in the 2024 United Kingdom general election. Agath cited displeasure in the choice of the Conservative candidate, Shivani Raja, as his reason to stand, branding her as an \"inexperienced candidate\" that had been \"dumped\" on the city.\nRepresentation at Westminster.\nIn the 2024 general election, Leicester is divided into three Parliamentary constituencies: Leicester East, represented by Conservative Party MP Shivani Raja, Leicester South, represented by independent MP Shockat Adam, and Leicester West represented by Work and Pensions Secretary Liz Kendall of the Labour Party.\nCoat of arms.\nThe Corporation of Leicester's coat of arms was first granted to the city at the Heraldic Visitation of 1619, and is based on the arms of the first Earl of Leicester, Robert Beaumont. The charge is a cinquefoil ermine, on a red field, and this emblem is used by the city council. After Leicester became a city again in 1919, the city council applied to add to the arms. Permission for this was granted in 1929, when the supporting lions, from the Lancastrian Earls of Leicester, were added.\nThe motto \"Semper Eadem\" was the motto of Queen Elizabeth I, who granted a royal charter to the city. It means \"always the same\" but with positive overtones meaning unchanging, reliable or dependable, and united. The crest on top of the arms is a white or silver legless wyvern with red and white wounds showing, on a wreath of red and white. The legless wyvern distinguishes it as a Leicester wyvern as opposed to other wyverns. The supporting lions are wearing coronets in the form of collars, with the white cinquefoil hanging from them.\nDemography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nComparing.\nIn the 2021 census, the population of the Leicester unitary authority area was 368,581, an increase of 11.7% compared to the United Kingdom Census 2011 figure of 329,839. The wider Leicester Urban Area, showed an estimated population of 509,000. The population of the Leicester unitary authority area is marginally higher than that of Nottingham, while Nottingham has a higher urban area population compared to Leicester. Eurostat's Larger Urban Zone lists the population of the Leicester LUZ at 886,673 (2017) below that of Nottingham; metropolitan and city region populations tend to be similar. According to the 2011 census Leicester had the largest proportion of people aged 19-and-under in the East Midlands at 27 per cent. Coventry, to the south west, has a population of 352,900 (2016 est.) compared to Leicester's 348,300 at the same date. Nonetheless, Coventry has an area one third greater than Leicester's, approximately equivalent to a combined 'Leicester + Oadby and Wigston' with a respective population of 404,100 (2016 est.).\nThe Eurostat regional yearbook 2015 classifies Leicester as one of country's eleven 'Greater Cities', together with Birmingham and Nottingham in the Midlands. Leicester is second only to Bristol as the largest unitary authority city in England (List of English districts by population 2015 estimates), and ninth largest counting both unitary authority cities and cities within metropolitan counties.\nIn terms of ethnic composition, according to the 2021 census, 40.9% of the population was White (33.2% White British, 0.5% White Irish, 0.1% Gypsy or Irish Traveller, 6.8% Other White), 43.4% Asian (34.3% Indian, 3.4% Pakistani, 1.9% Bangladeshi, 0.7% Chinese, 3.1% Other Asian), 3.8% of mixed race (1.4% White and Black Caribbean, 0.5% White and Black African, 1.0% White and Asian, 0.8% Other Mixed), 7.8% Black (5.8% African, 1.4% Caribbean, 0.8% Other Black), 0.9% Arab and 3.2% of other ethnic heritage.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], Leicester is the second fastest growing city in the country.\nLanguages.\nA demographic profile of Leicester published by the city council in 2008 noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Alongside English, around 70 languages and/or dialects spoken in the city. In addition to English and the primary western and central European languages, eight ethnic languages are sometimes heard: Gujarati is the preferred language of 16% of the city's residents, Punjabi 3%, Somali 4% and Urdu 2%. Other smaller language groups include Hindi and Bengali. With continuing migration into the city, new languages and or dialects from Africa, the Middle East and Eastern Europe are also being spoken in the city.\nIn certain primary schools in Leicester, English may not be the preferred language of 45% of pupils and the proportion of children whose first language is known, or believed to be, other than English, is significantly higher than other cities in the Midlands or the UK as a whole.\nCertain European languages such as Polish will undoubtedly feature in current statistics, although their prevalence may reduce subsequently as future generations rapidly assimilate or return to places of origin, given cultural and geographic proximity and changes in the geo-political environment.\nPopulation change.\nThe ONS 2014 basis population projections indicate the city will be home to 400,000 inhabitants by around 2035.\nTourism.\nThe city of Leicester is considered to be one of the birthplaces of popular tourism. Visit Leicester, who are based at the King Richard III Visitor Centre, define the city as 'The Place Where Tourism Began.' \nEconomy.\nLeicester has the second largest economy in the East Midlands, after Nottingham.\nCompanies that have their principal offices or significant sites in Leicester and the surrounding area include; Brantano Footwear, Dunelm Mill, Next, Shoe Zone, Everards brewing and associated businesses, KPMG, Mazars, Cambridge &amp; Counties Bank, HSBC and Santander banking, Hastings Insurance, British Gas, British Telecom, Caterpillar (Inc.), Topps Tiles and DHL.\nGood Growth for Cities Index.\nThe city of Leicester is regularly rated as the best place to live and work in the East Midlands. The Good Growth for Cities Index is an annual study which ranks UK cities based on a range of economic factors. In 2022, the Index placed Leicester 14th out of 50 UK cities and the best performing city in the East Midlands. In 2023, the index ranked Leicester first of seven East Midlands cities, and 16th overall across the country. In 2024, the Good Growth for Cities Index again rated Leicester as the best performing city in the East Midlands, and 20th overall out of 52 other UK cities.\nTextiles.\nThe city has historically had a strong association with the production of textiles, clothing and footwear. While important companies such as Corah, Liberty Shoes and Equity Shoes have closed, companies such as Next and Boden are still active and ASOS and New Look manufacture in the city. Moreover, in recent years the higher transport prices and longer lead-times associated with globalised production in Asia has led some textile manufacturers to locate to the city.\nThere have long been concerns about the working conditions in this sector. Leicester's garment district is home to more than 1,000 factories employing as many as 10,000 workers. It has received fewer than 60 health and safety inspections and only 28 fire inspections since October 2017. HMRC has made just 36 visits checking on compliance with minimum wage legislation; it has issued penalties to fewer than 10 textile firms and claimed just over \u00a3100,000 in arrears relating to 143 workers. Research at the University of Leicester in 2010 and published in 2015 found there were 11,700 employees in the East Midlands garment industry. 75-90% of them were being paid \u00a33 per hour, which was less than half of the then legal minimum wage. In 2017 Peter Soulsby, Mayor of Leicester called together 40 regulatory organisations to coordinate a response. He aimed to make sure that Leicester had the highest standards of employment; that workers are properly paid, well trained and work in safe environments, In 2020 the HSE was alerted to COVID-19 non-compliance, made inspections and gave advice.\nEngineering.\nEngineering companies include Jones &amp; Shipman (machine tools and control systems), Richards Engineering (foundry equipment), Transmon Engineering (materials handling equipment) and Trelleborg (suspension components for rail, marine, and industrial applications). Local commitment to nurturing British engineers includes apprenticeship schemes with local companies, and academic-industrial connections with the engineering departments at Leicester University, De Montfort University, and nearby Loughborough University. Leicester was also home to the famous Gents' of Leicester clock manufacturers.\nShopping.\nThe city centre has two large shopping malls \u2013 Highcross Leicester and the Haymarket Shopping Centre. The Haymarket Shopping Centre opened in 1974 and has two levels of shopping, multi-storey parking for up to 500 cars, a bus station and is home to the Haymarket Theatre. Highcross Leicester opened in 2008 after work to redevelop \"The Shires Centre\" was completed at a cost of \u00a3350\u00a0million (creating 120 stores, 15 restaurants, a cinema, 110,000\u00a0m2 of shopping space).\nSt Martin's Square and the Leicester Lanes area has numerous designer and specialist shops; several of the city's Victorian arcades are located in the same neighbourhood. Leicester Market is the largest outdoor covered market in Europe. It central feature, the Leicester Corn Exchange, has been converted into a public house.\nCentral Leicester is the location for several department stores including John Lewis, Debenhams.\nThe Golden Mile is the name given to a stretch of Belgrave Road renowned for its authentic Indian restaurants, sari shops, and jewellers; the Diwali celebrations in Leicester are focused on this area and are the largest outside the sub-continent.\nFood and drink.\nHenry Walker was a successful pork butcher who moved from Mansfield to Leicester in the 1880s to take over an established business in High Street. The first Walker's crisp production line was in the empty upper storey of Walker's Oxford Street factory in Leicester. In the early days the potatoes were sliced by hand and cooked in an ordinary deep fryer. In 1971 the Walker's crisps business was sold to Standard Brands, an American firm, who sold on the company to Frito-Lay. Walker's crisps makes 10\u00a0million bags of crisps per day at two factories in Beaumont Leys, and is the UK's largest grocery brand. The Beaumont Leys manufacturing plant is world's largest crisp factory.\nMeanwhile, the sausage and pie business was bought out by Samworth Brothers in 1986. Production outgrew the Cobden Street site and pork pies are now manufactured at a meat processing factory and bakery in Beaumont Leys, coincidentally near to the separately owned crisp factories. Sold under the Walker's name and under UK retailers own brands such as Tesco, over three million hot and cold pies are made each week. Henry Walker's butcher shop at 4\u20136 Cheapside sold Walker's sausages and pork pies until March 2012 when owner Scottish Fife Fine Foods ceased trading, although the shop was temporarily open and selling Walker's pies for the Christmas season of 2012.\nLandmarks.\nThere are 10 scheduled monuments in Leicester, 13 Grade I listed buildings, and 35 Grade II* listed buildings. Some sites, such as Leicester Castle and the Jewry Wall, are both scheduled monuments and listed buildings.\n20th-century architecture: Leicester University Engineering Building (James Stirling &amp; James Gowan : Grd II Listed), Kingstone Department Store, Belgrave Gate (Raymond McGrath : Grd II Listed), National Space Centre tower.\nOlder architecture:\nHistoric buildings: Jewry Wall, the Castle, Newarke Magazine Gateway, St Nicholas Church, St Margaret's Church, St Mary de Castro, All Saints, the Cathedral, the Abbey, the Guildhall, the Town Hall, Belgrave Hall, The City Rooms, the Clock Tower, the Secular Hall.\nParks: Abbey Park, Botanic Gardens, Castle Gardens, Grand Union Canal, Knighton Park, Nelson Mandela Park, River Soar, Victoria Park, Watermead Country Park.\nIndustry: Abbey Pumping Station, National Space Centre, Great Central Railway.\nShopping: Abbey Lane-\"grandes surfaces\", Beaumont Shopping Centre, Belvoir Street/Market Street, Golden Mile, Haymarket Shopping Centre, Highcross, Leicester Lanes, Leicester Market, St Martin's Square, Silver Arcade area.\nSport: King Power Stadium \u2013 Leicester City FC, Welford Road \u2013 Leicester Tigers, Grace Road \u2013 Leicestershire County Cricket Club, Paul Chapman &amp; Sons Arena, Leicester Lions Speedway, Leicester Sports Arena \u2013 Leicester Riders, Saffron Lane sports centre \u2013 Leicester Coritanian Athletics Club.\nTransport.\nAir.\nEast Midlands Airport (EMA), at Castle Donington north-north-west of the city, is the closest international airport. The airport is a national hub for mail/freight networks.\nLeicester Airport (LRC) is a small airport, some east of Leicester city centre; it does not operate scheduled services.\nRoad.\nLeicester is at the midpoint of the primary English north/south M1 motorway between London and Leeds, served by junctions 21, 21A and 22. This is where the M1 transects with one of the primary north-east to south-west routes, the M69 motorway/A46 corridor linking to the A1 and M6 motorway at Newark-on-Trent and Coventry respectively. The M42 motorway towards Birmingham Airport terminates in north-west Leicestershire, some west-north-west of the Leicester urban area. Leicester is at the nexus of the A6/(A14), A50, A47 and A607 trunk roads and A426 and A5199 primary routes.\nBuses.\nLeicester has two main bus stations: St. Margarets and Haymarket, which was recommissioned in May 2016. The main bus operators for Leicester and the surrounding area are Arriva Fox County, Centrebus, First Leicester, Hinckley Bus (Part of Arriva Midlands), Kinchbus, Leicester Bus and Stagecoach Midlands.\nThe Star trak real time system was introduced in 2000 by Leicester City Council; it allowed bus tracking and the retrieval of bus times by text message or online. The system was discontinued in 2011.\nThere are three permanent Park and Ride sites at Meynells Gorse (Leicester Forest East), Birstall and Enderby; buses operate every 15 mins from all sites. The park and ride services are branded as \"quicksilver shuttle\" and are contracted to Roberts' Coaches from the City Council and County Council; buses use a purpose-built terminal near St. Nicholas Circle.\nLeicester has two circular bus services: Hop! which operates anticlockwise in the city centre via the railway station and Haymarket bus station, and the larger long Orbital which operates in both directions.\nCycling.\nNational Cycle Network Route 6 passes through Leicestershire along with other secondary routes. The Leicester Bike Park is in Town Hall Square. \"Cycle Works\" Bike Mechanic Training Centre is in Wellington Street Adult Education Centre and former Central Lending Library.\nFrom 2021 to 2023, the city had an electric bicycle sharing scheme, Santander Cycles Leicester. The scheme was a joint venture between Leicester City Council, the operator Ride On, Enzen Global as delivery partner and additional funding provided through sponsorship with Santander.\nRailway.\nMainline rail.\nThe rail network is of growing importance in Leicester and, with the start of Eurostar international services from London St Pancras International in November 2007, Leicester railway station has gained connections at St. Pancras station to Lille, Brussels and Paris onwards.\nInter-city services are operated by East Midlands Railway providing connectivity on 'fast' and 'semi-fast' services to London, the south-east and to major locations in the East Midlands and Yorkshire; there are also local services operating within the East Midlands region. Trans-regional services to the West Midlands and East Anglia are provided by CrossCountry, enabling connections at nearby Nuneaton, onto the West Coast Main Line, and at Peterborough to the East Coast Main Line.\nThe from Leicester Railway Station to London St Pancras International on the Midland Main Line are covered in an average of 1hour 25minutes during the morning peak, with journey times as low as 1hour 6minutes later in the day. Transfers onto London Underground or Thameslink train services to London City or West End add another 15 to 25minutes to the journey time; double that to Canary Wharf. The journey time to Sheffield is around one hour, with Leeds and York taking approximately two. Birmingham is 50minutes away and Cambridge, via Peterborough, can be reached in around 1hour 55minutes with further direct services available onto Stansted Airport in north Essex.\nGreat Central Railway.\nThe decommissioned Leicester Central railway station is on the late Victorian Great Central Railway line that ran from London Marylebone northwards. Beeching cuts closed the route in the late 1960s. A preserved section, however, remains operational in the East Midlands centred on Loughborough Central railway station providing tourist services through central Leicestershire\",\" passing Swithland Reservoir on to the Leicester North railway station terminus.\nWaterways.\nTwo navigable waterways join at Leicester: The Leicester Line of the Grand Union Canal, and the River Soar Navigation. The Grand Union Canal links Leicester with London and Birmingham to the south, and joins the Soar in Leicester, which links the city to the River Trent, and the Trent and Mersey Canal to the north.\nEducation.\nSchools.\nLeicester is home to a number of comprehensive schools and independent schools. There are three sixth form colleges, all of which were previously grammar schools.\nThe Leicester City Local Education Authority initially had a troubled history when formed in 1997 as part of the local government reorganisation \u2013 a 1999 Ofsted inspection found \"few strengths and many weaknesses\", although there has been considerable improvement since then.\nTudor Grange Samworth Academy an academy whose catchment area includes the Saffron and Eyres Monsell estates, was co-sponsored by the Church of England and David Samworth, chairman of Samworth Brothers pasty makers.\nUnder the \"Building Schools for the Future\" project, Leicester City Council has contracted with developers Miller Consortium for \u00a3315\u00a0million to rebuild Beaumont Leys School, Judgemeadow Community College, the City of Leicester College in Evington, and Soar Valley College in Rushey Mead, and to refurbish Fullhurst Community College in Braunstone.\nLeicester City Council underwent a major reorganisation of children's services in 2006, creating a new Children and Young People's Services department.\nTertiary.\nLeicester is home to two universities, the University of Leicester, which attained its Royal Charter in 1957 and was ranked 12th by the 2009 Complete University Guide, and De Montfort University, which opened in 1969 as Leicester Polytechnic and achieved university status in 1992. In 2025, the University of Leicester was named as the Daily Mail University of the Year.\nIt is also home to the National Space Centre off Abbey Lane, due in part to the University of Leicester being one of the few universities in the UK to specialise in space sciences.\nReligion.\nThe Cathedral Church of Saint Martin, Leicester, usually known as Leicester Cathedral, is the Church of England cathedral and is the seat of the Bishop of Leicester. The church was elevated to a collegiate church in 1922 and made a cathedral in 1927 following the establishment of a new Diocese of Leicester in 1926.\nThe Church of England parish church of St Nicholas is the oldest place of worship in the city. Parts of the church certainly date from about 880 AD, and a recent architectural survey suggested possible Roman building work. The tower is Norman. By 1825 the church was in an extremely poor condition, and plans were made for its demolition. Instead, it was extensively renovated between 1875 and 1884, including the building of a new north aisle. Renovation continued into the twentieth century. A fifteenth-century octagonal font. from the redundant Church of St Michael the Greater, Stamford, was transferred to St Nicholas.\nSt Peter's Lane takes its name from the former medieval church of that name, which closed in the 1570s, its parish having merged with All Saints church.\nFrom the mid 17th century Leicester became a noted centre for Protestant Nonconformity and many sects constructed places of worship in the city including the Baptists, the Congregationalists, the Quakers, the Methodists, and the Unitarians. By the 19th century the Baptist, Methodist, and Congregational presence had grown to include churches in several districts across the city and the Nonconformist conscience did much to impact the city's progressive politics. Many of these congregations are still active. In the aftermath of Catholic Emancipation in the 19th century a number of Roman Catholic churches and schools have been established in the city (see Catholic churches in Leicester).\nIn 2011 Christians were the largest religious group in the city at 32.4%, with Muslims next (18.6%), followed by Hindus (15.2%), Sikhs (4.4%), Buddhists (0.4%), and Jews (0.1%). In addition, 0.6% belonged to other religions, 22.8% identified with no religion and 5.6% did not respond to the question. The city is home to places of worship or gathering for all the faith groups mentioned and many of their respective sub-denominations. In the case of Judaism, for example, with only 0.1% declaring it as their faith, the city hosts two active synagogues: one Liberal and one Orthodox.\nPlaces of worship.\nPlaces of worship include: Holy Cross Priory (Roman Catholic), Shree Jalaram Prarthana Mandal (Hindu temple), the Stake Centre of the LDS Church's Stake, four Christadelphian meeting halls, Jain Centre, Leicester Cathedral, Leicester Central Mosque,\nMasjid Umar (Mosque), Guru Nanak Gurdwara (Sikh), Neve Shalom Synagogue (Progressive Jewish).\nCulture.\nThe city hosts annually a Caribbean Carnival and parade (the largest in the UK outside London), Diwali celebrations (the largest outside of India), the largest comedy festival in the UK Leicester Comedy Festival and a Pride Parade (Leicester Pride). Belgrave Road, not far from the city centre, is colloquially known as \"The Golden Mile\" because of the number of Jewellers.\nThe Leicester International Short Film Festival is an annual event; it commenced in 1996 under the banner title of \"Seconds Out\". It has become one of the most important short film festivals in the UK and usually runs in early November, with venues including the Phoenix Cinema and Arts Centre.\nNotable arts venues in the city include:\nIn popular culture.\nLeicester is the setting for the fictional diaries of Adrian Mole, created by Sue Townsend. In the early books he lives in a suburb of Leicester and attends a local school where he first meets \"the love of his life\", Pandora Braithwaite.\nAfter a period of years spent working in Oxford and London, Mole returns to Leicester and gets a job in a second-hand bookshop and a flat in an \"upmarket\" development on a swan-infested waterfront, which is a barely disguised representation of the area near to St. Nicholas Circle. Vastly in debt he is forced to move to the fictional village of Mangold Parva. The local (fictional) Member of Parliament (MP) for the town of Ashby de la Zouch is his old flame, Pandora Braithwaite.\nLeicester is the setting for Rod Duncan's novels, the \"Fall of the Gas-Lit Empire\" series and the Riot trilogy.\nLeicester and the surrounding county are settings for several Graham Joyce novels, including \"Dark Sister\", \"The Limits of Enchantment\" and \"Some Kind of Fairy Tale\".\nThe Clarendon Park and New Walk areas of the city, along with an unnamed Charnwood village (\"vaguely based upon Cossington\", according to the author) are some of the settings of the 2014 novel \"The Knot of Isis\" by Chrid McGordon.\nLeicester is the setting for the British children book series, \"The Sleepover Club\", by authors Rose Impey, Narinder Dhami, Lorna Read, Fiona Cummings, Louis Catt, Sue Mongredien, Angie Bates, Ginny Deals, Harriet Castor and Jana Novotny Hunter.\nNotable feature films made in the city are \"The Girl with Brains in Her Feet\" (1997), \"Jadoo\" (2013) and \"Yamla Pagla Deewana 2\" (2013).\nSport.\nThe city of Leicester has a successful record in sport. In 2016, it was named the UK's Greatest Sporting City, and in 2008, it was named as a European City of Sport.\nLeicester City are a professional association football club who currently compete in the EFL Championship. The club famously won the Premier League in 2016.\nLeicester Tigers have been the most successful English rugby union football club since the introduction of a league in 1987, winning it a record eleven times, five more than either Bath or Wasps. They won the Premiership title most recently in 2022.\nLeicester Riders are the oldest professional basketball team in the country. In 2016, they moved into the new Charter Street Leicester Community Sports Arena.\nLeicestershire County Cricket Club who are a professional cricket club based at Grace Road, Leicester, currently play in the second tier of the county championship. They won the County Championship in 1975, 1996 and 1998.\nLeicester City Hockey Club was founded in 1894, and a men's team was established in 2018. The women's team is regarded as one of the oldest and most successful teams in England with six league titles.\nGreyhound racing took place at two venues in the city; the main venue was the Leicester Stadium which hosted racing from 1928 to 1984, it also hosted speedway. A smaller track existed at Aylestone Road (1927\u20131929).\nPublic services.\nIn the public sector, University Hospitals Leicester NHS Trust is one of the larger employers in the city, with over 12,000 employees working for the Trust. Leicester City Primary Care Trust employs over 1,000 full and part-time staff providing healthcare services in the city. Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust employs 3,000 staff providing mental health and learning disability services in the city and county.\nIn the private sector are Nuffield Hospital Leicester and the Spire Hospital Leicester.\nLocal media.\nPrint and online.\nThe \"Leicester Mercury\" was founded by James Thompson in 1874. Until recently, it was based at 16\u201318 New Walk, but switched to an almost entirely remote operation after the COVID-19 pandemic.\nPukaar Group, a local media company, publishes the \"Leicester Times\".\nA co-operative and independent newspaper, the Great Central \"Gazette\", was launched online in March 2023. It was renamed the Leicester Gazette in 2024 and plans to launch a print edition in 2025.\nNational World has plans to launch online-only \"Leicester World\".\nTelevision.\nThe Midlands Asian Television channel known as MATV Channel 6 was broadcast in Leicester until late 2009.\nRadio.\nBBC Radio Leicester was the first BBC Local Radio station in Britain, opening on 8 November 1967. Other analogue FM radio stations are Leicester Community Radio for English speaking over 35's (1449 AM/MW), Demon FM which is Leicester's community and student radio station broadcasting from De Montfort University, Takeover Radio is the first ever children's radio station in the UK to be produced and presented by children, Capital Midlands, Hits Radio East Midlands, Smooth East Midlands and Hindu Sanskar Radio, which only broadcasts during Hindu religious festivals. BBC Asian Network and Sabras Radio broadcast on AM.\nThe local DAB multiplex includes Capital Midlands, BBC Radio Leicester, Hits Radio East Midlands and Smooth East Midlands.\nLeicester's independent radio stations launched a new DAB multiplex in 2023.\nThere are two hospital radio stations in Leicester, Radio Fox and Radio Gwendolen. Leicester University has a radio station, Galaxy Radio.\nTwin cities.\nLeicester is twinned with six cities.\nSince 1973, the fire services of Leicester and twin city Krefeld have played each other in an annual 'friendly' football match.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Leicester.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51158", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51158", "title": "Straits Settlements", "text": "British colony in Southeast Asia (1826\u20131946)\nThe Straits Settlements () were a group of British territories located in Southeast Asia. Originally established in 1826 as part of the territories controlled by the British East India Company, the Straits Settlements came under control of the British Raj in 1858 and then under direct British control as a Crown colony in 1867. In 1946, following the end of World War II and the Japanese occupation, the colony was dissolved as part of Britain's reorganisation of its Southeast Asian dependencies in the area.\nThe Straits Settlements originally consisted of the four individual settlements of Penang, Singapore, Malacca and Dinding. Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands were added in 1886. The island of Labuan, off the coast of Borneo, was also incorporated into the colony with effect from 1 January 1907, becoming a separate settlement within it in 1912. Most of the territories now form part of Malaysia, from which Singapore separated in 1965. The Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Island were transferred from Singapore to Australian control in 1955 and 1958, respectively. Their administrations were combined in 1996 to form the Australian Indian Ocean Territories.\nSettlements.\nDindings.\nThe Dindings\u2014named after the Dinding River in present-day Manjung District\u2014which comprised Pangkor Island and the town of Lumut on the mainland, were ceded by Perak to the British government under the Pangkor Treaty of 1874. It was hoped that its excellent natural harbour would prove to be valuable. This did not come to be with the territory being sparsely inhabited and altogether politically and financially unimportant. It was returned to Perak in February 1935.\nMalacca.\nThe Dutch colony of Malacca was ceded to the British in the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824 in exchange for the British possession of Bencoolen and for British rights in Sumatra. Malacca's importance was in establishing an exclusive British zone of influence in the region, and was overshadowed as a trading post by Penang and, later, Singapore.\nPenang and Province Wellesley.\nThe first settlement was the Penang territory, in 1786. This originally comprised Penang Island, then known as the '\"Prince of Wales Island\"'. This was later extended to encompass an area of the mainland, which became known as Province Wellesley (now Seberang Perai). The first grant was in 1800, followed by another in 1831. Further adjustments to Province Wellesley's border were made in 1859, in 1867 with a treaty with Siam and in 1874 with the Treaty of Pangkor. It was administered by a district officer, with some assistants, answering to the resident councillor of Penang. Province Wellesley consisted, for the most part, of a fertile plain, thickly populated by Malays, and occupied in some parts by sugar-planters and others engaged in similar agricultural industries and employing Chinese and Tamil labour. About a tenth of the whole area was covered by low hills with thick jungle. Large quantities of rice were grown by the Malay inhabitants, and between October and February, there was snipe-shooting in the paddy fields. A railway from Butterworth, opposite Penang, runs into Perak, and then via Selangor and Negri Sembilan to Malacca, with an extension via Muar under the rule of the Sultan of Johor, and through Johor to Johor Bahru, opposite Singapore.\nSingapore.\nSingapore became the site of a British trading post in 1819 after its founder, Stamford Raffles, successfully involved the East India Company in a dynastic struggle for the throne of Johor. Thereafter the British came to control the entire island of Singapore, which was developed into a thriving colony and port. In 1824, the Dutch conceded any rights they had to the island in the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824, and from 1832, Singapore was the seat of government of the Straits Settlements for 114 years until its dissolution in 1946.\nHistory and government.\nEast India Company rule.\nThe establishment of the Straits Settlements followed the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824, by which the Malay Archipelago was divided into a British zone in the north and a Dutch zone in the south. This resulted in the exchange of the British settlement of Bencoolen (on Sumatra) for the Dutch colony of Malacca and undisputed control of Singapore. The population of the settlements were largely Chinese, with a tiny but important European minority. Their capital was moved from George Town, the capital of Penang, to Singapore in 1832. Their scattered nature proved to be difficult and, after the company lost its monopoly in the china trade in 1833, expensive to administer.\nDuring their control by the East India Company, the settlements were used as penal settlements for Indian civilian and military prisoners, earning them the title \"Botany Bays of India\". There were minor uprisings by convicts in Singapore and Penang in 1852 and 1853. Upset with East India Company rule, in 1857 the European population of the settlements sent a petition to the British Parliament asking for direct rule; but the idea was overtaken by the Indian Rebellion of 1857.\nWhen a \"Gagging Act\" was imposed to prevent the uprising in India from spreading, the settlements' press reacted with anger, classing it as something that subverted \"every principle of liberty and free discussion\". As there was little or no vernacular press in the settlements, such an act seemed irrelevant: it was rarely enforced and ended in less than a year.\nCrown colony status.\nOn 1 April 1867, the Straits Settlements were transferred to the British Colonial Office and became a Crown colony, making the settlements answerable directly to the Colonial Office in London instead of the Government of India in Calcutta. Earlier, on 4 February 1867, letters patent had granted the settlements a colonial constitution. This allocated much power to the settlements' governor, who administered the colony of the Straits Settlements with the aid of an Executive Council, composed wholly of official (i.e., ex-officio) members, and a legislative council, composed partly of official and partly of nominated members, of which the former had a narrow permanent majority. The work of administration, both in the colony and in the Federated Malay States, was carried on by means of a civil service whose members were recruited by competitive examination held annually in London.\nPenang and Malacca were administered, directly under the governor, by resident councillors.\nGovernor's wider role.\nIn 1886, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands (which were settled and once owned by the Scottish Clunies-Ross family) and Christmas Island, formerly attached to Ceylon, were transferred to the care of the government of the Straits Settlements in Singapore. In 1907, the former Crown Colony of Labuan, in Borneo, which for a period was vested in the British North Borneo Company, was resumed by the British government and was vested in the governor of the Straits Settlements.\nThe governor was also High Commissioner for the Federated Malay States on the peninsula, for British North Borneo, the sultanate of Brunei and Sarawak in Borneo. British residents controlled the native states of Perak, Selangor, Negri Sembilan and Pahang, but on 1 July 1896, when the federation of these states was effected, a resident-general, responsible to the high commissioner, was placed in charge of all the British protectorates in the peninsula.\nJapanese invasion and dissolution.\nDuring World War II (specifically the Pacific War), the Japanese invaded Malaya and the Straits Settlements by landing on Kelantan on 8 December 1941. On 16 December, Penang became the first Straits Settlement to fall into Japanese hands, followed by Malacca on 15 January 1942. Singapore was the last settlement to fall on 15 February, following the Battle of Singapore. The Straits Settlements, along with the rest of the Malay Peninsula, remained under Japanese occupation until the end of the war in August 1945.\nAfter the war, the colony was dissolved with effect from 1 April 1946, with Singapore becoming a separate Crown colony (and ultimately an independent republic), while Penang and Malacca joined the new Malayan Union (a predecessor of modern-day Malaysia). Labuan was briefly annexed to Singapore, before being attached to the new colony of North Borneo (and ultimately detached to become a Federal Territory).\nPopulation.\nThe following are the area and population, with details of race distribution, of the colony of the Straits Settlements, the figures being those of the census of 1901:\nThe population, which was 306,775 in 1871 and 423,384 in 1881, had in 1901 reached a total of 572,249. As in former years, the increase was solely due to immigration, especially of Chinese, though a considerable number of Tamils and other natives of India settled in the Straits Settlements. The total number of births registered in the colony in 1900 was 14,814, and the ratio per 1,000 of the population during 1896, 1897 and 1898, respectively, was 22\u201318, 20\u201382 and 21\u201357; while the number of registered deaths for 1896\u20131900 gave a ratio per 1,000 of 42\u201321, 36\u201390, 30\u201343, 31\u201366 and 36\u201325, respectively, the number of deaths registered during 1900 being 23,385. The cause to which the excess of deaths over births is to be attributed is to be found in the fact that the Chinese and Indian population, which numbered 339,083, or over 59 per cent of the whole, was composed of 261,412 males and only 77,671 females, and a comparatively small number of the latter were married women and mothers of families. Male Europeans also outnumbered females by about two to one. Among the Malays and Eurasians, who alone had a fair proportion of both sexes, infant mortality was excessive due to early marriages and other causes.\nThe number of immigrants landing in the various settlements during 1906 was: Singapore 176,587 Chinese; Penang 56,333 Chinese and 52,041 natives of India; and Malacca 598 Chinese. The total number of immigrants for 1906 was therefore 285,560, against 39,136 emigrants, mostly Chinese returning to China. In 1867, the date of the transfer of the colony from the East India Company to the Crown, the total population was estimated at 283,384.\nIn 1939, the population reached 1,370,300.\nFinance.\nIn the early nineteenth century, the most common currency used in the East Indies was the Spanish dollar, including issues both from Spain and from the New World Spanish colonies, most significantly Mexico, due to market circulation from the Spanish East Indies (Spanish Philippines). Locally issued coinages included the Kelantan and Trengganu keping, and the Penang dollar. In 1837, the Indian rupee was made the sole official currency in the Straits Settlements, as it was administered as part of India. However, Spanish dollars continued to circulate and 1845 saw the introduction of coinage for the Straits Settlements using a system of 100 cents = 1 Straits dollar, with the dollar equal to the Spanish dollar or Mexican peso. In 1867, the administration of the Straits Settlements was separated from India and the dollar was made the standard currency.\nThe revenue of the colony in 1868 amounted to $1,301,843. In 1906 revenue was $9,512,132, exclusive of $106,180 received for land sales. Of this sum, $6,650,558 was derived from import duties on opium, wines and spirits, and licences to deal in these articles, $377,972 from land revenue, $592,962 from postal and telegraphic revenue, and $276,019 from port and harbour dues.\nExpenditures, which in 1868 amounted to $1,197,177, rose in 1906 to $8,747,819. The total cost of the administrative establishments amounted to $4,450,791, of which $2,586,195 were personal emoluments and $1,864,596 other charges. The military expenditure (the colony paid on this account 20 per cent of its gross revenue to the British government by way of military contribution) amounted in 1906 to $1,762,438; $578,025 was expended on upkeep and maintenance of existing public works, and $1,209,291 on new roads, streets, bridges and buildings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51160", "revid": "50990193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51160", "title": "Photophone", "text": "Device that uses light to transmit speech \nThe photophone is a telecommunications device that allows transmission of speech on a beam of light. It was invented jointly by Alexander Graham Bell and his assistant Charles Sumner Tainter on February 19, 1880, at Bell's laboratory at 1325 L Street NW in Washington, D.C. Both were later to become full associates in the Volta Laboratory Association, created and financed by Bell.\nOn June 3, 1880, Bell's assistant transmitted a wireless voice telephone message from the roof of the Franklin School to the window of Bell's laboratory, some 213 meters (about 700\u00a0ft.) away.\nBell believed the photophone was his most important invention. Of the 18 patents granted in Bell's name alone, and the 12 he shared with his collaborators, four were for the photophone, which Bell referred to as his \"greatest achievement\", telling a reporter shortly before his death that the photophone was \"the greatest invention [I have] ever made, greater than the telephone\".\nThe photophone was a precursor to the fiber-optic communication systems that achieved worldwide popular usage starting in the 1980s. The master patent for the photophone (https:// \"Apparatus for Signalling and Communicating, called Photophone\") was issued in December 1880, many decades before its principles came to have practical applications.\nDesign.\nThe photophone was similar to a contemporary telephone, except that it used modulated light as a means of wireless transmission while the telephone relied on modulated electricity carried over a conductive wire circuit.\nBell's own description of the light modulator:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have found that the simplest form of apparatus for producing the effect consists of a plane mirror of flexible material against the back of which the speaker's voice is directed. Under the action of the voice the mirror becomes alternately convex and concave and thus alternately scatters and condenses the light.\nThe brightness of a reflected beam of light, as observed from the location of the receiver, therefore varied in accordance with the audio-frequency variations in air pressure\u2014the sound waves\u2014which acted upon the mirror.\nIn its initial form, the photophone receiver was also non-electronic, using the photoacoustic effect. Bell found that many substances could be used as direct light-to-sound transducers. Lampblack proved to be outstanding. Using a fully modulated beam of sunlight as a test signal, one experimental receiver design, employing only a deposit of lampblack, produced a tone that Bell described as \"painfully loud\" to an ear pressed close to the device.\nIn its ultimate electronic form, the photophone receiver used a photoresistor based on a selenium cell at the focus of a parabolic mirror. The cell's electrical resistance was higher when dimly lit and lower when brightly lit. Thus, the photoresistor modulated the current flowing through an earphone, and thereby converted light into sound.\nIn his speech to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in August 1880, Bell gave credit for the first demonstration of speech transmission by light to Mr. A.C. Brown of London in the Fall of 1878.\nBecause the device used radiant energy, the French scientist suggested that the invention should not be named 'photophone', but 'radiophone', as its mirrors reflected the Sun's radiant energy in multiple bands including the invisible infrared band. Bell used the name for a while but it should not be confused with the later invention \"radiophone\" which used radio waves.\nFirst successful wireless voice communications.\nWhile honeymooning in Europe with his bride Mabel Hubbard, Bell likely read of the newly discovered property of selenium having a variable resistance when acted upon by light, in a paper by Robert Sabine as published in \"Nature\" on 25 April 1878. In his experiments, Sabine used a meter to see the effects of light acting on selenium connected in a circuit to a battery. However Bell reasoned that by adding a telephone receiver to the same circuit he would be able to hear what Sabine could only see.\nAs Bell's former associate, Thomas Watson, was fully occupied as the superintendent of manufacturing for the nascent Bell Telephone Company back in Boston, Massachusetts, Bell hired Charles Sumner Tainter, an instrument maker who had previously been assigned to the U.S. 1874 Transit of Venus Commission, for his new 'L' Street laboratory in Washington, at the rate of $15 per week.\nOn February 19, 1880, the pair had managed to make a functional photophone in their new laboratory by attaching a set of metallic gratings to a diaphragm, with a beam of light being interrupted by the gratings movement in response to spoken sounds. When the modulated light beam fell upon their selenium receiver Bell, on his headphones, was able to clearly hear Tainter singing \"Auld Lang Syne\".\nIn an April 1, 1880, Washington, D.C., experiment, Bell and Tainter communicated some along an alleyway to the laboratory's rear window. Then a few months later on June 21 they succeeded in communicating clearly over a distance of some 213 meters (about 700\u00a0ft.), using plain sunlight as their light source, practical electrical lighting having only just been introduced to the U.S. by Edison. The transmitter in their latter experiments had sunlight reflected off the surface of a very thin mirror positioned at the end of a speaking tube; as words were spoken they cause the mirror to oscillate between convex and concave, altering the amount of light reflected from its surface to the receiver. Tainter, who was on the roof of the Franklin School, spoke to Bell, who was in his laboratory listening and who signaled back to Tainter by waving his hat vigorously from the window, as had been requested.\nThe receiver was a parabolic mirror with selenium cells at its focal point. Conducted from the roof of the Franklin School to Bell's laboratory at 1325 'L' Street, this was the world's first formal wireless telephone communication (away from their laboratory), thus making the photophone the world's earliest known voice wireless telephone system, at least 19 years ahead of the first spoken radio wave transmissions. Before Bell and Tainter had concluded their research in order to move on to the development of the Graphophone, they had devised some 50 different methods of modulating and demodulating light beams for optical telephony.\nReception and adoption.\nThe telephone itself was still something of a novelty, and radio was decades away from commercialization. The social resistance to the photophone's futuristic form of communications could be seen in an August 1880 \"New York Times\" commentary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ordinary man ... will find a little difficulty in comprehending how sunbeams are to be used. Does Prof. Bell intend to connect Boston and Cambridge ... with a line of sunbeams hung on telegraph posts, and, if so, what diameter are the sunbeams to be ...[and] will it be necessary to insulate them against the weather ... until (the public) sees a man going through the streets with a coil of No. 12 sunbeams on his shoulder, and suspending them from pole to pole, there will be a general feeling that there is something about Professor Bell's photophone which places a tremendous strain on human credulity.\nHowever at the time of their February 1880 breakthrough, Bell was immensely proud of the achievement, to the point that he wanted to name his new second daughter \"Photophone\", which was subtly discouraged by his wife Mabel Bell (they instead chose \"Marian\", with \"Daisy\" as her nickname). He wrote somewhat enthusiastically:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have heard articulate speech by sunlight! I have heard a ray of the sun laugh and cough and sing! ...I have been able to hear a shadow and I have even perceived by ear the passage of a cloud across the sun's disk. You are the grandfather of the Photophone and I want to share my delight at my success.\u2014\u200a\nBell transferred the photophone's intellectual property rights to the American Bell Telephone Company in May 1880. While Bell had hoped his new photophone could be used by ships at sea and to also displace the plethora of telephone lines that were blooming along busy city boulevards, his design failed to protect its transmissions from outdoor interferences such as clouds, fog, rain, snow and such, that could easily disrupt the transmission of light. Factors such as the weather and the lack of light inhibited the use of Bell's invention. Not long after its invention laboratories within the Bell System continued to improve the photophone in the hope that it could supplement or replace expensive conventional telephone lines. Its earliest non-experimental use came with military communication systems during World War I and II, its key advantage being that its light-based transmissions could not be intercepted by the enemy.\nBell pondered the photophone's possible scientific use in the spectral analysis of artificial light sources, stars and sunspots. He later also speculated on its possible future applications, though he did not anticipate either the laser or fiber-optic telecommunications:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Can Imagination picture what the future of this invention is to be!... We may talk by light to any visible distance without any conduction wire... In general science, discoveries will be make by the Photophone that are undreamed of just now.\nFurther development.\nAlthough Bell Telephone researchers made several modest incremental improvements on Bell and Tainter's design, Marconi's radio transmissions started to far surpass the maximum range of the photophone as early as 1897 and further development of the photophone was largely arrested until German-Austrian experiments began at the turn of the 20th century.\nThe German physicist Ernst Ruhmer believed that the increased sensitivity of his improved selenium cells, combined with the superior receiving capabilities of professor H. T. Simon's \"speaking arc\", would make the photophone practical over longer signalling distances. Ruhmer carried out a series of experimental transmissions along the Havel river and on Lake Wannsee from 1901 to 1902. He reported achieving sending distances under good conditions of 15 kilometers (9 miles), with equal success during the day and at night. He continued his experiments around Berlin through 1904, in conjunction with the German Navy, which supplied high-powered searchlights for use in the transmissions.\nThe German Siemens &amp; Halske Company boosted the photophone's range by utilizing current-modulated carbon arc lamps which provided a useful range of approximately . They produced units commercially for the German Navy, which were further adapted to increase their range to using voice-modulated ship searchlights.\nBritish Admiralty research during WWI resulted in the development of a vibrating mirror modulator in 1916. More sensitive molybdenite receiver cells, which also had greater sensitivity to infrared radiation, replaced the older selenium cells in 1917. The United States and German governments also worked on technical improvements to Bell's system.\nBy 1935 the German Carl Zeiss Company had started producing infrared photophones for the German Army's tank battalions, employing tungsten lamps with infrared filters which were modulated by vibrating mirrors or prisms. These also used receivers which employed lead sulfide detector cells and amplifiers, boosting their range to under optimal conditions. The Japanese and Italian armies also attempted similar development of lightwave telecommunications before 1945.\nSeveral military laboratories, including those in the United States, continued R&amp;D efforts on the photophone into the 1950s, experimenting with high-pressure vapour and mercury arc lamps of between 500 and 2,000 watts power.\nCommemorations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nFROM THE TOP FLOOR OF THIS BUILDING\nWAS SENT ON JUNE 3, 1880\nOVER A BEAM OF LIGHT TO 1325 'L' STREET\nTHE FIRST WIRELESS TELEPHONE MESSAGE\nIN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD.\nTHE APPARATUS USED IN SENDING THE MESSAGE\nWAS THE PHOTOPHONE INVENTED BY\nALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL\nINVENTOR OF THE TELEPHONE\nTHIS PLAQUE WAS PLACED HERE BY\nALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL CHAPTER\nTELEPHONE PIONEERS OF AMERICA\nMARCH 3, 1947\nTHE CENTENNIAL OF DR. BELL'S BIRTH\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nMarker on the Franklin School commemorating the first formal trial\nOn March 3, 1947, the centenary of Alexander Graham Bell's birth, the Telephone Pioneers of America dedicated a historical marker on the side of one of the buildings, the Franklin School, which Bell and Sumner Tainter used for their first formal trial involving a considerable distance. Tainter had originally stood on the roof of the school building and transmitted to Bell at the window of his laboratory. The marker did not acknowledge Tainter's scientific and engineering contributions.\nOn February 19, 1980, exactly 100 years to the day after Bell and Tainter's first photophone transmission in their laboratory, staff from the Smithsonian Institution, the National Geographic Society and AT&amp;T's Bell Labs gathered at the location of Bell's former 1325 'L' Street Volta Laboratory in Washington, D.C. for a commemoration of the event.\nThe Photophone Centenary commemoration had first been proposed by electronics researcher and writer Forrest M. Mims, who suggested it to Dr. Melville Bell Grosvenor, the inventor's grandson, during a visit to his office at the National Geographic Society. The historic grouping later observed the centennial of the photophone's first successful laboratory transmission by using Mims hand-made demonstration photophone, which functioned similar to Bell and Tainter's model.\nMims also built and provided a pair of modern hand-held battery-powered LED transceivers connected by of optical fiber. The Bell Labs' Richard Gundlach and the Smithsonian's Elliot Sivowitch used the device at the commemoration to demonstrate one of the photophone's modern-day descendants. The National Geographic Society also mounted a special educational exhibit in its Explorer's Hall, highlighting the photophone's invention with original items borrowed from the Smithsonian Institution.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n Footnotes \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Citations \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Bibliography \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51161", "revid": "50552535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51161", "title": "Breda (disambiguation)", "text": "Breda is a city in the southern Netherlands.\nBreda may also refer to the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51162", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51162", "title": "DAF", "text": "DAF or Daf may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51164", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51164", "title": "Ronald Binge", "text": "British composer and arranger (1910\u20131979)\nRonald Binge (15 July 1910 \u2013 6 September 1979) was a British composer and arranger of light music. He arranged many of Mantovani's most famous pieces before composing his own music, which included \"Elizabethan Serenade\" and \"Sailing By\".\nBiography.\nBinge was born in a working-class neighbourhood in Derby, Derbyshire, in the English Midlands. In his childhood, he was a chorister at Saint Andrew's Church (Church of England), London Road, Derby \u2013 'the railwaymen's church' (demolished 1970). Binge was educated at the Derby School of Music, where he studied the organ. Early in his career, he was a cinema organist and later worked in summer orchestras in British seaside resorts (including Blackpool and Great Yarmouth), for which he learned to play the piano accordion. Binge's skill as a cinema organist was put to good use, and he played the organ in Mantovani's first band, the Tipica Orchestra. During the Second World War, he served in the Royal Air Force, during which time he was in high demand for organising in-camp entertainment.\nAfter the war, Mantovani offered Binge the job of arranging and composing for his new orchestra. With Mantovani, Binge also orchestrated No\u00ebl Coward's musicals \"Pacific 1860\" (1946) and \"Ace of Clubs\" (1950). In 1951, his arrangement of \"Charmaine\" gave him and Mantovani worldwide success and recognition. However, he tired of writing arrangements and turned to composing original works and film scores. Mantovani's orchestra began playing his light orchestral pieces for radio broadcasts. In 1952, Binge devised and conducted his own BBC radio programme, String Song, which featured many of his compositions. He regularly composed for production and library music publishers, and a number of his works were used for radio and television signature tunes.\nFamily.\nBinge married Vera Simmons in 1945. During the 1950s, they lived at 18, Smitham Bottom Lane in Purley, Croydon. \nThey had two children, Margaret Binge (born 1947) and Christopher Binge (born 1956).\nHe died in Ringwood, Hampshire, of liver cancer in 1979, aged 69, survived by his wife, son and daughter. \nA grandson is British science-fiction author Nicholas Binge.\nCompositions.\nBinge was interested in the technicalities of composition and was most famous as the inventor of the \"cascading strings\" effect that is the signature sound of the Mantovani orchestra, used in their arrangements of popular music. First heard on the hit \"Charmaine\" (1951), it was originally created to capture the essence of the echo properties of a building such as a cathedral, although it later became particularly associated with easy-listening music.\nBinge's catalogue includes hundreds of works, most of them light orchestral. His first big compositional success was the orchestral overture \"Spitfire\", composed in Blackpool while he was still on RAF service, which predated William Walton's orchestral tribute by a year. Best known today is probably \"Elizabethan Serenade\" (1951), which was used by the British Broadcasting Corporation as the theme for the popular 1950s series, \"Music Tapestry\", and as the play-out for the British Forces Network radio station, and for which in 1957 he won an Ivor Novello Award. It was later turned into a vocal version called \"Where the Gentle Avon Flows\", with lyrics by the poet Christopher Hassall. A reggae version of the tune, \"Elizabethan Reggae\", was performed by Boris Gardiner in 1970.\nBinge is also known for \"Sailing By\" (1963), which introduces the late-night Shipping Forecast on BBC Radio 4. Other well-known pieces include \"Miss Melanie\" (used as the theme for the CBS Network's radio comedy \"The Couple Next Door\" from 1957 to 1960), \"Like Old Times\", \"The Watermill\" (1958) for oboe and strings (used as the theme for the BBC children's series The Secret Garden), and his Concerto for Alto Saxophone in E-flat major (1956). His largest, longest, and most ambitious work is the four-movement Symphony in C (or \"Saturday Symphony\"), which was written during his retirement between 1966 and 1968, and performed in Britain and Germany. It was issued as a recording by the South German Radio Orchestra, conducted by the composer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51165", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51165", "title": "Formentera", "text": "Spanish island in the Balearic Islands\nFormentera (, ) is a Spanish island located in the Mediterranean Sea, which belongs to the Balearic Islands autonomous community together with Mallorca, Menorca, and Ibiza.\nFormentera is the smallest and most southerly island of the Pityusic Islands group (comprising Ibiza and Formentera itself, as well as various small islets). It covers an area of , including offshore islets. At the 2011 Census, the population was 10,583; according to the Census of 1 January 2021, it counted 11,891 inhabitants, while the official estimate at 1 January 2023 was 11,389.\nHistory.\nThe island's name is said to derive from the Latin word \"frumentarium\", meaning \"granary\". The island was occupied in prehistoric times, going back to 2,000\u20131,600 BC. Archaeological sites from that period remain in Ca na Costa, Cap de Barbaria (multiple sites) and Cova des Fum. The island had been occupied by the Carthaginians before passing to the ancient Romans. In succeeding centuries, it passed to the Visigoths, the Byzantines, the Vandals, and the Arabs. In 1109, Formentera was the target of a devastating attack by the Norwegian king Sigurd I at the head of the Norwegian Crusade. The island was conquered by James I the Conqueror, added to the Crown of Aragon and later became part of the medieval Kingdom of Majorca.\nFrom 1403 to the early 18th century, the threat of Barbary pirate attacks rendered the island uninhabitable. On 17 June 1651, during the Franco-Spanish War (1635\u20131659), a squadron of Spanish galleys under John of Austria the Younger captured the French galleon \"Lion Couronn\u00e9\" off this island.\nThe island and its surrounding islets became a separate insular council with the same territory as the eponymous municipality after 1977. Before that, it was administered in the former insular council of Ibiza and Formentera (covering the whole group of the Pityusic Islands), but in a separate comarca which already covered the current municipality of Formentera. This reform allowed Ibiza to unify its comarca of five municipalities with its new insular council, no longer administrating Formentera.\nGeography.\nThe main island of Formentera is long and is located about south of Ibiza in the Mediterranean Sea. More specifically Formentera is part of the delimitation of the Balearic Sea, which is a northwestern element of the Mediterranean Sea. Its major villages are Sant Francesc Xavier, Sant Ferran de ses Roques, El Pilar de la Mola (on the La Mola peninsula), La Savina, and Es Pujols, the most important tourist destination of the island.\nFormentera comprises one municipality, also called Formentera, and has a population of 11,981 (as of 1 January 2021). Its land area is . It is subdivided into several civil parishes (\"parr\u00f2quies\"), themselves subdivided into \"vendas\" (\"v\u00e9ndes\" in Catalan).\nNorth of Formentera is located Espalmador (in Catalan: \"Illa de S'Espalmador\"), the second largest island of the Pitiusas Islands, surrounded by a few minor islets.\nEspalmador is a tombolo, separated from the main island of Formentera by a shallow sandbar. This area is a popular stopping point for those in yachts heading between Ibiza and Formentera.\nClimate.\nFormentera has a semi-arid climate with hot, very dry summers and warm, dry winters. The flat orography of the island means that rainfall is scarce and the temperature is quite uniform. The average annual rainfall is 370\u2013420\u00a0mm. The average annual temperature is between 17 and 18\u00a0\u00b0C. Overall, the climate is mild, with an average annual temperature of 18.6 degrees Celsius and 2883 hours of annual sunshine on average.\nAdministration.\nInsular government.\nElections are held every four years concurrently with local elections. From 1983 to 2007, councilors were indirectly elected from the results of the election to Parliament of the Balearic Islands for the constituencies of Ibiza and Formentera (then forming a single Island council, with Formentera sending a single councilor to both Parliament and the Island council). Since 2007, however, separate direct elections are held to elect the Island Council of Formentera, with currently 17 seats (it only sends a single one to the Balearic Parliament).\nAttractions.\nSince the 1960s, Formentera has been a popular destination for hippies. Formentera is renowned across Europe for many pristine white beaches and the fact that nude sunbathing is allowed on most of its beaches.\nThroughout its history, Formentera has been the subject of many legends, written in novels by famous writers such as Jules Verne, and in songs by musicians as varied as Gilberto Gil and Pink Floyd. From this artistic curiosity, the annual \"Formentera Jazz Festival\" has been held annually in early June and features many emerging and established musicians from the local and international scene.\nThe Canadian writer Patrick Roscoe was born in Formentera. Joni Mitchell wrote her 1971 album \"Blue\" on the island while Bob Dylan once slept on the Far de la Mola on the island. Author Matt Haig also writes about visiting the island often in his twenties in \"Reasons to Stay Alive\". The opening track of the King Crimson album \"Islands\", \"Formentera Lady\", is named after the island. James Taylor also worked on his hit song \"Carolina in My Mind\" on holiday from recording with Apple Records, though he began writing it in London and completed it on the nearby island of Ibiza.\nThe Cap de Barbaria Lighthouse plays a pivotal role in Julio Medem's 2001 Spanish film, \"Sex and Lucia (Luc\u00eda y el sexo)\", which was filmed on the island and served as a touchstone for the various characters' interwoven relationships.\nAlthough paved roads allow access to all parts of the island and cars are easily hired in the port, many people choose to rent mopeds or even bicycles due to the flat nature of most of the island and the availability of dedicated cycle tracks in many locations.\nThe island also has four Martello towers.\nTransport.\nWith no airports, the island was formerly reachable only by boat from Ibiza, making it the quieter of the two islands, but in recent years regular passenger service from the Spanish mainland has increased tourism.\nFerry tickets from Ibiza are available in advance, as are transfers from Ibiza airport or port directly to accommodation in Formentera.\nFerries to Formentera operate from their own terminal in Ibiza port, with departures every half hour in high season on large (200+ passenger) fast catamarans. The journey takes approximately 30 minutes comprising 10 minutes leaving Ibiza, 10 minutes crossing the sea, and 10 minutes arriving in Formentera past the isthmus to Espalmador.\nSome of the anchorages may not be suitable for sailboats under less than ideal circumstances.\nThere is a regular bus service on the island. During high season it comprises 5 routes, which connect the port with major settlements like Sant Francesc, Es Pujols, Sant Ferran, Pilar de la Mola and popular beaches including Ses Illetes, Migjorn, and Cala Saona. During winter only the L2 route remains operational, with additional detour to serve Es Pujols.\nCulture.\nA local Ibizan (\"eivissenc\") variant of the Balearic dialect of the Catalan language is spoken in Formentera. While the official languages are Catalan and Spanish, other major languages like English, Italian, German, French and Dutch can also be heard extensively in the summer due to mass tourism.\nSports.\nFrom 1 September to 7 September, Formentera hosted the 2007 Techno 293 OD World Championships in windsurfing for juniors under 15 and youths under 17.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51166", "revid": "1309551718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51166", "title": "Tapiola", "text": "Tapiola (; ) is a district of the municipality of Espoo on the south coast of Finland, and is one of the major urban centres of Espoo. It is located in the western part of Helsinki capital region. The name \"Tapiola\" is derived from \"Tapio\", who is the forest god of Finnish mythology, especially as expressed in the \"Kalevala\".\nTapiola was largely constructed in the 1950s and 1960s by the Finnish housing foundation and was designed as a garden city. It is the location of the Espoo cultural centre, the Espoo Museum of Modern Art (EMMA), the Espoo city museum, and the Espoo City Theatre.\nAccording to the Finnish National Board of Antiquities, Tapiola was the largest and most valuable example of the 1960s construction ideologies in Finland. Its architecture and landscaping that combine urban living with nature have attracted tourists ever since.\nName.\nThe original name for the Tapiola area was \"Bj\u00f6rnvik\", based on a bay with the same name, currently called Otsolahti (both names mean \"Bay of bears\", in Swedish and Finnish respectively), and the island of Bj\u00f6rnholm on the southeastern side of the bay and the Bj\u00f6rnholm croft located on the island. A mansion called Hagalund was builtr on the lands of the Bj\u00f6rnvik village in the 19th century, giving rise to the Swedish name for Tapiola, Hagalund. The Finnish name Tapiola was the result of a competition held for the name of a new garden city in the 1950s. The name is based on the god Tapio in the ancient Finnish religion, which also has a connection to the traditional bear motive.\nHistory.\nAs car traffic in Finland started increasing in the 1920s, planning for a southern road connection westwards from Helsinki started. The city of Helsinki bought the island of Lauttasaari in the 1930s and a decision to construct a road from Lauttasaari to the village of Jorvas (presently located in the municipality of Kirkkonummi) was made. The road Jorvaksentie (now known as the L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4 highway) running on the southern border of Tapiola was opened for traffic in 1937. When the Soviet Union returned the Porkkala area to Finland in 1956, this road became an important connection to the western part of Uusimaa. Turning the road into a motorway started in 1961 and the road reached Espoonlahti in 1969. At this point the road was officially named L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4.\nThe part of the Keh\u00e4 I beltway from L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4 to Lepp\u00e4vaara, forming the eastern border of Tapiola, was built in the 1960s as a public road.\nAfter the Continuation War had ended in 1944 the entire country of Finland suffered from shortage of housing. In the Moscow Armistice, Finland had been forced to reinstate all the areas it had ceded from the Soviet Union, which meant that the evacuees from Finnish Karelia had to be settled in Finland. Already during the Continuation War, the Finnish Family Federation had decided that action had to be taken to relieve the shortage of housing.\nTapiola was one of the first post-war \"new town\" projects in Continental Europe. It was created by a private non-profit enterprise called Asuntos\u00e4\u00e4ti\u00f6 (the Housing Foundation), which was established in 1951 by six social trade organisations including the Confederation of Finnish Trade Unions, the Central Organisation of Tenants, the Mannerheim Child Welfare Federation, the Finnish Federation of Civilian and Military Invalids and the Civil Servants' Federation.\nThe project was conceived, built and managed by Heikki von Hertzen, the executive of the Asuntos\u00e4\u00e4ti\u00f6 and garden city advocate. Von Hertzen was a lawyer, who had worked as a branch manager for a bank in Tampere before becoming the director of the Finnish Family Federation.\nUnder von Hertzen's leadership, the Housing Foundation bought 660 acres (267 ha) of forest land, six miles (9.65km) from the centre of Helsinki, and set out to create an ideal garden city. The role of the Housing Foundation included financing the project and overseeing the planning and building process so as to ensure consistency within different areas of the town. The Housing Foundation's unique combination of various socio-political organisations facilitated the negotiation of funds with governmental bodies. Von Hertzen set out to create a modern urban environment that would address the housing shortage in Helsinki while also being economically viable and beautiful. Tapiola did not form part of any wider plan for Finland's development other than von Hertzen's Seven Towns Plan, a response to urban sprawl in Helsinki.\nIn 1946 von Hertzen explained his thoughts about urban planning in his pamphlet \"Koti vaiko kasarmi lapsillemme\" (\"A home or a barracks for our children?\"), where he strongly criticised the cramped and gloomy closed city blocks of Helsinki and defended the importance of nature in a built environment. This idea of a garden city movement was inspired by the garden design principles of the British Ebenezer Howard. New residential areas in Sweden also served as inspiration for Tapiola.\nThe original city plans for Tapiola were made by Otto-Iivari Meurman. Later, the Housing Foundation made significant changes to the plans, and handed planning of Tapiola over to a group of prominent Finnish architects, including Aarne Ervi, Alvar Aalto, and Kaija Siren. Each member of the group designed their own part of the area and its buildings, including social housing blocks (80% of all dwellings) and individual houses.\nThe planners of Tapiola were convinced that no one professional group could solve the manifold problems of modern community planning; planning has to be highly skilled and strictly directed teamwork at all levels. Tapiola is a result of close teamwork in the fields of architecture, sociology, civil engineering, landscape gardening, domestic science, and youth welfare.\nThe name of the garden city itself was chosen through a public competition in 1953. The winning name, which in Finnish means the home of the Tapio, the forest god from the Kalevala, was suggested by eleven different people. The prominent difference between the Finnish and Swedish names is explained by different etymologies. The Swedish name Hagalund comes from Hagalund manor, whose lands originally included the site of present-day Tapiola, even though the main building of the manor is actually located in nearby Otaniemi, separated from Tapiola by the Keh\u00e4 I beltway. The original northernmost part of Tapiola was separated to its own district called Pohjois-Tapiola (\"Northern Tapiola\").\nTapiola is also the cultural centre of Espoo, as it houses the Espoo cultural centre (home of the Tapiola Sinfonietta), the city museum (in the WeeGee house), and the Espoo City Theatre. The Tapiola library is located in the cultural centre.\nFuture.\nThe business centre of Tapiola has been significantly renovated by building business and office buildings deviating from the original design of Tapiola and based on the principles of dismantling and expanding construction. The development of the business centre is still ongoing. New space for residence, culture and services will be available when parking and maintenance will be moved to an underground parking garage with space for three thousand cars. The Espoo City Theatre will also move to new premises in connection to the business centre. This renovation is connected to the L\u00e4nsimetro expansion including the Tapiola metro station taken into use in 2017, which is located underneath the parking garage dug into the rock.\nThe residential buildings and their environments in Tapiola will also be renovated. The most important renovation projects include the improvement of the appearance of the M\u00e4ntyviita urban space and renovating the current residential buildings.\nUrban planning.\nTapiola brought worldwide fame for Finnish urban planning. From its first stages it gained both a national and international reputation for its high class architecture and landscaping, as well as an ideological experiment. Tapiola's planners aimed at demonstrating a new direction for Finnish town planning and housing. The aim of the Housing Foundation was to create a garden city which would be a microcosm of Finnish society: all social classes would live there and there would be different types of buildings, ranging from detached houses to terraced and multi-storey blocks. The slogan of the project was: \"we do not want to build houses or dwellings but socially healthful surroundings for contemporary man and his family\". Tapiola provided a utopian vision of society and an alternative to what was seen at the time as an oppressive urban environment. In this sense, Tapiola was both an experiment and a model.\nTapiola was built using some of the principles of Ebenezer Howard's garden city. The founder of Tapiola, Heikki von Hertzen, believed that it was not possible to create a satisfactory residential centre if the population density exceeded a certain figure. Hertzen's vision for Tapiola, which was originally planned for an area of 600 acres, was to have only 26 residents per acre, and a total of 15,000 people. The ground was divided into four neighbourhood units, separated by green belts, and in the middle was built a main shopping and cultural centre to meet the needs of 30,000 inhabitants (including those of surrounding districts) (Hertzen 1959). An important feature of garden cities is the development of a self-contained community. This meant that as many jobs as possible had to be provided \u2013 as many as could be at a distance of less than 10\u00a0km from Helsinki.\nThe architects commissioned to plan Tapiola had also been influenced by Le Corbusier and other proponents of Modernism, and thus their urban ideals also included tower blocks forming impressive silhouettes, as well as a dense method of building. The various residential units which made up Tapiola comprise multi-storey blocks and individual homes, either detached or in rows, introducing a note of variety in the neighbourhood and allowing for the mixing of residents. Combining the architecture of modernism and the ideology of the garden city movement is credited for the huge interest in Tapiola's planning history.\nThe main planning features on which Tapiola was built, as synthesised from Von Hertzen's writings, are summarised below:\nNeighbourhoods.\nThe development of Tapiola occurred in several stages: the eastern neighbourhood 1952 \u2013 1956, the western neighbourhood, 1957-1960, the town centre 1958-1961-1970, the northern neighbourhood 1958-1967, the southern neighbourhood 1961-1965. Planning in Tapiola commenced with architect, Otto-Iivari Meurman's site plan and building schedule which were reviewed from 1951 onwards. His original plan detailed four neighbourhoods split by two crossing roads and set apart by green belts.\nArchitects Aarne Ervi, Viljo Revell, Aulis Blomstedt and Markus Tavio were charged with designing the eastern neighbourhood based on Meurman's plan. They were required to design buildings suited to the surrounding environment and the topography of the area.\nA housing team was created to appraise the architects' housing designs; this process occurred more frequently during the development of the eastern neighbourhood. Team members were from a wide range of fields and included a building engineer, a heating engineer, two independent architects, an electrical engineer, a landscape gardener, a domestic science expert, a child welfare expert, a sociologist, and a housewife. This unique team, coupled with the board of the Housing Foundation, assessed housing designs, taking into consideration the needs and desires of future residents from a diverse range of backgrounds. The parties had different beliefs and values, which sometimes led to disagreements, for example the Housing Foundation was concerned with economising whilst the home-economics experts were chiefly concerned with the needs of families. Thus planning in Tapiola was collaborative and proactive as it involved targeting specific family types and classes, deciding on an ideal lifestyle for these residents, which accordingly influenced their behaviours. Many dwellings were designed to house a specific family-type and lifestyle. For example, it was perceived to be ideal to have families with children reside in dwellings, at or close to ground level in order for the children to have better access to the outdoors and to parks, whilst a tower block with one-room flats was designed to accommodate childless couples.\nMeurman resigned from the board of governors of the Housing Foundation in 1954 following a shift from developing a town with low population density (six persons per acre) and low-rise buildings dwellings, as advocated by Meurman, to more multi-storey buildings and a higher population density (30 persons per acre) as recommended by other architects and the Housing Foundation. This shift was prompted by the need to accommodate a larger population, triggered by the housing shortage in Finland. Ervi took up Meurman's position as master planner.\nThe development of the eastern neighbourhood led to the implementation of important planning principles such as providing facilities that encourage interaction and foster a sense of community as well as the separation of vehicles and pedestrians. It was also deemed necessary to have a mixture of building types located within the one area to encourage social diversification. The eastern and western residential areas of Tapiola featured curved streets of varying sizes and positions, whilst the northern neighbourhood designed by architect Pentti Ahola, marked a return to the orthogonal grid plan. Ahola's design however, reflected the original aims of Tapiola; that of encouraging social diversification by locating a variety of building types within the one area. Financial concerns affected the development of the western area of Tapiola, leading to the construction of housing units that were economically feasible.\nIn 1953 Aarne Ervi was awarded the commission to plan the town centre. The aim of the town centre's design was to provide all the facilities necessary for a modern urban centre and to maximise social interaction. The centre included a market square, public square, church, public premises, businesses and an administration building. As with the other areas of Tapiola, the centre was designed with consideration for the site's features and terrain as well as to provide an active and versatile environment for pedestrians. Roads surrounded the central area producing a modern design completely separate from vehicles and featuring a special route for pedestrians and cyclists only (Tapionraitti). Ervi ensured the centre preserved the garden-city character of Tapiola by locating the buildings around an artificial lake, however this plan was considered strange and criticised for its lack of density. The centre was later expanded with a pedestrian based shopping centre linked to the Tapionraitti, notable for its undercover, outdoor pathways. Later developments showed less consideration for the natural surroundings, though most developments respected the dominance of the existing buildings. Tapiola's centre did not expand to such an extent as to rival Helsinki.\nServices.\nFinland's first shopping centre, Heikintori, was opened in Tapiola in 1968. The Tapiola centre has a large selection of services: a department store (Stockmann), a book store (Akateeminen Kirjakauppa), groceries (K-Supermarket, Food Market Herkku), Alko, a post office, banks (Nordea, Danske Bank, Aktia, Osuuspankki, \u00c5landsbanken, Handelsbanken and Nooa S\u00e4\u00e4st\u00f6pankki), photography stores, barber's shops, and other small businesses. Public services include the Tapiola health centre, a library, an employment bureau.\nPublic transportation.\nPublic transport in Tapiola consists of buses and the metro maintained by the Helsinki Regional Transport Authority. The Tapiola metro station, a station of the Helsinki Metro, opened as a part of L\u00e4nsimetro (the Western Metro Extension) in November 2017.\nSports services.\nThe Tapiola centre houses a swimming pool and the Tapiola bowling alley. Near the centre is also the Tapiola tennis park. In the Tuulim\u00e4ki defense shelter there are premises for wrestling, judo, shooting (air guns and archery), table tennis, gymnastics and fencing. There is also a boxing ring in connection to the Tuulim\u00e4ki gymnasium. In western Tapiola there is the Tapiola sports park, housing the ice hockey rink, skating rink and the tennis centre. The name Tapiola comes from a competition held by the apartment foundation. The lands originally belonged to the Hagalund mansion.\nBuildings.\nIn the centre of Tapiola, next to the central pool, there is the Tapiola Garden hotel, designed by Aarne Ervi. In autumn 2005, the highest wooden office building in Europe, called the Modular-office, was built in southern Tapiola by next to the L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4 highway. The building is operated by Finnforest.\nTapiola is also the name of a Finnish insurance company, presumably from the location of its headquarters. Among other major companies headquartered in Tapiola are Huhtam\u00e4ki and M-real.\nIn Otsolahti in eastern Tapiola, there is a small boat harbour for motor boats.\nThe It\u00e4kartano area east of the Tapiola centre is famous for its apartment buildings built in the 1950s, visited by architects from all around the world. The It\u00e4kartano centre operated as the centre of the whole district of Tapiola before the current central area was built. Remnants of this central role include Tapiola's cinema, Kino Tapiola, by the M\u00e4ntyviita street, and office apartments. The area belongs to the Finnish museum bureau's list of significant cultural environments. The highest, oldest, and most significant building in the area is the white, 11-storey M\u00e4ntytorni building.\nTo the north of Tapiola centre is a central park, Silkkiniitty, a large grass field reaching to Pohjois-Tapiola. It is popular among sportspeople and sunbathers.\nAccording to the Finnish museum bureau, Tapiola is a unique phenomenon in the world. According to the bureau, new proposed changes to the city planning threaten the existence of this cultural heritage.\nThe WeeGee house, designed by architect Aarno Ruusuvuori and completed in 1964, is the former printing house of the Weilin+G\u00f6\u00f6s publishing house. It currently hosts the Espoo Museum of Modern Art (EMMA), the Espoo City Museum, the Helin\u00e4 Rautavaara Museum, the Finnish Museum of Horology, the Finnish Toy Museum, Galleria AARNI, and other cultural institutions.\nTapiola has its own metro station, the Tapiola metro station. The station was opened in November 2017.\nControversies.\nThe founder of the Garden City Tapiola, Heikki von Hertzen, considered suing the insurance company Tapiola in 1981 for stealing the trade name of Tapiola. The Garden City had used substantial resources in advertisement. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51167", "revid": "50195558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51167", "title": "Karlovy Vary International Film Festival", "text": "Annual film festival in the Czech Republic\nThe Karlovy Vary International Film Festival (, KVIFF) is an annual film festival held in Karlovy Vary, Czech Republic. The Karlovy Vary Festival is one of the oldest in the world and has become the leading film event in Central Europe.\nHistory.\nThe pre-war dream of many enthusiastic filmmakers materialized in 1946 when a non-competition festival of films from seven countries took place in Mari\u00e1nsk\u00e9 L\u00e1zn\u011b and Karlovy Vary. Above all it was intended to screen the results of the recently nationalized Czechoslovak film industry. After the first two years the festival moved permanently to Karlovy Vary.\nThe Karlovy Vary IFF first held an international film competition in 1948. Since 1951, an international jury has evaluated the films. The Karlovy Vary competition quickly found a place among other developing festivals and by 1956 FIAPF had already classified Karlovy Vary as a category A festival. Given the creation of the Moscow Film Festival and the political decision to organize only one \"A\" festival for all socialist countries, Karlovy Vary was forced to alternate year by year with Moscow IFF between 1959 and 1993.\nThe social and political changes that took place after the Velvet Revolution in November 1989 pushed concerns about organizing the Karlovy Vary IFF to the background. The program for 1990 was saved by the release of a collection of Czechoslovak films that had been locked up for years in a storage vault. And the appearance of a number of international guests such as Milo\u0161 Forman, Lindsay Anderson, Annette Bening and Robert De Niro helped as well. Future festivals were in doubt. Financial problems and a lack of interest on the part of the government, organizers and viewers almost ended the festival's long tradition in 1992.\nIn 1994, the 29th Karlovy Vary IFF inaugurated an entirely new tradition. After nearly forty years of alternating with the Moscow IFF, the festival began once again to take place every year. The Karlovy Vary Film Festival Foundation was set up in 1993 co-created by the Ministry of Culture, The City of Karlovy Vary, and the Grand Hotel Pupp. Actor Ji\u0159\u00ed Barto\u0161ka was invited to be the festival's president, and Eva Zaoralov\u00e1 became program director in 1995. Since 1998, the organization of the festival has been carried out by Film Servis Festival Karlovy Vary, a joint stock company.\nThe 2020 edition was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic; a shortened event was later scheduled for 18\u201321 November, which will not be counted as an official edition of the festival (being promoted as the 54th and-a-half edition). Due to the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War, portions of the Odesa International Film Festival were hosted at KVIFF in July 2022.\nProgram.\nThe main center of the festival is Hotel Thermal. The core of the program is the feature film competition; in accordance with FIAPF regulations only those films which have not been shown in competition at any other international festivals can be included. The documentary competition is an important festival event. The extensive informative program features both distribution pre-premiers and films awarded at other festivals. But it also includes discoveries of artistic creations by independent directors, productions coming out of little known film industries, retrospectives, and an overview of Czech film output during the past year. For the tenth straight year the festival will present Variety Critics' Choice: new and interesting films of mainly European production selected by critics working at this prestigious magazine.\nSeminars focusing primarily on European film are another important part of the festival.\nThousands of visitors and the great variety of films testify to the effectiveness of the program team with program director Eva Zaoralov\u00e1 at its head. Due to their valiant efforts many films will be purchased at the festival for wider distribution or, thanks to receiving a festival award, will attract the attention of major producers, distributors, and the media.\nThe festival program has the following sections:\nAwards.\nSince 1948, the Grand Prize has been the Crystal Globe \u2013 although its form has often changed. As of the 35th Karlovy Vary IFF 2000 the Crystal Globe has taken on a new look: now the figure of a woman stands raising a crystal ball (artistic concept developed by Tono Stano, Ale\u0161 Najbrt, Michal Caban, and \u0160imon Caban).\nThe Feature Film Competition is divided into the following main awards: \nThe Documentary Competition is divided into the following main awards:\nEach year, the festival also presents the Crystal Globe for Outstanding Contribution to World Cinema.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51168", "revid": "3808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51168", "title": "Vichy, France", "text": ""}
{"id": "51169", "revid": "22344901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51169", "title": "Vichy", "text": " \nVichy (, ; ) is a city in the central French department of Allier. Located on the Allier river, it is a major spa and resort town and during World War II was the capital of Vichy France. As of 2022, Vichy has a population of 25,702.\nKnown for its mineral springs since the Roman times, Vichy had become a major destination for the French nobility and the wealthy by the late 18th century. The town developed further under the patronage of Napoleon III. Following the 1940 armistice, the pro-German collaborationist government headed by Philippe P\u00e9tain was set up at Vichy, which remained the de facto capital of the French rump state for the next four years. After the war, the city experienced a period of great prosperity but went into decline from the 1960s.\nIn 2021, the town became part of the transnational UNESCO World Heritage Site under the name \"Great Spa Towns of Europe\" because of its famous baths and its architectural testimony to the popularity of spa towns in Europe from the 18th through 20th centuries.\nName.\nVichy is the French form of the Occitan name of the town, ', of uncertain etymology. Dauzat &amp; al. have proposed that it derived from an unattested Latin name (') referencing the most important regional landowner (presumably a \"Vippius\") during the time of the Roman emperor Diocletian's administrative reorganizations and land surveys at the end of the 3rd century AD.\nThe name Vichy may be pronounced or in either American or British English; its usual French pronunciation is . The pronunciation of the Occitan name \"\" is .\nIn French, the present-day demonym for a female resident or native of Vichy is \", f sg\" (\"Vichyssoises, f pl\") and \", m sg\" for a male, and \"Vichyssois m pl\" for a mixed group of both sexes. Until the 18th century, it was also common to use \"\"(\"e\"), which derived from the Occitan name of the town. The cold soup vichyssoise is also named after the town.\nGeography and geology.\nVichy lies on the banks of the river Allier. The source of the Allier is in the nearby Massif Central plateau which lies only a few miles to the south, near the region's capital, Clermont-Ferrand.\nThe historical existence of volcanic activity in the Massif Central is somewhat visually evident. Volcanic eruptions have happened for at least 150,000 years, but all volcanoes there have been dormant for at least 112 years. Volcanic activity in the area is the direct cause of the many thermal springs that exist in and around Vichy.\nThe famous mineral springs in Vichy are rich in trace elements such as lithium and fluorine, and high in sodium bicarbonate. The temperatures of the spring range from 73 degrees C at Antoine Spring to 14 degrees C at Lafayette Spring. In total, about 289 springs have been charted in Vichy and its surroundings. These springs are derived from infiltration through Oligocene-period sedimentary rocks, part of the Limagne Graben collapse basin.\nClimate.\nVichy enjoys an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"). Heavy snows in the Massif Central often make roads impassable, but Vichy is low enough\u2014about above sea level\u2014that the climate is more continental than mountain. Rainfall is moderate around Vichy, averaging about annually.\nHistory.\nRoman era.\nThe first known settlement at Vichy was established by Roman legionaries in 52BC. Returning south from their defeat at the Battle of Gergovia by the Gauls under Vercingetorix, they found the hot mineral springs beside the \"\" (\"River Allier\") and established the township of Aquae Calidae (Latin for \"Hot Waters\"). During the first two centuries AD, Vichy became fairly prosperous because of the supposed medicinal value of the thermal springs.\nMiddle Ages.\nOn 2 September 1344, John II of France ceded the noble fiefdom of Vichy to Peter I, Duke of Bourbon. On 6 December 1374, the last part of Vichy was acquired by Louis II, Duke of Bourbon. At that point Vichy was incorporated into the House of Bourbon. In 1410, a Celestinian monastery was founded with twelve monks. A building located above the Celestinian Spring is still visible.\nIn 1527, the House of Bourbon was incorporated into the French Kingdom. By the end of the 16th century, the mineral baths had obtained a reputation for having quasi-miraculous curing powers and attracted patients from the noble and wealthy classes. Government officials, such as Fouet and Chomel, began to classify the curing properties of the mineral baths.\nVichy's thermal baths.\nMarie de Rabutin-Chantal, marquise de S\u00e9vign\u00e9 was a patient in 1676 and 1677 and would popularize Vichy's Thermal Baths through the written descriptions in her letters. The Vichy waters were said to have cured the paralysis in her hands, thus enabling her to take up letter-writing. In 1761 and 1762, Ad\u00e9la\u00efde and Victoire of France, the daughters of Louis XV, came to Vichy for the first time and returned in 1785. The bath facilities seemed extremely uncomfortable to them because of the muddy surroundings and insufficient access. When they returned to Versailles, they asked their nephew Louis XVI to build roomier and more luxurious thermal baths, which were subsequently completed in 1787.\nIn 1799, Laetitia Bonaparte, mother of Napoleon, came to be cured with her son Louis. Under the Empire, \"Le Parc des Sources\", was created on the Emperor's orders (Decree of Gumbinen of 1812).\nUnder Charles X, the great increase in patients wishing to be healed at the springs led to an expansion of the hydrotherapeutic facilities. Princess Marie-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se-Charlotte expanded the \"Janson\" buildings under the plan of \"Rose \u2013 Beauvais\" (work completed in 1830). From 1844 to 1853, theatrical and poetry recitals were performed for the wealthy in the comfort of their own homes by Isaac Strauss.\nVichy in style.\nBy the 19th century, Vichy was a \"station \u00e0 la mode\", attended by many celebrities. However, it was the stays of Napoleon III between 1861 and 1866 that were to cause the most profound transformation of the city: dikes were built along the Allier, of landscaped gardens replaced the old marshes and, along the newly laid-out boulevards and streets, chalets and pavilions were built for the emperor and his court. Recreational pursuits were not spared: in view of the park, a large casino was built by the architect Badger in 1865. The Emperor would be the catalyst of the development of a small rail station, which increased the number of inhabitants and visitors tenfold in fifty years.\nAfter the Second French Empire, the Belle \u00c9poque marked the second large construction campaign in Vichy. In 1903, the Opera House (l'Op\u00e9ra), the Hall of Springs and a large bath designed in the eastern style were inaugurated. In 1900, the \"Parc des Sources\" was enclosed by a metal gallery which came from the World Fair of 1889. long, it is decorated by a \"frise de chardons\" and was completed by the ironworker Emile Robert. Many private mansions with varied architectural styles were erected during the first half of the 20th century.\nVichy welcomed 40,000 \"curistes\" in 1900, and that figure had risen to nearly 100,000 just before the onset of the First World War. \"La vie thermale\" had its heyday in the 1930s. The success in treating ailments that was attributed to the Vichy Baths led \"la Compagnie Fermi\u00e8re\" to enlarge the Baths again by creating the Callou and Lardy Baths. The Art Nouveau-style Op\u00e9ra, inaugurated in 1903, accommodated all the great names on the international scene. Vichy became the summertime music capital of France, but the war of 1914 would put a brutal end to that development.\nWorld War II \u2013 Seat of the pro-German collaborationist government.\nFollowing the stunning defeat of Allied forces in just four weeks, on 10 June 1940 the French government fled Paris for Bordeaux. On 22 June France signed an armistice, which stipulated German occupation of the north and west of the country, including Paris and all of the Atlantic coast. The remaining two-fifths of France became the unoccupied Free Zone (\"Zone Libre\"). On 29 June the government and its parliamentarians moved to Clermont-Ferrand.\u00a0 Finding that city too cramped, on 1 July it moved on to Vichy.\nGerman forces had taken the city unopposed on 19 June, but departed with the Armistice. Vichy had the country's second largest hotel capacity, and a modern telephone exchange and post office built for its international visitors. The city was in the unoccupied zone south of the Demarcation Line, relatively close to Paris (4.5 hours by train), and surrounded by productive agricultural lands.\u00a0Pierre Laval, soon to be Prime Minister, hailed from Ch\u00e2teldon, a village south of Vichy. The city was, in any case, expected to be only a temporary seat of government until signature of the peace treaty.\nOn 9\u201310 July, 670 of the 846 members of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies met in the Vichy Opera House, where they overwhelmingly voted full powers to Philippe P\u00e9tain and authorized him to revise the constitution. The new regime called itself simply the French State (\"\u00c9tat Fran\u00e7ais\"), but it quickly came to be known as Vichy France. While Paris remained the official capital and much of the bureaucracy stayed there, Vichy was the \"de facto\" capital. It was home to P\u00e9tain's cabinet, top civil servants, the diplomatic corps, and the neutered parliamentarians. As the volume of individuals engaged in government activity adversely affected locals and the spa business, a system of residence permits was established that permitted only five days' maximum stay between 1 June and 30 September.\nFollowing the Anglo-American invasion of North Africa in November 1942, Germany occupied the Free Zone, including Vichy. The P\u00e9tain government remained, albeit with an even smaller range of effective action. The city became a center for Gestapo and the Vichy \"milice\".\u00a0After the Allied breakout from Normandy in August 1944, the Germans took P\u00e9tain and his entourage to exile in Germany. The Envoy of the Swiss Confederation to France, Minister Walter Stucki, arranged for the peaceful withdrawal of local German forces and the \"milice\". The FFI liberated the city on 26 August without bloodshed.\nThe term \"Vichyste\", which designates partisans of the P\u00e9tain regime, should not be confused with \"Vichyssois\" which designates the inhabitants of the city. \n\"Reine des villes d'eaux\".\nThe 1950s and 1960s would become the most ostentatious period for Vichy, complete with parading personalities, visits from crowned heads (Thami El Glaoui, the Pasha of Marrakech; Prince Rainier III of Monaco) and profits from a massive influx of North African French clients who holidayed in Vichy, spending lavishly. There were thirteen cinemas (which sometimes showed special previews), eight dance halls and three theatres. It was at this period that the station would take the title of \"Reine des villes d'eaux\" (Queen of the Spa Towns).\nFrom June to September, so many French-Algerian tourists were arriving that it almost seemed like there was an airlift set up between Vichy-Charmeil and the airports of Algeria. Mayor Pierre Coulon (1950\u20131967) decided to create Lake Allier (10 June 1963) and Omnisports Park (1963\u201368), giving the city its current look.\nDecline of Vichy.\nThe war in Algeria (1950s\u201360s), which led to decolonization, marked once again a halt in the prosperity of Vichy, which from then on had to deal with much less favorable conditions. The need to continue to pay the debts incurred by the considerable investments that had been made in more prosperous times obligated the new mayor, Jacques Lacarin (1967\u20131989), the successor of Pierre Coulon, to adopt a much more careful policy of management.\nModern revival.\nClaude Malhuret, former Minister of Human Rights, born in Strasbourg in 1950, was mayor from 1989 to 2017. He and Bernard Kouchner are the co-founders of Doctors Without Borders (\"M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res\"). The city and its economic partners have concluded an important program of restoration and modernization. These projects include:\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nThe city was first noted for its thermal cures in Roman times. Its waters come from springs such as the Vichy Celestins and Vichy Saint-Yorre.\nVichy Pastilles (made in Vichy) are octagon-shaped candies made from soda contained in the spring waters.\nThe health and beauty business, with the laboratories of the L'Or\u00e9al company, also make it possible to publicize the city's name to a worldwide audience under the Vichy brand.\nUnlike the neighbouring communes on the Allier such as industrial Montlu\u00e7on and administrative seat Moulins, Vichy's economy is centred on the tertiary sector, with companies like the Compagnie de Vichy developing the health and well-being sector to mitigate the decline of medical hydrotherapy. The local market, open on Sundays, attracts shoppers from tens of kilometres around.\nThe closing of two important local employers, the Manurhin company and the Sediver company, has reduced employment in the Vichy basin. Job creation by developing companies such as the NSE electronics company or the Satel call center company may not completely compensate for the removal of jobs, despite the internet tour operator Karavel's establishment of a new call center in May 2005.\nNevertheless, the two most important employers of the city belong to the public sector: the hospital (1,120 employees), and the town hall (500).\nSince 1989, Vichy has been one of the seven sites of the European Total Quality Institute (\"Institut Europ\u00e9en de la Qualit\u00e9 Totale\").\nThe \"P\u00f4le Universitaire de Vichy\" (previously called P\u00f4le Universitaire et Technologique Lardy), born from a project of thermal waste land rehabilitation and launched during the mid-1990s, is an economic priority. This campus accommodates 600 students in the downtown area, in ten areas of study including the fields of biotechnology, international trade, multi-media and languages.\nThe CAVILAM \u2013 Alliance Fran\u00e7aise (Centre of Live Approaches to Languages and the Media), receives students from diverse countries who want to learn French. Created in 1964, under the impulse of the Universities of Clermont-Ferrand and the city of Vichy, CAVILAM \u2013 Alliance Fran\u00e7aise joined the international network of the Alliance Fran\u00e7aise in 2012. After the Covid lockdown, the center developed online courses for FLE teachers, FLE ressources pages, and foreign language courses for locals.\nThe Palace of the Congresses is a venue primarily for the conferences of trade associations and learned societies. The structure is in area, including two plenary rooms and fifteen multi-use rooms. With 25,000 visitors yearly, the conferences must carry the economic role once held by the hydrotherapy industry, which today counts only 12,000 patients each year. The hydrotherapy business will now have to reorganise itself to take a less strict therapeutic-only role, and adapt to patients' stays shorter than the traditional three weeks.\nBuilding projects.\nUnder the authority of the local communities, much work is being done on building sites and projects, which will deeply modify Vichy in the years to come. The construction by the Hotel of the Community of Agglomeration in September 2005 on the old site of the \"Commercial City\" may precede the total restoration of the market hall \"Le Grand March\u00e9\" (which would cost \u20ac5.9 million) which would be delivered in September 2006. Other projects include the creation of a mother-child centre in the hospital complex, the restoration of the spa fa\u00e7ade (removal of the metal boarding to uncover the original style of 1862), the transformation of the spa into a multi-use center, creation of parks with fountains in place of parking lots, the demolition and the transformation of the buildings in a congested area to create an enterprise center intended to create 800 jobs (opened in early 2008), the construction of a new aquatic stadium including five basins (open since 2008), and motorway connection (opened in early 2015).\nReligion.\nA wide variety of faiths are practiced. Various Christian denominations such as diverse Orthodox, Catholic, and Protestant churches are found throughout the area along with adherents of Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, and others.\nTransport.\nHighway access.\nVichy is accessible from departmental road 2209, former \"route nationale\" 209 (from the towns of Gannat or Varennes-sur-Allier), the D906e, former D906 from Thiers, the D1093 from Randan or the from Charmeil.\nThe city is situated from the A719 autoroute and from the A89 autoroute.\nThe A719 autoroute, connecting Vichy to the A71 to Clermont-Ferrand, opened in January 2015.\nIn 2014, only regional two-lane highways (\"routes d\u00e9partementales\") pass through the urban ring of Vichy. The D2209 is the principal axis of circulation for heavily loaded trucks, from the west (via Gannat) or the north (via Varennes-sur-Allier or Saint-Germain-des-Foss\u00e9s); other important routes are the following (listed in the clockwise order):\nThe D67 is a loop to the north of the city created to limit traffic jams (access to Creuzier-le-Neuf, afterwards by the D907, Lapalisse and the N7).\nRail transport.\nVichy is served by the following train lines:\nPublic transport.\nMobiVie is the network of urban transport for six communes of Vichy Communaut\u00e9 intercommunality. This network is composed of eight lines as of 2022[ [update]].\n\"Mobival\" is an on-call transportation service for Vichy and its neighborhood. This service offers the local communes a reliable transportation service for areas that are not served by the MobiVie network. Created in October 2004, it has ten lines.\nAir transport.\nVichy is from Vichy \u2014 Charmeil Airport. However, there aren't any scheduled flights to and from the airport. The nearest airports are Clermont-Ferrand Auvergne Airport, located south west and Lyon\u2013Saint-Exup\u00e9ry Airport, located south east of Vichy.\nCultural Events.\nVichy hosted the 2024 Europe Triathlon Championships on 21\u201322 September, attracting top athletes from across Europe. Known for its picturesque setting and rich sporting history, Vichy has previously welcomed major events like Challenge and Ironman. The championships further cemented its status as a premier triathlon destination.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nVichy is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51170", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51170", "title": "Batavian Republic", "text": "Dutch client state of the French First Republic and French Empire, 1795\u20131806\nThe Batavian Republic (; ) was the successor state to the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands. It was proclaimed on 19 January 1795 after the Batavian Revolution and ended on 5 June 1806, with the accession of Louis Bonaparte to the Dutch throne. From October 1801 onward, it was known as the Batavian Commonwealth (). Both names refer to the Germanic tribe of the \"Batavi\", representing both the Dutch ancestry and their ancient quest for liberty in their nationalist lore.\nIn early 1795, intervention by the French Republic led to the downfall of the old Dutch Republic. The new republic enjoyed widespread support from the Dutch populace and was the product of a genuine popular revolution. However, it was founded with the armed support of the French Revolutionary Army. The Batavian Republic became a client state, the first of the \"sister republics\", and later part of the French Empire of Napoleon. Its politics were deeply influenced by the French, who supported three different \"coups d'\u00e9tat\" to bring the different political factions to power that France favored at different moments in its own political development. Nevertheless, the process of creating a written Dutch constitution was mainly driven by internal political factors and not by French influence until Napoleon forced the Dutch government to accept his brother, Louis Bonaparte, as monarch.\nThe political, economic, and social reforms that were brought about during the relatively short duration of the Batavian Republic have had a lasting impact. The confederal structure of the old Dutch Republic was permanently replaced by a unitary state. For the first time in Dutch history, the constitution that was adopted in 1798 had a genuinely democratic character. For a time, the Republic was governed democratically, although a coup d'\u00e9tat in 1801 put an authoritarian regime in power after another change to the constitution. The influence of this period helped smooth the transition to a more democratic government in 1848 (the constitutional revision by Johan Rudolph Thorbecke, limiting the power of the king). A type of ministerial government was introduced for the first time in Dutch history and many of the current government departments date their history back to this period.\nThough the Batavian Republic was a client state of France, its successive governments tried to maintain a degree of independence and to serve Dutch interests even where they clashed with the interests of the French. This clash of interests led to the eventual demise of the Republic when the short-lived experiment with the regime of \"Grand Pensionary\" Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck proved unsatisfactory to Napoleon. The subsequent king Louis Bonaparte also refused to follow French dictates, which ultimately led in turn to his downfall in 1810 when the territory was incorporated into the French Empire.\nBackground.\nDue to the disastrous Fourth Anglo-Dutch War, the Patriot party revolted against the authoritarian regime of Stadtholder William V but were quickly struck down through the intervention of William's brother-in-law Frederick William II of Prussia in September 1787. Most Patriots went into exile in France, while the Netherlands' own \"ancien r\u00e9gime\" strengthened its grip on Dutch government chiefly through the Orangist Grand Pensionary Laurens Pieter van de Spiegel. This \"de facto\" status of Anglo-Prussian protectorate was internationally formalized in 1788 by the Act of Guarantee (for which Great Britain and Prussia acted as guarantors) and the Triple Alliance between the Dutch Republic, Prussia, and Great Britain. The Netherlands was little more than a pawn for the major powers.\nThe French Revolution embraced many of the political ideas that the Patriots had espoused in their own revolt. The Patriots enthusiastically supported the Revolution, and when the French revolutionary armies started to spread the revolution, the Patriots joined in, hoping to liberate their own country from its authoritarian yoke. The Stadtholder joined the ill-fated First Coalition of countries in their attempt to subdue the suddenly anti-Austrian French First Republic. The Patriots sought French revolutionary aid in their struggle against the stadtholder, but did not want to be considered territory conquered by France, but rather a \"sister republic\". There was open warfare, with the Patriots' cause dependent on its success on the battlefield. With the defeat of allies of the stadtholder at Battle of Fleurus, Austria abandoned its interest in the southern Netherlands. French revolutionary forces were able to take advantage of the freezing of rivers in December 1794 and forced the stadtholder into exile.\nCreation of the Republic.\nThe French Revolutionary War proceeded disastrously for the forces of the Stadtholder. In the severe winter of 1794/95 a French army under General Charles Pichegru, with a Dutch contingent under General Herman Willem Daendels, crossed the great frozen rivers that traditionally protected the Netherlands from invasion. Aided by the fact that a substantial proportion of the Dutch population looked favorably upon the French incursion, and often considered it a liberation, the French were quickly able to break the resistance of the forces of the Stadtholder and his Austrian and British allies. However, in many cities revolution broke out even before the French arrived and Revolutionary Committees took over the city governments, and (provisionally) the national government as well. William was forced to flee to England on a fishing boat on 18 January 1795.\nHistorical stages of the Republic.\nThe French presented themselves as liberators. But there were acrimonious negotiations between the representatives of the new Batavian Republic and those of the French Republic, and a harsh Treaty of The Hague was concluded on 16 May 1795. In addition to imposing territorial concessions and a huge indemnity, the treaty obligated the Dutch to maintain a French army of occupation of 25,000 men. To fulfill its responsibilities, Dutch financier Pieter Stadnitski joined a committee at the end of July 1795. To beat hyperinflation it was announced that from 3 August French soldiers in the Batavian Republic would be paid in sound Dutch currency and going forward no one could be obliged to accept French assignats. This changed the Dutch republic from a client state of Great Britain and Prussia into a French one; henceforth it would conduct a foreign and military policy dictated by France, where its predecessor had followed British dictates since 1787 (an offensive and defensive alliance of the two republics was part of the treaty). With the treaty, economic policies would in effect also be made subservient to the interests of France, but this did not mean that it lost its independence in all respects. The program of reform that the Dutch revolutionaries attempted to put in place, constrained by the political realities of the French revolution, was mostly driven by Dutch needs and aspirations. The political events in the Netherlands were mainly derived from Dutch initiative, with some notable exceptions. The French were responsible for at least one of the coups d'\u00e9tat, and the French ambassador often acted as a proconsul.\nRevolutionary States-General.\nAt first, the revolutionaries used the constitutional machinery of the old confederal republic. They resumed where they had left off after the purge in 1787 of Patriot regents, taking over the offices of the Orangist regents that were now purged in their turn. (For instance, the States of Holland and West Friesland were replaced by having the 18 cities that formally were represented in those States send representatives to a constituent assembly that formally abolished the States and founded a new body, the Provisional Representatives of the People of Holland, that took over the functions of the States of Holland as long as the States General continued to exist). Though the political make-up of the States General changed appreciably because of this change in personnel, it retained a number of defenders of the old particularist interests. The first order of business of the revolutionaries therefore was to strive for the reform of the confederal state, with its discrimination of the Generality Lands, and of particular minorities (Catholics, Jews), in the direction of a unitary state, in which the minorities would be emancipated, and the old entrenched interests superseded by a more democratic political order. As a first step the representatives of Brabant were admitted to the States General.\nHowever, a grass-roots democratic movement began to form in the Summer of 1795, consisting of popular societies (clubs) and \"wijkvergaderingen\" (precinct meetings), demanding popular influence on the government. A kind of parallel government in the form of \"general assemblies\" sprang up next to the city governments and the provincial States that repeatedly came into conflict with the established order. In the Fall of 1795 the States General started to work on a procedure to peacefully replace itself, \"by constitutional means\", with a National Assembly that would possess full executive, legislative and constituent powers. This project at first met with sharp resistance from the conservatives. In some cases even force was used (as in Friesland and Groningen) to overcome this opposition. The new National Assembly convened in The Hague on 1 March 1796.\nStruggle for a constitution.\nLike the old revolutionary States-General, the new National Assembly contained radically opposed parties: the unitary democrats, led by Pieter Vreede, Johan Valckenaer and Pieter Paulus, and the federalists, such as Jacob Abraham de Mist and . But there was a broad continuum of opinion between these poles. In this force-field the federalists held the upper hand after the sudden demise of Paulus (who might otherwise have acted as a unifier). The conservative federalists were more adept at parliamentary manoeuvering. Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck proved himself especially adept at this. The frustration this engendered among the democrats led them to appeal to popular opinion and to extra-parliamentary action. Meanwhile, the Assembly installed a constitutional commission that in November 1796 presented a report that amounted to a continuation of the old federal arrangements. As this was totally unacceptable to the unitarists, this draft was subsequently amended into its opposite, by a compromise that finally formed a basis for a new Constitution. The Assembly now began discussing other important matters, such as the separation between church and state, and the emancipation of minorities. The organs of the state were to be a bicameral \"Legislative Corps\", to be elected in indirect elections, and a Directory-like Executive of five members. The end result looked much like the French Constitution of 1795. This was approved by the Assembly on 10 May 1797.\nThe draft-Constitution was to be subjected to a referendum on 8 August 1797, after a very lively campaign in which the French ambassador No\u00ebl weighed in with a supportive appeal. This probably contributed to the resounding defeat of the proposal (108,761 votes to 27,995). The Assembly was back at square one. At this moment foreign events in the form of the 18 Fructidor coup of General Pierre Augereau intervened. This brought the more radical faction to power in France, which proved to be ultimately less patient with the vagaries of the Dutch political process, and more prone to intervene. Elections for a second National Assembly returned one in which the balance of power had shifted to the unitarists in the Fall of 1797. Nevertheless, the federalists managed to retain control of the new constitutional commission by a bare majority. This led to more dawdling and the unitarists in the Assembly now came with their own proposal in the form of the \"Declaration of 43\" on 12 December 1797, containing a nine-point manifesto concerning the minimum conditions to which the new constitution should conform.\nNow the course of events started to speed up. The new French ambassador Charles-Fran\u00e7ois Delacroix took the side of the radicals. His behavior sufficiently intimidated the opponents of the radical proposals to actually fall in line. The coup that was to follow was therefore in reality superfluous. Nevertheless, the radicals, led by Wybo Fijnje and Willem Ockerse, in collaboration with Pierre Auguste Brahain Ducange, the secretary of the French ambassador, now started to plot the coup d'\u00e9tat of 21\u201322 January 1798, which, with the assistance of General Herman Willem Daendels, put the radicals in power. A rump assembly of about fifty radicals declared itself a Constituante, which in one fell swoop enacted the entire radical program, while the other members of the Assembly were forcibly detained. All provincial sovereignties were repealed; the dissident members of the Assembly expelled; an \"interim Executive Directory\" empowered; and the constitutional commission reduced to seven radical members.\nThough the resulting constitution has sometimes been depicted as a French project, it was actually a result of the constitutional commission's discussions between October 1797 and January 1798. Except for the purge of the electoral rolls of \"crypto-Orangists\" and other reactionaries, it might therefore have been acceptable for the moderates, obviating the need for the January coup. In any case, the \"suggestions\" of Delacroix were rejected and the constitutional commission insisted on the following three essential points: universal manhood suffrage, without fiscal qualifications. the right of revision of the constitution at quinquennial intervals by the voters; and finally the rejection of the principle of a bicameral legislature, in which each House would have a separate electoral base.\nThough the coup of 22 January 1798 did not bode well for a genuinely democratic approval process for the new constitution (and the French would have preferred going the \"safe\" way of approval by the rump assembly) the 1798 constitutional referendum had a democratic quality. On 23 April 1798, the was approved with 153,913 votes against 11,587 (i.e., just 641 more people voted for approval in 1798 than had voted for rejection of the previous draft in 1797; about 50% of the electorate had voted.) The new regime therefore seemed well-grounded in the new doctrine of popular sovereignty.\nThe new constitution addressed many of the reformist concerns of the Patriots since 1785, including no hereditary offices; no sinecures; and accountability of officials. It also came down on the side of economic liberalism, as opposed to mercantilism, in the economic debate then raging in republican circles, and therefore promised to do away with guilds and internal impediments to trade. The old provincial-repartition system of public finance was to be replaced by a system of national taxation. There was to be a five-man \"Uitvoerend Bewind\" as a collective Executive, with eight national \"Agenten\" (government ministers) doing the actual Administration, directing Foreign Affairs, Police and Interior, Justice, Finance, War, Navy, National Education, and National Economy. Most importantly, as historian Simon Schama states: \"[i]ts central aim was to change the nature of the Dutch state and to bind its new institutions into the framework of an electoral democracy.\" As such it had an importance that outlasted the Batavian Republic and set up an ideal to emulate for its successor states.\n\"Uitvoerend Bewind\".\nGiddy with their success, the radicals now pushed further. Their legitimacy was already tenuous, because of the way they had seized power. Now they also lost support in the rump-Assembly because of their partisanship. Not wishing to repeat the mistakes of the French Jacobins they moved against the popular political clubs that formed their political base, thereby alienating their most enthusiastic supporters. On the other hand, at the behest of Delacroix they also moved against \"counter-revolutionaries\" by having purging commissions removing these men from the electoral rolls, further undermining the legitimacy of the regime, as moderate Patriots were also disenfranchised. The final blow was that the new regime reneged on its promise to elect an entirely new Representative Assembly.\n\"Coup d'\u00e9tat\" of the moderates.\nMeanwhile, the \"22 Flor\u00e9al\" coup in France undermined Delacroix, because it inspired more sympathy by French foreign minister Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord for the Dutch opposition members who demanded the ambassador's recall. At the same time, Daendels became disaffected with the regime he had helped put into power because of the depredations of the purging commissions. His French colleague General Barth\u00e9lemy Catherine Joubert was displeased with the radicals because of conflicts about the co-dominion of Flushing. Finally, the newly appointed \"Agenten\" were disturbed about the inefficiency of the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\". All these disaffections came together with the coup on 12 June 1798, of that recidivist, General Daendels, in which he disturbed a dinner party of Delacroix and three members of the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\", violating the diplomatic immunity of the ambassador by putting pistols to his chest. The members of the \"Representative Assembly\" were arrested in session.\nThe fall of the Vreede-Fijnje \"Bewind\" opened the way for the actual implementation of the new constitution. The \"Interim Directory\" that now came to power (consisting of a few of the dissenting \"Agenten\") made haste with organizing elections for the Representative Assembly that convened on 31 July. By the middle of August a new \"Uitvoerend Bewind\" had been appointed and the \"Agenten\" who had been behind the coup, resumed their original positions. This new regime now started to implement the policies that their radical predecessors had written into the constitution. The coup of June therefore was not a reactionary revolution, but only brought about a change in personnel. Soon most of the people that were arrested at both the January and June coups were released in the spirit of reconciliation that the new regime advocated. The make-up of the Representative Assembly closely resembled that of the second National Assembly of 1797.\nThe new regime was soon to discover that changes do not easily come about by legislative fiat. The part of the constitution that worked adequately was the experiment with indirect democracy. During the period in which the constitution was in force, the system of primary assemblies that elected delegates who voted for the respective organs of government worked efficiently, and kept the voters engaged. However, exactly because the Republic was a genuine democracy, other goals of the regime were less easy to attain. The elections often put people into office that were very much opposed to the unitary state that was now enshrined in the constitution, and to other innovations that it entailed, or in any case were of a conservative inclination.\nThis already applied at the top: the constitution contained an age-requirement for the members of the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\", which favored the election of staid Patriot regents, and discriminated against the more talented appointed \"Agents\", like Jacobus Spoors, Gerrit Jan Pijman and Alexander Gogel. The tenor of the \"Bewind\" became more conservative in the ensuing years. The agents went to work energetically, however, and started with an onslaught on the old administrative organization of the country, in a deliberate attempt to liquidate the very identity of the old federal structure. The once mighty province of Holland was carved into three pieces: \"Amstel\" (Amsterdam and immediate vicinity), \"Texel\" (the northern peninsula) and \"Delf\" (the southern part); and the other provinces were often merged in larger entities, like Overijssel and Drente into \"Ouden Yssel\", and Frisia and Groningen into the \"Eems department\". The aim was to organize the country into units with equal numbers of primary assemblies (hence the small Amstel department with its large population). The first elections for the administrative organs of these new entities were held in March 1799. But, of course, such a reorganization did not suddenly change the old allegiances of the people living in these areas. In any case, the new local and departmental administrations, though elected, were supposed to execute the policies as centrally laid down by the national government. As the elections often put people in power who represented the old order (like Joan Arend de Vos van Steenwijk in Ouden Yssel) this was exceedingly unlikely. To put it differently, the political effort to attain \"national unity\" through reconciliation of the diverse Patriot factions of all stripes, got in the way of the effort to create an efficient national unitary state, as envisioned by Gogel.\nPublic finance reform.\nThe unitary state was not an end in itself, but a means to higher ends. The republic had been in dire financial straits even before the revolution of 1795. The system of public finance that had been the envy of the world in its Golden Age, enabling it to throw far beyond its weight in world politics up to the Peace of Utrecht in 1713, had become a millstone around its neck. By 1713 the public debt of the County of Holland had reached 310 million guilders; the debt of the Generality was 68 million; and the debts of the smaller provinces, and of the cities came on top of this. The debt service of Holland alone in that year required 14 million guilders, which exceeded its regular tax revenue. Most of this humongous public debt was held by Dutch private citizens, so in a sense it merely engendered an internal money circuit in the Dutch economy. However, it was mostly concentrated in the hands of the \"rentier\" class, while the debt was serviced by mainly regressive taxes that weighed on the working population. Most importantly, these were taxes levied by the individual provinces, who serviced their own debt, and paid into the Generality coffers according to a repartition schedule last changed in 1616. Attempts to reform this structure during the 18th century were mainly fruitless.\nTo ameliorate the situation the old Republic maintained a policy of severe austerity during the century, especially economizing on its defense outlays (which in large part explains why its military and political role declined so much). Up to the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War this policy succeeded in bringing down the level of debt, but this war brought a large uptick in the public debt: between 1780 and 1794 the province of Holland alone issued 120 million guilders of new bonds. In 1795, its total debt stood at 455 million guilders. To this should be added the debts of the United East India Company and its sister, the WIC, and the five Dutch Admiralties for a total of about 150 million guilders. The other provinces owed 155 million guilders. The grand total in 1795, at the beginning of the Batavian Republic, came to 760 million guilders; this imposed a debt service of 25 million guilders annually. The indemnity of the Treaty of The Hague immediately added 100 million guilders to this total, and the maintenance of the French army of occupation added about 12 million annually (while the other funding requirements of the republic added another 20 million annually). To fulfill its engagements to the French Republic, Pieter Stadnitski joined a committee at the end of July 1795. On August 3 it was announced that from that date French soldiers would be paid in sound Dutch currency and no one could be obliged to accept French assignats anymore. In 1814 the public debt stood at 1.7 billion guilders.\nThe average ordinary revenue of the republic at this time amounted to between 28 and 35 million guilders. However, since the outbreak of the war in 1793 the expenditure had been running at between 40 and 55 millions. For the year 1800 the republic had to find 78 million guilders for its expenditures. In other words, the new Agent of Finance, Gogel, was faced with a financial emergency. He needed to generate about 50 million guilders annually in ordinary revenue on a permanent basis urgently. Besides, as the Dutch tax system was heavily skewed toward highly regressive indirect taxes, which inordinately burdened the impoverished population, he wanted to change this to a system that depended more on direct (income and wealth) taxes. Finally, he wanted to do away with the provincial differentiation in the taxation, and construct a nationally standardized system. When he put these reform proposals to the Representative Assembly on 30 September 1799, they met with massive resistance. This led to so much delay in its acceptance that by the time it was to be implemented (in 1801) the re-federalisation of the state by the new \"Staatsbewind\" regime was already underway. Eventually, Gogel's reforms were only implemented under the successor state of the Kingdom of Holland.\nThese are (important) examples of instances in which the good intentions of the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\" and its \"Agenten\" met with the political and economic realities of the times. Other necessary reforms (the abolition of the guilds, the reform of the system of poor relief to mention but a few examples) equally came to nothing. These defeats progressively led to disenchantment of the population with the regime, that already was in an awkward position because it was also brushed with the tar of the depredations of the French \"sister republic\" that mainly viewed the Batavian Republic as a milk cow, both collectively (in its demands for loans at very low interest rates) and individually (in the demands of French officials for bribes and other extortions).\nAnglo-Russian invasion.\nThe sagging popularity of the Republic did not escape the attention of the British intelligence services. However, because this intelligence was filtered through the eyes of Orangist agents in the Republic and \u00e9migr\u00e9s in England, it was erroneously interpreted as possible support for an Orangist restoration. This caused the miscalculation that led to the ill-fated Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland in the peninsula of North Holland in 1799.\nThough the expedition ended in failure the members of the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\" became very nervous in the days before the Battle of Bergen. The Agent for Foreign Affairs, Van der Goes who had been in favor of distancing the Republic from the French, chose this inopportune moment to secretly approach the King of Prussia as a mediator, with a scheme in which the Hereditary Prince was to become a kind of constitutional monarch in a constitution on the model of the American Constitution. The Republic would revert to its traditional neutrality, while Britain would occupy North Holland, and France Zeeland. The overture was rejected, and it caused a lot of embarrassment in the relations with the French Directory. At this time Napoleon Bonaparte performed his coup of 18 Brumaire, establishing the French Consulate. The Franco-Batavian relations now entered a whole new era.\nStaatsbewind and the Peace of Amiens.\nPressure for constitutional reform.\nThough Napoleon had a warlike reputation, his policies in his first years as First Consul were aimed at restoring peace in Europe, albeit at terms favorable to France. The animus of the members of the Second Coalition was mostly against the French Revolution, its ideas and its consequences. By this time Napoleon himself was convinced of their perfidy. Talleyrand and Napoleon therefore saw a possibility of a compromise, in which France would retain its chain of docile client states, but with the \"revolutionary\" sting removed, to appease the Allies. That unrevolutionary docility was to be assured by constitutions designed to eliminate not only domestic conflict (as was the new French political order), but also any flashes of impertinent nationalism. France therefore embarked on a program of constitutional reform in the dependent republics, first in the Helvetic Republic, where Napoleon as Mediator imposed the Constitution of Malmaison in 1801 (followed by the Second Helvetic Constitution a year later), restoring the old confederal order.\nA similar \"solution\" seemed appropriate for the Batavian Republic. The Batavian government, and its constitution, were particularly disliked by the Consul (no friend of democracy in any case), because of the snub that Amsterdam bankers gave in 1800 to his request for a big loan at the usual generous rate of interest the French expected as a matter of right. He blamed the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\" for this, and many other foibles, like undermining the boycott of British goods. To remedy these ills, a new Batavian constitution on the political principles of the Consulate (union, authority, political office for men of ability and social station) was needed. The new French ambassador Charles Louis Huguet, marquis de S\u00e9monville he sent to The Hague in 1799 was just the man for this job.\nMeanwhile, even the minds of reformers like Gogel had become receptive to the need for change. The frustrations of the stalemate between unitarist reformers and democratically elected federalist obstructionists had caused a certain disillusionment with democratic politics in the former (the latter were already convinced). An alliance was therefore forming between the would-be reformers, who would like to finally push their reforms through, by \"Bonapartist\" means, if necessary, and the people who wished to restore the old federal order, in the hands of the old regent class. Director Besier in particular was amenable to a project that would extend executive power (and curtail that of the Assembly), and revert the constitution to federal devolution. With the help of S\u00e9monville he now started to push a project of constitutional reform that followed the French Constitution of the Year VIII in important respects: a bicameral legislature would be appointed by a \"National College\" (akin to the French S\u00e9nat conservateur) from a list of names produced by a convoluted system of national elections. This met with little enthusiasm by two of the other Directors Fran\u00e7ois Ermerins and Jean Henri van Swinden, and by the Representative Assembly, that rejected the project on 11 June 1801, by fifty votes to twelve.\nAugereau-coup.\nThe majority in the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\" (Gerrit Pijman in particular) therefore amended the project in a sense that gave re-federalization even more emphasis. They unilaterally convened the primary assemblies by a proclamation on 14 September 1801, have a referendum on this new draft constitution. The Assembly defiantly ruled this proclamation illegal on 18 September. Then General Augereau (he of the Fructidor-coup), now commander-in-chief of the French forces in the Netherlands, routinely closed the doors of the Assembly (by previous arrangement with Pijman) on 19 September, and arrested the dissident Directors. Despite this military putsch the campaign for the plebiscite took place in an atmosphere of political freedom unthinkable in France. Nevertheless, this did not result in great enthusiasm for the new constitution. When the votes were counted on 1 October, out of 416,619 voters only 16,771 voted in favor and 52,219 against. The Directors then used a sleight of hand that unfortunately would also become familiar in the Dutch constitutional politics of the successor states: they counted the 350,000 abstentions as \"tacit affirmations\".\nUnlike the coup of June 1798, the Augereau coup did present a sharp break with the recent past. The new constitution reduced the role of the legislative branch (which now did not have the right of initiative), and expanded the powers of the Executive, which now became known as the \"Staatsbewind\" (Regency of State). The elective principle was reduced to a formality: the \"Staatsbewind\", originally consisting of the three directors taking part in the coup, expanded its membership by co-optation to twelve. This executive then appointed the first 35 members of the legislature. As vacancies arose, these were filled, as far as possible, on a provincial rota and according to national quotas of representatives of each province (much like the old States-General). Except for Holland, the old provinces were reconstituted. The local and provincial administrative organs continued to be elected \u2013 no longer by universal manhood suffrage, but by a system of census suffrage.\nMost important was the change in personnel of these organs, mostly as a consequence of this electoral change. The \"democrats\" were mostly replaced by Patriot regents, who had no patience with democracy, and by the old Orangist regents, who did not even have to disguise their allegiance as in early 1801 a convenient amnesty was proclaimed. One surprising example is Egbert Sjuck Gerrold Juckema van Burmania Rengers, the Orangist burgomaster of Leeuwarden before 1795, a notorious reactionary.\nThe coup represented a counter-revolution. This became clear in the way the iconography of the 1795 revolution disappeared: the epigraph \"Vrijheid, Gelijkheid, Broederschap\" (Liberty, Equality, Fraternity) which had adorned all official publications, was henceforth removed, and the last Liberty Trees were removed from the town squares. Soon the old ways were restored. For example, though the abolition of the guilds formally remained, in practice regulation of crafts and trades was reimposed by local ordinances.\nPeace negotiations.\nAgainst this background the negotiations for the Treaty of Amiens started in October 1801. The minor participants in the negotiations between Great Britain and France (the Batavian Republic and Spain) were immediately presented with faits accomplis: the preliminary agreement ceded Ceylon, and guaranteed free British shipping to the Cape of Good Hope, without the Dutch even being consulted. The Dutch ambassador in France, Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck, who acted as the Dutch plenipotentiary, vainly protested that the Treaty of The Hague had guaranteed the Dutch colonies, and that France had promised not to make a separate peace. After this separate peace had been concluded, the British were left to negotiate with the minor French allies separately. This did not mean that the Dutch were completely left to their own devices: whenever French interests seemed to be in danger, France decisively intervened on its own behalf, as in the attempt to deduct the value of the Dutch fleet, surrendered in 1799, that the British had purchased from the Stadtholder, from the indemnification of the Prince of Orange.\nThat indemnification was an important sideshow in the negotiations. The consequence of the peace treaty was that the Batavian Republic now received international recognition, even by the British, and that the old Dutch Republic was now irreversibly dead. This put an end to all pretensions of the Stadtholder and his heirs, such as they were. It may be important to note that these pretensions were dubious to begin with. The Stadtholder was never the sovereign power in the Netherlands, despite understandable misconceptions by foreigners, who may have thought that a country needed a head of state, and the Stadtholder was it. Instead he was an officeholder, appointed by the provincial States, who also was captain-general and admiral-general of the Union (there was originally no stadtholder on the confederal level).\nIn the Orangist revolution of 1747 this office had been revamped to \"Stadhouder-generaal\" and made hereditary, and after the Prussian intervention of 1787 the powers of the Stadtholder had become dictatorial. But formally the States General had been sovereign since 1588, and the Stadtholder was merely their \"first servant\". The British may have entertained certain fantasies about his formal status, but never seriously considered it. An example of this would the British acceptance of the surrender of the Batavian fleet in the name of the Stadtholder in 1799, as though he was a sovereign prince. But this was all make-believe, and it ended with the peace of 1802 (though it was revived in 1813).\nThe Prince had reason to feel aggrieved by this. He did have large patrimonial estates in the Netherlands that now were forfeit. Besides, the loss of his hereditary offices entailed a loss of income. According to his own calculations the arrears in all these incomes since 1795 amounted to 4 million guilders. The \"Staatsbewind\" refused to pay this, or any sum, point blank, and the peace treaty specifically exempted the Dutch from paying anything. Instead, an arrangement between the French, British and Prussians (the former stadtholder's champions) in the matter was reached that in return for dropping any and all claims William was to be compensated with the abbatial domains of Fulda and Corvey Abbey (see also Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda).\nShort interlude of peace.\nThe Treaty restored most of the colonies that had been captured by the British since 1795, except Ceylon, but including the Cape Colony. This now made the attempts in the Asiatic Council, which had replaced the Directorate of the VOC in 1799, to reform the management of the colonies, more urgent. Dirk van Hogendorp was commissioned to write a proposal, that met with considerable enthusiasm from the more progressive elements on the council, like Samuel Iperusz. Wiselius and J.H.Neethling. He proposed to abolish all perquisites and sinecures; to permit private trade; to permit native subjects to own private property; to substitute the \"land levies\" by a regulated land tax; and the abolition of all seigneurial rights in the colonies. This met with overwhelming resistance from vested interests. When a new Charter for the colonies was promulgated, Hogendorp's proposals had been whittled down to insignificance. The vestigial democrats on the Council were now purged in favor of Orangist reactionaries like Hendrik Mollerus, and Hendrik Van Stralen. In any case, the Republic did not enjoy the possession of its colonies for long. After the resumption of hostilities in 1803 the returned colonies in most cases were soon recaptured by the British. Java, however, remained Dutch until 1811.\nAnother potentially important consequence of the peace might have been that a number of provisions of the Treaty of The Hague, that had been conditional on a peace, like the reduction of the French army of occupation, would now have become operational. However, the First Consul proved reluctant to reduce the numbers of French troops, or return the port of Flushing, for the good of the Dutch as he pointed out, as they needed many of their own troops in their restored colonies, so the \"protection\" of the French troops was considered necessary. On the other hand, the departure of the French troops was an indispensable point for the British as they could not allow the Netherlands to be dominated by a hostile power, and the Batavian Republic was incapable of defending its own neutrality. This was to be an insoluble dilemma in the coming years.\nReal advantages of the peace came in the economic field. As an open economy, the Republic needed unhindered trade. It was heavily dependent on exports of agricultural products to the British markets, and on its services sector (especially its large merchant fleet, and the banking sector), whereas its industry (whatever remained of it after a century of being confronted by foreign protectionism) also was dependent on exports. All these sectors had suffered enormously from the war: the British blockade and French and British privateering had almost brought marine trade to a standstill, whereas a commercial treaty with France (which would have ended French discrimination of Dutch trade in industrial goods) proved an ever-receding fata morgana. True, much of the trade had shifted to flags of convenience (especially that of the US and European neutrals like Prussia), but the peace made the resurgence of the Dutch carrying trade fully practicable. Nevertheless, some changes proved irreversible, like the shift of trade patterns to German ports, and the decline of the fisheries.\nInvasion preparations and economic warfare.\nThe peace turned out to be of short duration. On 18 May 1803, slightly more than a year after the peace, war resumed. Napoleon was now intent on the destruction of Great Britain by culminating in an ambitious planned invasion. The French expected the Batavian Republic to play a major supporting role in this. As the Franco-Batavian alliance's embodiment, the \"Staatsbewind\" was forced to assent to a Convention bringing the total of French and Batavian forces in the Netherlands to 35,000. In addition, 9,000 Batavian troops were slated for the proposed overseas expedition. Even more importantly, the Dutch were to supply five ships-of-the-line, five frigates, 100 gunboats, and 250 flat-bottomed transport craft, capable of holding 60\u201380 men by December 1803. In total the Dutch were meant to provide transport for 25,000 men and 2,500 horses, the major part of Napoleon's invasion armada, and all at Dutch expense. Napoleon's imposed real burdens on the finances of the Republic and on its economy.\nAnother real burden was the economic warfare that Napoleon launched against the British, which was answered by a British counter-boycott. This foreshadowed the Continental System which was written into law in 1806. However already in 1803 it started to choke off Dutch trade. Ostensibly, the \"Staatsbewind\" did its part by prohibiting the import of all goods from the enemy on 5 July 1803. Later it banned cheese exports and butter. These measures were of little practical effect, since in 1804 the volume of general exports to Britain was nearly equal to that in the last year of peace in 1802. British goods reached Dutch destinations via neutral German ports or disguised as \"American cargo\". The republic was therefore an important \"keyhole into Europe\" that undermined the French economic sanctions against Britain. Since the members of the \"Staatsbewind\", and their friends, often profited from this clandestine trade directly, the patience of the French was wearing thin. Matters came to a head when the French commander in the Republic, Auguste de Marmont, ordered in November 1804 that French naval patrols and customs officials were to take over the responsibility for the surveillance of cargoes in Dutch ports, with powers of confiscation without reference to Dutch authorities. The\"Staatsbewind\" forbade any Batavian official to take orders from the French on 23 November 1804.\nGrand Pensionary and end of the Republic.\nThis act of defiance sealed the fate of yet another of the Batavian regimes. Napoleon had long been dissatisfied with what he viewed as the foot-dragging and inefficiency of the Dutch. As a matter of fact, since the Spring of 1804 informal talks, mediated by Talleyrand, had been under way with the Batavian envoy in Paris, Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck, who had a good personal rapport with Napoleon (by now emperor). Schimmelpenninck was a power in the Batavian Republic by himself. He had played an important role as the leader of the federalist opposition in the \"revolutionary\" States-General of 1795, and the first Assembly. Though an opponent of the radicals, he had politically survived the coups of 1798, and served as ambassador to France, and as plenipotentiary to the Amiens negotiations. Now Napoleon saw him as the person to clean the Augean stables of the Dutch client state.\nSchimmelpenninck saw himself in the same light. He had long had a woolly vision of a \"national conciliation\" in the Netherlands, that made him amenable to a rapprochement with conservative and Orangist circles. These were to become his power base. Though Schimmelpenninck was a convinced federalist, he was a pliable character also. When Napoleon indicated that he preferred a centralized organization of the Dutch state (as the re-federalized model of the \"Staatsbewind\" had clearly not worked out), he did not hesitate to implement this in his project of a new constitution, that he constructed in the Summer of 1804 in consultation with the \"Staatsbewind\". As a matter of fact, a delegation of the \"Staatsbewind\", consisting of Schimmelpenninck, and members of the Regency Van der Goes (the former agent) and Van Haersolte (a former director), presented the case for this draft to Napoleon in November 1804. When the clash about the French customs men therefore took place later in the month, Napoleon came to a speedy decision and soon thereafter the Batavian Republic had a new constitution and government.\nOn 10 May 1805, Schimmelpenninck was therefore inaugurated as \"Raadpensionaris\" (Grand Pensionary) of the Batavian Republic. This venerable title (clearly chosen for sentimental reasons) had little connection with the former office of the States of Holland; as a matter of fact, the new office more resembled that of Stadtholder, though even William V, after 1787, had not possessed the powers Schimmelpenninck was to wield. His was a one-man Executive that would in no way be encumbered by the 19 man Legislative Corps, that had no powers apart from the Pensionary. The Pensionary conducted his business assisted by a \"Staatsraad\", that resembled the French Conseil d'\u00c9tat more than the old \"Raad van State\", and by Secretaries of State, who resembled the \"Agenten\" of the \"Uitvoerend Bewind\". Of course, such an important change in the constitution had to receive the imprimatur of the popular will. A plebiscite was duly organized which elicited 14,903 Yes-votes (against 136 Noes) from an electorate of 353,322. The abstentions were counted as \"tacit affirmatives\" in the now well-established tradition.\nDespite such unpromisingly reactionary trappings the Schimmelpenninck regime actually accomplished more in its short existence than the previous regimes had accomplished in the ten years since 1795. This was, of course, mainly due to the diligent preparatory work that Agents like the ubiquitous Gogel; Johannes Goldberg, for National Economy; and Johannes van der Palm, for National Education; had done.\nGogel's General Taxation Plan was finally enacted in June 1805; a first government-approved attempt at unification of the Dutch spelling was made; an embryonic Department of Agriculture and Department of Hydraulics were formed, to foreshadow the later government departments; even a \"Pharmacopeia Batavia\" started the regulation of drugs; and the School Law of 1806 organized a national system of public elementary education. Most importantly perhaps, the local-government law of July 1805 founded the first Dutch system of public administration.\nThe French reaction to this flurry of reforms was mixed, however. The very zeal of the program might betoken a renascent nationalism that could work against French interests. The planned invasion of England was cancelled due to a lack of naval superiority, which was only reinforced by the debacle of the Battle of Trafalgar. The Dutch now began to clamor for economies in the form of the return of the Boulogne flotilla, which annoyed Napoleon, because he still had a use for it. The man who had led that flotilla to Boulogne, after repelling a superior British fleet, Carel Hendrik Ver Huell, was now Secretary for the Navy. He had also become a confidant of the emperor, and now engaged in a secret correspondence with Talleyrand and Napoleon. The latter had just concluded the Peace of Pressburg and was busy dividing up Europe in client-kingdoms apportioned to his relatives. He saw a good candidate for such a position in the Netherlands in his brother Louis Bonaparte.\nVer Huell started scheming with his French patrons behind the back of Schimmelpenninck and feeding negative information about the Pensionary that found its way into the French press. Schimmelpenninck's position was weakened by the fact that he was slowly going blind. The Dutch Secretaries of State and the \"Staatsraad\" did not have much choice: their only options were a complete extinguishing of the national identity in the form of annexation to the Empire, or the lesser evil of a new kingdom under one of Napoleon's relatives. A \"Groot Besogne\" (Grand Commission) was formed to conduct the unequal negotiations with the Emperor. The latter, however, refused to speak with the Commission, and only communicated to them through the intermediary of Ver Huell. Talleyrand had meanwhile drafted a \"Treaty\" which contained the conditions under which the crown of \"Holland\" was to be offered to Louis: no union of the crowns; no conscription; a possible commercial treaty with France; and the basic freedoms of the Netherlands (linguistic, religious, judicial) were to be maintained; while the civil list was fixed at the \"modest sum\" of 1.5 million guilders. The constitution of the Pensionary was actually to be maintained with a few minor alterations (the title of \"raadpensionaris\" changed to that of King; and the size of the \"Staatsraad\" and the legislative corps nearly doubled).\nThe Commission was not allowed to refer back to The Hague. Schimmelpenninck made a last-ditch attempt to have the treaty referred to a plebiscite, but he was ignored. He resigned on 4 June 1806. The next day at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud, after Napoleon had kept them waiting while he received the Turkish ambassador, the hapless commissioners presented their \"petition\" to Louis to accept the crown of \"Holland\", which he graciously did, while Napoleon looked on approvingly.\nAftermath.\nThe Kingdom of Holland lasted only four years. Though Louis performed his role beyond all expectations, and did his best to defend the interests of his subjects, for precisely this reason Napoleon decided that the Netherlands could no longer be denied the benefits of reunion with his Empire, over the objections of Louis. Louis abdicated on 2 July 1810, in favor of his son Napoleon Louis Bonaparte, who reigned for ten days, before the kingdom was finally reunited with the origins of the \"alluvial deposits of the French rivers\", in the words of Napoleon.\nThis reunion did not outlast the effects of the disastrous French invasion of Russia and subsequent defeat in the Battle of Leipzig. The Empire melted away, and the independent Netherlands took shape again with every city that the retreating French army of occupation evacuated in the course of 1813.\nIn the ensuing political vacuum a triumvirate of former Orangist regents, led by Gijsbert Karel van Hogendorp, invited the former Hereditary Prince (the old Stadtholder had died in 1806) to assume power as \"Sovereign Prince\". William VI of Orange landed in Scheveningen on 30 November 1813. He duly established control in the Netherlands and was offered the crown of the combined area of the former 17 provinces of the Netherlands (modern Belgium and the Netherlands) by the Allies in the secret London Protocol (also known as the Eight Articles of London) of 21 June 1814, which he accepted exactly one month later. On 16 March 1815, the United Kingdom of the Netherlands was proclaimed.\nHistoriography note.\nAccording to the British historian Simon Schama, the Batavian Republic has been controversially treated by historians. After the end of the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands during World War II, some historians saw a parallel between the Dutch National Socialist Movement (NSB) and the Patriot revolutionaries, while they pictured William V in the heroic role of Queen Wilhelmina and her government-in-exile. However, Dutch historian Pieter Geyl opposed such comparisons in his \"Patriotten en NSBers: een historische parallel\" (1946).\nStill, by that time the Batavians had already had a bad press in Dutch history writing. This may be explained by the fact that the old ideological struggle between the monarchically-oriented Orangist party and its successive opponents of a more \"republican\" bent (going back to at least the conflict between Johan van Oldenbarnevelt and Prince Maurice), of which the Patriots were only the latest incarnation, was being refought in the standard works of 19th-century Dutch historians like Guillaume Groen van Prinsterer, who saw plenty to despise in the \"popular-sovereignty\" philosophy of the Patriot radicals. In his turn Groen was very influential on the way John Lothrop Motley depicted the old Dutch Republic for an American audience.\nMotley did not get to deal explicitly with the Batavian Republic, but the way his collaborator William Elliot Griffis dismissed the Patriots speaks for itself: \"\u2026whether under the name of the 'Batavian Republic', the Kingdom of Holland, or the provinces of the French empire, the French occupation was virtually a French conquest that had little permanent influence on Dutch history or character.\"\nHowever most, if not all, characteristics of the current centralized state of the Kingdom of the Netherlands were foreshadowed by the accomplishments of the Batavian Republic, not least the liberal 1848 Constitution. That constitution restored the central tenets of the democratic \"Staatsregeling\" of 1798, under the guise of a Constitutional monarchy, as its author Johan Rudolph Thorbecke acknowledged.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51171", "revid": "34444074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51171", "title": "Education in Australia", "text": " \nEducation in Australia encompasses the sectors of early childhood education (preschool and pre-primary) and primary education (primary schools), followed by secondary education (high schools and senior high schools), and finally tertiary education, which includes higher education (universities and other higher education providers) and vocational education (registered training organisations). Regulation and funding of education is primarily the responsibility of the States and territories; however, the Australian Government also contributes to funding.\nEducation in Australia is compulsory between the ages of four, five, or six and fifteen, sixteen or seventeen, depending on the state or territory and the date of birth.\nTimeline of introduction of Compulsory Education.\nFor primary and secondary education, government schools educate approximately 64 per cent of Australian students, with approximately 36 per cent in non-government schools. At the tertiary level, the majority of Australia's universities are public, and student fees are subsidised through a student loan program where payment becomes due when debtors reach a certain income level, known as HECS. Underpinned by the Australian Qualifications Framework, implemented in 1995, Australia has adopted a national system of qualifications, encompassing higher education, vocational education and training (VET), and school-based education. For primary and secondary schools, a national Australian Curriculum has been progressively developed and implemented since 2010.\nIn 2012 Australia was ranked as the third-largest provider of international education after the United States and the United Kingdom.\nIn the 2018 PISA study by the OECD Australian students placed 16th in the world in reading, 29th in maths and 17th in science. This continues a sharp decline in educational standards.\nHowever, the Education Index, published with the UN's Human Development Index in 2018, based on data from 2017, listed Australia as 0.929, the second-highest in the world.\nRegulation, operation, and funding.\nThe regulation, operation, and funding of education is the responsibility of the states and territories, because the Australian Government does not have a specific constitutional power to pass laws with concerning education. However, the federal government helps to fund non-government schools, helps to fund public universities, and subsidises tertiary education through a national student loan scheme, and regulates vocational education providers. \nPost-compulsory education is regulated within the Australian Qualifications Framework, a unified system of national qualifications in schools, vocational education and training, and the tertiary education sector.\nThe Australian Government's involvement in education has been the responsibility of several departments over the years,[note a] with the Department of Education, Skills and Employment being formed in 2020.\nThe academic year in Australia varies among states and institutions; however, it generally runs from late January/early February until early/mid-December for primary and secondary schools and TAFE colleges, with slight variations in the inter-term holidays, and from late February until mid-November for universities, with seasonal holidays and breaks for each educational institute.\nPreschool.\nGovernment provision in Australia during the years before children start school is a relatively recent innovation. Historically, preschool and pre-prep programs in Australia were relatively unregulated, and children were cared for in informal ways by baby-sitters and by members of their families and close associates. While still not mandatory for children to attend, the Federal Government has had a focus since 2009 on encouraging families to enrol their children (from around 4 years of age) in a preschool or kindergarten that delivers quality early childhood education and care. Federal and state legislation requires preschool services to implement and deliver programming based on the nationally approved Early Years Learning Framework, implemented from 2009. The first exposure many Australian children have to learn with others outside of traditional parenting is daycare or a parent-run playgroup. This sort of activity is not generally considered schooling, as preschool education is separate from primary school in all states and territories except Western Australia\u2014where pre-school education is taught as part of the primary school system\u2014and Victoria, where the state framework, the Victorian Early Years Learning and Development Framework (VEYLDF) covers children from birth to eight years old, is used by some schools over the national framework. In Queensland, preschool programs are often called Kindergarten or Pre-Prep and are usually privately run but attract state government funding if run for at least 600 hours a year and delivered by a registered teacher.\nPreschools are usually run by the state and territory governments, except in Victoria, South Australia and New South Wales where they are more often run by local councils, community groups or private organisations. Preschool is offered for children ages three to five; attendance numbers vary widely between the states, but 85.7% of children attended preschool the year before school, the main year of preschool attendance. This year is far more commonly attended and may take the form of a few hours of activity during weekdays. Most states of Australia now fund government preschools to offer 15 hours per week (600 hours over a year) for each enrolled child in the year before they commence formal schooling\nPrimary and secondary education.\nIn 2023, 4,086,998 students were enrolled in 9,629 primary, secondary and special schools in Australia. As of 2023, government schools educated 64% of all students, while Catholic schools (19.7%) and independent schools (16.3%) educated the rest. In 2023, there were just under 311,655 full-time equivalent (FTE) teaching staff in Australian primary and secondary schools. The major part of government-run schools' costs is met by the relevant state or territory government. The Australian Government provides the majority of public funding for non-government schools, which is supplemented by states and territories.\nNon-government schools, both religious or secular typically charge compulsory tuition and other fees. Government schools provide education without compulsory tuition fees, although many government schools ask for payment of 'voluntary' fees to defray particular expenses.\nRegardless of whether a school is government or non-government, it is regulated by the same curriculum standards framework. The framework is administered by the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority. Most schools require students to wear prescribed school uniforms. A school year in Australia typically starts in January/February and finishes in December.\nCompulsory attendance requirements.\nSchool education in Australia is compulsory between certain ages as specified by state or territory legislation. Depending on the state or territory, and date of birth of the child, school is compulsory from the age of five to six to the age of fifteen to seventeen.\nIn the ACT, NSW, the Northern Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, and Western Australia, children are legally required to attend school from the age of six years old, until the minimum leaving age. In Tasmania, the compulsory school starting age is 5 years old. However, most children commence the preliminary year of formal schooling, in Pre-Year 1, between four and a half and five and a half years of age, variously called kindergarten (sometimes called Year K), reception, preparation (also abbreviated as \"prep\"), transition, or foundation.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the national year 10 to year 12 apparent retention rate (ARR), a measure of student engagement that provides an indicator of the success of education systems in keeping students in school beyond the minimum leaving age, was 79.9 per cent for all full-time students in Year 12.\nAustralian Curriculum.\nWhile state and territory governments are responsible for the regulation and delivery of school-based education within their jurisdiction, through the Council of Australian Governments, the Commonwealth Government has, since 2014, played an increasing role in the establishment of the Australian Curriculum that sets the expectations for what all young Australians should be taught, regardless of where they live in Australia or their background. The development of the Australian Curriculum is based on the principles of improving the quality, equity and transparency of Australia's education system. The Australian Curriculum, for pre-Year 1 to Year 9, is made up of English, maths, science, social studies, arts, technology, health education and foreign languages. In the senior secondary Australian Curriculum, for Year 10, Year 11 and Year 12, fifteen senior secondary subjects across English, maths, science, history and geography were endorsed between 2012 and 2013. The Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority has mandated the achievement standards that describe the quality of learning (including the depth of understanding, the extent of knowledge, and the sophistication of skill) expected of students who have studied the content for each subject.\nTypes of schools.\nThe types of schools in Australia fall broadly into two categories: government schools, being those schools operated by state or territory departments or agencies; and non-government schools, being those schools that are not operated by government departments or agencies. Non-government schools can be further classified, based on self-identification of the school's affiliation. Non-government schools are grouped for reporting as Catholic schools (including Catholic-affiliated private schools) or private (other non-government schools).\nGovernment schools receive funding from the relevant state or territory government. Non-government schools receive funding from the Australian Government and relevant state or territory government; and in most cases, parents are required to make a co-payment for their child's education.\nAs of 2019[ [update]] across primary and secondary education, approximately two-thirds of all school students attended government schools; with the remaining one-third of students educated in non-government schools.\nA small portion of students are legally home-schooled, particularly in rural areas. Part of these students supplement their education with the School of the Air, an Australian government education programme to provide access to primary and secondary education for children in remote areas. Beginning in 1951 this programme initially operated through radio broadcasts, however telephone classes teaching replaced these broadcasts in 2005. From 2007 to 2009, online classes and resources were rolled out and became the primary method of learning\nScholar performance.\nAccording to the 2022 PISA evaluations, Australian 15-year-olds ranked ninth in the OECD for reading and science and tenth for maths. However, less than 60% of Australian students achieved the National Proficiency Standard \u2013 51% in maths, 58% in science and 57% in reading.\nSchool years.\nPrimary schools.\nAlso sometimes called infants schools, Australia adopts the UNESCO term of primary school that generally covers a child's education from pre\u2013Year 1 and finishes with Year 6. The duration of primary school years varies across each Australian state and territory, with most adopting seven years- except in South Australia, where, until 2022, students finished with Year 7, making the duration of primary school eight years- until they are 11, 12 or 13 years of age. Primary schools focus on developing essential literacy, numeracy and social skills, and provide foundational knowledge to children about the world around them.\nSecondary schools.\nSecondary schools in Australia are also called high schools[note b] and colleges (or junior, intermediate, or senior colleges). Secondary schools vary across each Australian state and territory, but they generally cover Year 7 to Year 9 (compulsory period of education) and senior secondary schools continue to Year 12. Progressively, as students move from primary into secondary schools, subject matter becomes increasingly specialised, offering opportunities to students that show preferences in STEM, or in Humanities and Social Sciences, among other interests.\nMiddle schools.\nIn the majority of Australian states and territories, middle schools are relatively uncommon. Students progress from primary school to secondary school. As an alternative to the middle school model, some secondary schools divided their grades into \"junior high school\" (Years 7, 8 and 9) and \"senior high school\" (Years 10, 11 and 12). Some have three levels, \"junior\" (Years 7 and 8), \"intermediate\" (Years 9 and 10), and \"senior\" (Years 11 and 12).\nIn June 2006 the Northern Territory Government introduced a three-tier system featuring middle schools for Year 7 to Year 9 (approximate age 12\u201315) and high school for Year 10 to Year 12 (approximate age 15\u201318).\nCombined and central schools.\nIn Australia, combined schools, also known as K-12 schools, are schools that have classes from both primary and secondary year levels. These schools may be located in an urban, regional or rural area and can be government or non-government schools. As of 2019[ [update]] there were approximately 500 Australian combined government schools and approximately 850 Australian combined non-government schools.\nIn Western Australia, the term \"district high school\" is used to describe a school that educates students from pre-prep to year 10.\nIn New South Wales, Central schools are predominantly, government schools located in a rural area that provides both primary and lower secondary education to students, usually concluding at Year 10. These provide secondary education to students from multiple primary schools, in rural areas with too low of a population to support a secondary school. As of 2024 there were 58 central schools.\nOrganisational structures.\nSchools are broadly categorised into government and non-government schools. The non-government schools are further categorised into Catholic schools and private schools. As of 2018[ [update]], 65.7% of students were enrolled in government schools, 19.7% in catholic schools and 14.6% in private schools.\nGovernment schools.\nAlso called state schools or public schools, government schools educate approximately two-thirds of all school students in Australia. If a student elects to attend a government school, they are required to attend a school within their local school district unless the student has dispensation to attend another school, usually approved based on academic merit, specialisation, or other reasons, such as a student disability.\nGovernment schools are run by the respective state government agency. They offer free education; however, many government schools ask parents to pay a contribution fee and a materials and services charge for stationery, textbooks, sports, uniforms, school camps and other schooling costs that are not covered under government funding. In 2010 the additional cost for schooling was estimated to be on average $316 per year per child.\nGovernment schools may be further categorised into open or comprehensive schools, selective, special, and specialist schools; all defined below. In 2009 the Western Australia government introduced Independent Public Schools to describe a government school that, while a part of the state education system, was granted a higher degree of decision-making authority than a regular government school. A similar reform was introduced in Queensland and, as of December 2018, 250 government schools commenced as independent public schools in Queensland. In February 2014 the then Federal Education Minister, Christopher Pyne, announced a $70\u00a0million Independent Public Schools Initiative to support 1,500 Australian government schools to become more autonomous.\nGovernment hospital schools are located at some major hospitals and provide access to tuition for students who have extended stays in hospitals.\nAcross Australia, the Federal Department of Education sets the overall national policy and direction for education in Australia. The following state and territory government departments are responsible for the administration of education within their respective jurisdictions:\nNon-government schools.\nSchools from the non-government sector operate under the authority of state or territory governments but are not operated by government education departments. Schools from the non-government sector may operate as individual schools, in small groups or as a system such as those coordinated by the Catholic Education Commission in each state and territory. All non-government schools in Australia receive funding from the Commonwealth government.\nCatholic schools.\nThe education system delivered by the Roman Catholic Church in Australia began in 1820 and has grown to be the second-biggest provider of school-based education in Australia. As of 2018[ [update]], one in five Australian students attended Catholic schools. There are over 1,700 Catholic schools in Australia with more than 750,000 students enrolled, employing almost 60,000 teachers.\nAdministrative oversight of Catholic education providers varies depending on the origins, ethos, and purpose of each education provider. Oversight of Catholic \"systemic\" schools may rest with a Catholic parish, diocese, or archdiocese; while religious institutes have oversight of Catholic \"independent\" schools.\nThe National Catholic Education Commission (NCEC), established by the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference through the Bishops Commission for Catholic Education, is tasked with maintaining liaison with the federal government and other key national education bodies and complements and supports the work of the state and territory Catholic education commissions. While some Catholic schools operate independently via religious institutes, the majority of Catholic schools, called \"systemic schools\", operate under the Canon Law jurisdiction of an ecclesiastical public juridic person, such as a bishop. In practice, the bishop assigns a Catholic Education Office (CEO), Catholic Education Commission, Catholic Schools Offices, or a similar body with daily operational responsibility for the leadership, efficient operation, and management of the Catholic systemic schools which educate in parish primary and regional secondary schools in Australia. These diocesan bodies are charged with the implementation and management of the policies of the diocese and the allocation and administration of the funds provided by the government and private sources to Catholic systemic schools, as well as the financial responsibilities for the administration of salaries for staff members.\nMost Catholic schools (96 per cent) are \"systemically\" funded, meaning that the government funding they nominally attract is provided to the relevant state Catholic Education Commission for needs-based distribution. Sixty-one Australian Catholic schools are non-systemically funded (\"independent\" schools) and receive government grants directly.\nPrivate schools.\nPrivate schools are non-government schools that are not operated by government authority and have a system of governance that ensures their independent operation. Such schools are typically operated by an independently elected school council or board of governors and range broadly in the type of school education provided and the socio-economics of the school community served. Some private schools are run by religious institutes; others have no religious affiliation and are driven by a national philosophy (such as international schools), pedagogical philosophy (such as Waldorf-Steiner schools), or specific needs (such as special schools). As of 2018[ [update]], including private schools run by Catholic religious institutes, of the 9,477 schools in Australia 1,140 schools (12 per cent) are in the private sector. In the same year, private schools enrolled over 617,000 students or 16 per cent of the Australian student population.\nPrivate school fees can vary from under $100 per month to $3,200, depending on the student's year level, the school's size, and the socioeconomics of the school community. In late 2018 it was reported that the most expensive private schools (such as the APS Schools, the AGSV Schools in Melbourne, the GPS Schools, QGSSSA Schools in Brisbane and the NSW GPS Schools, Combined Associated Schools and the ISA Schools in Sydney and New South Wales) charge fees of up to $500,000 for the thirteen years of private school education.\nAustralian private schools broadly fall into the following categories:\nSpecialist organisational structures.\nSpecial schools.\nA special school is a school catering for students who have special educational needs due to learning difficulties, physical disabilities, developmental disabilities or social/emotional disturbance, or who are in custody, on remand or in hospital. Special schools may be specifically designed, staffed and resourced to provide appropriate special education for children with additional needs. Students attending special schools generally do not attend any classes in mainstream schools. The schools cater for students with mild, moderate and profound intellectual disabilities, deaf and hard of hearing students, students with Autism and students with a physical disability. Class sizes at specialist schools are smaller than at mainstream schools, and there is a much lower ratio of teaching and support staff to students. Some specialist schools also have therapists on staff. Specialist schools generally already have an accessible environment and curriculum for their student population; this may mean that there are limited subjects on offer.\nSelective schools.\nA selective school is a government school that enrols students based on some sort of selection criteria, usually academic. The term may have different connotations in different systems and is the opposite of an open or comprehensive school, which accepts all students, regardless of aptitude.\nIn New South Wales, student placement in fully and partially selective high schools is highly competitive, with approximately 3,600 places offered to the 15,000 students who sit the Selective High School Test. As of 2019[ [update]] there were 47 fully or partially selective government high schools, including 17 fully selective high schools (some of which are co-educational and others provide a single-sex educational environment); 25 partially selective high schools (high schools with both selective and comprehensive classes); four selective agricultural high schools; and one virtual selective high school. Of the 47 schools, 34 are located in greater metropolitan Sydney. Of the government selective high schools in New South Wales, James Ruse Agricultural High School is renowned for its academic achievements and competitiveness, as well as a near-perfect record of all students gaining university admission, especially in medicine, law and science. The school has outperformed every high school in New South Wales in the past 20 years in public university entrance examinations.\nIn Victoria, selective government high schools select all of their students based on an entrance examination. As of 2011, there were four selective schools: Melbourne High School, Mac.Robertson Girls' High School, Nossal High School and Suzanne Cory High School. In addition, there are three special schools namely Victorian College of the Arts Secondary School, John Monash Science School and Elizabeth Blackburn School of Sciences which cater to students opting for focused education in arts and science respectively.\nIn Queensland, there are four selective entry high schools. Brisbane State High School- established in 1921- which is partially selective, and the three Queensland Academies, which are fully selective- formed during 2007 and 2008. All require entry based on academic entry tests, NAPLAN results, primary school grades, interviews and other considerations.\nIn Western Australia, selective secondary education (officially named Gifted and Talented Education (GATE)) is operated by the Western Australian Department of Education through the Gifted and Talented Selective Entrance Programs for Year 7, and subject to limited placement availability for year-levels upward to Year 12. All applicants are required to sit the Academic Selective Entrance Test and possibly complete combined interviews, auditions and/or workshops depending on the program(s) applied for. The programs are categorised into three strands: academic, language, and arts. Eighteen government schools participate in the Gifted and Talented Programs, each specialising in one of the strands. All participating schools are partially selective and partially local intake, except for Perth Modern School which is fully selective.\nSpecialist schools.\nSchools that operate specialist education programs exist in all Australian states and territories. These schools are typically associated with the arts or elite sports programs. In South Australia, specialist schools cover the arts, gifted and talented programs, languages, agricultural schools, science, technology, engineering and mathematics, advanced technology project schools, sports schools, and trade training centres. In Victoria, examples of specialist government schools include those focused on science and maths (John Monash Science School), performing arts (Victorian College of the Arts Secondary School), sports (Maribyrnong Secondary College), and leadership and enterprise (The Alpine School). An alternative model is those sporting organisations that deliver specialist programs to a narrow selection of schools, such as Cricket Australia's Specialist School Program to three Western Australian schools.\nInternational schools.\nIn Australia, international schools promote international education and may be operated by the government of the country of origin, the government of the state or territory in which the school is located, or be operated as a private school. International schools include those schools that have received international accreditation such as from the Council of International Schools, the International Baccalaureate Organization, or the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, or other similar organisations. As of 2019[ [update]], approximately 80 Australian schools meet that definition, with the vast majority being schools that offered one or more of the International Baccalaureate programs. Other schools are affiliated with specific cultures or languages, most notably French (e.g. Telopea Park School (ACT), Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet (NSW), Auburn High School (VIC)), German (e.g. German International School Sydney (NSW) and Deutsche Schule Melbourne (VIC)), or Japanese (e.g. Sydney Japanese International School (NSW), The Japanese School of Melbourne (VIC) and The Japanese School in Perth (WA)) schools, including Japanese supplementary weekend schools; or may generally be international in their outlook, including the International Grammar School (NSW) or the International School of Western Australia (WA).\nMixed-sex and single-sex education.\nIn Australia, both government and non-government schools operate co-educational and single-sex educational environments for students. The overwhelming number of schools are co-educational, with a small proportion of government schools operating single-sex schools, sometimes with a separate boys' and girls' school in the same suburb. All government single-sex schools are secondary schools. Examples of adjacent single-sex government secondary schools include Asquith Boys' and Asquith Girls', Canterbury Boys' and Canterbury Girls', North Sydney Boys' and North Sydney Girls', Randwick Boys' and Randwick Girls', and Sydney Boys' and Sydney Girls' (all in Sydney); and Melbourne High, and Mac.Robertson Girls' (in Melbourne).\nThe majority of single-sex schools in Australia are non-government schools, heavily weighted towards private schools, some of which are Catholic private schools. Some Catholic systemic schools are also single-sex schools; however, like government schools, the overwhelming majority are co-educational schools.\nDay and boarding schools.\nIn Australia, both government and non-government schools operate day and boarding schools. As of 2019[ [update]], of the 10,584 registered schools operating in Australia, approximately 250 schools (or less than 2.5 per cent) were boarding schools. Some Australian schools offer gender-specific (boys' [approximately 21 per cent] or girls' [approximately 28 per cent]) and co-educational boarding schools (51 per cent); with multi-modal options, such as full-time boarding and part-time boarding (for example, going home on the weekends) offered by some schools. Some specialist education schools, such as The Australian Ballet School, offer boarding facilities. The largest peak body for boarding schools in Australia, the Australian Boarding Schools Association, claimed that, in 2017, there were 22,815 students in boarding schools covered by the association, an increase from 19,870 in 2014.\nQualifications.\nWithin the context of the Australian Qualifications Framework, each state and territory is responsible for issuing certificates and/or qualifications to secondary students, collectively referred to as the Senior Secondary Certificate of Education. The following table serves as a summary of the qualifications issued by each state or territory:\nAs an alternative form (or as an addition to) the government-endorsed certification path, students, by approval, may elect to receive certification under the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme.\nBasic skills tests (NAPLAN).\nAustralia's system of national assessments, the National Assessment Program, established by the Australian Education Research Organization, uses four main standardised assessments to measure literacy and numeracy achievement of schoolar students over time: the National Assessment Program \u2013 Literacy and Numeracy (abbreviated as NAPLAN), the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS).\nThe NAPLAN is a series of tests focused on basic skills that are administered annually to Australian students. These standardised tests assess students' reading, writing, language (spelling, grammar and punctuation) and numeracy. Introduced in 2008, NAPLAN is administered by the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA) and is overseen by the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) Education Council. The tests are designed to determine if Australian students are achieving outcomes. and to be carried out on the same days across Australia in any given year. Parents can decide whether their children take the test or not. The vast majority of Year 3, 5, 7 and 9 students participate. One of the aims of NAPLAN is to prepare young children for competitive examinations.\nUnlike NAPLAN, PISA; TIMSS; and PIRLS are international assessments that target small samples of students to compare their results with those of samples of students around the world. While PISA is not necessarily intended to assess their understanding of the Australian Curriculum, TIMSS and PIRLS are designed to address the degree to which students retain and understand the Curriculum contents.\nSchool education to international students.\nIn Australia, a student is considered as an \"international student\" if he/she studies at an approved educational institution and he/she is not an Australian citizen, Australian permanent resident, New Zealand citizen, or a holder of an Australian permanent resident humanitarian visa. Under the \"https://\" (Cth), the Australian Government regulates the delivery of school and tertiary education to international students who are granted a student visa to study in Australia. The government maintains the Commonwealth Register of Institutions and Courses for Overseas Students (CRICOS) and, as of 2018, there were 396 school providers with an overall approved capacity of 88,285 students. While Australia as an education destination showed strong and sustained growth over many years, as of June 2019, school-based education fell by three per cent for the year, and represented approximately three per cent of all international student enrolments, with tertiary education, vocational education and training, and English Language Intensive Courses for Overseas Students (ELICOS) accounting for 93 per cent of all enrolments and recording 21 per cent annual growth.\nIssues in Australian school education.\nSchool funding.\nIn 2010 the Gillard government commissioned David Gonski to the chair a committee to review funding of Australian schools. Entitled the Gonski Report, through the Council of Australian Governments the Gillard government sought to implement the National Education Reform Agreement that would deliver an A$9.4\u00a0billion school funding plan. Despite some states and territories becoming parties to the Agreement, the plan was shelved following the 2013 federal election. The Turnbull government commissioned Gonski in 2017 to chair the independent Review to Achieve Educational Excellence in Australian Schools, commonly called Gonski 2.0. The government published the report on 30 April 2018. Following negotiation, bilateral agreements between the Commonwealth of Australia with each state and territory commenced on 1 January 2019, with the exception of Victoria, whose bilateral agreement commenced on 1 February 2019. The funding agreements provide states with funding for government schools (20 percent) and non-government schools (80 percent) taking into consideration annual changes in enrolment numbers, indexation and student or school characteristics. A National School Resourcing Board was charged with the responsibility of independently reviewing each state's compliance with the funding agreement(s).\nThe tenth anniversary of the Gonski report in May 2022 led to criticism of successive state governments failure to implement its recommendations. In 2024\u201325, the Australian Government invested A$53 billion (7.2% of its federal budget) in education. 96.3% of gross income for government schools was government funds in 2022, as was 76.4% for Catholic schools and 48.7% for independent schools. In January 2025 South Australia and Victoria signed on to the new school funding agreement with the Albanese government (after the previous agreement had expired in 2024), which lifts federal funding of public schools to 25 per cent from 20 per cent, under the Better and Fairer Schools Agreement (BFSA). NSW signed up in early March, and Queensland was the last state to make the commitment, on 24 March 2025. Under the BFSA, states are required to increase their funding of public schools to 75 per cent of the minimum amount recommended by the 2012 Gonski Review and Gonski 2.0 per the SRS. This means that they will be \"fully funded\" according to the Gonski model.\nIndigenous primary and secondary education.\nAboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children are at a significant disadvantage when compared to non-Indigenous Australians across a number of key school educational measures. In 2008, the Council of Australian Governments announced seven[note e] \"closing the gap\" targets, of which four related to education, namely:\nAs of 2018[ [update]], the target results were:\nBilingual education in schools.\nBilingual education in Australia may be divided into three different types, or target audiences, each having somewhat different purposes: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples; immigrant (CALD) groups; and English speakers looking to add another language to their education. The first two are interested in language maintenance and language revitalisation for ensuing generations.\nThe first recorded government support for bilingual education came under the Menzies government in 1950, when the first government schools for Aboriginal students were opened at four sites in the Northern Territory (NT), where instruction \"should include English Language, Native Language (where appropriate)\". Policies and practices varied in the following years, with the first five pilot programs introduced in 1973 after the Whitlam government came to power and brought in new federal policies.\nIn the Northern Territory (the jurisdiction with the greatest proportion of Indigenous people, and many remote communities), bilingual programs for Indigenous students begun with Federal Government support in the early 1970s. Yirrkala Community School was identified as the first to undergo bilingual accreditation in 1980, and bilingual students outperformed the non-bilingual students. However, by December 1998 the Northern Territory Government had announced its decision to shift A$ away from the 29 bilingual programs to a Territory-wide program teaching English as a second language. Within 12 months though the government had softened its position, after people took to the streets in protest.\nFrom around 2000, most bilingual programs were allowed to continue under the names \"two-way education\", or \"both-ways\" learning. Other programs included language maintenance and language revitalisation in remote schools across the NT.\nThen on 24 August 2005, the Minister for Employment, Education and Training announced that the government would be \"revitalising bi-lingual education\" at 15 Community Education Centres: Alekarenge, Angurugu, Borroloola, Gapuwiyak, Gunbalanya, Kalkaringi, Lajamanu, Maningrida, Milingimbi, Ramingining, Ngukurr, Shepherdson College, Numbulwar, Yirrkala, and Yuendumu. This revitalisation is conceived as part of an effort aimed at \"providing effective education from pre-school through to senior secondary at each of the Territory's 15 Community Education Centres\".\nHowever, in October 2008, the first year of NAPLAN testing, despite the NT Indigenous Education Strategic Plan 2006\u20132009 supporting bilingual instruction, it was mandated by the NT Government that English should be the language of instruction in all NT schools for the first four hours of the school day. After legal challenges, an AIATSIS Symposium on Bilingual Education in 2009, media coverage and much debate, the policy was replaced by a new policy: \"Literacy for Both Worlds\", but that was soon withdrawn again. There was intervention by the Australian Human Rights Commission, and in 2012 the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander affairs issued a report which included the recommendation that: \"Indigenous language education should be introduced to all schools with Aboriginal students, and indigenous languages included as an official Closing the Gap measure\".\nProminent schools involved in bilingual education programs in the NT include Yirrkala Community Education Centre (CEC) and Shepherdson College on Galiwin'ku. Yirrkala School and its sister school ignored the government directive, and has continued to teach its \"both ways\" methodology. The students' first language, Yolngu Matha, is taught alongside English. The method has proven effective against reducing the drop-out rate, and in 2020 eight students were the first in their community to graduate year 12 with scores enabling them to attend university. Yirrkala School and its sister school, Laynhapuy Homelands School, are now being looked to as models for learning in remote traditional communities. Areyonga School, in Areyonga, was still using both-ways education in August 2023, 50 years since it had begun there, teaching in Pitjantjatjara language and culture.\nIn March 2025, Yuendemu School celebrated 50 years of bilingual education. The Warlpiri language has been taught alongside English first by Tess Napurrurla Ross and then her daughter Theresa Napurrurla Ross over these years.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], bilingual education funding in the Northern Territory has been merged into general school budgets, meaning that each school makes decisions about funding such programmes.\nReligious education in government schools.\nConstitutionally, Australia is a secular country. Section 116 of \"Chapter V. The States\" in the Australian Constitution reads:\nThe Commonwealth shall not make any law for establishing any religion, or for imposing any religious observance, or for prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and no religious test shall be required as a qualification for any office or public trust under the Commonwealth.\nNevertheless, Australia maintains one of the highest concentrations of religious schools, when compared with other OECD countries. Historically, the teaching of religion in Australian government schools has been a contentious issue and was a motivator for the foundation of the government schooling system.\nWhile the National School Chaplaincy Program provides an overarching framework based on pastoral care, not religious instruction, the practices and policies of religious instruction in Australian schools vary significantly from state to state. In New South Wales, the Special Religious Education classes are held in the government school sector that enable students to learn about the beliefs, practices, values and morals of a chosen religion. In Queensland, religious organisations may apply to school principals and, if approved, deliver approved religious instruction programs in government schools. In Victoria, legislation prescribes that government schools must not promote any particular religious practice, denomination or sect, and must be open to adherents of any philosophy, religion or faith. However, individual school principals may permit approved organisations to deliver non-compulsory \"special religious instruction\" classes of no more than 30 minutes per week per student, during lunchtime or in the hour before or after usual school hours. In Western Australia, both special religious education (not part of the general curriculum) and general religious education (as part of the general curriculum) are offered in government schools.\nSchool violence.\nIn July 2009, the Queensland Minister for Education said that the rising levels of violence in schools in the state were \"totally unacceptable\" and that not enough had been done to combat violent behaviour. In Queensland, 55,000 school students were suspended in 2008, nearly a third of which were for \"physical misconduct\".\nIn South Australia, 175 violent attacks against students or staff were recorded in 2008. Students were responsible for deliberately causing 3,000 injuries reported by teachers over two years from 2008 to 2009.\nAs of 2024, school violence is still prevalent. In an annual survey by the Australian Catholic University (ACU) 48 per cent of school principals reported having seen or experienced an event of physical violence.\nTertiary education.\nTertiary education (or higher education) in Australia is primarily study at university or at a registered training organisation provider (known as technical and further education, TAFE) leading to a degree, diploma, certificate or other qualification. A higher education provider is a body that is established or recognised by or under the law of the Australian Government, a state, the Australian Capital Territory or the Northern Territory. VET providers, both public and private are registered by state and territory governments.\nIn 2021, 1,185,450 students were attending university or other higher education. There are 42 universities in Australia: 37 public universities, 3 private universities and 2 international private universities, As of 2015[ [update]], the largest university in Australia was Monash University in Melbourne: with five campuses and 75,000 students. The Group of Eight (Go8) is a coalition of eight prestigious Australian universities established in 1999 which comprise more than two-thirds of the country's university research.\nThere are non-self-accrediting higher education providers accredited by state and territory authorities, numbering more than 132 as listed on state and territory registers. These include several that are registered in more than one state and territory.\nAll students doing nationally recognised training need to have a Unique Student Identifier (USI).\nInternational tertiary students.\nAustralia has the highest ratio of international students per head of population in the world by a large margin, with 812,000 international students enrolled in the nation's universities and vocational institutions in 2019. Accordingly, in 2019, international students represented on average 26.7% of the student bodies of Australian universities. International education, therefore, represents one of the country's largest exports and has a pronounced influence on the country's demographics, with a significant proportion of international students remaining in Australia after graduation on various skill and employment visas. The Australian onshore international education sector is predicted to rise to 940,000 by 2025. The biggest source markets for onshore international learner enrolments in 2025 were expected to be China, India, Vietnam, Thailand, Nepal, Malaysia, Brazil and South Korea. According to a 2016 report by Deloitte Access Economics for the Australian Trade and Investment Commission, higher education and Vocational Education and Training (VET) were projected to be the fastest-growing sectors in onshore international education by 2025. Australian Government is also planning to add another 1.46 billion AUD according to https://, which predicts a high jump in job growth and migration of people.\nRankings.\nThe Education Index, published with the UN's Human Development Index in 2018, based on data from 2017, listed Australia as 0.929, the second-highest in the world. Australian school students placed 16th in the world in reading, 29th in maths, and 17th in science in the 2018 PISA study by the OCED. The Australian Education Union accredits decreases in government funding for declining student outcomes.\nThirty-six Australian tertiary educational institutions were listed in the QS World University Rankings for 2021; and 37 institutions were listed in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings in the same year. As of 2020, 34 Australian universities were listed in China's Academic Ranking of World Universities ranking, with The University of Melbourne achieving the highest global ranking, at 35th. In the same year, according to the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities Rankings, 38 Australian universities were ranked, ranging from the University of Melbourne, at 25th place, to Bond University, at 1133th place.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51172", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51172", "title": "DNIX", "text": "Real-time operating system\nDNIX (original spelling: D-Nix) is a discontinued Unix-like real-time operating system from the Swedish company Dataindustrier AB (DIAB). A version named ABCenix was developed for the ABC 1600 computer from Luxor. Daisy Systems also had a system named Daisy DNIX on some of their computer-aided design (CAD) workstations. It was unrelated to DIAB's product.\nHistory.\nInception at DIAB in Sweden.\nDataindustrier AB (literal translation: computer industries shareholding company) was started in 1970 by Lars Karlsson as a single-board computer manufacture in Sundsvall, Sweden, producing a Zilog Z80-based computer named \"Data Board 4680\". In 1978, DIAB started to work with the Swedish television company Luxor AB to produce the home and office computer series ABC 80 and ABC 800.\nIn 1983 DIAB independently developed the first Unix-compatible machine, DIAB DS90 based on the Motorola 68000 CPU. D-NIX here made its appearance, based on a UNIX System V license from AT&amp;T Corporation. DIAB was however an industrial control system (automation) company, and needed a real-time operating system, so the company replaced the AT&amp;T-supplied UNIX kernel with their own in-house developed, yet compatible real-time variant. This kernel was inspired by a Z80 kernel named \"OS.8\" created for Monroe Systems division of Litton Industries.\nOver time, the company also replaced several of the UNIX standard userspace tools with their own implementations, to the point where no code was derived from UNIX, and their machines could be deployed independently of any AT&amp;T UNIX license. Two years later and in cooperation with Luxor, a computer called ABC 1600 was developed for the office market, while in parallel, DIAB continue to produce enhanced versions of the DS90 computer using newer versions of the Motorola CPUs such as Motorola 68010, 68020, 68030 and eventually 68040. In 1990 DIAB was acquired by Groupe Bull who continued to produce and support the DS machines under the brand name \"DIAB\", with names such as \"DIAB 2320\", \"DIAB 2340\" etc., still running DIABs version of DNIX.\nDerivative at ISC Systems Corporation.\nISC Systems Corporation (ISC) purchased the right to use DNIX in the late 1980s for use in its line of Motorola 68k-based banking computers. (ISC was later bought by Olivetti, and was in turn resold to Wang, which was then bought by Getronics. This corporate entity, most often referred to as 'ISC', has answered to a bewildering array of names over the years.) This code branch was the SVR2 compatible version, and received extensive modification and development at their hands. Notable features of this operating system were its support of demand paging, diskless workstations, multiprocessing, asynchronous input/output (I/O), the ability to mount processes (handlers) on directories in the file system, and message passing. Its real-time support consisted largely of internal event-driven queues rather than list search mechanisms (no 'thundering herd'), static process priorities in two classes (run to completion and timesliced), support for contiguous files (to avoid fragmentation of critical resources), and memory locking. The quality of the orthogonal asynchronous event implementation has yet to be equalled in current commercial operating systems, though some approach it. (The concept that has yet to be adopted is that the synchronous marshalling point of all the asynchronous activity could also be asynchronous, ad infinitum. DNIX handled this with aplomb.) The asynchronous I/O facility obviated the need for Berkeley sockets \"select\" or SVR4's STREAMS \"poll\" mechanism, though there was a socket emulation library that preserved the socket semantics for backward compatibility. Another feature of DNIX was that \"none\" of the standard utilities (such as \"ps\", a frequent offender) rummaged around in the kernel's memory to do their job. System calls were used instead, and this meant the kernel's internal architecture was free to change as required. The handler concept allowed network protocol stacks to be outside the kernel, which greatly eased development and improved overall reliability, though at a performance cost. It also allowed for foreign file systems to be user-level processes, again for improved reliability. The main file system, though it could have been (and once was) an external process, was pulled into the kernel for performance reasons. Were it not for this DNIX could well have been considered a microkernel, though it was not formally developed as such. Handlers could appear as any type of 'native' Unix file, directory structure, or device, and file I/O requests that the handler could not process could be passed off to other handlers, including the underlying one on which the handler was mounted. Handler connections could also exist and be passed around independent of the file system, much like a pipe. One effect of this is that text terminal (TTY) like \"devices\" could be emulated without needing a kernel-based pseudo terminal facility.\nAn example of where a handler saved the day was in ISC's diskless workstation support, where a bug in the implementation meant that using named pipes on the workstation could induce undesirable resource locking on the fileserver. A handler was created on the workstation to field accesses to the afflicted named pipes until the appropriate kernel fixes could be developed. This handler required approximately 5 kilobytes of code to implement, an indication that a non-trivial handler did not need to be large.\nISC also received the right to manufacture DIAB's DS90-10 and DS90-20 machines as its file servers. The multiprocessor DS90-20's, however, were too expensive for the target market and ISC designed its own servers and ported DNIX to them. ISC designed its own GUI-based diskless workstations for use with these file servers, and ported DNIX again. (Though ISC used Daisy workstations running Daisy DNIX to design the machines that would run DIAB's DNIX, there was negligible confusion internally as the drafting and layout staff rarely talked to the software staff. Moreover, the hardware design staff didn't use \"either\" system! The running joke went something like: \"At ISC we \"build\" computers, we don't \"use\" them.\") The asynchronous I/O support of DNIX allowed for easy event-driven programming in the workstations, which performed well even though they had relatively limited resources. (The GUI diskless workstation had a 7\u00a0MHz 68010 processor and was usable with only 512K of memory, of which the kernel consumed approximately half. Most workstations had 1 MB of memory, though there were later 2 MB and 4 MB versions, along with 10\u00a0MHz processors.) A full-blown installation could consist of one server (16\u00a0MHz 68020, 8 MB of RAM, and a 200 MB hard disk) and up to 64 workstations. Though slow to boot up, such an array would perform acceptably in a bank teller application. Besides the innate efficiency of DNIX, the associated DIAB C compiler was key to high performance. It generated particularly good code for the 68010, especially after ISC got done with it. (ISC also retargeted it to the Texas Instruments TMS34010 graphics coprocessor used in its last workstation.) The DIAB C compiler was, of course, used to build DNIX, which was one of the factors contributing to its efficiency, and is still available, in some form, through Wind River Systems.\nThese systems are still in use as of this writing in 2006, in former Seattle-First National Bank branches now branded Bank of America. There may be, and probably are, other ISC customers still using DNIX in some capacity. Through ISC there was a considerable DNIX presence in Central and South America.\nAsynchronous events.\nDNIX's native system call was the codice_1 library function, analogous to the standard Unix codice_2 or codice_3 function. It took multiple arguments, the first of which was a function code. Semantically this single call provided all appropriate Unix functionality, though it was syntactically different from Unix and had, of course, numerous DNIX-only extensions.\nDNIX function codes were organized into two classes: Type 1 and Type 2. Type 1 commands were those that were associated with I/O activity, or anything that could potentially cause the issuing process to block. Major examples were, codice_4, codice_5, codice_6, codice_7, codice_8, codice_9, codice_10, and codice_11. Type 2 were the remainder, such as, codice_12, codice_13, etc. They could be satisfied by the kernel immediately.\nTo invoke asynchronicity, a special file descriptor called a trap queue had to have been created via the Type 2 opcode, codice_14. A Type 1 call would have the, codice_15 bit OR-ed with its function value, and one of the additional parameters to, codice_1 was the trap queue file descriptor. The return value from an asynchronous call was not the normal value but a kernel-assigned identifier. At such time as the asynchronous request completed, a, codice_17 (or, codice_6) of the trap queue file descriptor would return a small kernel-defined structure containing the identifier and result status. The, codice_19 operation was available to cancel any asynchronous operation that hadn't yet been completed, one of its arguments was the kernel-assigned identifier. (A process could only cancel requests that were currently self-owned. The exact semantics of cancelling was up to each request's handler, fundamentally it only meant that any waiting was to be terminated. A partially completed operation could be returned.) In addition to the kernel-assigned identifier, one of the arguments given to any asynchronous operation was a 32-bit user-assigned identifier. This most often referenced a function pointer to the appropriate subroutine that would handle the I/O completion method, but this was merely convention. It was the entity that read the trap queue elements that was responsible for interpreting this value.\nstruct itrq { /* Structure of data read from trap queue. */\n short it_stat; /* Status */\n short it_rn; /* Request number */\n long it_oid; /* Owner ID given on request */\n long it_rpar; /* Returned parameter */\nOf note is that the asynchronous events were gathered via normal file descriptor read operations, and that such reading was also able to be asynchronous. This had implications for semi-autonomous asynchronous event handling packages that could exist within one process. (DNIX 5.2 did not have lightweight processes or threads.) Also of note is that \"any\" potentially blocking operation could be issued asynchronously, so DNIX was well equipped to handle many clients with a single server process. A process was not restricted to having only one trap queue, so I/O requests could be grossly prioritized in this way.\nCompatibility.\nIn addition to the native codice_1 call, a complete set of 'standard' libc interface calls was available.\ncodice_21, codice_22, codice_17, codice_24, etc. Besides being useful for backwards compatibility, these were implemented in a binary-compatible manner with the NCR Tower computer, so that binaries compiled for it would run unchanged under DNIX. The DNIX kernel had two trap dispatchers internally, one for the DNIX method and one for the Unix method. Choice of dispatcher was up to the programmer, and using both interchangeably was acceptable. Semantically they were identical wherever functionality overlapped. (In these machines the 68000 codice_25 instruction was used for the codice_2 calls, and the codice_27 instruction for codice_1. The two trap handlers were very similar, though the [usually hidden] codice_2 call held the function code in the processor's D0 register, whereas codice_1 held it on the stack with the rest of the parameters.)\nDNIX 5.2 had no networking protocol stacks internally (except for the thin X.25-based Ethernet protocol stack added by ISC for use by its diskless workstation support package), all networking was conducted by reading and writing to Handlers. Thus, there was no socket mechanism, but a codice_31 existed that used asynchronous I/O to talk to the TCP/IP handler. The typical Berkeley-derived networking program could be compiled and run unchanged (modulo the usual Unix porting problems), though it might not be as efficient as an equivalent program that used native asynchronous I/O.\nHandlers.\nUnder DNIX, a process could be used to handle I/O requests and to extend the file system. Such a process was called a \"Handler\", and was a major feature of the operating system. A handler was defined as a process that owned at least one \"request queue\", a special file descriptor that was procured in one of two ways: with a codice_32 or a codice_33 call. The former invented an isolated request queue, one end of which was then typically handed down to a child process. (The network remote execution programs, of which there were many, used this method to provide standard I/O paths to their children.) The latter hooked into the file system so that file I/O requests could be adopted by handlers. (The network login programs, of which there were even more, used this method to provide standard I/O paths to their children, as the semantics of logging in under Unix requires a way for multiple perhaps-unrelated processes to horn in on the standard I/O path to the operator.) Once mounted on a directory in the file system, the handler then received all I/O calls to that point.\nA handler would then read small kernel-assigned request data structures from the request queue. (Such reading could be done synchronously or asynchronously as the handler's author desired.) The handler would then do whatever each request required to be satisfied, often using the DNIX codice_34 and codice_35 calls to read and write into the request's data space, and then would terminate the request appropriately using codice_36. A privileged handler could adopt the permissions of its client for individual requests to subordinate handlers (such as the file system) via the codice_37 call, so it didn't need to reproduce the subordinate's permission scheme. If a handler was unable to complete a request alone, the codice_38 function could be used to pass I/O requests from one handler to another. A handler could perform part of the work requested before passing the rest on to another handler. It was very common for a handler to be state-machine oriented so that requests it was fielding from a client were all done asynchronously. This allowed for a single handler to field requests from multiple clients simultaneously without them blocking each other unnecessarily. Part of the request structure was the process ID and its priority so that a handler could choose what to work on first based upon this information, there was no requirement that work be performed in the order it was requested. To aid in this, it was possible to poll both request and trap queues to see if there was more work to be considered before buckling down to actually do it.\nstruct ireq { /* Structure of incoming request */\n short ir_fc; /* Function code */\n short ir_rn; /* Request number */\n long ir_opid; /* Owner ID that you gave on open or mount */\n long ir_bc; /* Byte count */\n long ir_upar; /* User parameter */\n long ir_rad; /* Random address */\n ushort ir_uid; /* User ID */\n ushort ir_gid; /* User group */\n time_t ir_time; /* Request time */\n ulong ir_nph;\n ulong ir_npl; /* Node and process ID */\nThere was no particular restriction on the number of request queues a process could have. This was used to provide networking facilities to chroot jails, for example.\nExamples.\nTo give some appreciation of the utility of handlers, at ISC handlers existed for:\nISC's extensions.\nISC purchased both 5.2 (SVR2 compatible) and 5.3 (SVR3 compatible) versions of DNIX. At the time of purchase, DNIX 5.3 was still undergoing development at DIAB so DNIX 5.2 was what was deployed. Over time, ISC's engineers incorporated most of their 5.3 kernel's features into 5.2, primarily shared memory and IPC, so there was some divergence of features between DIAB and ISC's versions of DNIX. DIAB's 5.3 likely went on to contain more SVR3 features than ISC's 5.2 ended up with. Also, DIAB went on to DNIX 5.4, a SVR4 compatible OS.\nAt ISC, developers considerably extended their version of DNIX 5.2 (only listed are features involving the kernel) based upon both their needs and the general trends of the Unix industry:\nFeatures that were never added.\nWhen DNIX development at ISC effectively ceased in 1997, a number of planned OS features were left on the table:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
