{"id": "52106", "revid": "51067433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52106", "title": "Albany, New York", "text": "Capital city of New York, United States\nAlbany ( ) is the capital city of the U.S. state of New York, and the county seat of \u2013 and most populous city in \u2013 Albany County. It is located on the west bank of the Hudson River, approximately south of its confluence with the Mohawk River. Its population was 99,224 at the time of the 2020 census and was estimated at 101,317 in 2024. \nThe oldest city in New York, the City of Albany is the economic and cultural core of New York State's Capital District, a metropolitan area including the nearby cities and suburbs of Colonie, Troy, Schenectady, and Saratoga Springs. With an estimated 913,000 residents, it is the fourth-most populous metropolitan area in the state.\nThe Hudson River area was originally inhabited by Algonquian-speaking Mohican. The area was settled by Dutch colonists, who built Fort Nassau in 1614 for fur trading and Fort Orange in 1624. In 1664, the English took over the Dutch settlements, renaming the city \"Albany\" in honor of the Scottish title of the Duke of York (later James II of England and Ireland and James VII of Scotland): the Duke of Albany. The city was officially chartered in 1686 under English rule. It became the capital of New York in 1797 after the formation of the United States. Albany is the oldest surviving settlement of the original British Thirteen Colonies north of Virginia.\nIn the late 18th century and throughout most of the 19th, Albany was a center of trade and transportation. The city lies toward the north end of the navigable Hudson River. It was the original eastern terminus of the Erie Canal, connecting to the Great Lakes, and was home to some of the earliest railroads in the world. In the 1920s a powerful political machine controlled by the Democratic Party arose in Albany. In the latter part of the 20th century, Albany's population shrank because of urban sprawl and suburbanization. In the 1990s, the New York State Legislature approved for the city a US$234 million building and renovation plan, which spurred downtown redevelopment. In the early 21st century, Albany's high-technology industry grew, significantly in nanotechnology.\nHistory.\nMohican, Mohawk, and Dutch before 1660.\nThe Hudson River area was originally inhabited by Algonquian-speaking Mohican (Mahican), who called it \"Pempotowwuthut-Muhhcanneuw\", meaning \"the fireplace of the Mohican nation\". Based to the west along the Mohawk River, the Iroquoian-speaking Mohawk called it \"Sche-negh-ta-da\", \"through the pine woods\", referring to the path they took there.\nAccording to Hendrick Aupaumut, the Mohicans came to the area from the north and the west. They settled along the Mahicannituck, which is now called the Hudson River, and called themselves the \"Muh-he-con-neok\", the \"People of the Waters That Are Never Still\".\nThe Mohawks, one of the Five Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, were based in the Mohawk valley and noted for their fur trading and their access to trade between the Iroquois and other nations. The Mohawk became strong trading partners with the Dutch and English. It is likely that the area was visited by European fur traders perhaps as early as 1540, but the extent and duration of those visits are unclear.\nPermanent European claims began when Englishman Henry Hudson, exploring for the Dutch East India Company on the \"Half Moon\" (), reached the area in 1609, claiming it for the United Netherlands. In 1614, Hendrick Christiaensen built Fort Nassau on Castle Island (now called Port of Albany), in the Hudson River. The fort acted as a fur-trading post and was the first documented European structure in present-day Albany. Commencement of the fur trade provoked hostility from the French colony in Canada and among the natives, all of whom vied to control the trade. In 1618, a flood ruined Fort Nassau, but the Dutch replaced it with Fort Orange on the mainland in 1624. Both forts were named in honor of the leading family of the Dutch Revolt, members of the House of Orange-Nassau. Fort Orange and the surrounding area were incorporated as the village of Beverwijck () in 1652, and the city of Albany in 1686. In these early decades of trade, the Dutch, Mohican, and Mohawk developed relations that reflected differences among their three cultures.\nBritish rule to 1800.\nAlbany is one of the oldest surviving European settlements from the original Thirteen Colonies and the longest continuously chartered city in the United States. When New Netherland was captured by the English in 1664, the name was changed from \"Beverwijck\" to \"Albany\" in honor of the Duke of Albany (later James II). Duke of Albany was a Scottish title given since 1398, generally to a younger son of the King of Scots. The name is ultimately derived from \"Alba\", the Gaelic name for Scotland. The Dutch briefly regained Albany in August 1673 and renamed the city \"Willemstadt\"; the English took permanent possession in 1674 with the Treaty of Westminster. On November 1, 1683, the Province of New York was split into counties, with Albany County being the largest: it included all of present New York State north of Dutchess and Ulster Counties in addition to present-day Bennington County, Vermont, theoretically stretching west to the Pacific Ocean; Albany became the county seat. Albany was formally chartered as a municipality by provincial Governor Thomas Dongan on July 22, 1686. The Dongan Charter was virtually identical in content to the charter awarded to the city of New York three months earlier. Dongan created Albany as a strip of land wide and long. Over the years Albany would lose much of the land to the west and annex land to the north and south. At this point, Albany had a population of about 500 people.\nPlan of Union.\nIn 1754, representatives of seven British North American colonies met in the \"Stadt Huys\", Albany's city hall, for the Albany Congress; Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania presented the Albany Plan of Union there, which was the first formal proposal to unite the colonies. Although it was never adopted by Parliament, it was an important precursor to the United States Constitution. The same year, the French and Indian War, the fourth in a series of wars dating back to 1689, began. It ended in 1763 with French defeat, resolving a situation that had been a constant threat to Albany and held back its growth.\nRevolutionary War and real estate.\nIn 1775, with the colonies in the midst of the Revolutionary War, the \"Stadt Huys\" became home to the Albany Committee of Correspondence (the political arm of the local revolutionary movement), which took over operation of Albany's government and eventually expanded its power to control all of Albany County. Tories and prisoners of war were often jailed in the \"Stadt Huys\" alongside common criminals. In 1776, Albany native Philip Livingston signed the Declaration of Independence at Independence Hall in Philadelphia.\nDuring and after the Revolutionary War, Albany County saw a great increase in real estate transactions. After Horatio Gates defeated John Burgoyne at Saratoga in 1777, the upper Hudson Valley was generally at peace as the war raged on elsewhere. Prosperity was soon seen all over Upstate New York. Migrants from Vermont and Connecticut began flowing in, noting the advantages of living on the Hudson and trading at Albany, while being only a few days' sail from New York City. Albany reported a population of 3,498 in the first national census in 1790, an increase of almost 700% since its chartering.\nEarly decades of American independence.\nOn November 17, 1793, fire broke out at a stable belonging to Leonard Gansevoort, destroying 26 homes on Broadway, Maiden Lane, James Street, and State Street. Three were arrested and charged with arson: Pompey, a man enslaved by Matthew Visscher; Dinah, a 14-year-old girl enslaved by Volkert P. Douw; and Bet, a 12-year-old girl enslaved by Philip S. Van Rensselaer. On January 6, 1794, the three were sentenced to death. Governor George Clinton issued a temporary stay of execution, but Dinah and Bet were executed by hanging on March 14, and Pompey on April 11, 1794.\nIn 1797, the state capital was moved permanently to Albany. From statehood to this date, the Legislature had frequently moved the state capital between Albany, Kingston, Poughkeepsie, and the city of New York. Albany is the tenth-oldest state capital in the United States and the second-oldest city that is a state capital, after Santa Fe, New Mexico.\n1800 to 1942.\nAlbany has been a center of transportation for much of its history. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, Albany saw development of the turnpike and by 1815, Albany was the turnpike center of the state. The development of Simeon De Witt's gridded block system in 1794\u2014which renamed streets that had originally named after the British royal family with names of birds and mammals instead\u2014was intersected by these major arterials coming out of Albany, cutting through the city at unexpected angles. The construction of the turnpike, in conjunction with canal and railroad systems, made Albany the hub of transportation for pioneers going to Buffalo and the Michigan Territory in the early and mid-19th century.\nIn 1807, Robert Fulton initiated a steamboat line from New York City to Albany, the first successful enterprise of its kind anywhere in the world. By 1810, with 10,763 people, Albany was the tenth-largest urban place in the nation. The town and village north of Albany known as \"the Colonie\" was annexed in 1815. In 1825 the Erie Canal was completed, forming a continuous water route from the Great Lakes to New York City. Unlike the current Barge Canal, which ends at nearby Waterford, the original Erie Canal ended at Albany; Lock 1 was north of Colonie Street. The Canal emptied into a man-made lagoon called the Albany Basin, which was Albany's main port from 1825 until the Port of Albany-Rensselaer opened in 1932. In 1829, while working as a professor at the Albany Academy, Joseph Henry, widely regarded as \"the foremost American scientist of the 19th century\", built the first electric motor. Three years later, he discovered electromagnetic self-induction (the SI unit for which is now the henry). He went on to be the first Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. In the 1830 and 1840 censuses, Albany was ranked as the ninth-largest urban place in the nation; it dropped back to tenth in 1850. This was the last time the city was one of the top ten largest urban places in the nation.\nAlbany also has significant history with rail transport, as the location of two major regional railroad headquarters. The Delaware and Hudson Railway was headquartered in Albany at what is now the SUNY System Administration Building. In 1853, Erastus Corning, a noted industrialist and Albany's mayor from 1834 to 1837, consolidated ten railroads stretching from Albany to Buffalo into the New York Central Railroad (NYCRR), headquartered in Albany until Cornelius Vanderbilt moved it to New York City in 1867. One of the ten companies that formed the NYCRR was the Mohawk and Hudson Railroad, which was the first railroad in the state and the first successful steam railroad running regularly scheduled service in the country.\nWhile the key to Albany's economic prosperity in the 19th century was transportation, industry and business also played a role. Largely thanks to the city's Dutch and German roots, beer was one of its biggest commodities. Beverwyck Brewery, originally known as Quinn and Nolan (Nolan being mayor of Albany 1878\u20131883), was the last remaining brewer from that time when it closed in 1972. The city's location at the east end of the Erie Canal gave it unparalleled access to both raw products and a captive customer base in the west. Albany was known for its publishing houses, and to some extent, still is. Albany was second only to Boston in the number of books produced for most of the 19th century. Iron foundries in both the north and south ends of the city attracted thousands of immigrants to the city for industrial jobs. Intricate wrought-iron details constructed in those years remain visible on what are now historic buildings. The iron industry waned by the 1890s due to increased costs associated with a newly unionized workforce and the opening of mines in the Mesabi Range in Minnesota.\nAlbany's other major exports during the 18th and 19th centuries were furs, wheat, meat, and lumber. By 1865, there were almost 4,000 saw mills in the Albany area and the Albany Lumber District was the largest lumber market in the nation. The city was also home to a number of banks. The Bank of Albany (1792\u20131861) was the second chartered bank in New York. The city was the original home of the Albank (founded in 1820 as the Albany Savings Bank), KeyBank (founded in 1825 as the Commercial Bank of Albany), and Norstar Bank (founded as the State Bank of Albany in 1803). American Express was founded in Albany in 1850 as an express mail business. In 1871, the northwestern portion of Albany\u2014west from Magazine Street\u2014was annexed to the neighboring town of Guilderland after the town of Watervliet refused annexation of the territory. In return for this loss, portions of Bethlehem and Watervliet were added to Albany. Part of the land annexed to Guilderland was ceded back to Albany in 1910, setting up the current western border.\nThe train carrying the body of slain President Abraham Lincoln came through Albany on the way to Illinois and the ghostly image of that train remains.\nAlbany opened one of the first commercial airports in the world, and the first municipal airport in the United States, in 1908. Originally on a polo field on Loudon Road, it moved to Westerlo Island in 1909 and remained there until 1928. The Albany Municipal Airport\u2014jointly owned by the city and county\u2014was moved to its current location in Colonie in 1928. By 1916 Albany's northern and southern borders reached their modern courses; Westerlo Island, to the south, became the second-to-last annexation, which occurred in 1926.\n1942 to present day.\nErastus Corning 2nd, arguably Albany's most notable mayor (and great-grandson of the former mayor of the same name), was elected in 1941. Although he was one of the longest-serving mayors of any city in United States history (1942 until his death in 1983), one historian describes Corning's tenure as \"long on years, short on accomplishments,\" citing Corning's preference for maintaining the status quo as a factor that held back potential progress during his tenure. While Corning brought stability to the office of mayor, it is said even those who admire him greatly cannot come up with a sizable list of \"major concrete Corning achievements.\" Corning is given credit for saving\u2014albeit somewhat unintentionally\u2014much of Albany's historic architecture.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, a time when federal aid for urban renewal was plentiful, Albany did not have growth in its economy or infrastructure. It lost more than 20 percent of its population during the Corning years, as people moved to newer housing in the suburbs, followed by most of the downtown businesses moving there as well. While cities across the country grappled with similar issues, the problems were magnified in Albany: interference from the Democratic political machine hindered progress considerably. In 1960, the mayor sold the city's stake in the airport to the county, citing budget issues. It was known from then on as Albany County Airport until a massive upgrade and modernization project between 1996 and 1998, when it was rebranded Albany International Airport.\nGovernor Nelson Rockefeller (1959\u20131973) (R) tried to stimulate the city with new monumental architecture and large, government-sponsored building projects; he drove construction of the Empire State Plaza, SUNY Albany's uptown campus, and much of the W. Averell Harriman State Office Building Campus. Albany County Republican Chairman Joseph C. Frangella once quipped, \"Governor Rockefeller was the best mayor Albany ever had.\" Corning, although opposed to the project, was responsible for negotiating the payment plan for the Empire State Plaza. Rockefeller did not want to be limited by the Legislature's power of the purse, so Corning devised a plan to have the county pay for the construction and have the state sign a lease-ownership agreement. The state paid off the bonds until 2004. It was Rockefeller's only viable option, and he agreed. Due to the clout Corning gained from the situation, he gained inclusion of the State Museum, a convention center, and a restaurant, back in the plans\u2014ideas which Rockefeller had originally vetoed. The county gained $35 million in fees and the city received $13 million for lost tax revenue. Having the state offices in the city enabled it to keep good jobs and retain middle-class residents.\nAnother major project of the 1960s and 1970s was the construction of Interstate 787 and the South Mall Arterial. Construction began in the early 1960s. A proposed Mid-Crosstown Arterial never came to fruition. One of the project's main results was separating the city from the Hudson River. Historian Paul Grondahl has described Corning as shortsighted with respect to use of the waterfront, saying the mayor could have used his influence to change the location of I-787, which now cuts the city off from \"its whole \"raison d'\u00eatre\"\" In 1967, the hamlet of Karlsfeld was the last annexation by the city, sourced from the Town of Bethlehem.\nWhen Corning died in 1983, Thomas Whalen assumed the mayorship and was reelected twice. He encouraged redevelopment of historic structures and helped attract federal dollars earmarked for that purpose. What Corning had saved from destruction, Whalen refurbished for continued and new uses. The Mayor's Office of Special Events was created in an effort to increase the number of festivals and artistic events in the city, including a year-long \"Dongan Charter\" tricentennial celebration in 1986. Whalen is credited for an \"unparalleled cycle of commercial investment and development\" in Albany due to his \"aggressive business development programs\".\nPrior to the recession of the 1990s, downtown Albany was home to four Fortune 500 companies. After the death of Corning and the retirement of Congressman Sam Stratton, the political environment changed. Long-term office holders became rare in the 1980s. Local media began following the drama surrounding county politics (specifically that of the newly created county executive position); the loss of Corning (and eventually the machine) led to a lack of interest in city politics. The election of Gerald Jennings was a surprise, and he served as mayor from 1994 until his retirement at the end of 2013. His tenure essentially ended the political machine that had been in place since the 1920s.\nDuring the 1990s, the State Legislature approved the $234 million \"Albany Plan\", \"a building and renovation project [that] was the most ambitious building project to affect the area since the Rockefeller era.\" Under the Albany Plan, renovation and new building projects were initiated around the downtown area. Many state workers were relocated from the Harriman State Office Campus to downtown, helping its retail businesses and vitality. The first decade of the 21st century saw a real possibility for a long-discussed and controversial Albany Convention Center; it opened in 2017 with the goal of making Albany a viable location for large events hosted by statewide organizations.\nAlbany remains an important location for business presence, given its role as de facto seat of Tech Valley and being home to the state capitol. Fortune 500 companies with offices in Albany include American Express, J.P. Morgan and Chase, Merrill Lynch, General Electric, Verizon, Goldman Sachs, International Paper, and Key Bank.\nAlbany won the All-America City Award in both 1991 and 2009.\nGeography.\nAlbany is about north of New York City on the Hudson River. It has a total area of , of which is land and (1.8%) is water. The city is bordered on the north by the town of Colonie (along with the village of Menands), on the west by the town of Guilderland, and on the south by the town of Bethlehem. The former Foxes Creek, Beaver Kill, and Rutten Kill were diverted underground in the 19th century. There are four lakes within city limits: Buckingham Lake; Rensselaer Lake at the mouth of the Patroon Creek; Tivoli Lake, which was formed as a reservoir and once connected to the Patroon Creek; and Washington Park Lake, which was formed by damming the Beaver Kill.\nThe highest natural point in Albany is a USGS benchmark near the Loudonville Reservoir off Birch Hill Road, at above sea level. The lowest point is at the Hudson River\u2014which is still technically an estuary at Albany and is affected by the Atlantic tide\u2014at an average of above sea level at low tide and at high tide. The interior of Albany consists of rolling hills which were once part of the Albany Pine Bush, an area of pitch pine and scrub oak, and has arid, sandy soil that is a remnant of the ancient Lake Albany. Due to development, the Pine Bush has shrunk from an original today. A preserve was set up by the State Legislature in 1988 and is on the city's western edge, spilling into Guilderland and Colonie; it is the only sizable inland pine barrens sand dune ecosystem in the United States, and is home to many endangered species, including the Karner Blue butterfly.\nClimate.\nAlbany is in the humid continental climate zone (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: Dfa), and features cold, snowy winters, and hot, humid summers; the city experiences four distinct seasons. Albany is in plant hardiness zone 6a near downtown and along the shore of the Hudson and 5b at its western end. Albany receives of precipitation per year, with 138 days of at least of precipitation each year. Snowfall is significant, totaling per season, but with less accumulation than the lake effect areas to the north and west, as it is farther from Lake Ontario. However, Albany is close enough to the Atlantic coast to receive heavy snow from Nor'easters and the city occasionally receives Alberta clippers. Winters can be very cold with fluctuating conditions; temperatures drop to or below on nine nights per annum. Summers in Albany can contain stretches of excessive heat and humidity, with temperatures of or hotter on nine days per year. Record temperature extremes range from , on January 19, 1971, to on July 4, 1911.\nCityscape.\nNeighborhoods.\nDue to the variety of its communities, Albany is often called a \"city of neighborhoods.\" The neighborhoods of Albany include Arbor Hill; Center Square, \"[an] eclectic mix of residential and commercial [buildings], including bars, night clubs, restaurants, and stores\"; Pine Hills; and the South End.\nDemographics.\nCity of immigrants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorically, Albany's population has been mixed. First dominated by Mohican and Mohawk, then Dutch and Germans, it was overtaken by the British in the early 19th century. Irish immigrants soon outnumbered most other ethnicities by the mid-19th century, and were followed by Italians and Poles. In the mid-to-late 20th century, the African-American population increased with thousands of people from the rural South, as part of the Great Migration. As historian (and Albany Assemblyman) John McEneny puts it,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dutch and Yankee, German and Irish, Polish and Italian, Black and Chinese\u2014over the centuries Albany's heritage has reflected a succession of immigrant nationalities. Its streets have echoed with a dozen languages, its neighborhoods adapting to the distinctive life-style and changing economic fortunes of each new group.\nUntil after the Revolution, Albany's population consisted mostly of ethnic Dutch descendants. Settlers migrating from New England tipped the balance toward British ethnicity in the early 19th century. Jobs on the turnpikes, canals, and railroads attracted floods of Irish immigrants in the early 19th century, especially in the 1840s during the Great Famine, solidifying the city's Irish base. Michael Nolan became Albany's first Irish Catholic mayor in 1878, two years before Boston. Polish and Italian immigrants began arriving in Albany in the wave of immigration in the latter part of the 19th century. Their numbers were smaller than in many other eastern cities mainly because most had found manufacturing jobs at General Electric in Schenectady. The Jewish community had been established early, with Sephardic Jewish members as part of the Beverwijck community. Its population rose during the late 19th century, when many Ashkenazi Jews immigrated from eastern Europe. In that period, there was also an influx of Chinese and east Asian immigrants, who settled in the downtown section of the city. Many of their descendants have since moved to suburban areas. Asian immigration all but halted after the Immigration Act of 1924.\nAlbany saw its last large immigration pattern as part of the Great Migration when many African Americans moved there from the American South before and after World War I to fill industrial positions and find other opportunities. In the early years, African-Americans lived together with Italians, Jews, and other immigrants in the South End, where housing was older and less expensive. The black community has grown as a proportion of the population since then; African Americans made up three percent of the city's population in 1950, six percent in 1960, 12 percent in 1970, and 30 percent in 2010. The change in proportion is related mostly to middle-class white families moving to the suburbs and black families remaining within city limits during the same time period.\nSince 2007, the number of Burmese refugees to Albany has increased. The Burmese refugee community consists mostly of people of Karen ethnicity. An estimated 5,000 Burmese refugees reside in Albany as of January\u00a02015[ [update]].\nReligious participation.\nLike most cities of comparable age and size, Albany has well-established Orthodox Christian, Roman Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish communities. Albany is home to the oldest Christian congregation in Upstate New York and the Mother Churches of two Christian dioceses. As of \u00a02010[ [update]], eight churches or religious buildings in the city were listed on the National Register of Historic Places, one of which\u2014St. Peter's Episcopal Church on State Street\u2014is a National Historic Landmark. Established in 1642, the congregation of the First Church in Albany (Reformed), also known as the North Dutch Church (on North Pearl Street), is the second-oldest Reformed Church in America. The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (Eagle Street and Madison Avenue, built 1852) is the cathedral of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Albany, led by Bishop Edward Scharfenberger, and the Cathedral of All Saints (South Swan Street and Elk Street, built 1888) is the cathedral of the Episcopal Diocese of Albany. As of 2023, the city was home to twelve Catholic churches and four Episcopal churches. Despite its history of Christendom, in 2019 the Albany-Schenectady-Troy MSA was found to be among the most post-Christian cities in the United States in a study by Christian polling firm The Barna Group.\nA significant Jewish presence has existed in Albany as early as 1658. As of 2010, Albany is home to two Conservative synagogues, a Chabad-Lubavitch synagogue, an Orthodox synagogue, and two Reform synagogues. Albany is also home to one of the few Karaite synagogues outside Israel. As of 2008, the total membership in Albany's synagogues was estimated at 12,000\u201313,000, with half the members residing outside the city. Since the early 2000s, there has been an increase in Orthodox Jews moving to Albany from the New York Metro area, largely due to cheaper housing prices and closer walking proximity to synagogues.\nThe Islamic community in Albany and its surrounding suburbs is represented by at least four major mosques in the region. The Muslim population increased substantially starting in the late 2000s, with the arrival of many refugees from countries such as Iraq, Syria, and Afghanistan.\nExact numbers on religious denominations in Albany are not readily available. Demographic statistics in the United States depend heavily on the United States Census Bureau, which cannot ask about religious affiliation as part of its decennial census. It does compile some national and statewide religious statistics, but these are not representative of a city the size of Albany. One report from 2000 offers religious affiliations for Albany County. According to the data, 59.2% of Albany County residents identified as Christian: 47% are Roman Catholic, 8.4% are mainline Protestants, 2.7% are Evangelical Protestants, and 1.1% are Eastern or Oriental Orthodox Christians. Residents who practice Judaism make up 4.2% of the population and Muslims represent 0.2%.\nModern overview.\n2020 census.\nAs of April 1, 2020, Albany's population was 99,224.\nWith a 2013 Census-estimated population of 1.1 million, the eight county Capital District, encompassing Albany, Troy, Schenectady and Saratoga, is the third-most populous metropolitan region in the state.\nAs of the 2010 census, Albany's population density was . There were 46,362 housing units at an average density of ; 5,205 of these units (11.2%) were vacant. The racial makeup of the city residents was 52.3% white; 27% Black or African American; 0.06% Native American or Native Alaskan; 7.4% Asian; 0.1% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander; .06% from other races; and 3.6% from two or more races. A total of 9.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. Non-Hispanic Whites were 52.0% of the population in 2010, compared to 87.0% in 1970.\nAs of 2010, 20.0% of Albany's population was under the age of 18, 19.3% was aged 18 to 24, 29.2% was aged 25 to 44, 18.1% was aged 45 to 64, and 13.4% was aged 65 years or older. The median age was 31.4 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.5 males. Some 81.3% of the population had completed high school or earned an equivalency diploma.\nAs of the 2000 census, the top five ancestry groups in the city were African American (27%), Irish (18.1%), Italian (12.4%), German (10.4%), and English (5.2%); (33.1%) of the population reported \"other ancestries\". Albany is home to a Triqui language-speaking community of Mexican-Americans.\nThere were 40,709 households in Albany in 2000, of which 22.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 25.3% were married couples living together, 16.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 54.8% were non-families. 41.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.11 and the average family size was 2.95.\nThe median income for a household in the city in 2000 was $, and the median income for a family was $ (male, year-round worker) and $ (female, year-round worker). The per capita income for the city was $. About 16.0% of families and 21.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 28.8% of those under age 18 and 12.5% of those age 65 or over. The rate of reported violent crimes for 2008 (1,095 incidents per 100,000 residents) were more than double the rate for similarly sized US cities. Reported property crimes (4,669 incidents per 100,000 residents) were somewhat lower.\nDemographically speaking, the population of Albany and the Capital District mirrors the characteristics of the United States consumer population as a whole better than any other major municipality in the country. According to a 2004 study conducted by the Acxiom Corporation, Albany and its environs are the top-ranked standard test market for new business and retail products. Albany, Rochester, and Syracuse all scored within the top five.\nAccording to the 2020 American Community Survey, the Latino population was: 4.57% Puerto Rican, 1.45% Dominican, .84% Ecuadorian, .77% Mexican, .69% Salvadoran, .22% Cuban.\nCrime.\nAlbany's violent crime rate was 10.03 per 1,000 residents in 2023, compared to 7.69 in Buffalo, 7.39 in Rochester, 8.22 in Syracuse, and 7.72 in New York City. New York State had statewide violent crime rate of 3.90 per 1,000 people in 2023.\nEconomy.\nAlbany's economy, along with that of the Capital District in general, is heavily dependent on government, health care, education, and more recently, technology. Because of these typically steady economic bases, the local economy has been relatively immune to national economic recessions in the past. In 2009, more than 25 percent of the city's population worked in government-related positions. Albany's estimated daytime population is more than 162,000. Companies based in Albany include Trans World Entertainment, AMRI Global and Clough Harbour. In 2019, Albany had the fourth-highest amount of lawyers in its employment pool (7.5 lawyers per 1,000 jobs) compared to the rest of the nation, behind Washington, D.C., Trenton, New Jersey, and New York City, respectively.\nTech Valley.\nSince the 2000s, the economy of Albany and the surrounding Capital District has been directed toward high technology, a growing fourth sector of the area's economic base. Tech Valley is a marketing name for the eastern part of New York State, encompassing Albany, the Capital District, and the Hudson Valley. Originated in 1998 to promote the greater Albany area as a high-tech competitor to regions such as Silicon Valley and Boston, it has since grown to represent the counties in the Capital District and extending to 19 counties from IBM's Westchester County plants in the south to the Canada\u2013US border in the north.\nThe area's high technology ecosystem is supported by technologically focused academic institutions including Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the State University of New York Polytechnic Institute. Tech Valley encompasses 19 counties straddling both sides of the Adirondack Northway and the New York Thruway, and with heavy state taxpayer subsidy, has experienced significant growth in the computer hardware side of the high-technology industry, with great strides in the nanotechnology sector, digital electronics design, and water- and electricity-dependent integrated microchip circuit manufacturing. A notable video game development cluster has grown in and around Albany starting in the 2010s.\nArts and culture.\nNightlife and entertainment.\nAlbany's geographic situation\u2014roughly equidistant from New York City to the south and Montreal to the north\u2014makes it a convenient stop for nationally touring artists and acts. The Palace Theatre and The Egg are mid-sized forums for music, theater, and spoken-word performances; the Capital Repertory Theatre is smaller. The MVP Arena is the city's largest musical venue for nationally and internationally prominent bands. It also hosts trade shows, sporting events, and other large gatherings. Some people praise the cultural contributions of Albany and the greater Capital District; others suggest that the city has a \"cultural identity crisis\" due to its widespread geography, which requires a car to reach most of what the area has to offer, a necessity not seen in larger and more densely populated metropolitan areas such as New York and Boston.\nIn recent years, the city's government has invested resources to cultivate venues and neighborhoods that attract after-hours business. Madison Avenue, Pearl Street, Delaware Avenue and Lark Street are the most active entertainment areas in the city. Many restaurants, clubs, and bars have opened since the mid-1990s, revitalizing areas that had once been abandoned and reclaiming old row houses, businesses, and a pump station. Bars are concentrated in three areas: about two blocks on Park Street, downtown; along Lark Street, home to smaller bars, which fit the neighborhood's artistic and eclectic style; and Western and Madison Avenues, in midtown, centered on the College of Saint Rose and SUNY Albany's downtown campus and drawing younger people. Much of the bar restaurant scene features classic Irish Pubs.\nFestivals.\n\"Alive at 5\" is a free, weekly concert series held downtown during the summer on Thursdays; with 10 concerts in 2010, total attendance was roughly 100,000. The Tulip Festival is set in Washington Park and celebrates the city's Dutch heritage, which began with Pinkster Festival, an African-Dutch Celebration. This traditional Albany event marks the beginning of spring as thousands of tulips bloom in the park in early May; attendance to the Tulip Festival in 2010 was approximately 80,000. Another large festival in Albany is the Capital Pride Parade and Festival, a major gay pride event held each June, attended by an estimated 30,000 spectators annually from across Upstate New York.\nThe Price Chopper Fabulous Fourth and Fireworks Festival at the Empire State Plaza celebrates Independence Day with musical performances and the region's largest fireworks display. Freihofer's Run for Women is a 5-kilometer run through the city that draws more than 4,000 participants from across the country; it is an annual event that began in 1978.http:// is an annual Festival that hosts more than 3500 people over 3 days. The Festival showcases more than 70 Regional Chefs &amp; Restaurants, 250 Global Wines &amp; Spirits, a NYS Craft Beer Pavilion, 4 competitions (The Signature Chef Invitational, Rising Star Chef, Barista Albany and Battle of the Bartenders) and one Grand Gala Reception, Dinner &amp; Auction featuring 10 f Albany's Iconic Chefs. The Albany Chefs' Food &amp; Wine Festival donates all net proceeds to deserving Albany Arts Organizations and is held the Thursday-Saturday preceding Martin Luther King Weekend. Smaller events include the African American Family Day Arts Festival each August at the Empire State Plaza; the Latin Fest, held each August at the Corning Preserve; the Albany Jazz Festival, an annual end-of-summer event held at the Corning Preserve; and Lark Fest, a music and art festival held each fall.\nMuseums and historic sites.\nBecause of Albany's historical and political significance, the city has numerous museums, historical buildings, and historic districts. Albany is home to the New York State Museum, the New York State Library and the New York State Archives; all three facilities are in the Cultural Education Center at the south end of Empire State Plaza and are free to the public. The USS \"Slater\" (DE-766), a decommissioned World War II destroyer escort that was restored in 1998, is a museum ship docked in the Hudson River at Quay Street. It is the only ship of its kind still afloat. The Albany Heritage Area Visitors Center, at the corner of Clinton Avenue and Broadway at Quackenbush Square, hosts a museum, gift shop, and the Henry Hudson Planetarium. In early 2012, the Irish American Heritage Museum opened in downtown Albany. The museum is home to exhibits highlighting the contributions of the Irish people in America.\nThe Albany Institute of History and Art, on Washington Avenue near the Center Square Neighborhood and State Capitol, is \"dedicated to collecting, preserving, interpreting and promoting interest in the history, art, culture of Albany and the Upper Hudson Valley region.\" The museum's most notable permanent exhibits include an extensive collection of paintings by the Hudson River School and an exhibit on Ancient Egypt featuring the institute's \"Albany Mummies\".\nAlbany is home to 57 listings on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and five National Historic Landmarks. The Ten Broeck Mansion, a 1797 Federal-style mansion (later renovated in the Greek-Revival style) built for Abraham Ten Broeck (mayor of Albany 1779\u20131783 and 1796\u20131798) is a historic house museum and the headquarters of the Albany County Historical Association; it was added to the NRHP in 1971. Later known as \"Arbor Hill\", it gave the current neighborhood its name.\nLiterature and film.\nAlbany has been the subject, inspiration, or location for many written and cinematic works. Many non-fiction works have been written on the city. One of the city's more notable claims to fame is \"Ironweed\" (1983), the 1984 Pulitzer Prize-winning book by Albany native William Kennedy. \"Ironweed\" was the third in a series of books by Kennedy known as the \"Albany Cycle\". The elusive author Trevanian also grew up in Albany and wrote \"The Crazyladies of Pearl Street\" (2005), about a North Albany neighborhood along Pearl Street. The book is considered a semi-autobiographical memoir.\nIn 1987, the film version of \"Ironweed\" premiered at the Palace Theatre. The movie starred Jack Nicholson and Meryl Streep, each of whom were nominated for Academy Awards for their performances; much of the filming was done on location in Albany. Most recently the downtown area was the site of filming for the action-thriller \"Salt\", starring Angelina Jolie, and the action-comedy \"The Other Guys\", starring Will Ferrell and Mark Wahlberg.\nAuthors Herman Melville and Henry James lived with their families in Albany when young, before their careers. James identified his character Isabel Archer, the heroine of his novel \"The Portrait of a Lady\", as being from Albany. Gregory Maguire, author of \"\" (adapted for the Broadway hit \"Wicked\"), grew up in North Albany and graduated from SUNY Albany.\nArchitecture.\nThe Empire State Plaza, a collection of state agency office buildings, dominates almost any view of Albany. Built between 1965 and 1978 at the hand of Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller and architect Wallace Harrison, the complex is a powerful example of late American modern architecture and remains a controversial building project both for displacing city residents and for its architectural style. The most recognizable aspect of the complex is the Erastus Corning Tower, the tallest building in New York outside of New York City. Juxtaposed at the north end of the Plaza is the 19th-century New York State Capitol, the seat of the New York State Legislature and the home of the Governor's office.\nAlbany's initial architecture incorporated many Dutch influences, followed soon after by those of the English. Quackenbush House, a Dutch Colonial brick mansion, was built c.\u20091736; Schuyler Mansion, a Georgian-style mansion, was built in 1765; and the oldest building in Albany is the 1728 Van Ostrande-Radliff House at 48 Hudson Avenue. Albany's housing varies greatly, with mostly row houses in the older sections of town, closer to the river. Housing type quickly changes as one travels westward, beginning with two-family homes of the late 19th century, and one-family homes built after World War II in the western end of the city.\nAlbany City Hall, designed by Henry Hobson Richardson, was opened in 1883. The New York State Capitol was opened in 1899 (after 32 years of construction) at a cost of $25 million, making it the most expensive government building at the time. Albany's Union Station, a major Beaux-Arts design, was under construction at the same time; it opened in 1900. In 1912, the Beaux-Arts styled New York State Department of Education Building opened on Washington Avenue near the Capitol. It has a classical exterior, which features a block-long white marble colonnade. The 1920s brought the Art Deco movement, which is illustrated by the Home Savings Bank Building (1927) on North Pearl Street and the Alfred E. Smith Building (1930) on South Swan Street, two of Albany's tallest high-rises.\nArchitecture from the 1960s and 1970s is well represented in the city, especially at the W. Averell Harriman State Office Building Campus (1950s and 1960s) and on the uptown campus of the University at Albany (1962\u20131971). The state office campus was planned in the 1950s by governor W. Averell Harriman to offer more parking and easier access for state employees. The uptown SUNY campus was built in the 1960s under Governor Rockefeller on the site of the city-owned Albany Country Club. Straying from the popular open campus layout, SUNY Albany has a centralized building layout with administrative and classroom buildings at center surrounded by four student housing towers. The design called for much use of concrete and glass, and the style has slender, round-topped columns and pillars reminiscent of those at Lincoln Center in New York City.\nDowntown has seen a revival in recent decades, often considered to have begun with Norstar Bank's renovation of the former Union Station as its corporate headquarters in 1986. The Knickerbocker Arena (MVP Arena) was originally slated for suburban Colonie, but was instead built downtown and opened in 1990. Other development in downtown includes the construction of the State Dormitory Authority headquarters at 515 Broadway (1998); the State Department of Environmental Conservation building, with its iconic green dome, at 625 Broadway (2001); the State Comptroller headquarters on State Street (2001); the Hudson River Way (2002), a pedestrian bridge connecting Broadway to the Corning Preserve; and 677 Broadway (2005), \"the first privately owned downtown office building in a generation\".\nSports.\nAlbany has teams in two top-level professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada (New York Atlas, and Albany Firebirds), and several minor-league sports teams with varying levels of support.\nThe Albany Devils were a minor league ice hockey team that moved to the city for the 2010\u201311 season. They played in the American Hockey League and were affiliated with the New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League. The Devils replaced the Albany River Rats, who played in the Capital Region from 1990 to 2010, when they relocated to Charlotte, North Carolina. The Albany Devils moved to Binghamton, New York in 2017.\nThe Times Union Center has previously hosted arena football teams including the Albany Firebirds in the Arena Football League (AFL) from 1990 to 2000 and then a team originally known as the Albany Conquest and later the Firebirds in the af2, the AFL's developmental league, from 2002 to 2009. The Albany Empire played in the AFL from 2018 through the 2019 season when the league folded. A new Albany Empire was relaunched in the National Arena League for the 2021 season. In 2023, Antonio Brown bought the team; after a series of problems with payments and personnel, the NAL suspended the franchise in the middle of the 2023 season. A relaunched Albany Firebirds franchise began playing in 2024.\nThe Tri-City ValleyCats short season minor league baseball team have played at the Joseph L. Bruno Stadium on the Hudson Valley Community College campus in North Greenbush since 2002. Prior to the ValleyCats' arrival, the Albany-Colonie Diamond Dogs (1995\u20132002) played at Heritage Park in Colonie; due to financial pressures, and facing impending competition from the ValleyCats, the franchise folded in 2002.\nThe Albany Legends (International Basketball League), played in the Washington Avenue Armory from 2010 to 2014 before moving to Schenectady. The Albany Patroons have played at the Armory on and off since 1982 and currently play in The Basketball League.\nWith the large number of local colleges and universities around Albany, college sports are popular. The University at Albany's Great Danes play at the Division I level in all sports. The football team is a member of the Coastal Athletic Association while all other sports teams play as members of the America East Conference. In 2006, UAlbany became the first SUNY-affiliated school to send a team to the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament. The Siena Saints saw a rise in popularity after their men's basketball team made it to the NCAA Tournament in 2008, 2009, and 2010. All 18 Saints teams are Division I and play in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference. Although Siena's campus is in nearby Colonie, the men's basketball team plays at the Times Union Center.\nUAlbany hosted the New York Giants training camp from 1996 to 2012.\nOn February 23, 2021, it was announced that the National Lacrosse League (NLL) would return to the city with the relocation of the New England Black Wolves. The team was named the Albany FireWolves on April 15, 2021. This is the second NLL team to be based in the area; the first, the Albany Attack, played in the city from 2000 to 2003.\nIn 2023, the Premier Lacrosse League (PLL) selected cities for their 8 franchises, and Albany was chosen as the primary home for the New York Atlas.\nIn 2024, the Albany Firebirds began playing in the AFL at the MVP Arena. After one season in the AFL, the team moved to the AF1.\nThe 518 Ballers (American Basketball Association) have played at Our Savior's Christian School since 2023.\nParks and recreation.\nAlbany has more than 60 public parks and recreation areas. Washington Park was organized as the Middle Public Square in 1806. Its current location has been public property since the \"Dongan Charter\" of 1686 gave the city title to all property not privately owned. Washington Park was designed by John Bogart and John Cuyler in 1870, and opened for public use the following year. The original lake house, designed by Frederick W. Brown, was added in 1876. The park had previously been used as a cemetery; its graves were moved to Albany Rural Cemetery. Washington Park is a popular place to exercise and play sports; skate during the winter; people-watch during Tulip Fest; and attend plays at the amphitheater during the summer.\nOther parks in Albany include Lincoln Park, Buckingham Park, the Corning Preserve, the Albany Skyway and the Pine Bush. Lincoln Park, southwest of the Empire State Plaza, was organized in 1886 and was originally known as Beaver Park. Today, the park has a pool that is open during the summer months. Buckingham Lake Park is between Manning Boulevard and Route 85 in the Buckingham Pond neighborhood; it contains a pond with fountains, a footpath, a playground, and picnic tables. The Albany Riverfront Park at the Corning Preserve has an 800-seat amphitheatre that hosts events in non-winter months, most notably the \"Alive at 5\" summer concert series. The Preserve's visitors center details the ecology of the Hudson River and the local environment. The park has a bike trail and boat launch and was effectively separated from downtown by Interstate 787 until the opening of the Hudson River Way in 2002.\nOther public parks include Westland Hill Park, Hoffman Park, Beverwyck Park, and Liberty Park, today a small circular grassy patch in downtown on Hudson Avenue, which is Albany's oldest park. Ridgefield Park is home to the clay courts of the Albany Tennis Club, one of the oldest tennis clubs in the United States. The municipal golf course, New Course at Albany, was constructed in 1929 as the Albany Municipal Golf Course, later renamed the Capital Hills at Albany, and remodeled in 1991.\nGovernment.\nAlbany has a strong mayor-council government, which functions under the Dongan Charter, granted by colonial governor Thomas Dongan in 1686 when Albany was incorporated. A revised charter was adopted by referendum in 1998, but was legally reckoned as an amendment to the Dongan Charter. This gives Albany the distinction of having the oldest active city charter in the United States and \"arguably the longest-running instrument of municipal government in the Western Hemisphere.\" The mayor, who is elected every four years, heads the executive branch of city government. The current mayor, Kathy Sheehan, was first elected in 2013. The Common Council represents the legislative branch of city government and is made up of fifteen council members (each elected from one ward) and an at-large Common Council President. The current president is Corey Ellis; he began his term in January 2018.\nWhile Albany has its own city government, it has also been the seat of Albany County since the county's formation in 1683 and the capital of New York since 1797. As such, the city is home to all branches of the county and state governments, as well as its own. Albany City Hall sits on Eagle Street, opposite the State Capitol, and the Albany County Office Building is on State Street. The state government has offices scattered throughout the city.\nAlbany is in the 20th Congressional district, represented by Paul Tonko (D) in the United States House of Representatives. The city is represented by Chuck Schumer (D) and Kirsten Gillibrand (D) in the United States Senate. On the state level, the city is in the 44th district in the New York Senate, represented by Patricia Fahy (D). In the New York Assembly, western Albany is in the 109th district, represented by Gabriella Romero (D) while downtown and eastern Albany are in the 108th district, represented by John T. McDonald III (D). As the seat of Albany County, the city is the location of the county's courts including Family Court, County Court, Surrogate Court, Supreme Court, and New York Court of Appeals. Albany is the site of a federal courthouse that houses the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York.\nPolitics.\nAlbany's politics have been dominated by the Democratic Party since the 1920s; Daniel (Uncle Dan) O'Connell established a political machine in the city with the election of William Stormont Hackett as mayor in 1922. Prior to that, William Barnes Jr. had set up a Republican machine in the 1890s. Barnes' success is attributed to the fact that he owned two newspapers in Albany and that he was the grandson of Thurlow Weed, the influential newspaper publisher and political boss. O'Connell's organization overcame Barnes' in 1922 and survived well into the 1980s (even after his death). In many instances, votes were outright bought.\nGerald Jennings' upset in the 1993 Democratic mayoral primary over Harold Joyce, who had the Democratic Party's formal endorsement and had only recently been its county chairman, is often cited as the end of the O'Connell era in Albany. In the early 21st century, Albany continued to be dominated by the Democratic Party. Democratic Party enrollment in the city was 38,862 in 2009, while Republican enrollment was 3,487. As of 2022, every elected city position had been held by a Democrat since 1931.\nIn November 2013, Kathy Sheehan became the first woman to be elected Mayor of Albany.\nEducation.\nThe City School District of Albany (CSDA) operates the city's public school system, which consists of 17 schools and learning centers; in addition, there are 7 charter schools, including Green Tech Charter High School, and Albany Leadership High School. In the 2015\u20132016 school year, over 9,000 students were enrolled in the public school system. The district had an average class size of 18, an 81-percent graduation rate, and a 5-percent dropout rate. The district's 2010\u201311 budget is $202.8 million. Although considered by the state to be one of the lowest-achieving high schools in New York, Albany High was listed as the nation's 976th best high school in a 2010 \"Newsweek/Washington Post\" report. Albany also has a number of private schools, including the coed Bishop Maginn High School and Albany Free School; the all-boys Albany Academy; and the all-girls Academy of the Holy Names and Albany Academy for Girls.\nThe Albany Medical College (private), today part of Albany Medical Center, was founded in 1839. Albany Law School (private) is the oldest law school in New York and the fourth-oldest in the country; it was opened in 1851. President William McKinley was an alumnus. The Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences (private) is the second-oldest pharmacy school in New York and the fifteenth-oldest in the United States.\nThe New York State Normal School, one of the oldest teachers colleges in the United States, opened in 1844; it was later known as the State Teachers College. It eventually evolved into the University at Albany, also known as SUNY Albany (public), which inherited the Normal School's original downtown campus on Western Avenue. The center of the campus moved to its current Uptown Campus in the west end of the city in 1970. SUNY Albany is a unit of the State University of New York and one of only four university centers in the system. Other colleges and universities in Albany include Empire State College, The College of Saint Rose, Excelsior College, Maria College, Mildred Elley, and Sage College of Albany. Nearby Hudson Valley Community College (HVCC) fills the community college niche in the Albany-Troy area. The effect of the campuses on the city's population is substantial: Combining the student bodies of all the aforementioned campuses (except HVCC) results in 63,149 students, or almost 70 percent of the 2008 estimate of Albany's permanent population.\nMedia.\nThe \"Times Union\" is Albany's primary daily newspaper and the only one based close to the city; its headquarters moved from within city limits to suburban Colonie in the 1960s after a dispute with Mayor Corning over land needed for expansion. Its circulation totals about 73,000 on weekdays and 143,000 on Sundays. Serving Albany to a lesser degree are \"The Daily Gazette\", based in Schenectady, and \"The Record\", of Troy. \"Metroland\" is the alternative newsweekly in the area, publishing each Thursday, while \"The Business Review\" is a business weekly published each Friday. The \"Legislative Gazette\", another weekly newspaper, focuses exclusively on issues related to the Legislature and the state government.\nAs of 2010, the Albany-Schenectady-Troy media market is the 63rd-largest in the country in terms of radio and the 57th-largest in terms of television audiences. It is a broadcast market with historical significance. The pioneering influence of General Electric in Schenectady directly contributed to the area emerging as the birthplace of station-based television with WRGB; the station was also the first affiliate of NBC. In 1947, the region was home to the first independently owned and operated commercial FM radio station in the United States: W47A. WGY was the second commercial radio station in New York and the twelfth in the nation. The Capital District is home to ABC affiliate WTEN 10, CBS affiliate WRGB 6 (also operating CW affiliate WCWN 45), Fox affiliate WXXA 23, NBC affiliate WNYT 13 (also operating MyNetworkTV affiliate WNYA 51), and PBS member station WMHT 17. Charter Communications hosts Spectrum News Capital Region, the area's only local 24-hour news channel. The area has numerous radio stations.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nThe New York State Thruway is the most prominent highway serving Albany. From Albany westward, it is part of Interstate 90, connecting Albany with major cities such as Syracuse, Rochester and Buffalo. To the south, it becomes part of Interstate 87 and leads to New York City. A short un-tolled section of Interstate 90 extends around the northern and eastern portions of Albany before linking back up with the Berkshire extension of the Thruway, which leads to the Massachusetts Turnpike and ultimately to Boston. North of Albany, Interstate 87 follows the Northway to Canada at Champlain; Autoroute 15 continues into Quebec, linking Albany to Montreal. Interstate 787 links downtown Albany to the southbound I-87/Thruway to the south, while to the north, it links with the free portion of Interstate 90 before continuing to Troy, Watervliet, Colonie, and Menands. By way of Route 7, I-787 connects to the Northway.\nTrains.\nSince the closure of Union Station on Broadway, area passenger-rail service is provided by Amtrak at the Albany-Rensselaer station across the river in Rensselaer. In 2009, the station saw more than 720,000 passengers, making it Amtrak's second-busiest in New York, behind Manhattan's Penn Station. Amtrak provides service south to New York City; north to Montreal, and Burlington (Vermont); west to Niagara Falls, Toronto and Chicago; and east to Boston.\nAirport.\nAlbany's major airport is Albany International Airport in Colonie. Major airline service to Albany includes service by: American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Southwest Airlines, JetBlue Airlines, and United Airlines; Million Air is the local fixed-base operator. In 2010, Albany had the highest average airfare in New York, though the per-mile cost on its busiest routes was second-lowest in the state.\nBus.\nThe Capital District Transportation Authority (CDTA) provides bus service throughout Albany and the surrounding area, including Schenectady, Troy, and Saratoga Springs. The city was once served by an urban streetcar service maintained by the United Traction Company. As in many American cities, after the advent of the automobile, light rail services declined in Albany and were replaced by bus and taxi services. Greyhound Lines, Trailways, Peter Pan, Short Line, Vermont Translines, and Yankee Trails buses all serve a downtown terminal. Brown Coach provides commuter service. Low-cost curbside bus service from the SUNY Albany campus and the Rensselaer station is also provided by Megabus, with direct service to New York City.\nBoat.\nAlbany, long an important Hudson River port, today serves domestic and international ships and barges through the Port of Albany-Rensselaer, on both sides of the river. The port has the largest mobile harbor crane in the state of New York. The New York State Barge Canal, the ultimate successor of the Erie Canal, is in use today, largely by tourist and private boats.\nSister cities.\nThe city of Nijmegen, Netherlands connected with Albany following World War II. With the help of the Catholic university in Albany, the Catholic University of Nijmegen (Radboud University Nijmegen) rebuilt its partly destroyed library, with over 50,000 books being donated to the Dutch university. To show its gratitude for post-war assistance, the city sent Albany 50,000 tulip bulbs in 1948; this act led to the establishment of the annual Tulip Festival. Most of the other connections were made in the 1980s during Mayor Whalen's term in office as part of his cultural expansion program.\nAlbany's sister cities are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52107", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52107", "title": "Cree", "text": "Indigenous people of North America\nThe Cree are a North American Indigenous people, numbering more than 350,000 in Canada, where they form one of the country's largest First Nations macro-communities. There are numerous Cree peoples and several nations closely related to the Cree, these being the Plains Cree, Woodland Cree, Rocky Cree, Swampy Cree, Moose Cree, and East Cree with the Atikamekw, Innu, and Naskapi being closely related. Also closely related to the Cree are the Oji-Cree and M\u00e9tis, both nations of mixed heritage, the former with Ojibweg (Chippewa) and the latter with European fur traders. Cree homelands account for a majority of eastern and central Canada, from Eeyou Istchee in the east in what is now Quebec to northern Ontario, much of the Canadian Prairies, and up into British Columbia and the Northwest Territories. Although a majority of Cree live in Canada, there are small communities in the United States, living mostly in Montana where they share Rocky Boy's Indian Reservation with the Ojibwe people.\nThe Cree are in a variety of treaty relations with the Canadian state. Most notable are the Numbered Treaties which cover a majority of Cree homelands. In Quebec, the East Cree (along with the Inuit of Nunavik) entered into one of the first modern treaties: the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement which formalized relations between the province and both Eeyou Istchee and the Nunavik region of Inuit Nunangat. A documented westward migration, over time, has been strongly associated with their roles as traders and hunters in the North American fur trade.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Cree\" comes into English from the French , short for (alternatively: , , or ), which came from the Ojibwemowin word . The Ojibweg used the term for numerous communities which they encountered north and west of Lake Superior, predominately in Manitoba. The French used these terms to refer to various groups of peoples in Canada, some of which are now better distinguished as Severn Anishinaabe (Oji-Cree), who speak a related but distinct Algonquian language (Ojibwemowin).\nIn general, Cree and peoples related to the Cree (like the Atikamekw and Innu) use one of two terms to refer to themselves. The first comes from the Proto-Algonquian roots \"*nehi\" and \"*rowi\" meaning \"balance\" and \"action, movement\" which, when combined, becomes the Cree word for \"Indigenous person\". Nations like the Plains Cree (sing. \"n\u00eahiyaw\" \u14c0\u1426\u1403\u152d\u1424; plural: \"n\u00eahiyawak\" \u14c0\u1426\u1403\u152d\u1418\u1420), Woodland Cree (\"N\u012bhithaw\" \u14c3\u1426\u1403\u15ac\u1424; pl.: \"N\u012bhithawak\" \u14c3\u1426\u1403\u15ac\u1418\u1420), and Western Swampy Cree (\"n\u00eahinaw\" \u14c0\u1426\u1403\u14c7\u1424; pl.: \"n\u00eahinawak\" \u14c0\u1426\u1403\u14c7\u1418\u1420) use such a formulation. The Atikamekw also use this form (\"Nehirowisiw\"; pl.: \"Nehirowisiwok\"), which adds the Proto-Algonquian root \"*siw\" (\"human being\"), rendering \"one who is in balance with nature\" as its translation.\nThe other form comes from the Proto-Algonquian root \"*elenyiwa\" meaning \"human\", used by the rest of the Cree and related nations:\nSub-groups and geography.\nThe Cree are generally divided into eight groups based on dialect and region. These divisions do not necessarily represent ethnic subdivisions within the larger ethnic group:\nDue to the many dialects of the Cree language, the people have no modern collective autonym. The Plains Cree and Attikamekw refer to themselves using modern forms of the historical (\"Indigenous person\"), namely and , respectively. The Moose Cree, East Cree, Naskapi, and Innu all refer to themselves using modern dialectal forms of the historical , meaning 'man.' Moose Cree use the form , coastal East Cree and Naskapi use (variously spelled , , and ), inland East Cree use (variously spelled and ), and Montagnais use and , depending on dialect. The Cree use \"Cree\", \"cri\", \"Naskapi, or \"montagnais\" to refer to their people only when speaking French or English.\nPolitical aboriginal organization.\nHistorical.\nAs hunter-gatherers, the basic units of organization for Cree peoples were the \"lodge\", a group of perhaps eight to a dozen people, usually the families of two separate, but related, married couples living together in the same wigwam (domed tent) or tipi (conical tent), and the band, a group of lodges who moved and hunted together. In the case of disagreement, lodges could leave bands, and bands could be formed and dissolved with relative ease. However, as there is safety in numbers, all families would want to be part of some band, and banishment or exile was considered a very serious punishment. Bands would usually have strong ties to their neighbours through intermarriage and would assemble together at different parts of the year to hunt and socialize together. Other than these regional gatherings, there was no higher-level formal structure, and decisions of war and peace were made by consensus, with allied bands meeting together in-council. People could be identified by their clan, which is a group of people claiming descent from the same common ancestor; each clan would have a representative and a vote in all important councils held by the band (compare: Anishinaabe clan system).\nEach band remained independent of each other. However, Cree-speaking bands tended to work together and with their neighbours against outside enemies. Those Cree who moved onto the Great Plains and adopted bison hunting, called the Plains Cree, were allied with the Assiniboine, the Metis Nation, and the Saulteaux in what was known as the \"Iron Confederacy\", which was a major force in the North American fur trade from the 1730s to the 1870s. The Cree and the Assiniboine were important intermediaries in the First Nations trading networks on the northern plains.\nWhen a band went to war, they would nominate a temporary military commander, called a , loosely translated as \"war chief\". This office was different from that of the \"peace chief\", a leader who had a role more like that of diplomat. Big Bear was the leader of his band in the run-up to the 1885 North-West Rebellion, but once the fighting started Wandering Spirit became war leader.\nContemporary.\nThere have been several attempts to create a national political organization that would represent all Cree peoples, at least as far back as a 1994 gathering at the reserve of the Opaskwayak Cree Nation.\nLanguage.\nThe Cree language (also known in the most broad classification as Cree-Montagnais, Cree-Montagnais-Naskapi, to show the groups included within it) is the name for a group of closely related Algonquian languages, the mother tongue (i.e. language first learned and still understood) of approximately 96,000 people, and the language most often spoken at home of about 65,000 people across Canada, from the Northwest Territories to Labrador. It is the most widely spoken Indigenous language in Canada. The only region where Cree has official status is in the Northwest Territories, together with eight other aboriginal languages, French and English.\nThe two major groups, nehiyaw and Innu, speak a mutually intelligible Cree dialect continuum, which can be divided by many criteria. In a dialect continuum, \"It is not so much a language, as a chain of dialects, where speakers from one community can very easily understand their neighbours, but a Plains Cree speaker from Alberta would find a Quebec Cree speaker difficult to speak to without practice.\"\nOne major division between the groups is that the Eastern group palatalizes the sound to either (c) or to (\u010d) when it precedes front vowels. There is also a major difference in grammatical vocabulary (particles) between the groups. Within both groups, another set of variations has arisen around the pronunciation of the Proto-Algonquian phoneme \"*l\", which can be realized as or (th) by different groups. Yet in other dialects, the distinction between (\u0113) and (\u012b) has been lost, merging to the latter. In more western dialects, the distinction between and (\u0161) has been lost, both merging to the former. \"Cree is a not a typologically harmonic language. Cree has both prefixes and suffixes, both prepositions and postpositions, and both prenominal and postnominal modifiers (e.g. demonstratives can appear in both positions).\"\nVictor Golla, an American linguist, counts Cree dialects as eight of 55 North American languages that have more than 1,000 speakers and which are being actively acquired by children.\nIdentity and ethnicity.\nIn Canada.\nThe Cree are the largest group of First Nations in Canada, with 220,000 members and 135 registered bands. Together, their reserve lands are the largest of any First Nations group in the country. The largest Cree band and the second largest First Nations band in Canada after the Six Nations of the Grand River of the Iroquois is the Lac La Ronge Indian Band in northern Saskatchewan.\nGiven the traditional Cree acceptance of mixed marriages, it is acknowledged by academics that all bands are ultimately of mixed heritage and multilingualism and multiculturalism was the norm. In the west, mixed bands of Cree, Saulteaux, M\u00e9tis, and Assiniboine, all partners in the Iron Confederacy, are the norm. However, in recent years, as indigenous languages have declined across western Canada, where there were once three languages spoken on a given reserve, there may now only be one. This has led to a simplification of identity, and it has become \"fashionable\" for bands in many parts of Saskatchewan to identify as \"Plains Cree\" at the expense of a mixed Cree-Salteaux history. There is also a tendency for bands to categorize themselves as \"Plains Cree\" instead of Woods Cree or Swampy Cree. Neal McLeod argues this is partly due to the dominant culture's fascination with Plains Indian culture as well as the greater degree of written standardization and prestige Plains Cree enjoys over other Cree dialects.\nThe M\u00e9tis (from the French, \u2013 of mixed ancestry) are people of mixed ancestry, such as Cree and French, English, or Scottish heritage. According to Crown\u2013Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the M\u00e9tis were historically the children of French fur traders and Cree women, or from unions of English or Scottish traders and Cree, Northwestern Ojibwe, or northern Dene women (Anglo-M\u00e9tis). The M\u00e9tis National Council defines a M\u00e9tis as \"a person who self-identifies as M\u00e9tis, is distinct from other Aboriginal peoples, is of historic M\u00e9tis Nation Ancestry and who is accepted by the M\u00e9tis Nation\".\nIn the United States.\nIn the past, Cree lived in northern Minnesota, North Dakota, and Montana. Today, American Cree are mostly the Chippewa Cree who reside on the Rocky Boy's Indian Reservation and are a federally recognized tribe. Others are enrolled as \"Landless Cree\" on the Fort Peck Indian Reservation and as \"Landless Cree\" and \"Rocky Boy Cree\" on the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation, all in Montana. The Chippewa Cree share the reservation with the Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians, who form the Chippewa (Ojibwe) part of the Chippewa Cree tribe. On the other reservations, the Cree minority share the reservation with the Assiniboine, Gros Ventre, and Sioux tribes. Historically, the southern limits of the Cree territory in Montana were the Missouri River and the Milk River.\nFirst contact.\nIn Manitoba, the Cree were first contacted by Europeans in 1682, at the mouth of the Nelson and Hayes rivers by a Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) party travelling about inland. In the south, in 1732; Pierre Gaultier de Varennes, sieur de La V\u00e9rendrye, in what is now northwestern Ontario, met with an assembled group of 200 Cree warriors near present-day Fort Frances, as well as with the Monsoni, (Moose Cree, a branch of the Ojibwe). Both groups had donned war paint in preparation to an attack on the Dakota and another group of Ojibwe.\nAfter acquiring firearms from the HBC, the Cree moved as traders into the plains, acting as middlemen with the HBC.\nCommunities.\nNaskapi.\nThe Naskapi are the Innu First Nations inhabiting a region of northeastern Quebec and Labrador, Canada. The Naskapi are traditionally nomadic peoples, in contrast with the territorial Montagnais, the other segment of Innu. The Naskapi language and culture is quite different from the Montagnais, in which the dialect changes from y to n as in \"Iiyuu\" versus \"Innu\". is the Innu dialect spoken by the Naskapi. Today, the Naskapi are settled into two communities: Kawawachikamach Quebec and Natuashish, Newfoundland and Labrador.\nThe Naskapi Nation of Kawawachikamach is located in the Naskapi village of Kawawachikamach, northeast of Schefferville, Quebec. The village is in the reserve of the same name.\nThe Mushuau Innu First Nation, located in the community of Natuashish, Newfoundland and Labrador, is located in the Natuashish 2 reserve on the coast of Labrador.\nInnu.\nEastern Innu.\nInnus of Ekuanitshit live on their reserve of Mingan, Quebec, at the mouth of the Mingan River of the St. Lawrence River in the (north shore) region.\nInnu Takuaikan Uashat Mak Mani-Utenam based in Sept-\u00celes, Quebec, in the region on the St. Lawrence River. They own two reserves: Maliotenam 27A, east of Sept-\u00celes, and Uashat 27, within Sept-\u00celes.\nInnu Nation of Matimekush-Lac John is based in Schefferville, Quebec. One reserve, Matimekosh, is an enclave of Schefferville. The other, Lac-John, is outside the town.\nPremi\u00e8re Nation des Innus de Nutashkuan is based on their reserve of Nutashkuan or Natashquan. The reserve is located on the north shore of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence at the mouth of the Natashquan River.\nMontagnais de Pakua Shipi located in the community of Pakuashipi, Quebec, on the western shore of the mouth of the Saint-Augustin River on the north shore of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence in the region. The community is adjacent to the settlement of Saint-Augustin.\nMontagnais de Unamen Shipu are located at La Romaine, Quebec at the mouth of the Olomane River on the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. They have one reserve; Romaine 2.\nSheshatshiu Innu First Nation located in the community of Sheshatshiu in Labrador and is located approximately north of Happy Valley-Goose Bay. Sheshatshiu is located adjacent to the Inuit community of North West River. The Sheshatshiu Nation has one reserve, Sheshatshiu 3.\nWestern Innu.\nPekuakamiulnuatsh First Nation is located on the reserve of Mashteuiatsh in the Saguenay\u2013Lac-Saint-Jean region, north of Roberval, Quebec, on the western shore of Lac Saint-Jean.\nPessamit Innu Band based in Pessamit (Betsiamites), Quebec, is located about southwest of Baie-Comeau along the north shore of the Saint Lawrence River at the mouth of the Betsiamites River. It is across the river directly north of Rimouski, Quebec. Pessamit is northeast of Quebec City.\nInnue Essipit are based in their reserve of Essipit, adjacent to the village of Les Escoumins. The community is on the north shore of the Saint Lawrence River at the mouth of the Escoumins River in the region, northeast of Tadoussac and northeast of Qu\u00e9bec.\nAtikamekw ().\nConseil de la Nation Atikamekw, officially named Atikamekw Sipi \u2013 Conseil de la Nation Atikamekw, is a tribal council in Quebec. It is composed of three Atikamekw First Nations. The council is based in La Tuque, Quebec. The Atikamekw are inhabitants of the area called Nitaskinan (\"Our Land\" in the Atikamekw language), in the upper Saint-Maurice River valley.\nThe First Nations:\nJames Bay Cree.\nEeyou Istchee is a territory equivalent to a regional county municipality (TE) of Nord-du-Qu\u00e9bec represented by the Grand Council of the Crees. On 24 July 2012, the Quebec government signed an accord with the Cree Nation that resulted in the abolition of the neighbouring municipality of Baie-James and the creation of the new Eeyou Istchee James Bay Regional Government, providing for the residents of surrounding Jam\u00e9sie TE and Eeyou Istchee to jointly govern the territory formerly governed by the municipality of Baie-James. Eeyou Istchee is a territory of eight enclaves within Jam\u00e9sie plus one enclave (Whapmagoostui) within Kativik TE. Each enclave is a combination of a Cree reserved land (TC) and a Cree village municipality (VC), both with the same name.\nMoose Cree.\nMoose Cree ( or ), also known as Moosonee, are located in Northeastern Ontario.\nConstance Lake First Nation is the only Cree member of Matawa First Nations. They are located on their reserves, Constance Lake 92 and English River 66, in the Cochrane District, Ontario.\nMushkegowuk Council, based in Moose Factory, represents chiefs from seven First Nations across Ontario. Moose Cree members are Chapleau Cree First Nation, Kashechewan First Nation, Missanabie Cree First Nation, Moose Cree First Nation, and Taykwa Tagamou Nation. The Chapleau Cree First Nation and their two reserves, Chapleau Cree Fox Lake and Chapleau 75, are located outside of Chapleau, Ontario in the Sudbury District. The Kashechewan First Nation community is located on the northern shore of the Albany River on James Bay. The Hudson's Bay Company established a post, Fort Albany, at this location between 1675 and 1679. Kashechewan First Nation is one of two communities that were established from Old Fort Albany, the other being Fort Albany First Nation. The two nations share the Fort Albany 67 reserve. The Missanabie Cree First Nation signed Treaty 9 in 1906 but did not receive any reserved lands until 2018. The Missanabie reserve is in the Missanabie, Ontario area. The Moose Cree First Nation is based in Moose Factory in the Cochrane District. Moose Factory was founded in 1672\u20131673 by Charles Bayly, the first overseas governor of the Hudson's Bay Company, and was the company's second post. It was the first English settlement in what is now Ontario. The nation has two reserves: Factory Island 1 on Moose Factory Island, an island in the Moose River, about from its mouth at James Bay; and Moose Factory 68, a tract of land about upstream on the Moose River. The Taykwa Tagamou Nation has two reserves, New Post 69, and their main reserve, New Post 69A outside Cochrane, Ontario along the Abitibi River.\nWabun Tribal Council is a regional chief's council based in Timmins representing Ojibway and Cree First Nations in northern Ontario. Moose Cree members are Brunswick House First Nation and Matachewan First Nation. Brunswick House's reserves are Mountbatten 76A and Duck Lake 76B located in the Sudbury District near Chapleau, Ontario. The Matachewan First Nation is on the Matachewan 72 reserve near Matachewan township in the Timiskaming District.\nSwampy Cree.\nLocated in Ontario.\nFort Severn First Nation and their reserve, Fort Severn 89, located on the mouth of the Severn River on Hudson Bay, is the most northern community in Ontario. It is a member of Keewaytinook Okimakanak Council.\nMushkegowuk Council, based in Moose Factory, represents chiefs from seven First Nations across Ontario. Swampy Cree members are Fort Albany First Nation and Attawapiskat First Nation. Fort Albany First Nation is located at Fort Albany, Ontario, on the southern shore of the Albany River at James Bay. The reserve, Fort Albany 67, is shared with the Kashechewan First Nation. The Attawapiskat First Nation is located at mouth of the Attawapiskat River on James Bay. The community is on the Attawapiskat 91A reserve. The Attawapiskat 91 reserve is on both shores of the Ekwan River, upstream from the mouth on James Bay.\nIndependent from a tribal council is the Weenusk First Nation located in Peawanuck in the Kenora District. The community was located on their reserve of Winisk 90 on the mouth of the Winisk River on James Bay but the community was destroyed in the 1986 Winisk flood and the community had to be relocated to Peawanuck.\nLocated in Manitoba.\nKeewatin Tribal Council is a Tribal Council based in Thompson, Manitoba that represents eleven First Nations, of which five are Swampy Cree, across northern Manitoba. Fox Lake Cree Nation is based in Gillam, northeast of Thompson via Provincial Road 280 (PR 280), and has several reserves along the Nelson River. Shamattawa First Nation is located on their reserve, Shamattawa 1, on the banks of the Gods River where the Echoing River joins. The community is remote; only connected via the airport or winter and ice roads to other First Nation communities. The Tataskweyak Cree Nation is located in the community of Split Lake, Manitoba within the Split Lake 171 reserve, northeast of Thompson on PR 280, on the lake of the same name on the Nelson River system. War Lake First Nation possess several reserves but are located on the Mooseocoot reserve in the community of Ilford, Manitoba, east of York Landing. York Factory First Nation is based on the reserve of York Landing, south of Split Lake via ferry. York Factory was a settlement and Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) trading post, established in 1684, on the shore of Hudson Bay, at the mouth of the Hayes River. In 1956, the trading post was closed and the community was moved inland to the current site.\nSwampy Cree Tribal Council is, as the name suggests, a tribal council of seven Swampy Cree First Nations across northern Manitoba and is based in The Pas. The Chemawawin Cree Nation (also Rocky Cree) are based on their reserve Chemawawin 2, adjacent to Easterville, Manitoba, southeast of The Pas. Mathias Colomb First Nation (also Rocky Cree) is located in the community of Pukatawagan on the Pukatawagan 198 reserve. Misipawistik Cree Nation (also Rocky Cree) is located near Grand Rapids, Manitoba, north of Winnipeg at the mouth of the Saskatchewan River as it runs into Lake Winnipeg. Mosakahiken Cree Nation (also Rocky Cree) is located around the community of Moose Lake about southeast of The Pas on their main reserve, Moose Lake 31A. Opaskwayak Cree Nation (also Rocky Cree) has several reserves but most of the population lives on the Opaskwayak 21E reserve, immediately north of and across the Saskatchewan River from The Pas. The Sapotaweyak Cree Nation is located in the Shoal River 65A reserve adjacent to the community of Pelican Rapids, about south of The Pas. Wuskwi Sipihk First Nation has several reserves but the main reserve is Swan Lake 65C which contains the settlement of Indian Birch, about south of The Pas.\nNot affiliated with any Tribal Council: Fisher River Cree Nation, Marcel Colomb First Nation, and Norway House Cree Nation. Fisher River Cree Nation, located approximately north of Winnipeg in Koostatak on Lake Winnipeg, control the Fisher River 44 and 44A reserves. Marcel Colomb First Nation is located outside of Lynn Lake on the Black Sturgeon reserve on Hughes Lake, northwest of Thompson via Provincial Road 391. Norway House Cree Nation is located in Norway House which is located on the Playgreen Lake section of the Nelson River system on the north side of Lake Winnipeg. In 1821, Norway House became the principal inland fur trading depot for the Hudson's Bay Company. Norway House was also where Treaty 5 was signed. They control more than 80 reserves from less than to their largest, Norway House 17, at over . The nation is one of the most populous in Canada with 8,599 people as of November 2021[ [update]].\nLocated in Saskatchewan.\nPrince Albert Grand Council is based in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan and is owned by twelve First Nations of which three are Swampy Cree. Cumberland House Cree Nation is based in Cumberland House, Saskatchewan on the Cumberland House Cree Nation 20 reserve, southwest of Flin Flon, Manitoba. Cumberland House, founded in 1774 by Samuel Hearne, was the site of the HBC's first inland fur-trading post. The Red Earth First Nation is located in the community of Red Earth, on the banks of the Carrot River, on the Carrot River 29A reserve. Close by is the Red Earth 29 reserve, about east of Nipawin. Shoal Lake Cree Nation is located in Pakwaw Lake, on the Shoal Lake 28A reserve, east of Nipawin.\nWoodland Cree.\nRocky Cree ().\nSource:\nThe Keewatin Tribal Council, described under Swampy Cree, also represents Rocky Cree First Nations in Manitoba. The Barren Lands First Nation is located on the north shore of Reindeer Lake close to the Saskatchewan border. It has one reserve, Brochet 197, northwest of Thompson, adjoining the village of Brochet. The Bunibonibee Cree Nation is located along the eastern shoreline of Oxford Lake at the headwaters of the Hayes River. The Nation controls several reserves with the main reserve being Oxford House 24 adjacent to the community of Oxford House, Manitoba, southeast of Thompson. God's Lake First Nation is located in the Gods Lake Narrows area on the shore of Gods Lake. The main reserve is God's Lake 23, southeast of Thompson. The Manto Sipi Cree Nation also live on God's Lake in the community of God's River on the God's River 86A reserve, about northeast of Gods Lake Narrows. All of the Rocky Cree communities of Keewatin Tribal Council are remote; only connected via air and ice road during winter months.\nFive of the Swampy Cree Tribal Council First Nations contain Rocky Cree populations: Chemawawin Cree Nation, Mathias Colomb First Nation, Misipawistik Cree Nation, Mosakahiken Cree Nation, Opaskwayak Cree Nation.\nIn Saskatchewan, the Prince Albert Grand Council, described under Swampy Cree, also has Rocky Cree members. The Lac La Ronge Indian Band is one of the most populous First Nations in Canada with a registered population of 11,604 as of November 2021[ [update]]. The Nation is based in La Ronge on the Lac la Ronge 156 reserve but has other communities on other reserves. La Ronge is north of Prince Albert at the north end of Saskatchewan Highway 2. The Montreal Lake Cree Nation, on their reserves of Montreal Lake 106, is on the southern shore of Montreal Lake, north of Prince Albert. Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation is also a populous First Nation with 11,563 people as of November 2021[ [update]]. The Nation has eight communities and controls a large number of reserves; the administrative center is Pelican Narrows, Saskatchewan, northeast of Flin Flon, Manitoba. The Sturgeon Lake First Nation is located on the Sturgeon Lake 101 reserve on the eastern shore of Sturgeon Lake about northwest of Prince Albert.\nNot affiliated with any Tribal Council are Cross Lake First Nation, Nisichawayasihk Cree Nation, and O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation. The Cross Lake First Nation is a populous Nation with a registered population of 9,138 people as of November 2021[ [update]]. The Nation is in Cross Lake, Manitoba on the Cross Lake 19 reserve, north of Lake Winnipeg. The Nisichawayasihk Cree Nation is based in Nelson House, Manitoba on the Nelson House 170 reserve located south of Thompson. The O-Pipon-Na-Piwin Cree Nation is located in the settlement of South Indian Lake, northwest of Thompson. Marcel Colomb First Nation, listed under Swampy Cree, also has a Rocky Cree population.\nWoods Cree ().\nThe Canoe Lake Cree First Nation is based in Canoe Narrows, Saskatchewan on the Canoe Lake 165 reserve. The nation is a member of the Meadow Lake Tribal Council.\nThe Bigstone Cree Nation is based in Wabasca, Alberta, about northeast of Slave Lake, on the Wabasca 166A reserve. The Nation is not associated with a Tribal Council. The Bigstone Cree Nation was divided into two bands in 2010, with one group continuing under the former name, and the other becoming the Peerless Trout First Nation.\nThe Fort McMurray First Nation is located on the reserves Gregoire Lake 176 and 176A located about southeast of Fort McMurray near Anzac, Alberta on Gregoire Lake. They are the only Cree member of the Athabasca Tribal Council.\nKee Tas Kee Now Tribal Council is based in Atikameg, Alberta with five members: The Loon River First Nation is headquartered in Red Earth Creek with reserves to the immediate west near Loon Lake. The Lubicon Lake Band is based in the settlement of Little Buffalo, approximately east of Peace River. The Peerless Trout First Nation is located in Peerless Lake on the Peerless Trout 238 reserve, about west of Red Earth Creek. Whitefish Lake First Nation is based in Atikameg, on the western shore of Utikuma Lake on the Utikoomak Lake 155 reserve, north of High Prairie. The Woodland Cree First Nation is located in the hamlet of Cadotte Lake on the Woodland Cree 226 reserve, northeast of Peace River.\nLesser Slave Lake Indian Regional Council, based in the town of Slave Lake, Alberta is, as the name suggests, a Tribal Council of First Nations surrounding Lesser Slave Lake. Member Nations include: The Driftpile First Nation, based in Driftpile, on the Drift Pile River 150 reserve, west of Slave Lake.\nThe Kapawe'no First Nation is headquartered at Grouard, which is near High Prairie. They have six reserves, predominately located west of Lesser Slave Lake. The Sawridge First Nation is based in Slave Lake and the two reserves, Sawridge 150G and 150H, are adjacent to the town. The Sucker Creek First Nation is based in Enilda, east of High Prairie, on the Sucker Creek 150A reserve. Finally, the Swan River First Nation, near Kinuso, west of Slave Lake, controls the Swan River 150E and Assineau River 150F reserves.\nThe Little Red River Cree Nation is based in the settlement of John D'Or Prairie, Alberta, east of Fort Vermilion, on the John D'Or Prairie 215 reserve. They are a member of the North Peace Tribal Council based in High Level.\nThe Mikisew Cree First Nation is based in the community of Fort Chipewyan on the western tip of Lake Athabasca, approximately north of Fort McMurray. They are not a member of a tribal council. Fort Chipewyan, one of the oldest European settlements in Alberta, was established in 1788 by the North West Company as a fur trading post.\nWestern Cree Tribal Council is based in Valleyview, Alberta. Cree member Nations are: Duncan's First Nation is based in Brownvale, adjacent to the reserve Duncan's 151A, southwest of Peace River. The Sturgeon Lake Cree Nation is on the Sturgeon Lake 154 reserve, west of Valleyview.\nPlains Cree ().\nDownstream people ().\nBattlefords Agency Tribal Chiefs is a tribal council located in North Battleford. Members are: Ahtahkakoop Cree Nation, Moosomin First Nation, Mosquito, Grizzly Bear's Head, Lean Man First Nations, Red Pheasant Cree Nation, Saulteaux First Nation, and Sweetgrass First Nation.\nFile Hills Qu'Appelle Tribal Council is a tribal council based in Fort Qu'Appelle. Cree member Nations are: Little Black Bear First Nation, Muscowpetung Saulteaux Nation, Nekaneet Cree Nation, Okanese First Nation, Pasqua First Nation, Peepeekisis Cree Nation, Piapot First Nation, and Star Blanket Cree Nation\nMeadow Lake Tribal Council is a tribal council based in Meadow Lake, Saskatchewan with nine member First Nations. The members with Plains Cree populations are Flying Dust First Nation, Makwa Sahgaiehcan First Nation, Ministikwan Lake Cree Nation, and Waterhen Lake First Nation\nSaskatoon Tribal Council is, as the name suggests, a tribal council that is based in Saskatoon. Cree member nations are: Mistawasis N\u00eahiyawak, Muskeg Lake Cree Nation, Muskoday First Nation, and One Arrow First Nation.\nTouchwood Agency Tribal Council, based in Punnichy, is a tribal council of four First Nations, collectively known as the Touchwood Hills Cree (). The Cree Nations are: Day Star First Nation, George Gordon First Nation, Kawacatoose First Nation, and Muskowekwan First Nation.\nYorkton Tribal Council is a tribal council based in Yorkton. Cree members are: Kahkewistahaw First Nation and Ocean Man First Nation.\nWithout affiliation with any tribal council: Beardy's and Okemasis' Cree Nation, Cowessess First Nation, Ochapowace Nation, Onion Lake Cree Nation, Pheasant Rump Nakota First Nation, White Bear First Nations.\nUpstream people ().\nAgency Chiefs Tribal Council is a tribal council located in Spiritwood representing three First Nations: Pelican Lake First Nation, Big River First Nation, and Witchekan Lake First Nation.\nBattlefords Tribal Council is based in North Battleford, The three member nations are Lucky Man Cree Nation, Little Pine First Nation, and Poundmaker Cree Nation.\nInterlake Reserves Tribal Council is a tribal council based in Fairford, Manitoba. The council has six nations as members but the only Cree member is Peguis First Nation.\nWithout affiliation with any tribal council: Big Island Lake Cree Nation, Thunderchild First Nation.\nTribal Chiefs Ventures is a tribal council based in Edmonton with the following Cree members: Beaver Lake Cree Nation, Heart Lake First Nation, Frog Lake First Nation, and Kehewin Cree Nation.\nBeaver Hills Cree ().\nMaskwacis Cree Tribal Council is based in the unincorporated community of Maskwacis, (formerly Hobbema) Alberta, located south of Edmonton. The members are Ermineskin Cree Nation, Louis Bull Tribe, Montana First Nation, and Samson Cree Nation. All four members have individual reserves that surround the community of Maskwacis: Ermineskin 138, Louis Bull 138B, Montana 139, Samson 137, and Samson 137A. And all four share the reserve of Pigeon Lake 138A, about to the northwest.\nYellowhead Tribal Council is based in Morinville. Member nations are: Alexander First Nation, Alexis Nakota Sioux First Nation, O'Chiese First Nation, and Sunchild First Nation. The Alexander First Nation is located on the reserve of Alexander 134, west of Morinville and northwest of Edmonton. Alexis Nakota Sioux First Nation is based on the Alexis 133 reserve, outside Glenevis, northwest of Edmonton. The O'Chiese First Nation and Sunchild First Nation control the reserves O'Chiese 203 and Sunchild 202 which are adjacent to each other northwest of Rocky Mountain House.\nNot affiliated with any tribal council: Enoch Cree Nation, Paul Band, and Saddle Lake Cree Nation Enoch Cree Nation is located on their main reserve, Enoch Cree Nation 135, adjacent to the western boundary of the city of Edmonton. The Paul Band is based on the Wabamun 133A reserve, west of Edmonton. Saddle Lake Cree Nation is one of the most populous Nations in Canada with 11,235 people as of November 2021[ [update]]. The Nation is located in Saddle Lake, Alberta on the Saddle Lake 125 reserve, west of St. Paul, Alberta.\nUnited States.\nFort Peck Indian Reservation located near Fort Peck, Montana\nChippewa Cree on the Rocky Boy's Indian Reservation in northern Montana\nFort Belknap Indian Reservation located at Fort Belknap Agency, Montana\nOther First Nations.\nThe Papaschase, removed from land that now makes up southeast Edmonton, were a party to Treaty 6 but are not recognized by the Canadian government.\nEthnobotany.\nThe Cree use the pitch of \"Abies balsamea\" (balsam fir) for menstrual irregularity, and take an infusion of the bark and sometimes the wood for coughs. They use the pitch and grease used as an ointment for scabies and boils. They apply a poultice of pitch applied to cuts. They also use a decoction of pitch and sturgeon oil used for tuberculosis, and take an infusion of bark for tuberculosis. They also use the boughs to make brush shelters and use the wood to make paddles.\nHudson Bay Cree subgroup.\nThe Hudson Bay Cree use a decoction of the leaves of \"Kalmia angustifolia\" (dwarf laurel) for diarrhea, but they consider the plant to be poisonous.\nWoods Cree subgroup.\nThe Woods Cree make use of \"Ribes glandulosum\" (skunk currant) using a decoction of the stem, either by itself or mixed with wild red raspberry, to prevent clotting after birth, eat the berries as food, and use the stem to make a bitter tea. They make use of \"Vaccinium myrtilloides\" (Canadian blueberry), using a decoction of leafy stems used to bring menstruation and prevent pregnancy, to make a person sweat, to slow excessive menstrual bleeding, to bring blood after childbirth, and to prevent miscarriage. They also use the berries to dye porcupine quills, eat the berries raw, make them into jam and eat it with fish and bannock, and boil or pound the sun-dried berries into pemmican. They use the berries of the \"minus\" subspecies of \"Vaccinium myrtilloides\" to colour porcupine quills, and put the firm, ripe berries on a string to wear as a necklace. They also incorporate the berries of the \"minus\" subspecies of \"Vaccinium myrtilloides\" into their cuisine. They store the berries by freezing them outside during the winter, mix the berries with boiled fish eggs, livers, air bladders and fat and eat them, eat the berries raw as a snack food, and stew them with fish or meat.\nNotable Cree people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52108", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52108", "title": "General Dynamics", "text": "American defense manufacturing conglomerate\nGeneral Dynamics Corporation (GD), headquartered in Reston, Virginia, is an American industrial and technology company. It is primarily a developer and producer of advanced military equipment of a wide variety, such as nuclear submarines, main battle tanks, and armoured fighting vehicles. It is also the manufacturer of the civilian aviation Gulfstream business jets and a provider of information technology services. The company is the 3rd largest of the top 100 contractors of the U.S. federal government; it receives over 3% of total spending by the federal government of the United States on contractors.\nThe company is ranked 96th on the \"Fortune\" 100 and 242nd on the \"Forbes\" Global 2000. In 2024, 69% of revenue was from the federal government of the United States, 14% was from U.S. commercial customers, 10% was from non-U.S. government customers and 7% was from non-U.S. commercial customers.\nThe company was formed in 1952 via the merger of submarine manufacturer Electric Boat and aircraft manufacturer Canadair.\nHistory.\n1899\u20131920.\nIsaac Leopold Rice bought the Holland Torpedo Boat Company from John Philip Holland in 1899. Holland continued to work at the company as chief engineer and the company was renamed Electric Boat Company. Electric Boat was responsible for designing and building the , purchased by the United States Navy in 1900 for $150,000 (roughly $5.75M in 2025).\nElectric Boat also sold modified Holland-class and Plunger-class submarines to the British Royal Navy through the English armaments company Vickers as well as to Japan and Russia. In 1906, Electric Boat won contracts to design C-class submarines but subcontracted the construction to the Fore River Shipyard in Quincy, Massachusetts.\nWhen Holland passed away in 1914, Lawrence Spear (who replaced him as chief engineer) redesigned the Holland submarine. The redesign replaced the submarine's observation dome with a conning tower, a periscope, and first-of-its-kind torpedo tubes.\nIn 1911, Electric Boat acquired the New London Ship and Engine Company in Groton, Connecticut, to build parts for submarines, diesel engines, and commercial ships. Isaac Rice died in 1915 and was replaced by his associate Henry Carse. Carse expanded the company with the purchase of several companies, including Electro Dynamics, Elco Motor Yacht, and New London Ship &amp; Engine of Groton, Connecticut. Following the acquisitions, the company was renamed Submarine Boat Corporation. During World War I, the company received orders from the U.S. Navy to build 85 submarines, 722 submarine chasers, and 118 surface ships.\n1921\u20131940.\nIn 1924, the Peruvian government ordered two submarines built at the New London Ship &amp; Engine shipyard in Groton, Connecticut. In 1925, Carse reorganized the company, emphasized production of surface ships, and brought back the Electric Boat Company. In 1933, Electric Boat expanded its presence in Groton, Connecticut, by acquiring a second shipyard to build submarines. The was the first submarine built at the Groton Shipyard. In the early 1930s, the U.S. government placed orders for submarines and PT (patrol/torpedo) boats from Electric Boat facilities at Groton and the Elco plant in New Jersey, respectively. Lawrence Spear retired in 1937, replaced by John Jay Hopkins. Hopkins led the company's strong re-emergence as a shipbuilder in World War II.\n1941\u20131960.\nDuring World War II, Electric Boat and its Elco Yacht and Electro Dynamic subsidiaries mobilized full-capacity production. The sudden production expansion led to a labor shortage, and women filled the open jobs as welders and riveters. During World War II, Electric Boat produced 74 submarines and 398 PT boats. When the war ended in 1945, the Navy reduced its orders for new vessels, and the company reduced its workforce from 13,000 to 4,000.\nElectric Boat diversified at the end of WWII, so John Jay Hopkins acquired the Canadian government-owned Canadair for $10 million in 1946. The factory alone was worth more than $22 million, according to the Canadian government's calculations, excluding the value of the remaining contracts for planes or spare parts. However, Canadair's production line and inventory systems were in disorder when Electric Boat purchased the company. Hopkins hired Canadian-born mass-production specialist H. Oliver West to take over the president's role and return Canadair to profitability. Shortly after the takeover, Canadair began delivering its new Canadair North Star (a version of the Douglas DC-4) and was able to deliver aircraft to Trans-Canada Airlines, Canadian Pacific Airlines, and British Overseas, and Airways Corporation (BOAC) well in advance of their contracted delivery times.\nDefense spending increased with the onset of the Cold War, and Canadair went on to win many Canadian military contracts for the Royal Canadian Air Force and became a major aerospace company. These included Canadair CT-133 Silver Star trainer, the Canadair Argus long-range maritime reconnaissance and transport aircraft, and the Canadair F-86 Sabre. Between 1950 and 1958, 1,815 Sabres were built. Canadair also produced 200 CF-104 Starfighter supersonic fighter aircraft, a license-built version of the Lockheed F-104.\nIn 1951, the company was awarded the contract to build the world's first nuclear-powered submarine, the USS Nautilus (SSN571). The submarine was launched in 1954.\nAircraft production became increasingly important at Canadair, and Hopkins argued that the name \"Electric Boat\" was no longer appropriate. In 1952, Hopkins established the General Dynamics Corporation as a parent company holding Electric Boat and Canadair. \nIn 1953, General Dynamics (GD) purchased Convair from the Atlas Group. The sale was approved by government oversight with the provision that GD would continue to operate out of Air Force Plant 4 in Fort Worth, Texas. This factory had been set up in order to spread out strategic aircraft production, and it was rented to Convair during the war to produce B-24 Liberator bombers. Convair worked as an independent division inside General Dynamics and, over the next decade, developed the F-106 Delta Dart interceptor, the B-58 Hustler bomber, and the Convair 880 and 990 airliners. Convair also developed the Atlas missile, the U.S.'s first operational intercontinental ballistic missile. Convair led the development of the American nuclear aircraft program, which the Pentagon enthusiastically supported. CEO Hopkins was a strong advocate of nuclear power and its numerous applications, but the nuclear airplane, or 'N-bomber,' was later found to be impractical, and the project was abandoned. \nIn the late 1950s, General Dynamics hired Erik Nitsche as a graphic designer to develop corporate reports and advertising material designs, including the \"Atoms for Peace\" series of posters for the 1955 International Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva, Switzerland. These designs have become iconic examples of the mid-century modernist graphic design style.\nIn 1957, Hopkins fell seriously ill and was replaced by Frank Pace later that year. John Naish succeeded Joseph McNarney as president of Convair. In the same year, General Dynamics purchased Liquid Carbonic Corporation in September 1957 and controlled it as a wholly owned subsidiary. \nIn 1959, the U.S. Navy commissioned Electric Boat to design and build the first fleet ballistic-missile submarine, USS George Washington (SSBN598). The George Washington-class ballistic missile submarines were derived from the Skipjack-class submarine design, with a 130-foot missile compartment inserted between the control and reactor sections. The USS George Washington (SSBN-598) was initially laid down as the Skipjack-class USS Scorpion (SSN-589), but was repurposed during construction to accommodate the Polaris missile system. Materials from other planned attack submarines, including USS Sculpin (SSN-590), were also reallocated to the program.\nThe same year, Chicago industrialist Henry Crown became the company's largest shareholder and merged his Material Service Corporation with General Dynamics in 1959. General Dynamics subsequently reorganized into Eastern Group in New York City and Western Group in San Diego, California, with the latter taking over all of the aerospace activities and dropping the Convair brand name from its aircraft in the process. The board decided to build all future planes in Fort Worth, Texas, ending plane production at Convair's original plant in San Diego, California, but continuing with space and missile development there.\n1961\u20131980.\nIn 1961, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara initiated the Tactical Fighter Experimental (TFX) program to develop a single aircraft design for the Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps. General Dynamics and Boeing were selected to submit updated designs. McNamara selected General Dynamics' proposal due to the greater commonality between its versions. The Boeing aircraft shared less than half of the major structural components. The F-111's design pioneered variable-sweep wings, after-burning turbofan engines, and automated terrain-following radar for low-level, high-speed flight. General Dynamics continued to develop its version of the F-111 at the former Convair facility in Fort Worth, Texas. The company built 563 F-111s. \nIn 1962, Roger Lewis was appointed Chairman and CEO of General Dynamics. In 1963, General Dynamics purchased the Quincy Shipbuilding Works from Bethlehem Steel. In 1965, General Dynamics reorganized into 12 operating divisions based on product lines. In 1967, Electric Boat launched the USS Sturgeon (SSN637), the lead ship in the Sturgeon class of attack submarines. In 1970, the board replaced Roger Lewis with former McDonnell Douglas president David S. Lewis as Chief Executive Officer. David S. Lewis relocated the company headquarters to St. Louis, Missouri, in 1971. Later that year, Electric Boat and Newport News Shipbuilding were awarded contracts to co-manufacture the Los Angeles-class submarines. In 1972, Electric Boat received contracts for the design and development of the Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine. Electric Boat also developed a new modular process to build the 560-foot submarines; the process remains the industry standard. Construction of the flagship Los Angeles-class attack submarine began the same year. In 1973, General Dynamics established the Quonset Point Facility in North Kingstown, Rhode Island, to provide off-site manufacturing support for the Groton facility. Production began the following year.\nThe U.S. Air Force initiated the Lightweight Fighter (LWF) program to develop a new fighter aircraft that met the requirements of Major John Boyd's \"energy-maneuverability\" theory. General Dynamics organized its own version of Lockheed's Skunk Works, the Advanced Concepts Laboratory, and responded with a new aircraft design incorporating advanced technologies. General Dynamics submitted a design in 1972 for a new lightweight fighter, the YF-16. The YF-16 first flew in January 1974 and proved slightly better performance than the Northrop Grumman YF-17 in head-to-head testing. General Dynamics YF-16 was selected as the first Lightweight Fighter for the U.S. Air Force. It entered production as the F-16 Fighting Falcon in January 1975 with an initial order of 650 and 1,388. The F-16 also won contracts worldwide, beating the F-17 in foreign competition. General Dynamics built an aircraft production factory in Fort Worth, Texas to fulfill the contracts, and F-16 orders eventually totaled more than 4,600, making it the company's largest aircraft program. \nIn 1975, General Dynamics Electric Boat broke ground on a land-level submarine construction facility in Groton, Connecticut.\nLand Systems and Marine Systems focus.\nIn 1976, General Dynamics sold the struggling Canadair back to the Canadian government for $38 million. By 1984, General Dynamics had four divisions: Convair in San Diego, General Dynamics-Fort Worth, General Dynamics-Pomona, and General Dynamics-Electronics. In 1985 a further reorganization created the Space Systems Division from the Convair Space division. In 1985, GD also acquired Cessna. In 1986 the Pomona division (which mainly produced the Standard Missile and the Phalanx CIWS for the Navy) was split up, creating the Valley Systems Division. Valley Systems produced the Stinger surface-to-air missile and the Rolling Airframe Missile (RAM). Both units were recombined into one entity in 1992. In 1986, the General Dynamics Quincy Shipbuilding Division was closed.\nHenry Crown, still GD's largest shareholder, died on 15 August 1990. Following this, the company started to rapidly divest its under-performing divisions under CEO William Anders. Cessna was re-sold to Textron in January 1992, the San Diego and Pomona missile production units to General Motors-Hughes Aerospace in May 1992, the Fort Worth aircraft production to Lockheed in March 1993 (a nearby electronics production facility was separately sold to Israeli-based Elbit Systems, marking that company's entry into the US market), and its Space Systems Division to Martin Marietta in 1994. The remaining Convair Aircraft Structure unit was sold to McDonnell Douglas in 1994. The remains of the Convair Division were simply closed in 1996. GD's exit from the aviation world was short-lived, and in 1999 the company acquired Gulfstream Aerospace. The Pomona operation was closed shortly after its sale to Hughes Aircraft.\nIn 1995, General Dynamics purchased the privately held Bath Iron Works shipyard in Bath, Maine, for $300 million, diversifying its shipbuilding portfolio to include U.S. Navy surface ships such as guided-missile destroyers. In 1998, the company acquired NASSCO, formerly National Steel and Shipbuilding Company, for $415 million. The San Diego shipyard produces U.S. Navy auxiliary and support ships as well as commercial ships that are eligible to be U.S.-flagged under the Jones Act.\nHaving divested itself of its aviation holdings, GD concentrated on land and sea products. GD purchased Chrysler's defense divisions in 1982, renaming them General Dynamics Land Systems. In 2003, it purchased the defense divisions of General Motors as well. It is now a major supplier of armored vehicles of all types, including the M1 Abrams, LAV 25, Stryker, and a wide variety of vehicles based on these chassis. Force Protection, Inc. was acquired by General Dynamics Land Systems in November 2011 for $350 million.\nGeneral Dynamics UK.\nIn 1997, General Dynamics acquired Computing Devices Ltd based in Hastings, England, which had developed avionics and mission systems for the Panavia Tornado, British Aerospace Harrier II and Hawker Siddeley Nimrod. In 2001, Computing Devices Canada (CDC) was awarded a contract from the UK Ministry of Defence to supply tactical communication systems for their Bowman program. The work for this was carried out at its new UK headquarters in Oakdale, Wales, and the company was renamed General Dynamics UK Limited. As of 2020[ [update]], it comprises two business units: \"General Dynamics Land Systems \u2013 UK\" and \"General Dynamics Mission Systems \u2013 UK\" and operates in eight sites across the United Kingdom. It is currently responsible for delivering the General Dynamics Ajax family of armored vehicles, the Foxhound light protected patrol vehicle and the Morpheus communications system to the UK Ministry of Defence.\n21st century.\nIn 2004, General Dynamics bid for the UK company Alvis plc, the leading British manufacturer of armored vehicles. In March the board of Alvis Vickers voted in favor of the \u00a3309m takeover. However at the last minute BAE Systems offered \u00a3355m for the company. This deal was finalized in June 2004.\nOn August 19, 2008, GD agreed to pay $4 million to settle a lawsuit brought by the US Government claiming that a GD unit fraudulently billed the government for defectively manufactured parts used in US military aircraft and submarines. The US alleged that GD defectively manufactured or failed to test parts used in US military aircraft from September 2001 to August 2003, such as for the C-141 Starlifter transport plane. The GD unit involved, based in Glen Cove, New York, closed in 2004.\nIn 2014, the government of Canada announced it had selected the General Dynamics Land Systems subsidiary in London, Ontario, to produce Light Armoured Vehicles for Saudi Arabia as part of a $10 billion deal with the Canadian Commercial Corporation. The sale has been criticized by political opponents because of the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen. In December 2018, after Prime Minister Justin Trudeau suggested Canada might scrap the deal, the company warned that doing so could lead to \"billions of dollars in liability\" and risk the loss of thousands of jobs. Trudeau has since said that while he is critical of Saudi conduct, he cannot simply scrap the deal because \"Canada as a country of the rule of law needs to respect its contracts.\" On 30 January 2019, CEO Phebe Novakovic warned investors that the matter had \"significantly impacted\" the company's cash flow because Saudi Arabia was nearly $2 billion in arrears on its payments.\nIn 2018, General Dynamics acquired information technology services giant CSRA for $9.7 billion, and merged it with GDIT.\nGeneral Dynamics has been accused by groups such as Code Pink and Green America of \"making money from human suffering by profiting off the migrant children held at U.S. detention camps\" due to its IT services contracts with the Department of Health and Human Services' Office of Refugee Resettlement, the government agency that operates shelters for unaccompanied children to include those separated from their families as part of the Trump administration family separation policy. The company says it has no role in constructing or operating detention centers, and that its contracts to provide training and technical services began in 2000 and have spanned across four presidential administrations.\nIt was announced in September 2018 that the U.S. Navy awarded contracts for 10 new Arleigh Burke-class destroyers from General Dynamics Bath Iron Works and Huntington Ingalls Industries.\nFormer U.S. Secretary of Defense General Jim Mattis re-joined the company's board of directors in August 2019. He had previously served on the board, but resigned and divested before becoming Secretary of Defense.\nIn September 2020, General Dynamics announced a strategic counter-drone partnership, providing General Dynamics' global network with access to Dedrone's complete drone detection and defeat technology.\nIn December 2020, the board of directors for General Dynamics announced a regular quarterly dividend of $1.10, payable on February 5, 2021.\nOn December 26, 2020, General Dynamics confirmed that their business division General Dynamics Land Systems was awarded a $4.6 billion contract by the U.S. Army for M1A2 SEPv3 Abrams main battle tanks.\nAccording to a report by Reuters, General Dynamics was the primary contractor for a United States military-run propaganda campaign to spread disinformation about the Sinovac Chinese COVID-19 vaccine, including using fake social media accounts to spread the disinformation that the Sinovac vaccine contained pork-derived ingredients and was therefore \"haram\" under Islamic law. The campaign primarily targeted people in the Philippines and used a social media hashtag for \"China is the virus\" in Tagalog. The campaign ran from the spring of 2020 to mid-2021. In 2024, General Dynamics IT was awarded a $493 million contract by The Pentagon. According to an unnamed source cited by Reuters, a military audit of General Dynamics's work on the project concluded that the company had engaged in sloppy tradecraft and took inadequate precautions to conceal the origins of the fake accounts created for the campaign.\nGeneral Dynamics' supply of weapons to Israel in the Gaza war has led to protests at facilities in Pittsfield, Massachusetts; Lincoln, Nebraska; Saco, Maine; New London, Connecticut; Red Lion, Pennsylvania;and Garland, Texas.\nOperations.\nThe company's Gulfstream Aerospace division (23% of 2024 revenues) produces business jets including the Gulfstream G650/G700/G800 series and offers business aircraft services under Jet Aviation. The company's marine systems division (30% of 2024 revenues) designs and builds nuclear submarines and includes Bath Iron Works, General Dynamics Electric Boat, and National Steel and Shipbuilding Company. The company's combat systems division (19% of 2024 revenues) includes General Dynamics Land Systems, General Dynamics European Land Systems (GDELS), Steyr-Daimler-Puch, and Santa B\u00e1rbara Sistemas, and produces Phalanx CIWS, Expeditionary tanks, the M1 Abrams series main battle tank, Expeditionary Fighting Vehicles, M104 Wolverine, LAV III, Stryker armoured fighting vehicles, XM2001 Crusader self-propelled howitzer, GAU-17 (Minigun), GAU-19, ASCOD AFV, Pandur II, Mowag (including Mowag Duro, Mowag Eagle, and Mowag Piranha), Leopard 2E, and Scout SV. The company's technologies division (28% of 2024 revenues) includes General Dynamics Mission Systems and provides services such as consulting, mission-support, mobile communication, computers, command-and-control and cyber (C5) mission systems, and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. It is modernizing the information technology systems of the United States Central Command and for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.\nAcquisitions timeline.\n&lt;!-- &lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCompany demographics.\nIn 2021, General Dynamics's U.S. workforce was 21% veterans, 23% female, and 27% people of color. The US Department of Labor awarded the company the 2021 HIRE Vets Gold Award. The company has 26 Employee Resource Groups serving 10 employee segments. Approximately 20% of the company's employees are represented by labor unions such as International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (IAM), The International Union, and United Auto Workers (UAW). Independent research published by American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD), U.S. Department of Labor, \"Military Times\", \"U.S. Veterans Magazine\", \"Professional Women's Magazine\", \"Forbes\", and \"Fortune\" selected General Dynamics as a top employer. General Dynamics' community contributions in 2021 were 70% in Education &amp; Social Services, 18% in Arts &amp; Culture, and 12% in Service Member Support.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52110", "revid": "12028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52110", "title": "John C. Calhoun", "text": "Vice President of the United States from 1825 to 1832\nJohn Caldwell Calhoun (; March 18, 1782\u00a0\u2013\u00a0March 31, 1850) was an American statesman and political theorist who served as the seventh vice president of the United States from 1825 to 1832. Calhoun began his political career as a nationalist, modernizer and proponent of a strong federal government and protective tariffs. In the late 1820s, his views shifted, and he became a leading proponent of states' rights, limited government, nullification, and opposition to high tariffs, and distinguished himself as an outspoken defender of American slavery. Calhoun saw Northern acceptance of those policies as a condition of the South remaining in the Union. His beliefs heavily influenced the South's secession from the Union in 1860 and 1861. Calhoun was the first of two vice presidents to resign from the position, the second being Spiro Agnew, who resigned in 1973.\nBorn in South Carolina, Calhoun began his political career with election to the House of Representatives in 1810. As a prominent leader of the war hawk faction, he strongly supported the War of 1812. Calhoun served as Secretary of War under President James Monroe and, in that position, reorganized and modernized the War Department. He was a candidate for the presidency in the 1824 election. After failing to gain support, Calhoun agreed to be a candidate for vice president. The Electoral College elected him vice president by an overwhelming majority. He served under John Quincy Adams and continued under Andrew Jackson, who defeated Adams in the election of 1828, making Calhoun the most recent U.S. vice president to serve under two different presidents.\nCalhoun had a difficult relationship with Jackson, primarily because of the Nullification Crisis and the Petticoat affair. In contrast with his previous nationalist sentiments, Calhoun vigorously supported South Carolina's right to nullify federal tariff legislation that he believed unfairly favored the North, which put him into conflict with Unionists such as Jackson. In 1832, with only a few months remaining in his second term, Calhoun resigned as vice president and was elected to the Senate. He sought the Democratic Party nomination for the presidency in 1844 but lost to surprise nominee James K. Polk, who won the general election. Calhoun served as Secretary of State under President John Tyler from 1844 to 1845, and in that role supported the annexation of Texas as a means to extend the Slave Power and helped to settle the Oregon boundary dispute with Britain. Calhoun returned to the Senate, where he opposed the Mexican\u2013American War, the Wilmot Proviso and the Compromise of 1850 before he died of tuberculosis in 1850. He often served as a virtual independent who variously aligned as needed with Democrats and Whigs.\nLater in life, Calhoun became known as the \"cast-iron man\" for his rigid defense of white Southern beliefs and practices. His concept of republicanism emphasized proslavery thought and minority states' rights as embodied by the South. He owned dozens of slaves in Fort Hill, South Carolina, and asserted that slavery, rather than being a \"necessary evil\", was a \"positive good\" that benefited both slaves and enslavers. To protect minority rights against majority rule, he called for a concurrent majority by which the minority could block some proposals that it felt infringed on their liberties. To that end, Calhoun supported states' rights, and nullification, through which states could declare null and void federal laws that they viewed as unconstitutional. He was one of the \"Great Triumvirate\" or the \"Immortal Trio\" of congressional leaders, along with his colleagues Daniel Webster and Henry Clay.\nEarly life.\nJohn Caldwell Calhoun was born in Abbeville District, South Carolina on March 18, 1782. He was the fourth child of Irish-born Patrick Calhoun and his wife Martha Caldwell. Patrick's father, also named Patrick, joined the waves of Scotch-Irish emigration from County Donegal to southwestern Pennsylvania. After the death of the elder Patrick in 1741, the family moved to Virginia. Following the British defeat at the Battle of the Monongahela in 1755, the family, fearing Indian attacks, moved to South Carolina in 1756. Patrick, a prominent member of the tight-knit Scotch-Irish community on the frontier who worked as surveyor and farmer, was elected to the South Carolina Legislature in 1763 and acquired ownership over slave plantations. As a Presbyterian, he stood opposed to the established Anglican planter class based in Charleston. Patrick remained neutral in the American Revolution and opposed ratification of the U.S. Constitution on grounds of states' rights and personal liberties. Calhoun would eventually adopt his father's beliefs on states' rights.\nYoung Calhoun showed scholastic talent, and although schools were scarce on the Carolina frontier, he was enrolled briefly in an academy taught by his brother-in-law Moses Waddel. It stressed the Latin and Greek classics. He continued his studies privately. When his father died, his brothers were away starting business careers, and so the 14-year-old Calhoun took over management of the family farm and five other farms. For four years he simultaneously kept up his reading and his hunting and fishing. The family decided he should continue his education, and so he resumed studies at Waddel's academy after it reopened. With financing from his brothers, he went to Yale College in Connecticut in 1802. For the first time in his life, Calhoun encountered serious, advanced, and well-organized intellectual dialogue that could shape his mind. Yale was dominated by President Timothy Dwight, a Federalist who became his mentor. Dwight's brilliance entranced (and sometimes repelled) Calhoun.\nBiographer John Niven says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Calhoun admired Dwight's extemporaneous sermons, his seemingly encyclopedic knowledge, and his awesome mastery of the classics, of the tenets of Calvinism, and of metaphysics. No one, he thought, could explicate the language of John Locke with such clarity.\nDwight repeatedly denounced Jeffersonian democracy, and Calhoun challenged him in class. Dwight could not shake Calhoun's commitment to republicanism. \"Young man,\" retorted Dwight, \"your talents are of a high order and might justify you for any station, but I deeply regret that you do not love sound principles better than sophistry\u2014you seem to possess a most unfortunate bias for error.\" Dwight also expounded on the strategy of secession from the Union as a legitimate solution for New England's disagreements with the national government. Calhoun made friends easily, read widely, and was a noted member of the debating society of Brothers in Unity. He graduated as valedictorian in 1804. He studied law at the nation's first independent law school, Tapping Reeve Law School in Litchfield, Connecticut, where he worked with Tapping Reeve and James Gould. He was admitted to the South Carolina bar in 1807.\nBiographer Margaret Coit argues that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;every principle of secession or states' rights which Calhoun ever voiced can be traced right back to the thinking of intellectual New England\u00a0... Not the South, not slavery, but Yale College and Litchfield Law School made Calhoun a nullifier\u00a0... Dwight, Reeve, and Gould could not convince the young patriot from South Carolina as to the desirability of secession, but they left no doubts in his mind as to its legality.\nPersonal life.\nIn January 1811, Calhoun married Floride Bonneau Colhoun, a first cousin once removed. She was the daughter of wealthy United States Senator and lawyer John\u00a0E. Colhoun, a leader of Charleston high society.\nThe couple had ten children:\nCalhoun was not openly religious and was generally not outspoken about his religious beliefs. He was raised as an orthodox Presbyterian, but was attracted to Southern varieties of Unitarianism like those that attracted Jefferson. Southern Unitarianism was generally less organized than the variety popular in New England. After his marriage, Calhoun and his wife attended the Episcopal Church, of which she was a member. In 1821, he became a founding member of All Souls Unitarian Church in Washington, D.C.\nHistorian Merrill D. Peterson describes Calhoun: \"Intensely serious and severe, he could never write a love poem, though he often tried, because every line began with 'whereas'\u00a0...\"\nHouse of Representatives.\nWar of 1812.\nWith a base among the Irish and Scotch Irish, Calhoun won election to South Carolina's 6th congressional district of the House of Representatives in 1810, defeating John Archer Elmore. He immediately became a leader of the War Hawks, along with Speaker Henry Clay of Kentucky and South Carolina congressmen William Lowndes and Langdon Cheves. Brushing aside the vehement objections of both anti-war New Englanders and ardent Jeffersonians led by John Randolph of Roanoke, they pushed for war with Britain, claiming that America's national honor and republican values had been violated by British interference with US merchant shipping. As a member, and later acting chairman, of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Calhoun played a major role in drafting two key documents in the push for war, the Report on Foreign Relations and the War Report of 1812. Drawing on the linguistic tradition of the Declaration of Independence, Calhoun's committee called for a declaration of war in ringing phrases, citing Britain's supposed \"lust for power\", \"unbounded tyranny\", and \"mad ambition\".\nThe United States declared war on Britain on June 18, inaugurating the War of 1812. The opening phase involved multiple disasters for American forces, as well as a financial crisis when the Treasury could barely pay the bills. The conflict caused economic hardship for Americans, as the Royal Navy blockaded American ports and cut off imports, exports, and the coastal trade. Several American invasions of Canada were fiascos, but the U.S. seized control of Lake Erie in 1813 and broke the power of hostile Indians in battles such as the 1813 Battle of the Thames in Canada and the 1814 Battle of Horseshoe Bend in Alabama. These Indians had, in many cases, cooperated with the British or Spanish in opposing American interests.\nCalhoun labored to raise troops, provide funds, speed logistics, rescue the currency, and regulate commerce to aid the war effort. One colleague hailed him as \"the young Hercules who carried the war on his shoulders\". American military disasters made him double his legislative efforts to overcome the obstructionism of John Randolph, Daniel Webster, and other opponents of the war. In 1814, the British were thwarted in their invasions of New York and Baltimore, but Napoleon capitulated, meaning America would now face formidable British reinforcements consisting of units previously committed to Europe if the war were to continue. British and American diplomats signed the Treaty of Ghent undertaking a return to the borders of 1812 with no gains or losses. Before the treaty reached the Senate for ratification, and even before news of its signing reached New Orleans, a British invasion force was decisively defeated in January 1815 at the Battle of New Orleans, making a national hero of General Andrew Jackson. Americans celebrated what they called a \"second war of independence\" against Britain. This led to the beginning of the \"Era of Good Feelings\", an era marked by the formal demise of the Federalist Party and increased nationalism.\nPostwar planning.\nDespite American successes, the mismanagement of the Army during the war very much distressed Calhoun, and he resolved to strengthen and centralize the War Department. The militia had proven itself quite unreliable during the war and Calhoun saw the need for a permanent and professional military force. In 1816 he called for building an effective navy, including steam frigates, as well as a standing army of adequate size. The British blockade of the coast had underscored the necessity of rapid means of internal transportation; Calhoun proposed a system of \"great permanent roads\". The blockade had cut off the import of manufactured items, so he emphasized the need to encourage more domestic manufacture, fully realizing that industry was based in the Northeast. The dependence of the old financial system on import duties was devastated when the blockade cut off imports. Calhoun called for a system of internal taxation that would not collapse from a war-time shrinkage of maritime trade, as the tariffs had done. The expiration of the charter of the First Bank of the United States had also distressed the Treasury, so to reinvigorate and modernize the economy Calhoun called for a new national bank. A new bank was chartered as the Second Bank of the United States by Congress and approved by President James Madison in 1816. Through his proposals, Calhoun emphasized a national footing and downplayed sectionalism and states rights. Historian Ulrich B. Phillips says that at this stage of Calhoun's career, \"The word \"nation\" was often on his lips, and his conviction was to enhance national unity which he identified with national power.\"\nRhetorical style.\nRegarding his career in the House of Representatives, an observer commented that Calhoun was \"the most elegant speaker that sits in the House\u00a0... His gestures are easy and graceful, his manner forcible, and language elegant; but above all, he confines himself closely to the subject, which he always understands, and enlightens everyone within hearing.\"\nHis talent for public speaking required systematic self-discipline and practice. A later critic noted the sharp contrast between his hesitant conversations and his fluent speaking styles, adding that Calhoun \"had so carefully cultivated his naturally poor voice as to make his utterance clear, full, and distinct in speaking and while not at all musical it yet fell pleasantly on the ear\". Calhoun was \"a high-strung man of ultra intellectual cast\". As such, Calhoun was not known for charisma. He was often seen as harsh and aggressive with other representatives. But he was a brilliant intellectual orator and strong organizer. Historian Russell Kirk says, \"That zeal which flared like Greek fire in Randolph burned in Calhoun, too; but it was contained in the Cast-iron Man as in a furnace, and Calhoun's passion glowed out only through his eyes. No man was more stately, more reserved.\"\nJohn Quincy Adams concluded in 1821 that \"Calhoun is a man of fair and candid mind, of honorable principles, of clear and quick understanding, of cool self-possession, of enlarged philosophical views, and ardent patriotism. He is above all sectional and factious prejudices more than any other statesman of this Union with whom I have ever acted.\" Historian Charles Wiltse noted Calhoun's evolution, \"Though he is known today primarily for his sectionalism, Calhoun was the last of the great political leaders of his time to take a sectional position\u2014later than Daniel Webster, later than Henry Clay, later than Adams himself.\"\nSecretary of War and postwar nationalism.\nIn 1817, the deplorable state of the War Department led four men to decline offers from President James Monroe to accept the office of Secretary of War before Calhoun finally assumed the role. Calhoun took office on December 8 and served until 1825. He continued his role as a leading nationalist during the Era of Good Feelings. He proposed an elaborate program of national reforms to the infrastructure that he believed would speed up economic modernization. His priority was an effective navy, including steam frigates, and in the second place a standing army of adequate size\u2014and as further preparation for an emergency, \"great permanent roads\", \"a certain encouragement\" to manufacturers, and a system of internal taxation that would not collapse from a war-time shrinkage of maritime trade, like customs duties.\nA reform-minded modernizer, Calhoun attempted to institute centralization and efficiency in the Indian Department and in the Army by establishing new coastal and frontier fortifications and building military roads, but Congress either failed to respond to his reforms or responded with hostility. Calhoun's frustration with congressional inaction, political rivalries, and ideological differences spurred him to create the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 1824. Thomas McKenney was appointed as its first head.\nAs secretary, Calhoun had responsibility for the management of Indian affairs. He promoted a plan, adopted by Monroe in 1825, to preserve the sovereignty of eastern Indians by relocating them to western reservations they could control without interference from state governments. In over seven years Calhoun supervised the negotiation and ratification of 40 treaties with Indian tribes. Calhoun opposed the invasion of Spanish Florida launched in 1818 by General Jackson during the First Seminole War, which was done without direct authorization from Calhoun or President Monroe, and in private with other cabinet members, advocated censuring of Jackson as punishment. Calhoun claimed that Jackson had begun a war against Spain in violation of the Constitution and, that he had contradicted Calhoun's explicit orders in doing so. Specific official instructions not to invade Florida or attack the Spanish were not issued by the administration. However, Calhoun supported the execution of Alexander Arbuthnot and Robert Ambrister, two British subjects living in Florida who had been accused by American officials of inciting the Seminole to war against the United States. Calhoun accused the British of being involved in \"wickedness, corruption, and barbarity at which the heart sickens and which in this enlightened age it ought not scarcely to be believed that a Christian nation would have participated\". He added that he hoped the executions of Arbuthnot and Ambrister would deter the British and any other nations \"who by false promises delude and excite an Indian tribe to all the deeds of savage war\". The United States annexed Florida from Spain in 1819 through the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty.\nCalhoun's tenure as Secretary of War witnessed the outbreak of the Missouri crisis in December 1818, when a petition arrived from Missouri settlers seeking admission into the Union as a slave state. In response, Representative James Tallmadge Jr. of New York proposed two amendments to the bill designed to restrict the spread of slavery into what would become the new state. These amendments touched off an intense debate between North and South that had some talking openly of disunion. In February 1820, Calhoun predicted to Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, a New Englander, that the Missouri issue \"would not produce a dissolution\" of the Union. \"But if it should,\" Calhoun went on, \"the South would of necessity be compelled to form an alliance with... Great Britain.\" \"I said that would be returning to the colonial state,\" Adams recalled saying afterward. According to Adams, \"He said, yes, pretty much, but it would be forced upon them.\"\nAfter the war ended in 1815 the \"Old Republicans\" in Congress, with their Jeffersonian ideology for an economy in the federal government, sought to reduce the operations and finances of the War Department. Calhoun's political rivalry with William H. Crawford, the Secretary of the Treasury, over the pursuit of the presidency in the 1824 election, complicated Calhoun's tenure as War Secretary. The general lack of military action following the war meant that a large army, such as that preferred by Calhoun, was no longer considered necessary. The \"Radicals\", a group of strong states' rights supporters who mostly favored Crawford for president in the coming election, were inherently suspicious of large armies. Some allegedly also wanted to hinder Calhoun's presidential aspirations for that election. Thus, on March 2, 1821, Congress passed the Reduction Act, which reduced the number of enlisted men of the army by half, from 11,709 to 5,586, and the number of the officer corps by a fifth, from 680 to 540. Calhoun, though concerned, offered little protest. Later, to provide the army with a more organized command structure, which had been severely lacking during the War of 1812, he appointed Major General Jacob Brown to a position that would later become known as \"Commanding General of the United States Army\".\nVice presidency (1825\u20131832).\n1824 and 1828 elections and Adams presidency.\nCalhoun was initially a candidate for President of the United States in the election of 1824. Four other men also sought the presidency: Andrew Jackson, Adams, Crawford, and Henry Clay. Calhoun failed to win the endorsement of the South Carolina legislature, and his supporters in Pennsylvania decided to abandon his candidacy in favor of Jackson's, and instead supported him for vice president. Other states soon followed, and Calhoun therefore allowed himself to become a candidate for vice president rather than president. The Electoral College elected Calhoun vice president by a landslide on December 1, 1824. He won 182 of 261 electoral votes, while five other men received the remaining votes. No presidential candidate received a majority in the Electoral College, and the election was ultimately resolved by the House of Representatives, where Adams was declared the winner over Crawford and Jackson, who in the election had led Adams in both popular vote and electoral vote. After Clay, the Speaker of the House, was appointed Secretary of State by Adams, Jackson's supporters denounced what they considered a \"corrupt bargain\" between Adams and Clay to give Adams the presidency in exchange for Clay receiving the office of Secretary of State, the holder of which had traditionally become the next president. Calhoun also expressed some concerns, which caused friction between him and Adams.\nCalhoun also opposed President Adams' plan to send a delegation to observe a meeting of South and Central American leaders in Panama, believing that the United States should stay out of foreign affairs. Calhoun became disillusioned with Adams' high tariff policies and increased centralization of government through a network of \"internal improvements\", which he now saw as a threat to the rights of the states. Calhoun wrote to Jackson on June 4, 1826, informing him that he would support Jackson's second campaign for the presidency in 1828. The two were never particularly close friends. Calhoun never fully trusted Jackson, a frontiersman and popular war hero, but hoped that his election would bring some reprieve from Adams's anti-states' rights policies. Jackson selected Calhoun as his running mate, and together they defeated Adams and his running mate Richard Rush. Calhoun thus became the second of two vice presidents to serve under two different presidents. The only other man who accomplished this feat was George Clinton, who served as vice president from 1805 to 1812 under Thomas Jefferson and James Madison.\nDuring the election, Jackson's aide James Alexander Hamilton attempted a rapprochement between Jackson and Crawford, whom Jackson resented owing partially to the belief that it was he, not Calhoun, who had opposed the invasion of Florida. Hamilton spoke about this prospect with Governor John Forsyth of Georgia, who acted as a mediator between the Jackson campaign and Crawford. Forsyth wrote a letter back to Hamilton in which he claimed that Crawford had stated to him that it was Calhoun, not Crawford, who had supported censuring Jackson for his invasion of Florida. Knowing that the letter could destroy the partnership between Jackson and Calhoun, Hamilton and fellow Jackson aide William B. Lewis allowed it to remain in Hamilton's possession without informing Jackson or the public of its existence.\nPetticoat affair.\nEarly in Jackson's administration, Calhoun's wife Floride Bonneau Calhoun organized Cabinet wives (hence the term \"petticoats\") against Peggy Eaton, wife of Secretary of War John Eaton, and refused to associate with her. They alleged that John and Peggy Eaton had engaged in an adulterous affair while she was still legally married to her first husband, and that her recent behavior was unladylike. The allegations of scandal created an intolerable situation for Jackson. The Petticoat affair ended friendly relations between Calhoun and Jackson.\nJackson sided with the Eatons. He and his late wife Rachel Donelson had undergone similar political attacks stemming from their marriage in 1791. The two had married in 1791 not knowing that Rachel's first husband, Lewis Robards, had failed to finalize the expected divorce. Once the divorce was finalized, they married legally in 1794, but the episode caused a major controversy, and was used against him in the 1828 campaign. Jackson saw attacks on Eaton stemming ultimately from the political opposition of Calhoun, who had failed to silence his wife's criticisms. The Calhouns were widely regarded as the chief instigators. Jackson, who loved to personalize disputes, also saw the Petticoat affair as a direct challenge to his authority, because it involved lower-ranking executive officials and their wives seeming to contest his ability to choose whomever he wanted for his cabinet. Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, a widower, took Jackson's side and defended the Eatons. Van Buren was a northerner and a supporter of the 1828 tariff (which Calhoun bitterly opposed). Calhoun and Van Buren were the main contenders for the vice-presidential nomination in the ensuing election, and the nominee would then presumably be the party's choice to succeed Jackson. That Van Buren sided with the Eatons, in addition to disagreements between Jackson and Calhoun on other issues, mainly the Nullification Crisis, marked him as Calhoun's likely vice presidential successor.\nSome historians, including Jackson biographers Richard B. Latner and Robert V. Remini, believe that the hostility towards the Eatons was rooted less in questions of proper behavior than in politics. Eaton had been in favor of the Tariff of Abominations. He was also politically close to Van Buren. Calhoun may have wanted to expel Eaton from the cabinet as a way of boosting his anti-tariff agenda and increasing his standing in the Democratic Party. Many cabinet members were Southern and could be expected to sympathize with such concerns, especially Treasury Secretary Samuel D. Ingham, who was allied with Calhoun and believed that he, not Van Buren, should succeed Jackson as president.\nIn 1830, reports had emerged accurately stating that Calhoun, as Secretary of War, had favored censuring Jackson for his 1818 invasion of Florida. These infuriated Jackson. Eventually, Lewis decided to reveal the existence of Forsyth's letter, and on April 30, Crawford wrote a second letter, this time to Forsyth, repeating the charge Forsyth represented him as having previously made. Jackson received the letter on May 12, which confirmed his suspicions. He claimed that Calhoun had \"betrayed\" him. Eaton took his revenge on Calhoun. For reasons unclear, Calhoun asked Eaton to approach Jackson about the possibility of Calhoun publishing his correspondence with Jackson at the time of the Seminole War. Eaton did nothing, leading Calhoun to believe that Jackson had approved the publication of the letters. Calhoun published them in the \"United States Telegraph,\" a newspaper edited by a Calhoun prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Duff Green. This gave the appearance of Calhoun trying to justify himself against a conspiracy to damage him and further enraged the President.\nFinally in the spring of 1831, at the suggestion of Van Buren, who, like Jackson, supported the Eatons, Jackson replaced all but one of his Cabinet members, thereby limiting Calhoun's influence. Van Buren began the process by resigning as Secretary of State, facilitating Jackson's removal of others. Van Buren thereby grew in favor with Jackson, while the rift between the President and Calhoun was widened. Later, in 1832, Calhoun, as vice president, cast a tie-breaking vote against Jackson's nomination of Van Buren as Minister to Great Britain in a failed attempt to end Van Buren's political career. Missouri Senator Thomas Hart Benton, a staunch supporter of Jackson, then stated that Calhoun had \"elected a Vice President\", as Van Buren was able to move past his failed nomination as Minister to Great Britain and instead gain the Democratic Party's vice-presidential nomination in the 1832 election, in which he and Jackson were victorious.\nNullification.\nCalhoun had begun to oppose increases in protective tariffs, as they generally benefited Northerners more than Southerners. While he was vice president in the Adams administration, Jackson's supporters devised a high tariff legislation that placed duties on imports that were also made in New England. Calhoun had been assured that the northeastern interests would reject the Tariff of 1828, exposing pro-Adams New England congressmen to charges that they selfishly opposed legislation popular among Jacksonian Democrats in the west and mid-Atlantic States. The Southern legislators miscalculated and the so-called \"Tariff of Abominations\" passed and was signed into law by President Adams. Frustrated, Calhoun returned to his South Carolina plantation, where he anonymously composed \"South Carolina Exposition and Protest\", an essay rejecting the centralization philosophy and supporting the principle of nullification as a means to prevent a tyranny of a central government.\nCalhoun supported the idea of nullification through a concurrent majority. Nullification is a legal theory that a state has the right to nullify, or invalidate, any federal law it deems unconstitutional. In Calhoun's words, it is \"the right of a State to interpose, in the last resort, in order to arrest an unconstitutional act of the General Government, within its limits\". Nullification can be traced back to arguments by Jefferson and Madison in writing the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions of 1798 against the Alien and Sedition Acts. Madison expressed the hope that the states would declare the acts unconstitutional, while Jefferson explicitly endorsed nullification. Calhoun openly argued for a state's right to secede from the Union, as a last resort to protect its liberty and sovereignty. In his later years, Madison rebuked supporters of nullification, stating that no state had the right to nullify federal law.\nIn \"South Carolina Exposition and Protest\", Calhoun argued that a state could veto any federal law that went beyond the enumerated powers and encroached upon the residual powers of the State. President Jackson, meanwhile, generally supported states' rights, but opposed nullification and secession. At the 1830 Jefferson Day dinner at Jesse Brown's Indian Queen Hotel, Jackson proposed a toast and proclaimed, \"Our federal Union, it must be preserved.\" Calhoun replied, \"The Union, next to our liberty, the most dear. May we all remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states, and distributing equally the benefit and burden of the Union.\" Calhoun's publication of letters from the Seminole War in the \"Telegraph\" caused his relationship with Jackson to deteriorate further, thus contributing to the nullification crisis. Jackson and Calhoun began an angry correspondence that lasted until Jackson stopped it in July.\nJackson supported a revision to tariff rates known as the Tariff of 1832. It was designed to placate the nullifiers by lowering tariff rates. Written by Treasury Secretary Louis McLane, the bill lowered duties from 45% to 27%. In May, Representative John Quincy Adams introduced a slightly revised version of the bill, which Jackson accepted. It passed Congress on July 9 and was signed by the president on July 14. The bill failed to satisfy extremists on either side. In October, the South Carolina legislature voted to call a convention to nullify the tariffs. On November 24, the South Carolina Nullification Convention passed an ordinance nullifying both the Tariff of 1832 and the Tariff of 1828 and threatening to secede if the federal government attempted to enforce the tariffs. In response, Jackson sent U.S. Navy warships to Charleston harbor, and threatened to hang Calhoun or any man who worked to support nullification or secession. After joining the Senate, Calhoun began to work with Clay on a new compromise tariff. A bill sponsored by the administration had been introduced by Representative Gulian C. Verplanck of New York, but it lowered rates more sharply than Clay and other protectionists desired. Clay managed to get Calhoun to agree to a bill with higher rates in exchange for Clay's opposition to Jackson's military threats and, perhaps, with the hope that he could win some Southern votes in his next bid for the presidency. On the same day, Congress passed the Force Bill, which empowered the President of the United States to use military force to ensure state compliance with federal law. South Carolina accepted the tariff, but in a final show of defiance, nullified the Force Bill. In Calhoun's speech against the Force Bill, delivered on February 5, 1833, no longer as vice president, he strongly endorsed nullification, at one point saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Why, then, confer on the President the extensive and unlimited powers provided in this bill? Why authorize him to use military force to arrest the civil process of the State? But one answer can be given: That, in a contest between the State and the General Government, if the resistance be limited on both sides to the civil process, the State, by its inherent sovereignty, standing upon its reserved powers, will prove too powerful in such a controversy, and must triumph over the Federal Government, sustained by its delegated and limited authority; and in this answer we have an acknowledgment of the truth of those great principles for which the State has so firmly and nobly contended.\nIn his three-volume biography of Jackson, James Parton summed up Calhoun's role in the Nullification crisis: \"Calhoun began it. Calhoun continued it. Calhoun stopped it.\"\nResignation.\nAs tensions over nullification escalated, South Carolina Senator Robert Y. Hayne was considered less capable than Calhoun to represent South Carolina in the Senate debates, so in late 1832 Hayne resigned to become governor; Calhoun resigned as vice president, and the South Carolina legislature elected Calhoun to fill Hayne's Senate seat. Van Buren had already been elected as Jackson's new vice president, meaning that Calhoun had less than three months left on his term anyway. The South Carolina newspaper \"City Gazette\" commented on the change:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is admitted that the former gentleman [Hayne] is injudiciously pitted against Clay and Webster and, nullification out of the question, Mr. Calhoun's place should be in front with these formidable politicians.\nBiographer John Niven argues \"that these moves were part of a well-thought-out plan whereby Hayne would restrain the hotheads in the state legislature and Calhoun would defend his brainchild, nullification, in Washington against administration stalwarts and the likes of Daniel Webster, the new apostle of northern nationalism.\" As vice president, Calhoun cast a then-record 31 tie-breaking votes in the Senate, the most of any vice president in their capacity as Senate president until vice president Kamala Harris surpassed it in 2023.\nFirst term in the U.S. Senate.\nWhen Calhoun took his seat in the Senate on December 29, 1832, his chances of becoming president were considered poor due to his involvement in the Nullification Crisis, which left him without connections to a major national party. After the implementation of the Compromise Tariff of 1833, which helped solve the Nullification Crisis, the Nullifier Party, along with other anti-Jackson politicians, formed a coalition known as the Whig Party. Calhoun sometimes affiliated with the Whigs, but chose to remain a virtual independent due to the Whig promotion of federally subsidized \"internal improvements\".\nFrom 1833 to 1834, Jackson was engaged in removing federal funds from the Second Bank of the United States during the Bank War. Calhoun opposed this action, considering it a dangerous expansion of executive power. He called the men of the Jackson administration \"artful, cunning, and corrupt politicians, and not fearless warriors\". He accused Jackson of being ignorant about financial matters. As evidence, he cited the economic panic caused by Nicholas Biddle as a means to stop Jackson from destroying the Bank. On March 28, 1834, Calhoun voted with the Whig senators on a successful motion to censure Jackson for his removal of the funds. In 1837, he refused to attend the inauguration of Jackson's chosen successor, Van Buren, even as other powerful senators who opposed the administration, such as Webster and Clay, did witness the inauguration. However, by 1837, Calhoun generally had realigned himself with most of the Democrats' policies.\nTo restore his national stature, Calhoun cooperated with Van Buren. Democrats were hostile to national banks, and the country's bankers had joined the Whig Party. The Democratic replacement, meant to help combat the Panic of 1837, was the Independent Treasury system, which Calhoun supported and which went into effect. Calhoun, like Jackson and Van Buren, attacked finance capitalism and opposed what he saw as encroachment by government and big business. For this reason, he opposed the candidacy of Whig William Henry Harrison in the 1840 presidential election, believing that Harrison would institute high tariffs and therefore place an undue burden on the Southern economy. Calhoun resigned from the Senate on March 3, 1843, four years before the expiration of his term, and returned to Fort Hill to prepare an attempt to win the Democratic nomination for the 1844 presidential election. He gained little support, even from the South, and quit.\nSecretary of State.\nAppointment and the Annexation of Texas.\nWhen Harrison died in 1841 after a month in office, Vice President John Tyler succeeded him. Tyler, a former Democrat, was expelled from the Whig Party after vetoing bills passed by the Whig congressional majority to reestablish a national bank and raise tariffs. He named Calhoun Secretary of State on April 10, 1844, following the death of Abel P. Upshur, one of six people killed when a cannon exploded during a public demonstration in the USS \"Princeton\" disaster.\nUpshur's loss was a severe blow to the Tyler administration. When Calhoun was nominated as Upshur's replacement, the White House was well-advanced towards securing a treaty of annexation with Texas. The State Department's secret negotiations with the Texas republic had proceeded despite explicit threats from a suspicious Mexican government that an unauthorized seizure of its northern district of Coahuila y Tejas would be equivalent to an act of war. Both the negotiations with Texas envoys and the garnering of support from the U.S. Senate had been spearheaded aggressively by Secretary Upshur, a strong pro-slavery partisan. Tyler looked to its ratification by the Senate as the \"sine qua non\" to his ambition for another term in office. Tyler planned to outflank the Whigs by gaining support from the Democratic Party or possibly creating a new party of discontented Northern Democrats and Southern Whigs.\nCalhoun, though as avid a proponent for Texas acquisition as Upshur, posed a political liability to Tyler's aims. As secretary of state, Calhoun's political objective was to see that the presidency was placed in the hands of a southern extremist, who would put the expansion of slavery at the center of national policy.\nTyler and his allies had, since 1843, devised and encouraged national propaganda promoting Texas annexation, which understated Southern slaveholders' aspirations regarding the future of Texas. Instead, Tyler chose to portray the annexation of Texas as something that would prove economically beneficial to the nation as a whole. The further introduction of slavery into the vast expanses of Texas and beyond, they argued, would \"diffuse\" rather than concentrate slavery regionally, ultimately weakening white attachment and dependence on slave labor. This theory was yoked to the growing enthusiasm among Americans for Manifest Destiny, a desire to see the social, economic and moral precepts of republicanism spread across the continent. Moreover, Tyler declared that national security was at stake: If foreign powers\u2014Great Britain in particular\u2014were to gain influence in Texas, it would be reduced to a British cotton-producing reserve and a base to exert geostrategic influence over North America. Texas might be coerced into relinquishing slavery, inducing slave uprisings in adjoining slave states and deepening sectional conflicts between American free-soil and slave-soil interests. The appointment of Calhoun, with his southern states' rights reputation\u2014which some believed was \"synonymous with slavery\"\u2014threatened to cast doubt on Tyler's carefully crafted reputation as a nationalist. Tyler, though ambivalent, felt obliged to enlist Calhoun as Secretary of State, because Tyler's closest confidantes had, in haste, offered the position to the South Carolinian statesman in the immediate aftermath of the \"Princeton\" disaster. Calhoun would be confirmed by Congress by unanimous vote.\nIn advance of Calhoun's arrival in Washington, D.C., Tyler attempted to quickly finalize the treaty negotiations. Sam Houston, President of the Texas Republic, fearing Mexican retaliation, insisted on a tangible demonstration of U.S. commitments to the security of Texas. When key Texas diplomats failed to appear on schedule, the delay compelled Tyler to bring his new Secretary of State directly into negotiations. Secretary Calhoun was directed to honor former Secretary Upshur's verbal assurances of protection now offered by Calhoun in writing, to provide for U.S. military intervention in the event that Mexico used force to hold Texas. Tyler deployed U.S. Navy vessels to the Gulf of Mexico and ordered army units mobilized, entirely paid for with $100,000 of executive branch contingency funds. The move side-stepped constitutional requirements that Congress authorize appropriations for war.\nOn April 22, 1844, Secretary Calhoun signed the treaty of annexation and ten days later delivered it to the Senate for consideration in secret session. The details of the treaty negotiations and supporting documents were leaked to the press by Senator Benjamin Tappan of Ohio. Tappan, a Democrat, was an opponent of annexation and of slavery. The terms of the Tyler\u2013Texas treaty and the release of Calhoun's letter to British ambassador Richard Pakenham exposed the annexation campaign as a program to expand and preserve slavery. In the Pakenham letter, Calhoun alleged that the institution of slavery contributed to the physical and mental well-being of Southern slaves. The U.S. Senate was compelled to open its debates on ratification to public scrutiny, and hopes for its passage by the two-thirds majority required by the Constitution were abandoned by administration supporters. In linking Texas annexation to the expansion of slavery, Calhoun had alienated many who might previously have supported the treaty.\nOn June 8, 1844, after fierce partisan struggles, the Senate rejected the Tyler\u2013Texas treaty by a vote of 16\u201335, a margin of more than two-to-one. The vote went largely along party lines: Whigs had opposed it almost unanimously (1\u201327), while Democrats split, but voted largely in favor (15\u20138). Nevertheless, the disclosure of the treaty placed the issue of Texas annexation at the center of the 1844 general election.\nElection of 1844.\nAt the Democratic Convention in Baltimore, Maryland in May 1844, Calhoun's supporters, with Calhoun in attendance, threatened to bolt the proceedings and shift support to Tyler's third party ticket if the delegates failed to produce a pro-Texas nominee. Calhoun's Pakenham letter, and its identification with proslavery extremism, moved the presumptive Democratic Party nominee, the northerner Martin Van Buren, into denouncing annexation. Therefore, Van Buren, already not widely popular in the South, saw his support from that region crippled. As a result, James K. Polk, a pro-Texas Jacksonian and Tennessee politician, won the nomination. Historian Daniel Walker Howe says that Calhoun's Pakenham letter was a deliberate attempt to influence the outcome of the 1844 election, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By identifying Texas with slavery, Calhoun made sure that Van Buren, being a northerner, would have to oppose Texas. This, Calhoun correctly foresaw, would hurt the New Yorker's chances for the Democratic nomination. Nor did the Carolinian's ingenious strategy ultimately wreck the cause for Texas annexation. Indeed, in that respect it would turn out a brilliant success.\nIn the general election, Calhoun offered his endorsement to Polk on condition that he support the annexation of Texas, oppose the Tariff of 1842, and dissolve the \"Washington Globe,\" the semi-official propaganda organ of the Democratic Party headed by Francis Preston Blair. He received these assurances and enthusiastically supported Polk's candidacy. Polk narrowly defeated Henry Clay, who opposed annexation. Lame-duck President Tyler organized a joint House\u2013Senate vote on the Texas treaty which passed, requiring only a simple majority. He signed a bill of annexation on March 1. With President Polk's support, the Texas annexation treaty was approved by the Texas Republic in 1845. A bill to admit Texas as the 28th state of the Union was signed by Polk on December 29, 1845.\nSecond term in the Senate.\nMexican\u2013American War and Wilmot Proviso.\nCalhoun was re-elected to the Senate in 1845 following the resignation of Daniel Elliott Huger. He soon became vocally opposed to the Mexican\u2013American War. He believed that it would distort the national character by undermining republicanism in favor of empire and by bringing non-white persons into the country. When Congress declared war against Mexico on May 13, he abstained from voting on the measure. In South Carolina, Calhoun received some praise for his principled position, but support for the war was high in spite of his opposition. Calhoun also vigorously opposed the Wilmot Proviso, an 1846 proposal by Pennsylvania Representative David Wilmot to ban slavery in all newly acquired territories. The House of Representatives, through its Northern majority, passed the provision. However, the Senate never approved the measure.\nOregon boundary dispute.\nA major crisis emerged from the persistent Oregon boundary dispute between Great Britain and the United States, due to an increasing number of American migrants. The territory included most of present-day British Columbia, Washington, Oregon, and Idaho. American expansionists used the slogan \"54\u201340 or fight\" in reference to the Northern boundary coordinates of the Oregon territory. The parties compromised, ending the war threat, by splitting the area down the middle at the 49th parallel, with the British acquiring British Columbia and the Americans accepting Washington and Oregon. Calhoun, along with President Polk and Secretary of State James Buchanan, continued work on the treaty while he was a senator, and it was ratified by a vote of 41\u201314 on June 18, 1846.\nRejection of the Compromise of 1850.\nThe Compromise of 1850, devised by Clay and Stephen A. Douglas, a first-term Democratic senator from Illinois, was designed to solve the controversy over the status of slavery in the vast new territories acquired from Mexico. Many pro-slavery Southerners opposed it as inadequate protection for slavery, and Calhoun helped organize the Nashville Convention, which would meet in June to discuss possible Southern secession. The 67-year-old Calhoun had suffered periodic bouts of tuberculosis throughout his life. In March 1850, the disease reached a critical stage. Weeks from death and too feeble to speak, Calhoun wrote a blistering attack on the Compromise that would become his most famous speech. On March 4 a friend and disciple, Senator James Mason of Virginia, read his remarks. Calhoun affirmed the right of the South to leave the Union in response to what he called Northern subjugation, specifically the North's growing opposition to the South's \"peculiar institution\" of slavery. He warned that the day \"the balance between the two sections\" was destroyed would be a day not far removed from disunion, anarchy, and civil war. Calhoun queried how the Union might be preserved in light of subjugation of the \"weaker\" party\u2014the pro-slavery South\u2014by the \"stronger\" party, the anti-slavery North. He maintained that the responsibility of solving the question lay entirely on the North\u2014as the stronger section, to allow the Southern minority an equal share in governance and to cease its anti-slavery agitation. He added:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCalhoun died soon afterward, and although the Compromise measures did eventually pass, Calhoun's ideas about states' rights attracted increasing attention across the South. Historian William Barney argues that Calhoun's ideas proved \"appealing to Southerners concerned with preserving slavery. ...Southern radicals known as 'Fire-Eaters' pushed the doctrine of states' rights to its logical extreme by upholding the constitutional right of the state to secede\".\nDeath and burial.\nCalhoun died at the Old Brick Capitol boarding house in Washington, D.C., on March 31, 1850, of tuberculosis, at the age of 68. The last words attributed to him were \"The South, the poor South!\"\nHe was interred at St. Philip's Churchyard in Charleston, South Carolina. During the Civil War, a group of Calhoun's friends were concerned about the possible desecration of his grave by Federal troops and, during the night, removed his coffin to a hiding place under the stairs of the church. The next night, his coffin was buried in an unmarked grave near the church, where it remained until 1871 when it was again exhumed and returned to its original place.\nAfter Calhoun had died, an associate suggested that Senator Thomas Hart Benton give a eulogy in honor of Calhoun on the floor of the Senate. Benton, a devoted Unionist, declined, saying: \"He is not dead, sir\u2014he is not dead. There may be no vitality in his body, but there is in his doctrines.\"\nThe Clemson University campus in South Carolina occupies the site of Calhoun's Fort Hill plantation, which he bequeathed to his wife and daughter. They sold it and its 50 slaves to a relative. When that owner died, Thomas Green Clemson foreclosed the mortgage. He later bequeathed the property to the state for use as an agricultural college to be named after him.\nCalhoun's widow, Floride, died on July 25, 1866, and was buried in St. Paul's Episcopal Church Cemetery in Pendleton, South Carolina, near their children, but apart from her husband.\nPolitical philosophy.\nAgrarian republicanism.\nHistorian LeeH. Cheek Jr. characterizes Calhoun's American republicanism as within the South Atlantic tradition, as opposed to the Puritan tradition. While the New England\u2013based puritan tradition stressed a politically centralized enforcement of moral and religious norms to secure civic virtue, the South Atlantic tradition relied on a decentralized moral and religious order based on the idea of subsidiarity (or localism). Cheek considers the 1798 Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, written by Jefferson and Madison, the cornerstone of Calhoun's republicanism. Calhoun believed that popular rule is best expressed in local communities that are nearly autonomous while serving as units of a larger society.\nSlavery.\nCalhoun led the pro-slavery faction in the Senate, opposing both total abolitionism and attempts such as the Wilmot Proviso to limit the expansion of slavery into the western territories.\nCalhoun's father, Patrick Calhoun, was a staunch supporter of slavery who taught his son that social standing depended not merely on a commitment to the ideal of popular self-government, but also on the ownership of a substantial number of slaves. Flourishing in a world in which slaveholding was a hallmark of civilization, Calhoun saw little reason to question its morality as an adult. He believed that slavery instilled in white people a code of honor that fostered civic-mindedness. From Calhoun's standpoint, the expansion of slavery decreased the likelihood for social conflict and postponed the decay of when money would become the only measure of self-worth, as he believed had happened in New England. Calhoun was firmly convinced that slavery was the key to the success of the American dream.\nWhereas other Southern politicians had excused slavery as a \"necessary evil\", in a famous on February 6, 1837, Calhoun asserted that slavery was a \"positive good\". He rooted this claim on three grounds: white supremacy, paternalism and capitalism. All societies, Calhoun claimed, are ruled by an elite group that enjoys the fruits of the labor of a less-exceptional group. Senator William Cabell Rives of Virginia had earlier referred to slavery as an evil that might become a \"lesser evil\" in some circumstances. Calhoun believed that conceded too much to the abolitionists:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I take higher ground. I hold that in the present state of civilization, where two races of different origin, and distinguished by color, and other physical differences, as well as intellectual, are brought together, the relation now existing in the slaveholding States between the two, is, instead of an evil, a good\u2014a positive good\u00a0... I may say with truth, that in few countries so much is left to the share of the laborer, and so little exacted from him, or where there is more kind attention paid to him in sickness or infirmities of age. Compare his condition with the tenants of the poor houses in the more civilized portions of Europe\u2014look at the sick, and the old and infirm slave, on one hand, in the midst of his family and friends, under the kind superintending care of his master and mistress, and compare it with the forlorn and wretched condition of the pauper in the poorhouse\u00a0... I hold then, that there never has yet existed a wealthy and civilized society in which one portion of the community did not, in point of fact, live on the labor of the other.\nCalhoun's treatment of his own slaves includes an incident in 1831, when his slave Alick ran away when threatened with a severe whipping. Calhoun wrote to his second cousin and brother-in-law, asking him to keep a lookout for Alick, and if he was taken, to have him \"severely whipped\" and sent back. In a letter to Alick's captor, Calhoun wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am glad to hear that Alick has been apprehended and am much obliged to you for paying the expense of apprehending him . . . . He ran away for no other cause, but to avoid a correction for some misconduct, and as I am desirous to prevent a repetition, I wish you to have him lodged in Jail for one week, to be fed on bread and water and to employ some one for me to give him 30 lashes well laid on, at the end of the time.\nCalhoun rejected the belief of Southern leaders, such as Henry Clay, that all Americans could agree on the \"opinion and feeling\" that slavery was wrong, although they might disagree on the most practicable way to respond to that great wrong. Calhoun's constitutional ideas acted as a viable conservative alternative to Northern appeals to democracy, majority rule, and natural rights.\nAs well as providing an intellectual justification of slavery, Calhoun played a central role in devising the South's overall political strategy. According to historian Ulrich B. Phillips, [Calhoun's] devices were manifold: to suppress agitation, to praise the slaveholding system; to promote white Southern prosperity and expansion; to procure a Western alliance; to frame a fresh plan of government by concurrent majorities; to form a Southern bloc; to warn the North of the dangers of Southern desperation; to appeal for Northern magnanimity as indispensable for the saving of the Union.\nShortly after delivering his speech against the Compromise of 1850, Calhoun predicted the destruction of the Union over the slavery issue. Speaking to Senator Mason, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I fix its probable occurrence within twelve years or three presidential terms. You and others of your age will probably live to see it; I shall not. The mode by which it will be done is not so clear; it may be brought about in a manner that no one now foresees. But the probability is, it will explode in a presidential election.\nOpposition to the War with Mexico.\nCalhoun was consistently opposed to the War with Mexico, arguing that an enlarged military effort would only feed the alarming and growing lust of the public for empire regardless of its constitutional dangers, bloat executive powers and patronage, and saddle the republic with a soaring debt that would disrupt finances and encourage speculation. Calhoun feared, moreover, that Southern slave owners would be shut out of any conquered Mexican territories, as nearly happened with the Wilmot Proviso. He argued that the war would detrimentally lead to the annexation of all of Mexico, which would bring Mexicans into the country, whom he considered deficient in moral and intellectual terms. He said, in a speech on January 4, 1848:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We make a great mistake, sir, when we suppose that all people are capable of self-government. We are anxious to force free government on all; and I see that it has been urged in a very respectable quarter, that it is the mission of this country to spread civil and religious liberty over all the world, and especially over this continent. It is a great mistake. None but people advanced to a very high state of moral and intellectual improvement are capable, in a civilized state, of maintaining free government; and amongst those who are so purified, very few, indeed, have had the good fortune of forming a constitution capable of endurance.\nCalhoun argued that a war for territory was morally wrong and felt that the Polk administration had been too aggressive in trying to force a war. Anti-slavery Northerners denounced the war as a Southern conspiracy to expand slavery; Calhoun in turn perceived a connivance of Yankees to destroy the South. By 1847 he decided the Union was threatened by a totally corrupt party system. He believed that in their lust for office, patronage and spoils, politicians in the North pandered to the anti-slavery vote, especially during presidential campaigns, and politicians in the slave states sacrificed Southern rights in an effort to placate the Northern wings of their parties. Thus, the essential first step in any successful assertion of Southern rights had to be the jettisoning of all party ties. In 1848\u201349, Calhoun tried to give substance to his call for Southern unity. He was the driving force behind the drafting and publication of the \"Address of the Southern Delegates in Congress, to Their Constituents\". It alleged Northern violations of the constitutional rights of the South, then warned Southern voters to expect forced emancipation of slaves in the near future, followed by their complete subjugation by an unholy alliance of unprincipled Northerners and blacks. Whites would flee and the South would \"become the permanent abode of disorder, anarchy, poverty, misery, and wretchedness\". Only the immediate and unflinching unity of Southern whites could prevent such a disaster. Such unity would either bring the North to its senses or lay the foundation for an independent South. But the spirit of union was still strong in the region and fewer than 40% of the Southern congressmen signed the address, and only one Whig.\nMany Southerners believed his warnings and read every political news story from the North as further evidence of the planned destruction of the white southern way of life. The climax came a decade after Calhoun's death with the election of Republican Abraham Lincoln in 1860, which led to the secession of South Carolina, followed by six other Southern states. They formed the new Confederate States, which, in accordance with Calhoun's theory, did not have any organized political parties.\nConcurrent majority.\nCalhoun's basic concern for protecting the diversity of minority interests is expressed in his chief contribution to political science\u2014the idea of a concurrent majority across different groups as distinguished from a numerical majority. A concurrent majority is a system in which a minority group is permitted to exercise a sort of veto power over actions of a majority that are believed to infringe upon the minority's rights.\nAccording to the principle of a numerical majority, the will of the more numerous citizens should always rule, regardless of the burdens on the minority. Such a principle tends toward a consolidation of power in which the interests of the absolute majority always prevail over those of the minority. Calhoun believed that the great achievement of the American constitution was in checking the tyranny of a numerical majority through institutional procedures that required a concurrent majority, such that each important interest must consent to the actions of government. To secure a concurrent majority, those interests that have a numerical majority must compromise with the interests that are in the minority. A concurrent majority requires a unanimous consent of all the major interests in a community, which is the only sure way of preventing tyranny of the majority. This idea supported Calhoun's doctrine of interposition or nullification, in which the state governments could refuse to enforce or comply with a policy of the Federal government that threatened the vital interests of the states.\nHistorian Richard Hofstadter (1948) emphasizes that Calhoun's conception of minority was very different from the minorities of a century later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Not in the slightest was [Calhoun] concerned with minority rights as they are chiefly of interest to the modern liberal mind\u2014the rights of dissenters to express unorthodox opinions, of the individual conscience against the State, least of all of ethnic minorities. At bottom he was not interested in any minority that was not a propertied minority. The concurrent majority itself was a device without relevance to the protection of dissent, designed to protect a vested interest of considerable power\u00a0... it was minority privileges rather than [minority] rights that he really proposed to protect.\nUnlike Jefferson, Calhoun rejected attempts at economic, social, or political leveling, claiming that true equality could not be achieved if all classes were given equal rights and responsibilities. Rather, to ensure true prosperity, it was necessary for a stronger group to provide protection and care for the weaker one. This meant that the two groups should not be equal before the law. For Calhoun, \"protection\" (order) was more important than freedom. Individual rights were something to be earned, not something bestowed by nature or God. Calhoun was concerned with protecting the interests of the Southern States (which he identified with the interests of their slaveholding elites) as a distinct and beleaguered minority among the members of the federal Union; his idea of a concurrent majority as a protection for minority rights has gained some acceptance in American political thought. Political scientist Malcolm Jewell argues, \"The decision-making process in this country resembles John Calhoun's 'concurrent majority': A large number of groups both within and outside the government must, in practice, approve any major policy.\"\nCalhoun's ideas on the concurrent majority are illustrated in \"A Disquisition on Government\". The \"Disquisition\" is a 100-page essay on Calhoun's definitive and comprehensive ideas on government, which he worked on intermittently for six years until its 1849 completion. It systematically presents his arguments that a numerical majority in any government will typically impose a despotism over a minority unless some way is devised to secure the assent of all classes, sections, and interests and, similarly, that innate human depravity would debase government in a democracy.\nState sovereignty and the \"Calhoun Doctrine\".\nIn the 1840s three interpretations of the constitutional powers of Congress to deal with slavery in territories emerged: the \"free-soil doctrine,\" the \"popular sovereignty position,\" and the \"Calhoun doctrine\". The Free Soilers stated that Congress had the power to outlaw slavery in the territories. The popular sovereignty position argued that the voters living there should decide. The Calhoun doctrine said that neither Congress nor the citizens of the territories could outlaw slavery in the territories.\nIn what historian Robert R. Russell calls the \"Calhoun Doctrine\", Calhoun argued that the Federal Government's role in the territories was only that of the trustee or agent of the several sovereign states: it was obliged not to discriminate among the states and hence was incapable of forbidding the bringing into any territory of anything that was legal property in any state. Calhoun argued that citizens from every state had the right to take their property to any territory. Congress and local voters, he asserted, had no authority to place restrictions on slavery in the territories. In a February 1847 speech before the Senate, Calhoun declared that \"the enactment of any law which should directly, or by its effects, deprive the citizens of any of the States of this Union from emigrating, with their property, in to any of the territories of the United States, will make such discrimination and would therefore be a violation of the Constitution\". Enslavers therefore had a fundamental right to take their property wherever they wished. As constitutional historian Hermann von Holst noted, \"Calhoun's doctrine made it a solemn constitutional duty of the United States government and of the American people to act as if the existence or non-existence of slavery in the Territories did not concern them in the least.\" The Calhoun Doctrine was opposed by the Free Soil forces, which merged into the new Republican Party around 1854. Chief Justice Roger B. Taney used Calhoun's arguments in his decision in the 1857 Supreme Court case \"Dred Scott v. Sandford,\" in which he ruled that the federal government could not prohibit slavery in any of the territories.\nLegacy.\nMonuments and memorials.\nMany different places, streets, and schools were named after Calhoun. Some, such as Springfield, Illinois (1832) and Jackson County, Kansas (1859), were subsequently renamed. The \"Immortal Trio\" (Calhoun, Daniel Webster, and Henry Clay) were memorialized with streets in Uptown New Orleans.\nIn June 2020, Clemson University removed John C. Calhoun's name from Clemson University Calhoun Honors College, renaming it to Clemson University Honors College. This action was taken in response to a petition which was supported by NFL stars DeAndre Hopkins and Deshaun Watson who are Clemson University alumni. Against the backdrop of the George Floyd protests, University chairman Smyth McKissick said that \"we must recognize there are central figures in Clemson's history whose ideals, beliefs and actions do not represent the university's core values of respect and diversity\".\nThe Confederate government honored Calhoun on a 1\u00a2 postage stamp, which was printed in 1862 but was never officially released.\nIn 1887, at the height of the Jim Crow era, white segregationists erected a monument to Calhoun in Marion Square in Charleston, South Carolina; the base was within easy reach and the local black population defaced it. Finally, it was replaced in 1896 standing atop a column base at a total of 115 feet as well as fenced in to deter attackers. It continued as a target of vandalism regardless. The statue has been a topic of debate for a long time. In 2017, Charleston's city council deferred a proposal to put a plaque on the statue that would have stated his white-supremacist views. It was No. 5 on the Make It Right Project's 2018 list of the 10 Confederate monuments it most wanted removed. The Make It Right Project organized a protest at the monument on May 16, 2019. The monument was removed on June 24, 2020, following a unanimous vote by the Charleston City Council to relocate the monument.\nIn 1910, the state of South Carolina gave a statue of Calhoun to the National Statuary Hall Collection in the United States Capitol. Also in the Capitol, there is an 1896 bust of Calhoun in the U.S. Senate Vice Presidential Bust Collection, and he is one of the \"Famous Five\" former members originally selected by the Senate in 1957 to be honored with a portrait in Senate Reception Room.\nIn 1817, surveyors sent by Secretary of War Calhoun to map the area around Fort Snelling named the largest lake in what became Minneapolis, Minnesota, for him. Two centuries later, the city of Minneapolis renamed the lake with the Dakota language name Bde Maka Ska, meaning \"White Earth Lake\" or \"White Banks Lake\". The Calhoun-Isles Community Band in the Uptown district of Minneapolis changed its name to City of Lakes Community Band in November 2018, to distance itself from Calhoun's pro-slavery legacy, following the renaming of the lake. Calhoun Square and Calhoun Beach Club, both in Minneapolis, announced name changes, and the road around the lake was renamed Bde Maka Ska Parkway. In 2022, the city councilors of Savannah, Georgia, voted unanimously to remove his name from Calhoun Square.\nFilm and television.\nCalhoun was portrayed by Arliss Howard in the 1997 film \"Amistad\". The film depicts the controversy and legal battle surrounding the status of slaves who in 1839 rebelled against their transporters on the \"La Amistad\" slave ship.\nHistorical reputation.\nCalhoun was despised by Jackson and his supporters for his alleged attempts to subvert the unity of the nation for his own political gain. On his deathbed, Jackson regretted that he had not had Calhoun executed for treason. \"My country,\" he declared, \"would have sustained me in the act, and his fate would have been a warning to traitors in all time to come.\" Even after his death, Calhoun's reputation among Jacksonians remained poor. They disparaged him by portraying him as a man thirsty for power, who when he failed to attain it, sought to tear down his country with him.\nAccording to Parton, writing in 1860:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The old Jackson men of the inner set still speak of Mr. Calhoun in terms which show that they consider him at once the most wicked and the most despicable of American statesmen. He was a coward, conspirator, hypocrite, traitor, and fool, say they. He strove, schemed, dreamed, lived only for the presidency; and when he despaired of reaching that office through honorable means, he sought to rise upon the ruins of his country-thinking it better to reign in South Carolina than to serve in the United States. General Jackson lived and died in this opinion.\nWriting more than thirty years after Calhoun's death, James G. Blaine portrayed him as a mix of personal integrity and wrongheaded ideology:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCharles E. Merriam said Calhoun should rank as one of America's strongest political theorists of the first half of the 19th century, with reasoning that was keen and strong, but also narrow and cramped.\nCalhoun is often remembered for his defense of minority rights, in the context of defending white Southern interests from perceived Northern threats, by use of the \"concurrent majority\". He is also noted and criticized for his strong defense of slavery. These positions played an enormous role in influencing Southern secessionist leaders by strengthening the trend of sectionalism, thus contributing to the Civil War.\nBiographer Irving Bartlett wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Posterity decided against Calhoun's argument for the indefinite protection of slavery more than 130 years ago. What he had to say about the need in popular governments like our own to protect the rights of minorities, about the importance of choosing leaders with character, talent, and the willingness to speak hard truths to the people, and about the enduring need, in a vast and various country like our own, for the people themselves to develop and sustain both the civic culture and the institutional structures which contribute to their lasting interest is as fresh and significant today as it was in 1850.\nCalhoun has been held in regard by some Lost Cause of the Confederacy historians, who hold a romanticized view of the antebellum Southern way of life and its cause during the Civil War. Historians such as Charles M. Wiltse and Margaret Coit have, in their writings, portrayed Calhoun as a sympathetic or heroic figure.\nJohn Niven paints a portrait of Calhoun that is both sympathetic and tragic. He says that Calhoun's ambition and personal desires \"were often thwarted by lesser men than he\". Niven identifies Calhoun as a \"driven man and a tragic figure\". He argues that Calhoun was motivated by the near-disaster of the War of 1812, of which he was a \"thoughtless advocate,\" to work towards fighting for the freedoms and securities of the white Southern people against any kind of threat. Ultimately, Niven says, he \"would overcompensate and in the end would more than any other individual destroy the culture he sought to preserve, perpetuating for several generations the very insecurity that had shaped his public career\".\nIn 1957, a five-member \"special\" committee, led by Senator John F. Kennedy, selected Calhoun as one of the five senators to enter the newly created senatorial pantheon \"hall of fame\". This \"hall of fame\" was established to fill five vacant portrait spaces in the Senate Reception Room.\nRecently, Calhoun's reputation has suffered particularly due to his defense of slavery. The racially motivated Charleston church shooting in South Carolina in June 2015 reinvigorated demands for the removal of monuments dedicated to prominent pro-slavery and Confederate States figures. That month, the monument to Calhoun in Charleston was found vandalized, with spray-painted denunciations of Calhoun as a racist and a defender of slavery. Later, in 2020, during the George Floyd protests in South Carolina, the monument was vandalized with signs and spray paint, with calls from the public demanding its removal, causing the city of Charleston to erect a chain-link fence around the statue to prevent the public from accessing it, before announcing on June 23, 2020, that the statue would be removed.\nIn response to decades of requests, Yale President Peter Salovey announced in 2017 that the university's Calhoun College would be renamed to honor Grace Hopper, a pioneering computer programmer, mathematician and Navy rear admiral who graduated from Yale. Calhoun is commemorated elsewhere on the campus, including the exterior of Harkness Tower, a prominent campus landmark, as one of Yale's \"Eight Worthies\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52111", "revid": "1170111614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52111", "title": "John Calhoun (disambiguation)", "text": "John C. Calhoun was the 7th vice president of the United States.\nJohn Calhoun may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "52112", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52112", "title": "John Caldwell Calhoun", "text": ""}
{"id": "52113", "revid": "50912557", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52113", "title": "Vice president", "text": "Officer in government or business\nA vice president or vice-president, also director in British English, is an officer in government or business who is below the president (or chief executive officer) in rank. It can also refer to executive vice presidents, signifying that the vice president is on the executive branch of the government, university or company. The name comes from the Latin term \"vice\" meaning \"in place of\" and typically serves as \"pro tempore\" (Latin: \u2019for the time being\u2019) to the president. In some countries, the vice president is called the deputy president. In everyday speech, the abbreviation \"VP\" is used.\nIn government.\nIn government, a vice president is a person whose primary responsibility is to act in place of the president on the event of the president's death, resignation or incapacity. Vice presidents are either elected jointly with the president as their running mate, or more rarely, appointed independently after the president's election.\nMost governments with vice presidents have one person in this role at any time, although in some countries there are two or more vice presidents\u2013an extreme case being Iran's 14 vice presidents. If the president is not present, dies, resigns, or is otherwise unable to fulfill their duties, the vice president will generally serve as president. In many presidential systems, vice presidents may not wield much day-to-day political power, but are still considered important members of the cabinet, while other vice presidents might not have any purpose beyond acting in place of the president on the event of the president's death, resignation or incapacity. A few vice presidents in the Americas also hold the position of president of the senate; this is the case, for example, in Argentina, the United States, and Uruguay. The vice president sometimes assumes some of the ceremonial duties of the president, such as attending diplomatic functions and events that the actual president may be too busy to attend; the Vice President of the United States, for example, often attends funerals of world leaders on behalf of the president. A vice president, in some cases, may also be appointed by the president as the head of a ministry in the cabinet or to lead certain executive initiatives designated by the president. In parliamentary or semi-presidential systems, a vice president may coexist with a prime minister, as is the case in India and Namibia, but the presence of both offices concurrently is rare. \nIn business.\nIn business, \"vice president\" refers to hierarchical position that ranges from extremely senior positions directly reporting to C-level executives (in non-financial companies), to junior non-management positions with four to 10 years of experience (in financial companies).\nIn non-financial businesses, vice presidents often report directly to the president or CEO of the company and are members of the executive management team. Some corporations that use this term may have individuals with the title of vice president responsible for specific business divisions (e.g., vice president for legal, vice president for sales and marketing, vice president for finance, and vice president for human resources).\nWhen there are typically several vice presidents in a company, these individuals are sometimes differentiated with titles denoting higher positions such as executive vice president or senior vice president, with the remaining management team holding the title vice president. The title of assistant vice president or associate vice president is used in large organizations below vice president and there can be a very convoluted list of other types of VPs as seen in the next section.\nAs many of these VPs have minimal employees reporting to them, their necessity has been questioned, with for example \"Inc.\" magazine arguing to flatten the corporate hierarchy. Similarly, as universities have adopted a corporate structure there is concern over administrative bloat and over-paying VPs. Benjamin Ginsberg, a political scientist and professor, has claimed the proliferation of VPs and other administrators is destroying universities. \"Corporate vice president\" is an older term that usually denotes a vice president that is named as a corporate officer by the board of directors. Not all vice presidents in a company in the modern business environment are named as an official corporate officer.\nHierarchy of vice presidents.\nDepending on the specific organization, the following may be an example of the hierarchy of the vice presidents. The following list explains where the VP sits in an organization:\nThis comparison is not strictly correct, as \"director\" is a legal term, meaning someone registered with the relevant country's company registrar (or simply named in the legal documents, for countries not having company registration) as having managerial control of the company, and having legal responsibility for its operation, whilst a vice president does not. In either case the responsibilities may be overall to the company, a region (US, EMEA, CEE...), business unit or function such as sales, marketing, IT etc.\nThe Chief Executive Officer generally ranks above the President, although not all companies have both as discrete positions. In many instances these ranks are combined (President &amp; CEO), functioning as a single office.\nIn financial services companies.\nIn financial companies, a \"vice president\" is usually a seniority rank that denotes higher responsibility, though such may not be leadership. The title does not denote a leadership position within the company, but often a role relatively junior to the executive board. Financial services companies have multiple vice presidents, possibly because the title is a form of delayering when an employee can not be moved higher in the organization but still deserves recognition. In most cases, the title merely implies that someone is in a medium-seniority individual contributor role. Larger financial institutions have thousands of employees with the title \"vice president\".\nIn other organizations.\nIn other organizations (\"e.g.\", trade unions, societies, clubs) one or multiple vice presidents are elected by the members of the organization. When multiple vice presidents are elected, the positions are usually numbered to prevent confusion as to who may preside or succeed to the office of president upon vacancy of that office (for example: first vice president, second vice president, and so on). In some cases vice presidents are given titles due to their specific responsibilities, for example: vice president of operations, finance, etc. In some associations the first vice president can be interchangeable with executive vice president and the remaining vice presidents are ranked in order of their seniority. Sometimes a vice president is also called \"presidium member\", especially when there are more than person holding the post.\nThe primary responsibility of the vice president of a club or organization is to be prepared to assume the powers and duties of the office of the president in the case of a vacancy in that office. If the office of president becomes vacant, the vice president (or in clubs with multiple vice presidents, the VP that occupies the highest-ranking office), will assume the office of president, with the lower vice presidents to fill in the remaining vice presidencies, leaving the lowest vice presidency to be filled by either election or appointment. If the bylaws of a club specifically provide of the officer title of president-elect, that officer would assume the powers and duties of the president upon vacancy of that office only if specified in the bylaws.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52114", "revid": "3131428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52114", "title": "Secretary of War", "text": ""}
{"id": "52115", "revid": "1315615806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52115", "title": "Algonquian languages", "text": "Subfamily of the Algic languages of North America\nThe Algonquian languages ( ; also Algonkian) are a branch of the Algic language family. The name of the Algonquian language family is distinguished from the orthographically similar Algonquin dialect of the Indigenous Ojibwe language (Chippewa), which is a senior member of the Algonquian language family. The term \"Algonquin\" has been suggested to derive from the Wolastoqey word (), meaning 'they are our relatives/allies'.\nSpeakers of Algonquian languages stretch from the east coast of North America to the Rocky Mountains. The proto-language from which all of the languages of the family descend, Proto-Algonquian, was spoken around 2,500 to 3,000\u00a0years ago. There is no scholarly consensus about where this language was spoken.\nFamily division.\nThis subfamily of around 30 languages is divided into three groups according to geography: Plains, Central, and Eastern Algonquian. Of the three, only Eastern Algonquian constitutes a true genetic subgroup.\nThe languages are listed following the classifications of Goddard (1996) and Mithun (1999). Extinct languages are marked with \u2020, and endangered languages are noted as such. For dialects and subdialects, consult the separate main articles for each of the three divisions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSubgroups.\n\"Eastern Algonquian\" is a true genetic subgrouping. The \"Plains Algonquian\" and the \"Central Algonquian\" groups are not genetic groupings but rather areal groupings. Although these areal groups often do share linguistic features, these commonalities are usually attributed to language contact. Paul Proulx has argued that this traditional view is incorrect, and that \"Central Algonquian\" (in which he includes the Plains Algonquian languages) is a genetic subgroup, with Eastern Algonquian consisting of several different subgroups. However, this classification scheme has failed to gain acceptance from other specialists in the Algonquian languages.\nInstead, the commonly accepted subgrouping scheme is that proposed by Ives Goddard (1994). The essence of this proposal is that Proto-Algonquian originated with people to the west who then moved east, although Goddard did not attempt to identify a specific western urheimat for Proto-Algonquian in his 1994 paper. By this scenario, Blackfoot was the first language to branch off, which coincides well with its being the most divergent language of Algonquian. In west-to-east order, the subsequent branchings were:\nThis historical reconstruction accords best with the observed levels of divergence within the family, whereby the most divergent languages are found furthest west (since they constitute the earliest branches during eastern migration), and the shallowest subgroupings are found furthest to the east (Eastern Algonquian, and arguably Core Central). This general west-to-east order is compatible with the proposal from J.P. Denny (1991) that Proto-Algonquian people may have moved east from the Plateau region of Idaho and Oregon or the Rocky Mountain-Great Plains boundary of Montana, dropping off subgroups as people migrated. Goddard also points out that there is clear evidence for pre-historical contact between Eastern Algonquian and Cree-Montagnais, as well as between Cheyenne and Arapaho\u2013Gros Ventre. There has long been especially extensive back-and-forth influence between Cree and Ojibwe.\nIt has been suggested that the \"Eastern Great Lakes\" languages \u2013 what Goddard has called \"Core Central\", e.g., Ojibwe\u2013Potawatomi, Shawnee, Sauk\u2013Fox\u2013Kickapoo, and Miami-Illinois (but not Cree\u2013Montagnais or Menominee) \u2013 may also constitute their own genetic grouping within Algonquian. They share certain intriguing lexical and phonological innovations. However, this theory has not yet been fully fleshed out and is still considered conjectural.\nAlgonquian is sometimes said to have included the extinct Beothuk language of Newfoundland, whose speakers were both in geographic proximity to Algonquian speakers and who share DNA in common with the Algonquian-speaking Mi\ua78ckmaq. However, linguistic evidence is scarce and poorly recorded, and it is unlikely that reliable evidence of a connection can be found.\nGrammatical features.\nThe Algonquian language family is known for its complex polysynthetic morphology and sophisticated verb system. Statements that take many words to say in English can be expressed with a single word. Ex: (Menominee) \"paeht\u0101w\u0101\u0113wesew\" 'He is heard by higher powers' (\"paeht\"- 'hear', -\"\u0101w\u0101\u0113\"- 'spirit', -\"wese\"- passivizer, -\"w\" third-person subject) or (Plains Cree) \"k\u0101st\u0101hikoyahk\" \"it frightens us\". These languages have been extensively studied by Leonard Bloomfield, Ives Goddard, and others.\nAlgonquian nouns have an animate/inanimate contrast: some nouns are classed as \"animate\", while all other nouns are \"inanimate\". There is ongoing debate over whether there is a semantic significance to the categorization of nouns as animate or inanimate, with scholars arguing for it as either a clearly semantic issue, or a purely syntactic issue, along with a variety of arguments in between. More structurally inclined linguistic scholars have argued that since there is no consistent semantic system for determining the animacy of a noun, that it must be a purely linguistic characterization. Anthropological linguists have conversely argued the strong connection between animacy and items viewed as having spiritual importance.\nAnother important distinction involves the contrast between nouns marked as \"proximate\" and those marked as \"obviative\". Proximate nouns are those deemed most central or important to the discourse, while obviative nouns are those less important to the discourse.\nThere are personal pronouns which distinguish three persons, two numbers (singular and plural), inclusive and exclusive first person plural, and proximate and obviative third persons. Verbs are divided into four classes: transitive verbs with an animate object (abbreviated \"TA\"), transitive verbs with an inanimate object (\"TI\"), intransitive verbs with an animate subject (\"AI\"), and intransitive verbs with an inanimate subject (\"II\").\nA very notable feature of the Algonquian languages is their direct\u2013inverse (also known as \"hierarchical\") morphosyntactic alignment, distinguishing between an unmarked voice where the subject outranks the object in a person hierarchy and a marked voice where the opposite relation obtains.\nVocabulary.\nLoan words.\nBecause Algonquian languages were some of the first with which Europeans came into contact in North America, the language family has given many words to English. Many eastern and midwestern U.S. states have names of Algonquian origin (Massachusetts, Connecticut, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, etc.), as do many cities: Milwaukee, Chicago, et al. Ottawa, the capital of Canada, is named after the Algonquian nation, the Odawa people.\nFor a more detailed treatment of geographical names in three Algonquian languages, see the external link to the book by Trumbull.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52116", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52116", "title": "Bessie Smith", "text": "American blues singer (1892\u20131937)\nBessie Smith (April 15, 1892 \u2013 September 26, 1937) was an African-American blues singer widely renowned during the Jazz Age. Nicknamed the \"Empress of the Blues\" and formerly Queen of the Blues, she was the most popular female blues singer of the 1930s. Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1989, she is often regarded as one of the greatest singers of her era and was a major influence on fellow blues singers, as well as jazz vocalists.\nBorn in Chattanooga, Tennessee, Smith was young when her parents died, and she and her six siblings survived by performing on street corners. She began touring and performed in a group that included Ma Rainey, and then went out on her own. Her successful recording career with Columbia Records began in 1923, but her performing career was cut short by a car crash that killed her at the age of 45.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nThe 1900 census indicates that her family reported that Bessie Smith was born in Chattanooga, Tennessee, in July 1892. The 1910 census gives her age as 16, and a birth date of April 15, 1894, which appears on subsequent documents and was observed as her birthday by the Smith family. The 1870 and 1880 censuses report several older siblings or half-siblings.\nSmith was the daughter of Laura and William Smith, a laborer and part-time Baptist preacher (he was listed in the 1870 census as a \"minister of the gospel\", in Moulton, Lawrence County, Alabama). He died while his daughter was too young to remember him. By the time Bessie was nine, her mother and a brother had also died and her older sister Viola took charge of caring for her siblings. As a consequence, Bessie was unable to gain an education.\nDue to her parents' death and her poverty, Bessie experienced a \"wretched childhood.\" To earn money for their impoverished household, Bessie and her brother Andrew busked on the streets of Chattanooga. She sang and danced as he played the guitar. They often performed on \"street corners for pennies,\" and their habitual location was in front of the White Elephant Saloon at Thirteenth and Elm streets, in the heart of the city's African-American community.\nIn 1904, her oldest brother Clarence left home and joined a small traveling troupe owned by Moses Stokes. \"If Bessie had been old enough, she would have gone with him,\" said Clarence's widow, Maud. \"That's why he left without telling her, but Clarence told me she was ready, even then. Of course, she was only a child.\"\nIn 1912, Clarence returned to Chattanooga with the Stokes troupe and arranged an audition for his sister with the troupe managers, Lonnie and Cora Fisher. Bessie was hired as a dancer rather than a vocalist since the company already included popular singer Ma Rainey. Contemporary accounts indicate that, while Ma Rainey did not teach Smith to sing, she likely helped her develop a stage presence. Smith eventually moved on to performing in chorus lines, making the \"81\" Theatre in Atlanta her home base. She also performed in shows on the black-owned Theater Owners Booking Association (T.O.B.A.) circuit and would become one of its major attractions.\nCareer.\nBessie Smith began forming her own act around 1913, at Atlanta's \"81\" Theater. By 1920, she had established a reputation in the South and along the East Coast. At the time, sales of over 100,000 copies of \"Crazy Blues\", recorded for Okeh Records by the singer Mamie Smith (no relation), pointed to a new market. The recording industry had not directed its product to black people, but the success of the record led to a search for female blues singers.\nHoping to capitalize on this new market, Smith began her recording career in 1923. She was signed to Columbia Records in 1923 by Frank Walker, a talent agent who had seen her perform years earlier. Her first recording session for Columbia was on February 15, 1923; it was engineered by Dan Hornsby who was recording and discovering many southern music talents of that era. For most of 1923, her records were issued on Columbia's regular A-series. When the company established a \"race records\" series, Smith's \"Cemetery Blues\" (September 26, 1923) was the first issued. Both sides of her first record, \"Downhearted Blues\" backed with \"Gulf Coast Blues\", were hits (an earlier recording of \"Downhearted Blues\" by its co-writer Alberta Hunter had previously been released by Paramount Records).\nAs her popularity increased, Smith became a headliner on the Theatre Owners Booking Association (T.O.B.A.) circuit and rose to become its top attraction in the 1920s. Working a heavy theater schedule during the winter and performing in tent shows the rest of the year, Smith became the highest-paid black entertainer of her day and began traveling in her own 72-foot-long railroad car. Columbia's publicity department nicknamed her \"Queen of the Blues\", but the national press soon upgraded her title to \"Empress of the Blues\". Smith's music stressed independence, fearlessness, and sexual freedom, implicitly arguing that working-class women did not have to alter their behavior to be worthy of respect.\nDespite her success, neither she nor her music was accepted in all circles. She once auditioned for Black Swan Records (W. E. B. Du Bois was on its board of directors) and was dismissed because she was considered too rough as she supposedly stopped singing to spit. The businessmen involved with Black Swan Records were surprised when she became the most successful diva because her style was rougher and coarser than Mamie Smith. Even her admirers\u2014white and black\u2014considered her a \"rough\" woman (i.e., working class or even \"low class\").\nSmith had a strong contralto voice, which recorded well from her first session, which was conducted when recordings were made acoustically. The advent of electrical recording made the power of her voice even more evident. Her first electrical recording was \"Cake Walking Babies [From Home]\", recorded on May 5, 1925. Smith also benefited from the new technology of radio broadcasting, even on stations in the segregated South. For example, after giving a concert to a white-only audience at a theater in Memphis, Tennessee, in October 1923, she performed a late-night concert on station WMC, which was well received by the radio audience. Musicians and composers like Danny Barker and Tommy Dorsey compared her presence and delivery to a preacher because of her ability to enrapture and move her audience. \nShe made 160 recordings for Columbia, often accompanied by the finest musicians of the day, notably Louis Armstrong, Coleman Hawkins, Fletcher Henderson, James P. Johnson, Joe Smith, and Charlie Green. A number of Smith's recordings\u2014such as \"Alexander's Ragtime Band\" in 1927\u2014quickly became among the best-selling records of their release years.\nBroadway.\nSmith's career was cut short by the Great Depression, which nearly put the recording industry out of business, and the advent of sound in film, which spelled the end of vaudeville. She never stopped performing, however. The days of elaborate vaudeville shows were over, but Smith continued touring and occasionally sang in clubs. In 1929, she appeared in a Broadway musical, \"Pansy\". The play was a flop; top critics said she was its only asset.\nFilm.\nIn November 1929, Smith made her only film appearance, starring in a two-reeler, \"St. Louis Blues\", based on composer W. C. Handy's song of the same name. In the film, directed by Dudley Murphy and shot in Astoria, Queens, she sings the title song accompanied by members of Fletcher Henderson's orchestra, the Hall Johnson Choir, the pianist James P. Johnson and a string section, a musical environment radically different from that of any of her recordings.\nSwing era.\nIn 1933, John Henry Hammond, who also mentored Billie Holiday, asked Smith to record four sides for Okeh (which had been acquired by Columbia Records in 1925). He claimed to have found her in semi-obscurity, \"working as a hostess in a speakeasy on Ridge Avenue in Philadelphia.\" Smith worked at Art's Cafe on Ridge Avenue, but not as a hostess and not until the summer of 1936. In 1933, when she made the Okeh sides, she was still touring. Hammond was known for his selective memory and gratuitous embellishments.\nSmith was paid a non-royalty fee of $37.50 for each selection on these Okeh sides, which were her last recordings. Made on November 24, 1933, they serve as a hint of the transformation she made in her performances as she shifted her blues artistry into something that fit the swing era. The relatively modern accompaniment is notable. The band included such swing era musicians as the trombonist Jack Teagarden, the trumpeter Frankie Newton, the tenor saxophonist Chu Berry, the pianist Buck Washington, the guitarist Bobby Johnson, and the bassist Billy Taylor. Benny Goodman, who happened to be recording with Ethel Waters in the adjoining studio, dropped by and is barely audible on one selection. Hammond was not entirely pleased with the results, preferring to have Smith revisit her old blues sound. \"Take Me for a Buggy Ride\" and \"Gimme a Pigfoot\", both written by Wesley Wilson, were among her most popular recordings.\nDeath.\nOn September 26, 1937, Smith was critically injured in a car crash on U.S. Route 61 between Memphis, Tennessee, and Clarksdale, Mississippi. Her lover, Richard Morgan, was driving, and misjudged the speed of a slow-moving truck ahead of him. Skid marks at the scene suggested that Morgan tried to avoid the truck by driving around its left side, but he hit the rear of the truck side-on at high speed. The tailgate of the truck sheared off the wooden roof of Smith's old Packard vehicle. Smith, who was in the passenger seat, probably with her right arm or elbow out the window, took the full brunt of the impact. Morgan escaped without injuries.\nThe first person on the scene was a Memphis surgeon, Dr. Hugh Smith (no relation). In the early 1970s, Hugh Smith gave a detailed account of his experience to Bessie's biographer Chris Albertson. This is the most reliable eyewitness testimony about the events surrounding her death. Arriving at the scene, Dr. Smith examined Smith, who was lying in the middle of the road with obviously severe injuries. He estimated she had lost about a half pint (240 mL) of blood, and immediately noted a major traumatic injury: her right arm was almost completely severed at the elbow. \nDr. Smith stated that this injury alone did not cause her death. Though the light was poor, he observed only minor head injuries. He attributed her death to extensive and severe crush injuries to the entire right side of her body, consistent with a sideswipe collision. Henry Broughton, a fishing partner of Dr. Smith's, helped him move Smith to the shoulder of the road. Dr. Smith dressed her arm injury with a clean handkerchief and asked Broughton to go to a house about off the road to call an ambulance. By the time Broughton returned, about 25 minutes later, Smith was in shock.\nTime passed with no sign of the ambulance, so Dr. Smith suggested that they take her into Clarksdale in his car. He and Broughton had almost finished clearing the back seat when they heard the sound of a car approaching at high speed. Dr. Smith flashed his lights in warning, but the oncoming car failed to slow and plowed into his car at full speed. It sent his car careening into Smith's overturned Packard, completely wrecking it. The oncoming car ricocheted off Hugh Smith's car into the ditch on the right, barely missing Broughton and Bessie Smith.\nThe young couple in the speeding car did not sustain life-threatening injuries. Two ambulances then arrived from Clarksdale\u2014one from the black hospital, summoned by Broughton, the second from the white hospital, acting on a report from the truck driver, who had not seen the crash victims. Smith was taken to the G.\u00a0T. Thomas Afro-American Hospital in Clarksdale, where her right arm was amputated. She died that morning without regaining consciousness.\nAfter her death, an often repeated, but now discredited story emerged that she died because a whites-only hospital in Clarksdale refused to admit her. The jazz writer and producer John Hammond gave this account in an article in the November 1937 issue of \"DownBeat\" magazine. The circumstances of Smith's death and the rumor reported by Hammond formed the basis for Edward Albee's 1959 one-act play \"The Death of Bessie Smith\". \"The Bessie Smith ambulance would not have gone to a white hospital; you can forget that\", Hugh Smith told Albertson. \"Down in the Deep South Cotton Belt, no ambulance driver, or white driver, would even have thought of putting a colored person off in a hospital for white folks.\"\nSmith's funeral was held in Philadelphia a little over a week later, on October 4, 1937. Initially, her body was laid out at Upshur's funeral home. As word of her death spread through Philadelphia's black community, her body had to be moved to the O. V. Catto Elks Lodge to accommodate the estimated 10,000 mourners who filed past her coffin on Sunday, October 3. Contemporary newspapers reported that her funeral was attended by about seven thousand people. Far fewer mourners attended the burial at Mount Lawn Cemetery, in nearby Sharon Hill. Jack Gee thwarted all efforts to purchase a stone for his estranged wife, once or twice pocketing money raised for that purpose.\nUnmarked grave.\nSmith's grave remained unmarked until a tombstone was erected on August 7, 1970, paid for by the singer Janis Joplin and Juanita Green, who as a child had done housework for Smith. Dory Previn wrote a song about Joplin and the tombstone, \"Stone for Bessie Smith\", for her album \"Mythical Kings and Iguanas\". The Afro-American Hospital (now the Riverside Hotel) was the site of the dedication of the fourth historical marker on the Mississippi Blues Trail.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1923, Smith was living in Philadelphia when she met Jack Gee, a security guard, whom she married on June 7, 1923, just as her first record was being released. During the marriage, Smith became the highest-paid Black entertainer of the day, heading her own shows, which sometimes featured as many as 40 troupers, and touring in her own custom-built railroad car. \nIn the 1920s and 30s African Americans had limited options in terms of hotels and other spaces to gather. To meet this need, establishments were created by and for African Americans called Buffet Flats, which featured expensive food, free-flowing booze, and sex shows (see also, Prostitution in Harlem Renaissance). Smith frequented Buffet Flats after concerts with friends, including drag queens and gay men who viewed it as a safe haven. Her friends reported that a lot of people would pay top dollar to see the sex shows at the buffet, and it has been reported that she would engage in sexual activities with both men and women, including her longtime friend and lover Ruby Walker, both before and during her relationship with Jack Gee.\nHer marriage to Gee was stormy, with infidelity on both sides, including Smith's numerous female lovers. Gee was impressed by the money Smith made during her career, but never adjusted to show business life, or to her bisexuality. He would leave periodically, and Smith would use this as an opportunity to have affairs, including with her musical director Fred Longshaw. When Gee found out about this, he physically assaulted Smith, but she got back up quickly and started beating him. When she found out about one of her husband's affairs, she proceeded to get Gee's gun, and shot at him. In 1929, when she learned of his affair with another singer, Gertrude Saunders, Smith ended the relationship, although neither of them sought a divorce.\nSmith later entered a common-law marriage with an old friend, Richard Morgan, who was Lionel Hampton's uncle. She stayed with him until her death.\nMusical themes.\nSongs like \"Jail House Blues\", \"Work House Blues\", \"Prison Blues\", \"Sing Sing Prison Blues\" and \"Send Me to the 'Lectric Chair\" dealt critically with social issues of the day such as chain gangs, the convict lease system and capital punishment. \"Poor Man's Blues\" and \"Washwoman's Blues\" are considered by scholars to be an early form of African-American protest music.\nWhat becomes evident after listening to her music and studying her lyrics is that Smith emphasized and channeled a subculture within the African-American working class. Additionally, she incorporated commentary on social issues like poverty, intra-racial conflict, and female sexuality into her lyrics. Her lyrical sincerity and public behavior were not widely accepted as appropriate expressions for African-American women; therefore, her work was often written off as distasteful or unseemly, rather than as an accurate representation of the African-American experience.\nSmith's work challenged elitist norms by encouraging working-class women to embrace their right to drink, party, and satisfy their sexual needs as a means of coping with stress and dissatisfaction in their daily lives. Smith advocated for a wider vision of African-American womanhood beyond domesticity, piety, and conformity; she sought empowerment and happiness through independence, sassiness, and sexual freedom. Although Smith was a voice for many minority groups and one of the most gifted blues performers of her time, the themes in her music were precocious, which led to many believing that her work was undeserving of serious recognition.\nSmith's lyrics are often speculated to have portrayed her sexuality. In \"Prove it On Me\", performed by Ma Rainey, Rainey famously sang, \"Went out last night with a crowd of my friends. They must've been women, 'cause I don't like no mens.. they say I do it, ain't nobody caught me. Sure got to prove it on me.\" African American queer theorists and activists have often looked to Ma Rainey and Bessie Smith as \"gender-bending\" role models of the early 20th-century blues era.\nAwards and honors.\nGrammy Hall of Fame.\nThree recordings by Smith were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, an award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have \"qualitative or historical significance\".\nNational Recording Registry.\nIn 2002, Smith's recording of \"Downhearted Blues\" was included in the National Recording Registry by the National Recording Preservation Board of the Library of Congress. The board annually selects recordings that are \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\n\"Downhearted Blues\" was also included in the list of \"Songs of the Century\" by the Recording Industry of America and the National Endowment for the Arts in 2001, and in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 songs that shaped rock 'n' roll.\nInductions.\nIn 1984, Smith was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.\nU.S. postage stamp.\nThe U.S. Postal Service issued a 29-cent commemorative postage stamp honoring Smith in 1994.\nOther.\nIn 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Smith at No. 33 on their list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nIn pop culture.\nThe 1948 short story \"Blue Melody\", by J. D. Salinger, and the 1959 play \"The Death of Bessie Smith\", by Edward Albee, are based on Smith's life and death, but poetic license was taken by both authors; for instance, Albee's play distorts the circumstances of her medical treatment, or lack of it, before her death, attributing it to racist medical practitioners. The circumstances related by both Salinger and Albee were widely circulated until being debunked at a later date by Smith's biographer. \nDinah Washington and LaVern Baker released tribute albums to Smith in 1958. Released on Exodus Records in 1965, \"Hoyt Axton Sings Bessie Smith\" is another collection of Smith's songs performed by folk singer Hoyt Axton.\nThe song \"Bessie Smith\" by The Band first appeared on The Basement Tapes in 1975, but probably dates from 1970 to 1971, although musician Artie Traum recalls bumping into Rick Danko, the co-writer of the song, at Woodstock in 1969, who sang a verse of \"Going Down The Road to See Bessie\" on the spot.\nHer song \"See If I'll Care\" was sampled by Indian Summer throughout their self-titled EP, released in 1993. The release was received well by critics, noting how the sample helped contrast the post-hardcore and emo styles of the rest of the release. When their discography was reissued in 2019 to acclaim, Smith and the song also saw a boost in popularity. \nShe was the subject of a 1997 biography by Jackie Kay, reissued in February 2021 and featuring as \"Book of the Week\" on BBC Radio 4, read in an abridged version by the author.\nIn the 2015 HBO film \"Bessie\", Queen Latifah portrays Smith, focusing on the struggle and transition of Smith's life and sexuality. The film was well received critically and garnered four Primetime Emmy Awards, winning Outstanding Television Movie.\nIn the medical show New Amsterdam, season 2 episode 16, the character Reynolds says Bessie Smith's accident, and the myth she was first taken to a white hospital and denied care, was what inspired him and his treatment plans. The show did get the fact that she had an unmarked grave corrected and mentioned her legacy in the world of blues.\nEach June, the Bessie Smith Cultural Center in Chattanooga sponsors the Bessie Smith Strut as part of the city's Riverbend Festival.\nDigital remastering.\nTechnical faults in the majority of her original gramophone recordings (especially variations in recording speed, which raised or lowered the apparent pitch of her voice) misrepresented the \"light and shade\" of her phrasing, interpretation and delivery. They altered the apparent key of her performances (sometimes raised or lowered by as much as a semitone). The \"center hole\" in some of the master recordings had not been in the true middle of the master disc, so that there were wide variations in tone, pitch, key and phrasing, as commercially released records revolved around the spindle.\nGiven those historic limitations, the '70 Lp complete recordings and even more th digitally remastered versions of her work deliver noticeable improvements in the sound quality. Some critics believe that the American Columbia Records compact disc releases are somewhat inferior to subsequent transfers made by the late John R. T. Davies for Frog Records.\nDiscography.\nThroughout her entire music career (1923-1933), Bessie Smith recorded 156 tracks for Columbia Records and 4 for the subsidiary OKeh. This makes it quite easy to acquire her complete musical works, which were first released in the 1970s across the following five double albums: \"The World's Greatest Blues Singer\" (1970), \"Any Woman's Blues\" (1970), \"Empty Bed Blues\" (1971), \"The Empress\" (1971), \"Nobody's Blues But Mine\" (1972). Those recording were later reissued in LPs and CDs in the 1990s under The Complete Recordings (Vol. 1-5) title LPs and CDs\nFirst editions in 10 and 122\" Lps\nAntologies\nHit records.\nThere was no official national record chart in the US until 1936. National positions have been formulated \"post facto\" by music historian Joel Whitburn.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52117", "revid": "29840718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52117", "title": "Forms of state", "text": ""}
{"id": "52119", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52119", "title": "Embedding", "text": "Inclusion of one mathematical structure in another, preserving properties of interest\nIn mathematics, an embedding (or imbedding) is one instance of some mathematical structure contained within another instance, such as a group that is a subgroup.\nWhen some object formula_1 is said to be embedded in another object formula_2, the embedding is given by some injective and structure-preserving map formula_3. The precise meaning of \"structure-preserving\" depends on the kind of mathematical structure of which formula_1 and formula_2 are instances. In the terminology of category theory, a structure-preserving map is called a morphism.\nThe fact that a map formula_3 is an embedding is often indicated by the use of a \"hooked arrow\" (); thus: formula_7 (On the other hand, this notation is sometimes reserved for inclusion maps.)\nGiven formula_1 and formula_2, several different embeddings of formula_1 in formula_2 may be possible. In many cases of interest there is a standard (or \"canonical\") embedding, like those of the natural numbers in the integers, the integers in the rational numbers, the rational numbers in the real numbers, and the real numbers in the complex numbers. In such cases it is common to identify the domain formula_1 with its image formula_13 contained in formula_2, so that formula_15.\nTopology and geometry.\nGeneral topology.\nIn general topology, an embedding is a homeomorphism onto its image. More explicitly, an injective continuous map formula_16 between topological spaces formula_1 and formula_2 is a topological embedding if formula_19 yields a homeomorphism between formula_1 and formula_13 (where formula_13 carries the subspace topology inherited from formula_2). Intuitively then, the embedding formula_16 lets us treat formula_1 as a subspace of formula_2. Every embedding is injective and continuous. Every map that is injective, continuous and either open or closed is an embedding; however there are also embeddings that are neither open nor closed. The latter happens if the image formula_13 is neither an open set nor a closed set in formula_2.\nFor a given space formula_2, the existence of an embedding formula_30 is a topological invariant of formula_1. This allows two spaces to be distinguished if one is able to be embedded in a space while the other is not.\nRelated definitions.\nIf the domain of a function formula_16 is a topological space then the function is said to be \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;locally injective at a point\" if there exists some neighborhood formula_33 of this point such that the restriction formula_34 is injective. It is called \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;locally injective\" if it is locally injective around every point of its domain. Similarly, a \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;local (topological, resp. smooth) embedding\" is a function for which every point in its domain has some neighborhood to which its restriction is a (topological, resp. smooth) embedding. \nEvery injective function is locally injective but not conversely. Local diffeomorphisms, local homeomorphisms, and smooth immersions are all locally injective functions that are not necessarily injective. The inverse function theorem gives a sufficient condition for a continuously differentiable function to be (among other things) locally injective. Every fiber of a locally injective function formula_16 is necessarily a discrete subspace of its domain formula_36\nDifferential topology.\nIn differential topology:\nLet formula_37 and formula_38 be smooth manifolds and formula_39 be a smooth map. Then formula_19 is called an immersion if its derivative is everywhere injective. An embedding, or a smooth embedding, is defined to be an immersion that is an embedding in the topological sense mentioned above (i.e. homeomorphism onto its image). \nIn other words, the domain of an embedding is diffeomorphic to its image, and in particular the image of an embedding must be a submanifold. An immersion is precisely a local embedding, i.e. for any point formula_41 there is a neighborhood formula_42 such that formula_43 is an embedding.\nWhen the domain manifold is compact, the notion of a smooth embedding is equivalent to that of an injective immersion.\nAn important case is formula_44. The interest here is in how large formula_45 must be for an embedding, in terms of the dimension formula_46 of formula_37. The Whitney embedding theorem states that formula_48 is enough, and is the best possible linear bound. For example, the real projective space formula_49 of dimension formula_46, where formula_46 is a power of two, requires formula_48 for an embedding. However, this does not apply to immersions; for instance, formula_53 can be immersed in formula_54 as is explicitly shown by Boy's surface\u2014which has self-intersections. The Roman surface fails to be an immersion as it contains cross-caps.\nAn embedding is proper if it behaves well with respect to boundaries: one requires the map formula_55 to be such that\nThe first condition is equivalent to having formula_60 and formula_61. The second condition, roughly speaking, says that formula_13 is not tangent to the boundary of formula_2.\nRiemannian and pseudo-Riemannian geometry.\nIn Riemannian geometry and pseudo-Riemannian geometry:\nLet formula_64 and formula_65 be Riemannian manifolds or more generally pseudo-Riemannian manifolds.\nAn isometric embedding is a smooth embedding formula_66 that preserves the (pseudo-)metric in the sense that formula_67 is equal to the pullback of formula_68 by formula_19, i.e. formula_70. Explicitly, for any two tangent vectors formula_71 we have\nformula_72\nAnalogously, isometric immersion is an immersion between (pseudo)-Riemannian manifolds that preserves the (pseudo)-Riemannian metrics.\nEquivalently, in Riemannian geometry, an isometric embedding (immersion) is a smooth embedding (immersion) that preserves length of curves (cf. Nash embedding theorem).\nAlgebra.\nIn general, for an algebraic category formula_73, an embedding between two formula_73-algebraic structures formula_1 and formula_2 is a formula_73-morphism formula_78 that is injective.\nField theory.\nIn field theory, an embedding of a field formula_79 in a field formula_80 is a ring homomorphism formula_81.\nThe kernel of formula_82 is an ideal of formula_79, which cannot be the whole field formula_79, because of the condition . Furthermore, any field has as ideals only the zero ideal and the whole field itself (because if there is any non-zero field element in an ideal, it is invertible, showing the ideal is the whole field). Therefore, the kernel is formula_85, so any embedding of fields is a monomorphism. Hence, formula_79 is isomorphic to the subfield formula_87 of formula_80. This justifies the name \"embedding\" for an arbitrary homomorphism of fields.\nUniversal algebra and model theory.\nIf formula_82 is a signature and formula_90 are formula_82-structures (also called formula_82-algebras in universal algebra or models in model theory), then a map formula_93 is a formula_82-embedding exactly if all of the following hold:\nHere formula_105 is a model theoretical notation equivalent to formula_106. In model theory there is also a stronger notion of elementary embedding.\nOrder theory and domain theory.\nIn order theory, an embedding of partially ordered sets is a function formula_80 between partially ordered sets formula_1 and formula_2 such that\nformula_110\nInjectivity of formula_80\nfollows quickly from this definition. In domain theory, an additional requirement is that\nformula_112 is directed.\nMetric spaces.\nA mapping formula_113 of metric spaces is called an \"embedding\"\n(with distortion formula_114) if\nformula_115\nfor every formula_116 and some constant formula_117.\nNormed spaces.\nAn important special case is that of normed spaces; in this case it is natural to consider linear embeddings.\nOne of the basic questions that can be asked about a finite-dimensional normed space formula_118 is, \"what is the maximal dimension formula_119 such that the Hilbert space formula_120 can be linearly embedded into formula_1 with constant distortion?\"\nThe answer is given by Dvoretzky's theorem.\nCategory theory.\nIn category theory, there is no satisfactory and generally accepted definition of embeddings that is applicable in all categories. One would expect that all isomorphisms and all compositions of embeddings are embeddings, and that all embeddings are monomorphisms. Other typical requirements are: any extremal monomorphism is an embedding and embeddings are stable under pullbacks.\nIdeally the class of all embedded subobjects of a given object, up to isomorphism, should also be small, and thus an ordered set. In this case, the category is said to be well powered with respect to the class of embeddings. This allows defining new local structures in the category (such as a closure operator).\nIn a concrete category, an embedding is a morphism formula_122 that is an injective function from the underlying set of formula_123 to the underlying set of formula_124 and is also an initial morphism in the following sense:\nIf formula_67 is a function from the underlying set of an object formula_73 to the underlying set of formula_123, and if its composition with formula_19 is a morphism formula_129, then formula_67 itself is a morphism.\nA factorization system for a category also gives rise to a notion of embedding. If formula_131 is a factorization system, then the morphisms in formula_37 may be regarded as the embeddings, especially when the category is well powered with respect to formula_37. Concrete theories often have a factorization system in which formula_37 consists of the embeddings in the previous sense. This is the case of the majority of the examples given in this article.\nAs usual in category theory, there is a dual concept, known as quotient. All the preceding properties can be dualized.\nAn embedding can also refer to an embedding functor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndex of articles associated with the same name\nThis includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "52121", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52121", "title": "Strabo", "text": "Greek geographer, philosopher and historian (64/63 BC\u2013c.24 AD)\nStrabo (; ; 64 or 63 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200924\u00a0AD) was an ancient Greek geographer who lived in Asia Minor during the transitional period of the Roman Republic into the Roman Empire. He is best known for his work \"Geographica\", which presented a descriptive history of people and places from different regions of the world known during his lifetime. Additionally, Strabo authored historical works, but only fragments and quotations of these survive in the writings of other authors.\nEarly life.\nStrabo was born to an affluent family from Amaseia in Pontus in around 64BC. His family had been involved in politics since at least the reign of Mithridates V. Strabo was related to Dorylaeus on his mother's side. Several other family members, including his paternal grandfather, had served Mithridates\u00a0VI during the Mithridatic Wars. As the war drew to a close, Strabo's grandfather had turned several Pontic fortresses over to the Romans. Strabo wrote that \"great promises were made in exchange for these services\", and as Persian culture endured in Amaseia even after Mithridates and Tigranes were defeated, scholars have speculated about how the family's support for Rome might have affected their position in the local community, and whether they might have been granted Roman citizenship as a reward.\nEducation.\nStrabo studied under several prominent teachers of various specialities throughout his early life. He mentions all or most of his teachers as prominent citizens of their own respective cities, at different stops during his Mediterranean travels. The first chapter of his education took place in Nysa (modern Sultanhisar, Turkey) under the master of rhetoric Aristodemus, the grandson of the famous Posidonius, whose influence is manifest in Strabo's \"Geography\". Aristodemus had formerly taught the sons of the Roman general who had taken over Pontus. This also highlights the international trend of the era that Greek intellectuals would often instruct the Roman elite. Aristodemus was the head of two schools of rhetoric and grammar, one in Nysa and one in Rhodes. The school in Nysa possessed a distinct intellectual curiosity in Homeric literature and the interpretation of the ancient Greek epics. Strabo was an admirer of Homer's poetry, perhaps as a consequence of his time spent in Nysa with Aristodemus. \nHe was influenced by Hecataeus and Aristotle. \nAt around the age of 21, Strabo moved to Rome, in 44\u00a0BC, and stayed there, studying and writing, until at least 31\u00a0BC. He studied philosophy with the Peripatetic Xenarchus, a highly respected tutor in Augustus's court. Despite Xenarchus's Aristotelian leanings, Strabo later showed evidence of developing his own Stoic inclinations, largely influenced by his future teacher Athenodorus, who was also the tutor of Augustus. In Rome, he also learned grammar under the wealthy and renowned scholar Tyrannion of Amisus. Thus completing his traditional Greek aristocratic education in rhetoric, grammar, and philosophy. Tyrannion was known to have befriended Cicero and taught his nephew, Quintus. Although Tyrannion was also a Peripatetic, he was more relevantly a respected authority on geography, a fact of some significance considering Strabo's future contributions to the field.\nThe final noteworthy mentor to Strabo was Athenodorus Cananites, a philosopher who had spent his life since 44\u00a0BC in Rome forging relationships with the Roman elite. Athenodorus passed onto Strabo his philosophy, his knowledge and his contacts. Unlike the Aristotelian Xenarchus and Tyrannion who preceded him in teaching Strabo, Athenodorus was a Stoic and almost certainly the source of Strabo's diversion from the philosophy of his former mentors. Moreover, from his own first-hand experience, Athenodorus provided Strabo with information about regions of the empire which Strabo would not otherwise have known about.\nThe first of Strabo's major works, \"Historical Sketches\" (\"Historica hypomnemata\"), written while he was in Rome (c.\u200920\u00a0BC), is nearly completely lost. Meant to cover the history of the known world from the conquest of Greece by the Romans, Strabo quotes it himself and other classical authors mention that it existed, although the only surviving document is a fragment of papyrus now in the possession of the University of Milan (renumbered [Papyrus]\u00a046).\nCareer.\nStrabo's life was characterized by extensive travels. He journeyed to Egypt and Kush, as far west as the coastal region of Tuscany, and as far south as Ethiopia, in addition to his travels in Asia Minor and the time he spent in Rome. Travel throughout the Mediterranean and Near East, especially for scholarly purposes, was popular during this era and was facilitated by the relative peace enjoyed throughout the reign of Augustus (27\u00a0BC \u2013 AD\u00a014). In 29\u00a0BC, on his way to Corinth (where Augustus was at the time), he visited the island of Gyaros in the Aegean Sea. Around 25\u00a0BC, he sailed up the Nile until he reached Philae, after which point there is little record of his travels until AD 17.\nIt is not known precisely when Strabo's \"Geography\" was written, though comments within the work itself place the finished version within the reign of Emperor Tiberius. Some place its first drafts around 7\u00a0BC, others around AD\u00a017 or AD\u00a018. The latest passage to which a date can be assigned is his reference to the death in AD\u00a023 of Juba\u00a0II, king of Maurousia (Mauretania), who is said to have died \"just recently\". He probably worked on the \"Geography\" for many years and revised it steadily, but not always consistently. It is an encyclopaedic chronicle and consists of political, economic, social, cultural, and geographic descriptions covering almost all of Europe and the Mediterranean: Britain and Ireland, the Iberian Peninsula, Gaul, Germania, the Alps, Italy, Greece, Northern Black Sea region, Anatolia, Middle East, Central Asia and North Africa. The \"Geography\" is the only extant work providing information about both Greek and Roman peoples and countries during the reign of Augustus.\nOn the presumption that \"recently\" means within a year, Strabo stopped writing that year or the next (AD\u00a024), at which time he is thought to have died. \nWork.\n\"Geographica\".\nStrabo is best known for his work \"Geographica\" (\"Geography\"), which presented a descriptive history of people and places from different regions of the world known during his lifetime.\nAlthough the \"Geographica\" was rarely used by contemporary writers, a multitude of copies survived throughout the Byzantine Empire. It first appeared in Western Europe in Rome as a Latin translation issued around 1469. The first printed edition was published in 1516 in Venice. Isaac Casaubon, classical scholar and editor of Greek texts, provided the first critical edition in 1587.\nAlthough Strabo cited the classical Greek astronomers Eratosthenes and Hipparchus, acknowledging their astronomical and mathematical efforts covering geography, he claimed that a descriptive approach was more practical, such that his works were designed for statesmen who were more anthropologically than numerically concerned with the character of countries and regions.\nAs such, \"Geographica\" provides a valuable source of information on the ancient world of his day, especially when this information is corroborated by other sources. He travelled extensively, as he says: \"Westward I have journeyed to the parts of Etruria opposite Sardinia; towards the south from the Euxine [Black Sea] to the borders of Ethiopia; and perhaps not one of those who have written geographies has visited more places than I have between those limits.\"\nIt is not known when he wrote \"Geographica\", but he spent much time in the famous library in Alexandria taking notes from \"the works of his predecessors\". A first edition was published in 7\u00a0BC and a final edition no later than 23\u00a0AD, in what may have been the last year of Strabo's life. It took some time for \"Geographica\" to be recognized by scholars and to become a standard. \nAlexandria itself features extensively in the last book of \"Geographica\", which describes it as a thriving port city with a highly developed local economy. Strabo notes the city's many beautiful public parks, and its network of streets wide enough for chariots and horsemen. \"Two of these are exceeding broad, over a plethron in breadth, and cut one another at right angles ... All the buildings are connected one with another, and these also with what are beyond it.\"\nLawrence Kim observes that Strabo is \"... pro-Roman throughout the Geography. But while he acknowledges and even praises Roman ascendancy in the political and military sphere, he also makes a significant effort to establish Greek primacy over Rome in other contexts.\"\nIn Europe, Strabo was the first to connect the Danube (which he called Danouios) and the Istros \u2013 with the change of names occurring at \"the cataracts,\" the modern Iron Gates on the Romanian/Serbian border.\nIn India, a country he never visited, Strabo described small flying reptiles that were long with snake-like bodies and bat-like wings (this description matches the Indian flying lizard \"Draco dussumieri\"), winged scorpions, and other mythical creatures along with those that were actually factual.\nGeology.\nCharles Lyell, in his \"Principles of Geology\", wrote of Strabo:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStrabo\u2026enters largely, in the Second Book of his \"Geography\", into the opinions of Eratosthenes and other Greeks on one of the most difficult problems in geology, \"viz\"., by what causes marine shells came to be plentifully buried in the earth at such great elevations and distances from the sea.\nHe notices, amongst others, the explanation of Xanthus the Lydian, who said that the seas had once been more extensive, and that they had afterwards been partially dried up, as in his own time many lakes, rivers, and wells in Asia had failed during a season of drought. Treating this conjecture with merited disregard, Strabo passes on to the hypothesis of Strato, the natural philosopher, who had observed that the quantity of mud brought down by rivers into the Euxine [Black Sea] was so great, that its bed must be gradually raised, while the rivers still continued to pour in an undiminished quantity of water. He therefore conceived that, originally, when the Euxine was an inland sea, its level had by this means become so much elevated that it burst its barrier near Byzantium, and formed a communication with the Propontis [Sea of Marmara], and this partial drainage had already, he supposed, converted the left side into marshy ground, and that, at last, the whole would be choked up with soil. So, it was argued, the Mediterranean had once opened a passage for itself by the Columns of Hercules into the Atlantic, and perhaps the abundance of sea-shells in Africa, near the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, might also be the deposit of some former inland sea, which had at length forced a passage and escaped.\nBut Strabo rejects this theory as insufficient to account for all the phenomena, and he proposes one of his own, the profoundness of which modern geologists are only beginning to appreciate. 'It is not,' he says, 'because the lands covered by seas were originally at different altitudes, that the waters have risen, or subsided, or receded from some parts and inundated others. But the reason is, that the same land is sometimes raised up and sometimes depressed, and the sea also is simultaneously raised and depressed so that it either overflows or returns into its own place again. We must, therefore, ascribe the cause to the ground, either to that ground which is under the sea, or to that which becomes flooded by it, but rather to that which lies beneath the sea, for this is more moveable, and, on account of its humidity, can be altered with great celerity. It is proper,' he observes in continuation, \"'to derive our explanations from things which are obvious, and in some measure of daily occurrences, such as deluges, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and sudden swellings of the land beneath the sea;\" for the last raise up the sea also, and when the same lands subside again, they occasion the sea to be let down. And it is not merely the small, but the large islands also, and not merely the islands, but the continents, which can be lifted up together with the sea; and both large and small tracts may subside, for habitations and cities, like Bure, Bizona, and many others, have been engulfed by earthquakes.'\nIn another place, this learned geographer [Strabo], in alluding to the tradition that Sicily had been separated by a convulsion from Italy, remarks, that at present the land near the sea in those parts was rarely shaken by earthquakes, since there were now open orifices whereby fire and ignited matters and waters escaped; but formerly, when the volcanoes of Etna, the Lipari Islands, Ischia, and others, were closed up, the imprisoned fire and wind might have produced far more vehement movements. The doctrine, therefore, that volcanoes are safety valves, and that the subterranean convulsions are probably most violent when first the volcanic energy shifts itself to a new quarter, is not modern.\nFossil formation.\nStrabo commented on fossil formation mentioning Nummulite (quoted from Cel\u00e2l \u015eeng\u00f6r):One extraordinary thing which I saw at the pyramids must not be omitted. Heaps of stones from the quarries lie in front of the pyramids. Among these are found pieces which in shape and size resemble lentils. Some contain substances like grains half peeled. These, it is said, are the remnants of the workmen's food converted into stone; which is not probable. For at home in our country (Amaseia), there is a long hill in a plain, which abounds with pebbles of a porous stone, resembling lentils. The pebbles of the sea-shore and of rivers suggest somewhat of the same difficulty [respecting their origin]; some explanation may indeed be found in the motion [to which these are subject] in flowing waters, but the investigation of the above fact presents more difficulty. I have said elsewhere, that in sight of the pyramids, on the other side in Arabia, and near the stone quarries from which they are built, is a very rocky mountain, called the Trojan mountain; beneath it there are caves, and near the caves and the river a village called Troy, an ancient settlement of the captive Trojans who had accompanied Menelaus and settled there.\nVolcanism.\nStrabo commented on volcanism (effusive eruption) which he observed at Katakekaumene (modern Kula, Western Turkey). Strabo's observations predated Pliny the Younger who witnessed the eruption of Mount Vesuvius on 24 August AD\u00a079 in Pompeii:\u2026There are no trees here, but only the vineyards where they produce the Katakekaumene wines which are by no means inferior from any of the wines famous for their quality. The soil is covered with ashes, and black in colour as if the mountainous and rocky country was made up of fires. Some assume that these ashes were the result of thunderbolts and subterranean explosions, and do not doubt that the legendary story of Typhon takes place in this region. Ksanthos adds that the king of this region was a man called Arimus. However, it is not reasonable to accept that the whole country was burned down at a time as a result of such an event rather than as a result of a fire bursting from underground whose source has now died out. Three pits are called \"Physas\" and separated by forty stadia from each other. Above these pits, there are hills formed by the hot masses burst out from the ground as estimated by a logical reasoning. Such type of soil is very convenient for viniculture, just like the Katanasoil which is covered with ashes and where the best wines are still produced abundantly. Some writers concluded by looking at these places that there is a good reason for calling Dionysus by the name (\"Phrygenes\").\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52122", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52122", "title": "228", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 228 (CCXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Modestus and Maecius (or, less frequently, year 981 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 228 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52123", "revid": "1568174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52123", "title": "229", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 229 (CCXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Cassius (or, less frequently, year 982 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 229 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt and Science.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52124", "revid": "50072464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52124", "title": "VHS", "text": "Consumer-level analog videotape recording and cassette form standard\nVHS (Video Home System) is a discontinued standard for consumer-level analog video recording on tape cassettes, introduced in 1976 by JVC. It was the dominant home video format throughout the tape media period of the 1980s and 1990s.\nMagnetic tape video recording was adopted by the television industry in the 1950s in the form of the first commercialized video tape recorders (VTRs), but the devices were expensive and used only in professional environments. In the 1970s, videotape technology became affordable for home use, and widespread adoption of videocassette recorders (VCRs) began; the VHS became the most popular media format for VCRs as it would win the \"format war\" against Betamax (backed by Sony) and a number of other competing tape standards.\nThe cassettes themselves use a 0.5-inch (12.7 mm) magnetic tape between two spools and typically offer a capacity of at least two hours. The popularity of VHS was intertwined with the rise of the video rental market, when films were released on pre-recorded videotapes for home viewing. Newer improved tape formats such as S-VHS were later developed, as well as the earliest optical disc format, LaserDisc; the lack of global adoption of these formats increased VHS's lifetime, which eventually peaked and started to decline in the late 1990s after the introduction of DVD, a digital optical disc format. VHS rentals were surpassed by DVD in the United States in 2003, which eventually became the preferred low-end method of movie distribution. For home recording purposes, VHS and VCRs were surpassed by (typically hard disk\u2013based) digital video recorders (DVR) in the 2000s. Production of all VHS equipment ceased by 2016, although the format has since gained some popularity amongst collectors.\nHistory.\nBefore VHS.\nIn 1956, after several attempts by other companies, the first commercially successful VTR, the Ampex VRX-1000, was introduced by Ampex Corporation. At a price of US$50,000 in 1956 () and US$300 () for a 90-minute reel of tape, it was intended only for the professional market.\nKenjiro Takayanagi, a television broadcasting pioneer then working for JVC as its vice president, saw the need for his company to produce VTRs for the Japanese market at a more affordable price. In 1959, JVC developed a two-head video tape recorder and, by 1960, a color version for professional broadcasting. In 1964, JVC released the DV220, which would be the company's standard VTR until the mid-1970s.\nIn 1969, JVC collaborated with Sony Corporation and Matsushita Electric (Matsushita was the majority stockholder of JVC until 2011) to build a video recording standard for the Japanese consumer. The effort produced the U-matic format in 1971, which was the first cassette format to become a unified standard for different companies. It was preceded by the reel-to-reel &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\" EIAJ format.\nThe U-matic format was successful in businesses and some broadcast television applications, such as electronic news-gathering, and was produced by all three companies until the late 1980s, but because of cost and limited recording time, very few of the machines were sold for home use. Therefore, soon after the U-Matic release, all three companies started working on new consumer-grade video recording formats of their own. Sony started working on Betamax, Matsushita started working on VX, and JVC released the CR-6060 in 1975, based on the U-matic format.\nVHS development.\nIn 1971, JVC engineers Yuma Shiraishi and Shizuo Takano put together a team to develop a VTR for consumers.\nBy the end of 1971, they created an internal diagram, \"VHS Development Matrix\", which established twelve objectives for JVC's new VTR:\nIn early 1972, the commercial video recording industry in Japan took a financial hit. JVC cut its budgets and restructured its video division, shelving the VHS project. However, despite the lack of funding, Takano and Shiraishi continued to work on the project in secret. By 1973, the two engineers had produced a functional prototype.\nCompetition with Betamax.\nIn 1974, the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), desiring to avoid consumer confusion, attempted to force the Japanese video industry to standardize on just one home video recording format. Later, Sony had a functional prototype of the Betamax format, and was very close to releasing a finished product. With this prototype, Sony persuaded the MITI to adopt Betamax as the standard, and allow it to license the technology to other companies.\nJVC believed that an open standard, with the format shared among competitors without licensing the technology, was better for the consumer. To prevent the MITI from adopting Betamax, JVC worked to convince other companies, in particular Matsushita (Japan's largest electronics manufacturer at the time, marketing its products under the National brand in most territories and the Panasonic brand in North America, and JVC's majority stockholder), to accept VHS, and thereby work against Sony and the MITI. Matsushita agreed, primarily out of concern that Sony might become the leader in the field if its proprietary Betamax format was the only one allowed to be manufactured. Matsushita also regarded Betamax's one-hour recording time limit as a disadvantage.\nMatsushita's backing of JVC persuaded Hitachi, Mitsubishi, and Sharp to back the VHS standard as well. Sony's release of its Betamax unit to the Japanese market in 1975 placed further pressure on the MITI to side with the company. However, the collaboration of JVC and its partners was much stronger, which eventually led the MITI to drop its push for an industry standard. JVC released the first VHS machines in Japan in late 1976, and in the United States in mid-1977.\nSony's Betamax competed with VHS throughout the late 1970s and into the 1980s (see Videotape format war). Betamax's major advantages were its smaller cassette size, theoretical higher video quality, and earlier availability, but its shorter recording time proved to be a major shortcoming.\nOriginally, Beta I machines using the NTSC television standard were able to record one hour of programming at their standard tape speed of 1.5\u00a0inches per second\u00a0(ips). The first VHS machines could record for two hours, due to both a slightly slower tape speed (1.31\u00a0ips) and significantly longer tape. Betamax's smaller cassette limited the size of the reel of tape, and could not compete with VHS's two-hour capability by extending the tape length. Instead, Sony had to slow the tape down to 0.787\u00a0ips (Beta II) in order to achieve two hours of recording in the same cassette size. Sony eventually created a Beta III speed of 0.524 ips, which allowed NTSC Betamax to break the two-hour limit, but by then VHS had already won the format battle.\nAdditionally, VHS had a \"far less complex tape transport mechanism\" than Betamax, and VHS machines were faster at rewinding and fast-forwarding than their Sony counterparts.\nVHS eventually won the war, gaining 60% of the North American market by 1980.\nInitial releases of VHS-based devices.\nThe first VCR to use VHS was the Victor HR-3300, and was introduced by the president of JVC in Japan on September 9, 1976. JVC started selling the HR-3300 in Akihabara, Tokyo, Japan, on October 31, 1976. Region-specific versions of the JVC HR-3300 were also distributed later on, such as the HR-3300U in the United States, and the HR-3300EK in the United Kingdom. The United States received its first VHS-based VCR, the RCA VBT200, on August 23, 1977. The RCA unit was designed by Matsushita and was the first VHS-based VCR manufactured by a company other than JVC. It was also capable of recording four hours in LP (long play) mode. The UK received its first VHS-based VCR, the Victor HR-3300EK, in 1978.\nQuasar and General Electric followed-up with VHS-based VCRs \u2013 all designed by Matsushita. By 1999, Matsushita alone produced just over half of all Japanese VCRs. TV/VCR combos, combining a TV set with a VHS mechanism, were also once available for purchase. Combo units containing both a VHS mechanism and a DVD player were introduced in the late 1990s, and at least one combo unit, the Panasonic DMP-BD70V, included a Blu-ray player.\nTechnical details.\nVHS has been standardized in IEC 60774\u20131.\nCassette and tape design.\nThe VHS cassette is a 187\u00a0mm wide, 103\u00a0mm deep, and 25\u00a0mm thick (7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20448 \u00d7 4&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416\u00d7 1 inch) plastic shell held together with five Phillips-head screws. The flip-up cover, which allows players and recorders to access the tape, has a latch on the right side, with a push-in toggle to release it (bottom view image). The cassette has an anti-despooling mechanism, consisting of several plastic parts between the spools, near the front of the cassette (white and black in the top view). The spool latches are released by a push-in lever within a 6.35\u00a0mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 inch) hole at the bottom of the cassette, 19\u00a0mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 inch) in from the edge label. The tapes are made, pre-recorded, and inserted into the cassettes in cleanrooms, to ensure quality and to keep dust from getting embedded in the tape and interfering with recording (both of which could cause signal dropouts)\nThere is a clear tape leader at both ends of the tape to provide an optical auto-stop for the VCR transport mechanism. In the VCR, a light source is inserted into the cassette through the circular hole in the center of the underside, and two photodiodes are on the left and right sides of where the tape exits the cassette. When the clear tape reaches one of these, enough light will pass through the tape to the photodiode to trigger the stop function; some VCRs automatically rewind the tape when the trailing end is detected. Early VCRs used an incandescent bulb as the light source: when the bulb failed, the VCR would act as if a tape were present when the machine was empty, or would detect the blown bulb and completely stop functioning. Later designs use an infrared LED, which has a much longer life.\nThe recording medium is a Mylar magnetic tape, 12.7\u00a0mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 inch) wide, coated with metal oxide, and wound on two spools. VHS tapes stored next to magnetic materials can become damaged or distorted due to the disruption of the oxide particles. \nThe tape speed for \"Standard Play\" mode (see below) is 3.335\u00a0cm/s (1.313 ips) for NTSC, 2.339\u00a0cm/s (0.921 ips) for PAL\u2014or just over 2.0 and 1.4 metres (6\u00a0ft 6.7 in and 4\u00a0ft 7.2 in) per minute respectively. The tape length for a T-120 VHS cassette is 247.5 metres (812\u00a0ft).\nTape loading technique.\nAs with almost all cassette-based videotape systems, VHS machines pull the tape out of the cassette shell and wrap it around the inclined head drum, which rotates at 1,800 rpm in NTSC machines and at 1,500\u00a0rpm for PAL, one complete rotation of the head corresponding to one video frame. VHS uses an \"M-loading\" system, also known as M-lacing, where the tape is drawn out by two threading posts and wrapped around more than 180 degrees of the head drum (and also other tape transport components) in a shape roughly approximating the letter M. The heads in the rotating drum get their signal wirelessly using a rotary transformer.\nRecording capacity.\nA VHS cassette holds a maximum of about 430\u00a0m (1,410\u00a0ft) of tape at the lowest acceptable tape thickness, giving a maximum playing time of about four hours in a T-240/DF480 for NTSC and five hours in an E-300 for PAL at \"standard play\" (SP) quality. More frequently, however, VHS tapes are thicker than the required minimum to avoid complications such as jams or tears in the tape. Other speeds include \"long play\" (LP), \"extended play\" (EP) or \"super long play\" (SLP) (standard on NTSC; rarely found on PAL machines). LP and EP/SLP double and triple the recording time respectively, but these speed reductions cause a reduction in horizontal resolution \u2013 from the normal equivalent of 250 vertical lines in SP, to the equivalent of 230 in LP and even less in EP/SLP.\nDue to the nature of recording diagonally from a spinning drum, the actual write speed of the video heads does not get slower when the tape speed is reduced. Instead, the video tracks become narrower and are packed closer together. This results in noisier playback that can be more difficult to track correctly: The effect of subtle misalignment is magnified by the narrower tracks. The heads for linear audio are not on the spinning drum, so for them, the tape speed from one reel to the other is the same as the speed of the heads across the tape. This speed is quite slow: for SP it is about 2/3s that of an audio cassette, and for EP it is slower than the slowest microcassette speed. This is widely considered inadequate for anything but basic voice playback, and was a major liability for VHS-C camcorders that encouraged the use of the EP speed. Color depth deteriorates significantly at lower speeds in PAL: often, a color image on a PAL tape recorded at low speed is displayed only in monochrome, or with intermittent color, when playback is paused.\nTape lengths.\nVHS cassettes for NTSC and PAL/SECAM systems are physically identical, although the signals recorded on the tape are incompatible. The tape speeds are different too, so the playing time for any given cassette will vary between the systems. To avoid confusion, manufacturers indicate the playing time in minutes that can be expected for the market the tape is sold in: E-XXX indicates playing time in minutes for PAL or SECAM. T-XXX indicates playing time in minutes for NTSC or PAL-M.\nTo calculate the playing time for a T-XXX tape in a PAL machine, this formula is used:\n PAL/SECAM recording time = T-XXX in minutes \u00d7 1.426\nTo calculate the playing time for an E-XXX tape in an NTSC machine, this formula is used:\n NTSC recording time = E-XXX in minutes \u00d7 0.701\nSince the recording/playback time for PAL/SECAM is roughly 1/3 longer than the recording/playback time for NTSC, some tape manufacturers label their cassettes with both T-XXX and E-XXX marks, like T60/E90, T90/E120 and T120/E180.\nSP is standard play, LP is long play (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 speed, equal to recording time in DVHS \"HS\" mode), EP/SLP is extended/super long play (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 speed) which was primarily released into the NTSC market. Some later Panasonic DVD combo models such as the SA-HT820V supported VP (very long play) recording, equal to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20445 speed of SP.\nCopy protection.\nAs VHS was designed to facilitate recording from various sources, including television broadcasts or other VCR units, content producers quickly found that home users were able to use the devices to copy videos from one tape to another. Despite generation loss in quality when a tape was copied, this practice was regarded as a widespread problem, which members of the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) claimed caused them great financial losses. In response, several companies developed technologies to protect copyrighted VHS tapes from casual duplication by home users. The most popular method was Analog Protection System, better known simply as Macrovision, produced by a company of the same name. According to Macrovision: The technology is applied to over 550 million videocassettes annually and is used by every MPAA movie studio on some or all of their videocassette releases. Over 220 commercial duplication facilities around the world are equipped to supply Macrovision videocassette copy protection to rights owners...The study found that over 30% of VCR households admit to having unauthorized copies, and that the total annual revenue loss due to copying is estimated at $370,000,000 annually.\nThe system was first used in copyrighted movies beginning with the 1984 film \"The Cotton Club\".\nMacrovision copy protection saw refinement throughout its years, but has always worked by essentially introducing deliberate errors into a protected VHS tape's output video stream. These errors in the output video stream are ignored by most televisions, but will interfere with re-recording of programming by a second VCR. The first version of Macrovision introduces high signal levels during the vertical blanking interval, which occurs between the video fields. These high levels confuse the automatic gain control circuit in most VHS VCRs, leading to varying brightness levels in an output video, but are ignored by the TV as they are out of the frame-display period. \"Level II\" Macrovision uses a process called \"colorstriping\", which inverts the analog signal's colorburst period and causes off-color bands to appear in the picture. Level III protection added additional colorstriping techniques to further degrade the image.\nThese protection methods worked well to defeat analog-to-analog copying by VCRs of the time. Consumer products capable of digital video recording are mandated by law to include features which detect Macrovision encoding of input analog streams, and disrupt copying of the video. Both intentional and false-positive detection of Macrovision protection has frustrated archivists who wish to copy now-fragile VHS tapes to a digital format for preservation. As of the 2020s, modern software decoding ignores Macrovision as software is not limited to the fixed standards that Macrovision was intended to disrupt in hardware based systems.\nRecording process.\nThe recording process in VHS consists of the following steps, in this order:\nErase head.\nThe erase head is fed by a high-level, high-frequency AC signal that overwrites any previous recording on the tape. Without this step, the new recording cannot be guaranteed to completely replace any old recording that might have been on the tape.\nVideo recording.\nThe tape path then carries the tape around the spinning video-head drum, wrapping it around a little more than 180 degrees (called the \"omega\" transport system) in a helical fashion, assisted by the slanted tape guides. The head rotates constantly at 1798.2 rpm in NTSC machines, exactly 1500 in PAL, each complete rotation corresponding to one frame of video.\nTwo tape heads are mounted on the cylindrical surface of the drum, 180 degrees apart from each other, so that the two heads \"take turns\" in recording. The rotation of the inclined head drum, combined with the relatively slow movement of the tape, results in each head recording a track oriented at a diagonal with respect to the length of the tape, with the heads moving across the tape at speeds higher than what would otherwise be possible. This is referred to as helical scan recording. A tape speed of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+5\u204416 inches per second corresponds to the heads on the drum moving across the tape at (a writing speed of) 4.86 or 6.096 meters per second.\nTo maximize the use of the tape, the video tracks are recorded very close together. To reduce crosstalk between adjacent tracks on playback, an azimuth recording method is used: The gaps of the two heads are not aligned exactly with the track path. Instead, one head is angled at plus six degrees from the track, and the other at minus six degrees. This results, during playback, in destructive interference of the signal from the tracks on either side of the one being played.\nEach of the diagonal-angled tracks is a complete TV picture field, lasting &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204460 of a second (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204450 on PAL) on the display. One tape head records an entire picture field. The adjacent track, recorded by the second tape head, is another &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204460 or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204450 of a second TV picture field, and so on. Thus one complete head rotation records an entire NTSC or PAL frame of two fields.\nThe original VHS specification had only two video heads. When the EP recording speed was introduced, the thickness of these heads was reduced to accommodate the narrower tracks. However, this subtly reduced the quality of the SP speed, and dramatically lowered the quality of freeze frame and high speed search. Later models implemented both wide and narrow heads, and could use all four during pause and shuttle modes to further improve quality although machines later combined both pairs into one. In machines supporting VHS HiFi (described later), yet another pair of heads was added to handle the VHS HiFi signal. Camcorders using the miniaturized drum required twice as many heads to complete any given task. This almost always meant four heads on the miniaturized drum with performance similar to a two head VCR with a full sized drum. No attempt was made to record Hi-Fi audio with such devices, as this would require an additional four heads to work. W-VHS decks could have up to 12 heads in the head drum, of which 11 were active including a flying erase head for erasing individual video fields, and one was a dummy used for balancing the head drum.\nThe high tape-to-head speed created by the rotating head results in a far higher bandwidth than could be practically achieved with a stationary head.\nVHS machines record up to 3\u00a0MHz of baseband video bandwidth and 300\u00a0kHz of baseband chroma bandwidth. The luminance (black and white) portion of the video is frequency modulated and combined with a down-converted \"color under\" chroma (color) signal that is encoded using quadrature amplitude modulation. Including side bands, the signal on a VHS tape can use up to 10\u00a0MHz of RF bandwidth.\nVHS horizontal resolution is 240 Television Lines or TVL, about 320 lines across a scan line. The vertical resolution (number of scan lines) is the same as the respective analog TV standard (625 or 525 lines; somewhat fewer scan lines are actually visible due to overscan and the VBI). In modern-day digital terminology, NTSC VHS resolution is roughly equivalent to ~333\u00d7480 (~159,840 pixels or ~0.16 MP) for luma and ~40\u00d7480 pixels for chroma. PAL VHS resolution is roughly ~333\u00d7576 pixels for luma and ~40\u00d7576 pixels for chroma (although when decoded PAL and SECAM half the vertical color resolution).\nJVC countered 1985's SuperBeta with VHS HQ, or High Quality. The frequency modulation of the VHS luminance signal is limited to 3 megahertz, which makes higher resolutions technically impossible even with the highest-quality recording heads and tape materials, but an HQ branded deck includes luminance noise reduction, chroma noise reduction, white clip extension, and improved sharpness circuitry. The effect was to increase the apparent horizontal resolution of a VHS recording from 240 to 250 TVL (equivalent to 333 pixels from left-to-right, in digital terminology). The major VHS OEMs resisted HQ due to cost concerns, eventually resulting in JVC reducing the requirements for the HQ brand to white clip extension plus one other improvement.\nIn 1987, JVC introduced a new format called Super VHS (often known as S-VHS) which extended the bandwidth to over 5 megahertz, yielding 420 TVL (equivalent to 560 pixels left-to-right, in digital terminology). Most Super VHS recorders can play back standard VHS tapes, but not vice versa. S-VHS was designed for higher resolution, but failed to gain popularity outside Japan because of the high costs of the machines and tapes. Because of the limited user base, Super VHS was never picked up to any significant degree by manufacturers of pre-recorded tapes, although it was used extensively in the low-end professional market for filming and editing.\nAudio recording.\nAfter leaving the head drum, the tape passes over the stationary audio and control head. This records a control track at the bottom edge of the tape, and one or two linear audio tracks along the top edge.\nOriginal linear audio system.\nIn the original VHS specification, audio was recorded as baseband in a single linear track, at the upper edge of the tape, similar to how an audio compact cassette operates. The recorded frequency range was dependent on the linear tape speed. For the VHS SP mode, which already uses a lower tape speed than the compact cassette, this resulted in a mediocre frequency response of roughly 100\u00a0Hz to 10\u00a0kHz for NTSC, frequency response for PAL VHS with its lower standard tape speed was somewhat worse of about 80\u00a0Hz to 8\u00a0kHz. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was an acceptable 42\u00a0dB for NTSC and 41\u00a0dB for PAL. Both parameters degraded significantly with VHS's longer play modes, with EP/NTSC frequency response peaking at 4\u00a0kHz. S-VHS tapes can give better audio (and video) quality, because the tapes are designed to have almost twice the bandwidth of VHS at the same speed.\nSound cannot be recorded on a VHS tape without recording a video signal because the video signal is used to generate the control track pulses which effectively regulate the tape speed on playback. Even in the audio dubbing mode, a valid video recording (control track signal) must be present on the tape for audio to be correctly recorded. If there is no video signal to the VCR input during recording, most later VCRs will record black video and generate a control track while the sound is being recorded. Some early VCRs record audio without a control track signal; this is of little use, because the absence of a signal from the control track means that the linear tape speed is irregular during playback.\nMore sophisticated VCRs offer stereo audio recording and playback. Linear stereo fits two independent channels in the same space as the original mono audiotrack. While this approach preserves acceptable backward compatibility with monoaural audio heads, the splitting of the audio track degrades the audio's signal-to-noise ratio, causing objectionable tape hiss at normal listening volume. To counteract the hiss, linear stereo VHS VCRs use Dolby B noise reduction for recording and playback. This dynamically boosts the high frequencies of the audio program on the recorded medium, improving its signal strength relative to the tape's background noise floor, then attenuates the high frequencies during playback. Dolby-encoded program material exhibits a high-frequency emphasis when played on non-Hi-Fi VCRs that are not equipped with the matching Dolby Noise Reduction decoder, although this may actually improve the sound quality of non-Hi-Fi VCRs, especially at the slower recording speeds.\nHigh-end consumer recorders take advantage of the linear nature of the audio track, as the audio track could be erased and recorded without disturbing the video portion of the recorded signal. Hence, \"audio dubbing\" and \"video dubbing\", where either the audio or video is re-recorded on tape (without disturbing the other), were supported features on prosumer linear video editing-decks. Without dubbing capability, an audio or video edit could not be done in-place on master cassette, and requires the editing output be captured to another tape, incurring generational loss.\nStudio film releases began to emerge with linear stereo audiotracks in 1982. From that point, nearly every home video release by Hollywood featured a Dolby-encoded linear stereo audiotrack. However, linear stereo was never popular with equipment makers or consumers.\nTracking adjustment and index marking.\nAnother linear \"control\" track at the tape's lower edge holds pulses that mark the beginning of every frame of video; these are used to fine-tune the tape speed during playback, so that the high speed rotating heads remained exactly on their helical tracks rather than somewhere between two adjacent tracks (known as \"tracking\"). Since good tracking depends on precise distances between the rotating drum and the fixed control/audio head reading the linear tracks, which usually varies by a couple of micrometers between machines due to manufacturing tolerances, most VCRs offer tracking adjustment, either manual or automatic, to correct such mismatches.\nThe control track is also used to hold \"index marks\", which were normally written at the beginning of each recording session, and can be found using the VCR's \"index search\" function: this will fast-wind forward or backward to the \"n\"th specified index mark, and resume playback from there. At times, higher-end VCRs provided functions for the user to manually add and remove these marks.\nBy the late 1990s, some high-end VCRs offered more sophisticated indexing. For example, Panasonic's Tape Library system assigned an ID number to each cassette, and logged recording information (channel, date, time and optional program title entered by the user) both on the cassette and in the VCR's memory for up to 900 recordings (600 with titles).\nHi-Fi audio system.\nAround 1984, JVC added \"Hi-Fi\" audio to VHS (model HR-D725U, in response to Betamax's introduction of Beta Hi-Fi.) Both VHS Hi-Fi and Betamax Hi-Fi delivered flat full-range frequency response (20\u00a0Hz to 20\u00a0kHz), excellent 70\u00a0dB signal-to-noise ratio (in consumer space, second only to the compact disc), dynamic range of 90\u00a0dB, and professional audio-grade channel separation (more than 70\u00a0dB). VHS Hi-Fi audio is achieved by using audio frequency modulation (AFM), modulating the two stereo channels (L, R) on two different frequency-modulated carriers and embedding the combined modulated audio signal pair into the video signal. To avoid crosstalk and interference from the primary video carrier, VHS's implementation of AFM relied on a form of magnetic recording called \"depth multiplexing\". The modulated audio carrier pair was placed in the hitherto-unused frequency range between the luminance and the color carrier (below 1.6\u00a0MHz), and recorded first. Subsequently, the video head erases and re-records the video signal (combined luminance and color signal) over the same tape surface, but the video signal's higher center frequency results in a shallower magnetization of the tape, allowing both the video and residual AFM audio signal to coexist on tape. (PAL versions of Beta Hi-Fi use this same technique). During playback, VHS Hi-Fi recovers the depth-recorded AFM signal by subtracting the audio head's signal (which contains the AFM signal contaminated by a weak image of the video signal) from the video head's signal (which contains only the video signal), then demodulates the left and right audio channels from their respective frequency carriers. The result of the complex process was audio of high fidelity, which was uniformly solid across all tape-speeds (EP, LP or SP.) Since JVC had gone through the complexity of ensuring Hi-Fi's backward compatibility with non-Hi-Fi VCRs, virtually all studio home video releases produced after this time contained Hi-Fi audio tracks, in addition to the linear audio track. Under normal circumstances, all Hi-Fi VHS VCRs will record Hi-Fi and linear audio simultaneously to ensure compatibility with VCRs without Hi-Fi playback, though only early high-end Hi-Fi machines provided linear stereo compatibility.\nThe sound quality of Hi-Fi VHS stereo is comparable to some extent to the quality of CD audio, particularly when recordings were made on high-end or professional VHS machines that have a manual audio recording level control. This high quality compared to other consumer audio recording formats such as compact cassette attracted the attention of amateur and hobbyist recording artists. Home recording enthusiasts occasionally recorded high quality stereo mixdowns and master recordings from multitrack audio tape onto consumer-level Hi-Fi VCRs. However, because the VHS Hi-Fi recording process is intertwined with the VCR's video-recording function, advanced editing functions such as audio-only or video-only dubbing are impossible. A short-lived alternative to the HiFi feature for recording mixdowns of hobbyist audio-only projects was a PCM adaptor so that high-bandwidth digital video could use a grid of black-and-white dots on an analog video carrier to give pro-grade digital sounds though DAT tapes made this obsolete.\nSome VHS decks also had a \"simulcast\" switch, allowing users to record an external audio input along with off-air pictures. Some televised concerts offered a stereo simulcast soundtrack on FM radio and as such, events like \"Live Aid\" were recorded by thousands of people with a full stereo soundtrack despite the fact that stereo TV broadcasts were some years off (especially in regions that adopted NICAM). Other examples of this included network television shows such as \"Friday Night Videos\" and MTV for its first few years in existence. Likewise, some countries, most notably South Africa, provided alternate language audio tracks for TV programming through an FM radio simulcast.\nThe considerable complexity and additional hardware limited VHS Hi-Fi to high-end decks for many years. While linear stereo all but disappeared from home VHS decks, it was not until the 1990s that Hi-Fi became a more common feature on VHS decks. Even then, most customers were unaware of its significance and merely enjoyed the better audio performance of the newer decks. VHS Hi-Fi audio has been standardized in IEC 60774-2.\nIssues with Hi-Fi audio.\nDue to the path followed by the video and Hi-Fi audio heads being striped and discontinuous\u2014unlike that of the linear audio track\u2014head-switching is required to provide a continuous audio signal. While the video signal can easily hide the head-switching point in the invisible vertical retrace section of the signal, so that the exact switching point is not very important, the same is obviously not possible with a continuous audio signal that has no inaudible sections. Hi-Fi audio is thus dependent on a much more exact alignment of the head switching point than is required for non-HiFi VHS machines. Misalignments may lead to imperfect joining of the signal, resulting in low-pitched buzzing. The problem is known as \"head chatter\", and tends to increase as the audio heads wear down.\nAnother issue that made VHS Hi-Fi imperfect for music is the inaccurate reproduction of levels (softer and louder) which are not re-created as the original source.\nVariations.\nSuper-VHS / ADAT / SVHS-ET.\nSeveral improved versions of VHS exist, most notably Super-VHS (S-VHS), an analog video standard with improved video bandwidth. S-VHS improved the horizontal luminance resolution to 400 lines (versus 250 for VHS/Beta and 500 for DVD). The audio system (both linear and AFM) is the same. S-VHS made little impact on the home market, but gained dominance in the camcorder market due to its superior picture quality.\nThe ADAT format provides the ability to record multitrack digital audio using S-VHS media. JVC also developed SVHS-ET technology for its Super-VHS camcorders and VCRs, which simply allows them to record Super VHS signals onto lower-priced VHS tapes, albeit with a slight blurring of the image. Nearly all later JVC Super-VHS camcorders and VCRs have SVHS-ET ability.\nVHS-C / Super VHS-C.\nAnother variant is VHS-Compact (VHS-C), originally developed for portable VCRs in 1982, but ultimately finding success in palm-sized camcorders. The longest tape available for NTSC holds 60 minutes in SP mode and 180 minutes in EP mode. Since VHS-C tapes are based on the same magnetic tape as full-size tapes, they can be played back in standard VHS players using a mechanical adapter, without the need of any kind of signal conversion. The magnetic tape on VHS-C cassettes is wound on one main spool and uses a gear wheel to advance the tape.\nThe adapter is mechanical, although early examples were motorized, with a battery. It has an internal hub to engage with the VCR mechanism in the location of a normal full-size tape hub, driving the gearing on the VHS-C cassette. Also, when a VHS-C cassette is inserted into the adapter, a small swing-arm pulls the tape out of the miniature cassette to span the standard tape path distance between the guide rollers of a full-size tape. This allows the tape from the miniature cassette to use the same loading mechanism as that from the standard cassette.\nSuper VHS-C or S-VHS Compact was developed by JVC in 1987. S-VHS provided an improved luminance and chrominance quality, yet S-VHS recorders were compatible with VHS tapes.\nSony was unable to shrink its Betamax form any further, so instead developed Video8/Hi8 which was in direct competition with the VHS-C/S-VHS-C format throughout the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. Ultimately neither format \"won\" and both have been superseded by digital high definition equipment.\nW-VHS / Digital-VHS (high-definition).\nWide-VHS (W-VHS) allowed recording of MUSE Hi-Vision \"analog\" high definition television, which was broadcast in Japan from 1989 until 2007. The other improved standard, called Digital-VHS (D-VHS), records digital high definition video onto a VHS form factor tape. D-VHS can record up to 4 hours of ATSC digital television in 720p or 1080i formats using the fastest record mode (equivalent to VHS-SP), and up to 49 hours of lower-definition video at slower speeds.\nD9.\nThere is also a JVC-designed component digital professional production format known as Digital-S, or officially under the name D9, that uses a VHS form factor tape and essentially the same mechanical tape handling techniques as an S-VHS recorder. This format is the least expensive format to support a Sel-Sync pre-read for video editing. This format competed with Sony's Digital Betacam in the professional and broadcast market, although in that area Sony's Betacam family ruled supreme, in contrast to the outcome of the VHS/Betamax domestic format war. It has now been superseded by high definition formats.\nV-Lite.\nIn the late 1990s, there was a disposable promotional variation of the VHS format called V-Lite. It was a cassette constructed largely with polystyrene, with only the rotating components like the tape reels being of hard plastic with glued casings without standard features like a protective cover for the exposed tape. Its purpose was to be as lightweight as possible for minimized mass delivery costs for the purpose of a media company's promotional campaign and intended for only a few viewings with a runtime of typically 2 to 3 minutes. One such production so promoted was the A&amp;E Network's 2000 adaptation of \"The Great Gatsby\". The format arose concurrently and then rendered obsolete, with the rise of the DVD video format which eventually supplanted VHS, being lighter and less expensive still to mass-distribute, while video streaming would later supplant the use of physical media for video promotion altogether.\nAccessories.\nShortly after the introduction of the VHS format, VHS tape rewinders were developed. These devices served the sole purpose of rewinding VHS tapes. Proponents of the rewinders argued that the use of the rewind function on the standard VHS player would lead to wear and tear of the transport mechanism. The rewinder would rewind the tapes smoothly and also normally do so at a faster rate than the standard rewind function on VHS players. However, some rewinder brands did have some frequent abrupt stops, which occasionally led to tape damage.\nSome devices were marketed which allowed a personal computer to use a VHS recorder as a data backup device. The most notable of these was ArVid, widely used in Russia and CIS states. Similar systems were manufactured in the United States by Corvus and Alpha Microsystems, and in the UK by \"Backer\" from Danmere Ltd. The \"Backer\" system could store up to 4 GB of data with a transfer rate of 9 MB per minute.\nSignal standards.\nVHS can record and play back all varieties of analog television signals in existence at the time VHS was devised. However, a machine must be designed to record a given standard. Typically, a VHS machine can only handle signals using the same standard as the country it was sold in. This is because some parameters of analog broadcast TV are not applicable to VHS recordings, the number of VHS tape recording format variations is smaller than the number of broadcast TV signal variations\u2014for example, analog TVs and VHS \"machines\" (except multistandard devices) are not interchangeable between the UK and Germany, but VHS \"tapes\" are. The following tape recording formats exist in conventional VHS (listed in the form of standard/lines/frames):\nPAL/625/25 VCRs allow playback of SECAM (and MESECAM) tapes with a monochrome picture, and vice versa, as the line standard is the same.\nSince the 1990s, dual and multi-standard VHS machines, able to handle a variety of VHS-supported video standards, became more common. For example, VHS machines sold in Australia and Europe could typically handle PAL, MESECAM for record and playback, and NTSC for playback only on suitable TVs. Dedicated multi-standard machines can usually handle all standards listed, and some high-end models could convert the content of a tape from one standard to another on the fly during playback by using a built-in standards converter.\nS-VHS is only implemented as such in PAL/625/25 and NTSC/525/30; S-VHS machines sold in SECAM markets record internally in PAL, and convert between PAL and SECAM during recording and playback. S-VHS machines for the Brazilian market record in NTSC and convert between it and PAL-M.\nA small number of VHS decks are able to decode closed captions on video cassettes before sending the full signal to the set with the captions. A smaller number still are able, additionally, to record subtitles transmitted with world standard teletext signals (on pre-digital services), simultaneously with the associated program. S-VHS has a sufficient resolution to record teletext signals with relatively few errors, although for some years now it has been possible to recover teletext pages and even complete \"page carousels\" from regular VHS recordings using non-real-time computer processing.\nUses in marketing.\nVHS was popular for long-form content, such as feature films or documentaries, as well as short-play content, such as music videos, in-store videos, teaching videos, distribution of lectures and talks, and demonstrations. VHS instruction tapes were sometimes included with various products and services, including exercise equipment, kitchen appliances, and computer software. The aforementioned V-Lite format was designed specifically for this purpose for minimizing distribution costs.\nComparison to Betamax.\nVHS was the winner of a protracted and somewhat bitter format war during the late 1970s and early 1980s against Sony's Betamax format as well as other formats of the time.\nBetamax was widely perceived at the time as the better format, as the cassette was smaller in size, and Betamax offered slightly better video quality than VHS \u2013 it had lower video noise, less luma-chroma crosstalk, and was marketed as providing pictures superior to those of VHS. However, the sticking point for both consumers and potential licensing partners of Betamax was the total recording time. To overcome the recording limitation, Beta II speed (two-hour mode, NTSC regions only) was released in order to compete with VHS's two-hour SP mode, thereby reducing Betamax's horizontal resolution to 240 lines (vs 250 lines). In turn, the extension of VHS to VHS HQ produced 250 lines (vs 240 lines), so that overall a typical Betamax/VHS user could expect virtually identical resolution. (Very high-end Betamax machines still supported recording in the Beta I mode and some in an even higher resolution Beta Is (Beta I Super HiBand) mode, but at a maximum single-cassette run time of 1:40 [with an L-830 cassette].)\nBecause Betamax was released more than a year before VHS, it held an early lead in the format war. However, by 1981, United States' Betamax sales had dipped to only 25-percent of all sales. There was debate between experts over the cause of Betamax's loss. Some, including Sony's founder Akio Morita, say that it was due to Sony's licensing strategy with other manufacturers, which consistently kept the overall cost for a unit higher than a VHS unit, and that JVC allowed other manufacturers to produce VHS units license-free, thereby keeping costs lower. Others say that VHS had better marketing, since the much larger electronics companies at the time (Matsushita, for example) supported VHS. Sony would make its first VHS players/recorders in 1988, although it continued to produce Betamax machines concurrently until 2002.\nDecline.\nVHS was widely used in television-equipped American and European living rooms for more than twenty years from its introduction in the late 1970s. The home television recording market, also known as the VHS market, as well as the camcorder market, has since transitioned to digital recording on solid-state memory cards. The introduction of the DVD format to American consumers in March 1997 triggered the market share decline of VHS.\nDVD rentals surpassed those on the VHS format in the United States for the first time in June 2003. \"The Hill\" said that David Cronenberg's movie \"A History of Violence\", sold on VHS in 2006, was \"widely believed to be the last instance of a major motion picture to be released in that format\". By December 2008, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported on \"the final truckload of VHS tapes\" being shipped from a warehouse in Palm Harbor, Florida, citing Ryan J. Kugler's Distribution Video Audio Inc. as \"the last major supplier\".\nThough 94.5 million Americans still owned VHS format VCRs in 2005, market share continued to drop. In the mid-2000s, several retail chains in the United States and Europe announced they would stop selling VHS equipment. In the U.S., no major brick-and-mortar retailers stock VHS home-video releases, focusing only on DVD and Blu-ray media. Sony Pictures Home Entertainment along with other companies ceased production of VHS in late 2010 in South Korea.\nThe last known company in the world to manufacture VHS equipment was Funai of Japan, who produced video cassette recorders under the Sanyo brand in North America. Funai ceased production of VHS equipment (VCR/DVD combos) in July 2016, citing falling sales and a shortage of components.\nModern use.\nDespite the decline in both VHS players and programming on VHS machines, they are still owned in some households worldwide. Those who still use or hold on to VHS do so for a number of reasons, including nostalgic value, ease of use in recording, keeping personal videos or home movies, watching content currently exclusive to VHS, and collecting. Some expatriate communities in the United States also obtain video content from their native countries in VHS format.\nAlthough VHS has been discontinued in the United States, VHS recorders and blank tapes were still sold at stores in other developed countries prior to digital television transitions. As an acknowledgement of the continued use of VHS, Panasonic announced the world's first dual deck VHS-Blu-ray player in 2009. The last standalone JVC VHS-only unit was produced October 28, 2008. JVC, and other manufacturers, continued to make combination DVD+VHS units even after the decline of VHS. Countries like South Korea released films on VHS until December 2010, with \"Inception\" being the last Hollywood film to be released on VHS in the country.\nA market for pre-recorded VHS tapes has continued, and some online retailers such as Amazon still sell new and used pre-recorded VHS cassettes of movies and television programs. None of the major Hollywood studios generally issues releases on VHS. The last major studio film to be released in the format in the United States and Canada, other than as part of special marketing promotions, was \"A History of Violence\" in 2006. In October 2008, Distribution Video Audio Inc., the last major American supplier of pre-recorded VHS tapes, shipped its final truckload of tapes to stores in America.\nHowever, there have been a few exceptions. For example, \"The House of the Devil\" was released on VHS in 2010 as an Amazon-exclusive deal, in keeping with the film's intent to mimic 1980s horror films. The first \"Paranormal Activity\" film, produced in 2007, had a VHS release in the Netherlands in 2010. The horror film \"V/H/S/2\" was released as a combo in North America that included a VHS tape in addition to a Blu-ray and a DVD copy on September 24, 2013. In 2019, Paramount Pictures produced limited quantities of the 2018 film \"Bumblebee\" to give away as promotional contest prizes. In 2021, professional wrestling promotion Impact Wrestling released a limited run of VHS tapes containing that year's Slammiversary, which quickly sold out. The company later announced future VHS runs of pay-per-view events.\nThe VHS medium has a cult following. For instance, in February 2021, it was reported that VHS was once again doing well as an underground market. In January 2023, it was reported that VHS tapes were once again becoming valuable collector's items. VHS collecting would make a comeback in the 2020s. The 2024 horror film, \"\", had a limited release on VHS, marking the first major Hollywood film to receive an official VHS release since 2007.\nSuccessors.\nVCD.\nThe Video CD (VCD) was created in 1993, becoming an alternative medium for video, in a CD-sized disc. Though occasionally showing compression artifacts and color banding that are common discrepancies in digital media, the durability and longevity of a VCD depends on the production quality of the disc, and its handling. The data stored digitally on a VCD theoretically does not degrade (in the analog sense like tape). In the disc player, there is no physical contact made with either the data or label sides. When handled properly, a VCD will last a long time.\nSince a VCD can hold only 74 minutes of video, a movie exceeding that mark has to be divided into two or more discs.\nDVD.\nThe DVD-Video format was introduced first on November 1, 1996, in Japan; to the United States on March 26, 1997 (\"test marketed\"); and mid-to-late 1998 in Europe and Australia.\nWhile the DVD was highly successful in the pre-recorded retail market, it failed to displace VHS for in home recording of video content (e.g. broadcast or cable television). A number of factors hindered the commercial success of the DVD in this regard, including:\nHigh-capacity digital recording technologies.\nHigh-capacity digital recording systems are also gaining in popularity with home users. These types of systems come in several form factors:\nHard disk-based systems include TiVo as well as other digital video recorder (DVR) offerings. These types of systems provide users with a no-maintenance solution for capturing video content. Customers of subscriber-based TV generally receive electronic program guides, enabling one-touch setup of a recording schedule. Hard disk\u2013based systems allow for many hours of recording without user-maintenance. For example, a 120 GB system recording at an extended recording rate (XP) of 10 Mbit/s MPEG-2 can record over 25 hours of video content.\nLegacy.\nOften considered an important medium of film history, the influence of VHS on art and cinema was highlighted in a retrospective staged at the Museum of Arts and Design in 2013. In 2015, the Yale University Library collected nearly 3,000 horror and exploitation movies on VHS tapes, distributed from 1978 to 1985, calling them \"the cultural id of an era.\"\nThe documentary film \"Rewind This!\" (2013), directed by Josh Johnson, tracks the impact of VHS on film industry through various filmmakers and collectors.\nThe last Blockbuster franchise is still renting out VHS tapes, and is based in Bend, Oregon, a town home to under 100,000 people as of 2020.\nThe VHS aesthetic is also a central component of the analog horror genre, which is largely known for imitating recordings of late 20th century TV broadcasts.\nIn 2023, a VHS tape of Nukie was sold on eBay for $80,600 by Red Letter Media, becoming the most expensive VHS tape ever sold. Red Letter Media had been sent a large number of tapes of the film over the years by fans, and after getting one tape professionally graded, they then destroyed all of the remaining copies except one to artificially inflate the value as an experiment and commentary on collector culture. All profits were donated to St Jude's Children Research Hospital and the Wisconsin Humane Society. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52128", "revid": "4007668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52128", "title": "892", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\nYear 892 (DCCCXCII) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar, the 892nd year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 892nd year of the 1st millennium, the 92nd year of the 9th century, and the 3rd year of the 890s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52129", "revid": "48991948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52129", "title": "893", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\nYear 893 (DCCCXCIII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52130", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52130", "title": "890", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 890 (DCCCXC) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar, the 890th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 890th year of the 1st millennium, the 90th year of the 9th century, and the 1st year of the 890s decade.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nBritain.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52131", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52131", "title": "889", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 889 (DCCCLXXXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52132", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52132", "title": "Le Mans 24 Hours", "text": ""}
{"id": "52135", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52135", "title": "Pneumonia", "text": "Inflammation of the alveoli of the lungs\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPneumonia is an inflammatory condition of the lung primarily affecting the small air sacs known as alveoli. Symptoms typically include some combination of productive or dry cough, chest pain, fever, and difficulty breathing. The severity of the condition is variable.\nPneumonia is usually caused by infection with viruses or bacteria, and less commonly by other microorganisms. Identifying the responsible pathogen can be difficult. Diagnosis is often based on symptoms and physical examination. Chest X-rays, blood tests, and culture of the sputum may help confirm the diagnosis. The disease may be classified by where it was acquired, such as community- or hospital-acquired or healthcare-associated pneumonia.\nRisk factors for pneumonia include cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), sickle cell disease, asthma, diabetes, heart failure, a history of smoking, a poor ability to cough (such as following a stroke), and immunodeficiency.\nVaccines to prevent certain types of pneumonia (such as those caused by \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" bacteria, influenza viruses, or SARS-CoV-2) are available. Other methods of prevention include hand washing to prevent infection, prompt treatment of worsening respiratory symptoms, and not smoking.\nTreatment depends on the underlying cause. Pneumonia believed to be due to bacteria is treated with antibiotics. If the pneumonia is severe, the affected person is generally hospitalized. Oxygen therapy may be used if oxygen levels are low.\nEach year, pneumonia affects about 450\u00a0million people globally (7% of the population) and results in about 4 million deaths. With the introduction of antibiotics and vaccines in the 20th century, survival has greatly improved. Nevertheless, pneumonia remains a leading cause of death in developing countries, and also among the very old, the very young, and the chronically ill. Pneumonia often shortens the period of suffering among those already close to death and has thus been called \"the old man's friend\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nPeople with infectious pneumonia often have a productive cough, fever accompanied by shaking chills, shortness of breath, sharp or stabbing chest pain during deep breaths, and an increased rate of breathing. In elderly people, confusion may be the most prominent sign.\nThe typical signs and symptoms in children under five are fever, cough, and fast or difficult breathing. Fever is not very specific, as it occurs in many other common illnesses and may be absent in those with severe disease, malnutrition or in the elderly. In addition, a cough is frequently absent in children less than 2 months old. More severe signs and symptoms in children may include blue-tinged skin, unwillingness to drink, convulsions, ongoing vomiting, extremes of temperature, or a decreased level of consciousness.\nBacterial and viral cases of pneumonia usually result in similar symptoms. Some causes are associated with classic, but non-specific, clinical characteristics. Pneumonia caused by \"Legionella\" may occur with abdominal pain, diarrhea, or confusion. Pneumonia caused by \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" is associated with rusty colored sputum. Pneumonia caused by \"Klebsiella\" may have bloody sputum often described as \"currant jelly\". Bloody sputum (known as hemoptysis) may also occur with tuberculosis, Gram-negative pneumonia, lung abscesses and more commonly acute bronchitis. Pneumonia caused by \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\" may occur in association with swelling of the lymph nodes in the neck, joint pain, or a middle ear infection. Viral pneumonia presents more commonly with wheezing than bacterial pneumonia. Pneumonia was historically divided into \"typical\" and \"atypical\" based on the belief that the presentation predicted the underlying cause. However, evidence has not supported this distinction, therefore it is no longer emphasized.\nCause.\nPneumonia is due to infections caused primarily by bacteria or viruses and less commonly by fungi and parasites. Although more than 100 strains of infectious agents have been identified, only a few are responsible for the majority of cases. Mixed infections with both viruses and bacteria may occur in roughly 45% of infections in children and 15% of infections in adults. A causative agent may not be isolated in about half of cases despite careful testing. In an active population-based surveillance for community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization in five hospitals in Chicago and Nashville from January 2010 through June 2012, 2259 patients were identified who had radiographic evidence of pneumonia and specimens that could be tested for the responsible pathogen. Most patients (62%) had no detectable pathogens in their sample, and unexpectedly, respiratory viruses were detected more frequently than bacteria. Specifically, 23% had one or more viruses, 11% had one or more bacteria, 3% had both bacterial and viral pathogens, and 1% had a fungal or mycobacterial infection. \"The most common pathogens were human rhinovirus (in 9% of patients), influenza virus (in 6%), and \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" (in 5%).\"\nThe term \"pneumonia\" is sometimes more broadly applied to any condition resulting in inflammation of the lungs (caused for example by autoimmune diseases, chemical burns or drug reactions); however, this inflammation is more accurately referred to as pneumonitis.\nFactors that predispose to pneumonia include smoking, immunodeficiency, alcoholism, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, sickle cell disease (SCD), asthma, chronic kidney disease, liver disease, and biological aging. Additional risks in children include not being breastfed, exposure to cigarette smoke and other air pollution, malnutrition, and poverty. The use of acid-suppressing medications \u2013 such as proton-pump inhibitors or H2 blockers \u2013 is associated with an increased risk of pneumonia. Approximately 10% of people who require mechanical ventilation develop ventilator-associated pneumonia, and people with a gastric feeding tube have an increased risk of developing aspiration pneumonia. Moreover, the misplacement of a feeding tube can lead to aspiration pneumonia. 28% of tube malposition results in pneumonia. As with Avanos Medical's feeding tube placement system, the CORTRAK* 2 EAS, which was recalled in May 2022 by the FDA due to adverse events reported, including pneumonia, caused a total of 60 injuries and 23 patient deaths, as communicated by the FDA. For people with certain variants of the FER gene, the risk of death is reduced in sepsis caused by pneumonia. However, for those with TLR6 variants, the risk of getting Legionnaires' disease is increased.\nBacteria.\nBacteria are the most common cause of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), with \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" isolated in nearly 50% of cases. Other commonly isolated bacteria include \"Haemophilus influenzae\" in 20%, \"Chlamydophila pneumoniae\" in 13%, and \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\" in 3% of cases; \"Staphylococcus aureus\"; \"Moraxella catarrhalis\"; and \"Legionella pneumophila\". A number of drug-resistant versions of the above infections are becoming more common, including drug-resistant \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" (DRSP) and methicillin-resistant \"Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA).\nThe spreading of organisms is facilitated by certain risk factors. Alcoholism is associated with \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", anaerobic organisms, and \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\"; smoking facilitates the effects of \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", \"Haemophilus influenzae\", \"Moraxella catarrhalis\", and \"Legionella pneumophila\". Exposure to birds is associated with \"Chlamydia psittaci\"; farm animals with \"Coxiella burnetti\"; aspiration of stomach contents with anaerobic organisms; and cystic fibrosis with \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" and \"Staphylococcus aureus\". \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" is more common in the winter, and it should be suspected in persons aspirating a large number of anaerobic organisms.\nViruses.\nIn adults, viruses account for about one third of pneumonia cases, and in children for about 15% of them. Commonly implicated agents include rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), adenovirus, and parainfluenza. Herpes simplex virus rarely causes pneumonia, except in groups such as newborns, persons with cancer, transplant recipients, and people with significant burns. After organ transplantation or in otherwise immunocompromised persons, there are high rates of cytomegalovirus pneumonia. Those with viral infections may be secondarily infected with the bacteria \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", \"Staphylococcus aureus\", or \"Haemophilus influenzae\", particularly when other health problems are present. Different viruses predominate at different times of the year; during flu season, for example, influenza may account for more than half of all viral cases. Outbreaks of other viruses also occur occasionally, including hantaviruses and coronaviruses. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) can also result in pneumonia.\nFungi.\nFungal pneumonia is uncommon, but occurs more commonly in individuals with weakened immune systems due to AIDS, immunosuppressive drugs, or other medical problems. It is most often caused by \"Histoplasma capsulatum\", \"Blastomyces\", \"Cryptococcus neoformans\", \"Pneumocystis jiroveci\" (pneumocystis pneumonia, or PCP), and \"Coccidioides immitis\". Histoplasmosis is most common in the Mississippi River basin, and coccidioidomycosis is most common in the Southwestern United States. The number of cases of fungal pneumonia has been increasing in the latter half of the 20th century due to increasing travel and rates of immunosuppression in the population. For people infected with HIV/AIDS, PCP is a common opportunistic infection.\nParasites.\nA variety of parasites can affect the lungs, including \"Toxoplasma gondii\", \"Strongyloides stercoralis\", \"Ascaris lumbricoides\", and \"Plasmodium malariae\". These organisms typically enter the body through direct contact with the skin, ingestion, or via an insect vector. Except for \"Paragonimus westermani\", most parasites do not specifically affect the lungs but involve the lungs secondarily to other sites. Some parasites, in particular those belonging to the \"Ascaris\" and \"Strongyloides\" genera, stimulate a strong eosinophilic reaction, which may result in eosinophilic pneumonia. In other infections, such as malaria, lung involvement is due primarily to cytokine-induced systemic inflammation. In the developed world, these infections are most common in people returning from travel or in immigrants. Around the world, parasitic pneumonia is most common in the immunodeficient.\nNoninfectious.\nIdiopathic interstitial pneumonia or noninfectious pneumonia is a class of diffuse lung diseases. They include diffuse alveolar damage, organizing pneumonia, nonspecific interstitial pneumonia, lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia, desquamative interstitial pneumonia, respiratory bronchiolitis interstitial lung disease, and usual interstitial pneumonia. Lipoid pneumonia is another rare cause due to lipids entering the lung. These lipids can either be inhaled or spread to the lungs from elsewhere in the body.\nMechanisms.\nPneumonia frequently starts as an upper respiratory tract infection that moves into the lower respiratory tract. It is a type of pneumonitis (lung inflammation). The normal flora of the upper airway give protection by competing with pathogens for nutrients. In the lower airways, reflexes of the glottis, actions of complement proteins and immunoglobulins are important for protection. Microaspiration of contaminated secretions can infect the lower airways and cause pneumonia. The progress of pneumonia is determined by the virulence of the organism; the amount of organism required to start an infection; and the body's immune response against the infection.\nBacterial.\nMost bacteria enter the lungs via small aspirations of organisms residing in the throat or nose. Half of normal people have these small aspirations during sleep. While the throat always contains bacteria, potentially infectious ones reside there only at certain times and under certain conditions. A minority of types of bacteria such as \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" and \"Legionella pneumophila\" reach the lungs via contaminated airborne droplets. Bacteria can also spread via the blood. Once in the lungs, bacteria may invade the spaces between cells and between alveoli, where the macrophages and neutrophils (defensive white blood cells) attempt to inactivate the bacteria. The neutrophils also release cytokines, causing a general activation of the immune system. This leads to the fever, chills, and fatigue common in bacterial pneumonia. The neutrophils, bacteria, and fluid from surrounding blood vessels fill the alveoli, resulting in the consolidation seen on chest X-ray.\nViral.\nViruses may reach the lung by a number of different routes. Respiratory syncytial virus is typically contracted when people touch contaminated objects and then touch their eyes or nose. Other viral infections occur when contaminated airborne droplets are inhaled through the nose or mouth. Once in the upper airway, the viruses may make their way into the lungs, where they invade the cells lining the airways, alveoli, or lung parenchyma. Some viruses such as measles and herpes simplex may reach the lungs via the blood. The invasion of the lungs may lead to varying degrees of cell death. When the immune system responds to the infection, even more lung damage may occur. Primarily white blood cells, mainly mononuclear cells, generate the inflammation. As well as damaging the lungs, many viruses simultaneously affect other organs and thus disrupt other body functions. Viruses also make the body more susceptible to bacterial infections; in this way, bacterial pneumonia can occur at the same time as viral pneumonia.\nDiagnosis.\nPneumonia is typically diagnosed based on a combination of physical signs and often a chest X-ray. In recent years, however, the role of lung ultrasonography has gained prominence, with substantial evidence demonstrating that, in expert hands, it surpasses radiography in accuracy. In adults with normal vital signs and a normal lung examination, the diagnosis is unlikely. However, the underlying cause can be difficult to confirm, as there is no definitive test able to distinguish between bacterial and non-bacterial cause. The overall impression of a physician appears to be at least as good as decision rules for making or excluding the diagnosis.\nDiagnosis in children.\nThe World Health Organization has defined pneumonia in children clinically based on either a cough or difficulty breathing and a rapid respiratory rate, chest indrawing, or a decreased level of consciousness. A rapid respiratory rate is defined as greater than 60 breaths per minute in children under 2 months old, greater than 50 breaths per minute in children 2 months to 1 year old, or greater than 40 breaths per minute in children 1 to 5 years old.\nIn children, low oxygen levels and lower chest indrawing are more sensitive than hearing chest crackles with a stethoscope or increased respiratory rate. Grunting and nasal flaring may be other useful signs in children less than five years old.\nLack of wheezing is an indicator of \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\" in children with pneumonia, but as an indicator it is not accurate enough to decide whether or not macrolide treatment should be used. The presence of chest pain in children with pneumonia doubles the probability of \"Mycoplasma pneumoniae\".\nDiagnosis in adults.\nIn general, in adults, investigations are not needed in mild cases. There is a very low risk of pneumonia if all vital signs and auscultation are normal. C-reactive protein (CRP) may help support the diagnosis. For those with CRP less than 20\u00a0mg/L without convincing evidence of pneumonia, antibiotics are not recommended.\nProcalcitonin may help determine the cause and support decisions about who should receive antibiotics. Antibiotics are encouraged if the procalcitonin level reaches 0.25 \u03bcg/L, strongly encouraged if it reaches 0.5 \u03bcg/L, and strongly discouraged if the level is below 0.10 \u03bcg/L. In people requiring hospitalization, pulse oximetry, chest radiography and blood tests \u2013 including a complete blood count, serum electrolytes, C-reactive protein level, and possibly liver function tests \u2013 are recommended.\nThe diagnosis of influenza-like illness can be made based on the signs and symptoms; however, confirmation of an influenza infection requires testing. Thus, treatment is frequently based on the presence of influenza in the community or a rapid influenza test.\nAdults 65 years old or older, as well as cigarette smokers and people with ongoing medical conditions are at increased risk for pneumonia.\nPhysical exam.\nPhysical examination may sometimes reveal low blood pressure, high heart rate, or low oxygen saturation. The respiratory rate may be faster than normal, and this may occur a day or two before other signs. Examination of the chest may be normal, but it may show decreased expansion on the affected side. Harsh breath sounds from the larger airways that are transmitted through the inflamed lung are termed bronchial breathing and are heard on auscultation with a stethoscope. Crackles (rales) may be heard over the affected area during inspiration. Percussion may be dulled over the affected lung, and increased, rather than decreased, vocal resonance distinguishes pneumonia from a pleural effusion.\nImaging.\nA chest radiograph is frequently used in diagnosis. In people with mild disease, imaging is needed only in those with potential complications, those not having improved with treatment, or those in which the cause is uncertain. If a person is sufficiently sick to require hospitalization, a chest radiograph is recommended. Findings do not always match the severity of disease and do not reliably separate between bacterial and viral infection.\nX-ray presentations of pneumonia may be classified as lobar pneumonia, bronchopneumonia, lobular pneumonia, and interstitial pneumonia. Bacterial, community-acquired pneumonia classically show lung consolidation of one lung segmental lobe, which is known as lobar pneumonia. However, findings may vary, and other patterns are common in other types of pneumonia. Aspiration pneumonia may present with bilateral opacities primarily in the bases of the lungs and on the right side. Radiographs of viral pneumonia may appear normal, appear hyper-inflated, have bilateral patchy areas, or present similar to bacterial pneumonia with lobar consolidation. Radiologic findings may not be present in the early stages of the disease, especially in the presence of dehydration, or may be difficult to interpret in the obese or those with a history of lung disease. Complications such as pleural effusion may also be found on chest radiographs. Laterolateral chest radiographs can increase the diagnostic accuracy of lung consolidation and pleural effusion.\nA CT scan can give additional information in indeterminate cases and provide more details in those with an unclear chest radiograph (for example occult pneumonia in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). They can be used to exclude pulmonary embolism and fungal pneumonia, and detect lung abscesses in those who are not responding to treatments. However, CT scans are more expensive, have a higher dose of radiation, and cannot be done at bedside.\nLung ultrasound may also be useful in helping to make the diagnosis. Ultrasound is radiation free and can be done at bedside. However, ultrasound requires specific skills to operate the machine and interpret the findings. It may be more accurate than chest X-ray.\nMicrobiology.\nIn people managed in the community, determining the causative agent is not cost-effective and typically does not alter management. For people who do not respond to treatment, sputum culture should be considered, and culture for \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" should be carried out in persons with a chronic productive cough. Microbiological evaluation is also indicated in severe pneumonia, alcoholism, asplenia, immunosuppression, HIV infection, and those being empirically treated for MRSA of pseudomonas. Although positive blood culture and pleural fluid culture definitively establish the diagnosis of the type of micro-organism involved, a positive sputum culture has to be interpreted with care for the possibility of colonisation of respiratory tract. Testing for other specific organisms may be recommended during outbreaks, for public health reasons. In those hospitalized for severe disease, both sputum and blood cultures are recommended, as well as testing the urine for antigens to \"Legionella\" and \"Streptococcus\". Viral infections, can be confirmed via detection of either the virus or its antigens with culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR), among other techniques. \"Mycoplasma\", \"Legionella\", \"Streptococcus\", and \"Chlamydia\" can also be detected using PCR techniques on bronchoalveolar lavage and nasopharyngeal swab. The causative agent is determined in only 15% of cases with routine microbiological tests.\nClassification.\n\"Pneumonitis\" refers to lung inflammation; pneumonia refers to pneumonitis, usually due to infection but sometimes non-infectious, that has the additional feature of pulmonary consolidation. Pneumonia is most commonly classified by where or how it was acquired: community-acquired, aspiration, healthcare-associated, hospital-acquired, and ventilator-associated pneumonia. It may also be classified by the area of the lung affected: lobar, bronchial pneumonia and acute interstitial pneumonia; or by the causative organism. Pneumonia in children may additionally be classified based on signs and symptoms as non-severe, severe, or very severe.\nThe setting in which pneumonia develops is important to treatment, as it correlates to which pathogens are likely suspects, which mechanisms are likely, which antibiotics are likely to work or fail, and which complications can be expected based on the person's health status.\nCommunity.\nCommunity-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is acquired in the community, outside of health care facilities. Compared with healthcare-associated pneumonia, it is less likely to involve multidrug-resistant bacteria. Although the latter are no longer rare in CAP, they are still less likely. Prior stays in healthcare-related environments such as hospitals, nursing homes, or hemodialysis centers or a history of receiving domiciliary care can increase patients' risk for CAP caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria. \nHealthcare.\nHealth care\u2013associated pneumonia (HCAP) is an infection associated with recent exposure to the health care system, including hospitals, outpatient clinics, nursing homes, dialysis centers, chemotherapy treatment, or home care. HCAP is sometimes called MCAP (medical care\u2013associated pneumonia).\nPeople may become infected with pneumonia in a hospital; this is defined as pneumonia not present at the time of admission (symptoms must start at least 48 hours after admission). It is likely to involve hospital-acquired infections, with higher risk of multidrug-resistant pathogens. People in a hospital often have other medical conditions, which may make them more susceptible to pathogens in the hospital.\nVentilator-associated pneumonia occurs in people breathing with the help of mechanical ventilation. Ventilator-associated pneumonia is specifically defined as pneumonia that arises more than 48 to 72 hours after endotracheal intubation.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nSeveral diseases can present with similar signs and symptoms to pneumonia, such as: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, pulmonary edema, bronchiectasis, lung cancer, and pulmonary emboli. Unlike pneumonia, asthma and COPD typically present with wheezing, pulmonary edema presents with an abnormal electrocardiogram, cancer and bronchiectasis present with a cough of longer duration, and pulmonary emboli present with acute onset sharp chest pain and shortness of breath. Mild pneumonia should be differentiated from upper respiratory tract infection (URTI). Severe pneumonia should be differentiated from acute heart failure. Pulmonary infiltrates that resolved after giving mechanical ventilation should point to heart failure and atelectasis rather than pneumonia. For recurrent pneumonia, underlying lung cancer, metastasis, tuberculosis, a foreign bodies, immunosuppression, and hypersensitivity should be suspected.\nPrevention.\nPrevention includes vaccination, environmental measures, and appropriate treatment of other health problems. It is believed that, if appropriate preventive measures were instituted globally, mortality among children could be reduced by 400,000; and, if proper treatment were universally available, childhood deaths could be decreased by another 600,000.\nVaccination.\nVaccination prevents against certain bacterial and viral pneumonias both in children and adults. Influenza vaccines are modestly effective at preventing symptoms of influenza, The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends yearly influenza vaccination for every person 6\u00a0months and older. Immunizing health care workers decreases the risk of viral pneumonia among their patients.\nVaccinations against \"Haemophilus influenzae\" and \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" have good evidence to support their use. There is strong evidence for vaccinating children under the age of 2 against \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" (pneumococcal conjugate vaccine). Vaccinating children against \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" has led to a decreased rate of these infections in adults, because many adults acquire infections from children. A \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" vaccine is available for adults, and has been found to decrease the risk of invasive pneumococcal disease by 74%, but there is insufficient evidence to suggest using the pneumococcal vaccine to prevent pneumonia or death in the general adult population. The CDC recommends that young children and adults aged 50 or older receive the pneumococcal vaccine, as well as older children or younger adults who have an increased risk of getting pneumococcal disease. In October 2024, the CDC lowered the age for adult pneumococcal vaccination from 65 to 50 years old to give more adults the opportunity to protect themselves from pneumococcal disease at the age when risk of infection substantially increases. The pneumococcal vaccine has been shown to reduce the risk of community acquired pneumonia in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but does not reduce mortality or the risk of hospitalization for people with this condition. People with COPD are recommended by a number of guidelines to have a pneumococcal vaccination. Other vaccines for which there is support for a protective effect against pneumonia include pertussis, varicella, and measles.\nMedications.\nWhen influenza outbreaks occur, medications such as amantadine or rimantadine may help prevent the condition, but they are associated with side effects. Zanamivir or oseltamivir decrease the chance that people who are exposed to the virus will develop symptoms; however, it is recommended that potential side effects are taken into account.\nOther.\nSmoking cessation and reducing indoor air pollution, such as that from cooking indoors with wood, crop residues or dung, are both recommended. Smoking appears to be the single biggest risk factor for pneumococcal pneumonia in otherwise-healthy adults. Hand hygiene and coughing into one's sleeve may also be effective preventative measures. Wearing surgical masks by the sick may also prevent illness.\nAppropriately treating underlying illnesses (such as HIV/AIDS, diabetes mellitus, and malnutrition) can decrease the risk of pneumonia. In children less than 6\u00a0months of age, exclusive breast feeding reduces both the risk and severity of disease. In people with HIV/AIDS and a CD4 count of less than 200 cells/uL the antibiotic trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole decreases the risk of \"Pneumocystis pneumonia\" and is also useful for prevention in those that are immunocompromised but do not have HIV.\nTesting pregnant women for Group B Streptococcus and \"Chlamydia trachomatis\", and administering antibiotic treatment, if needed, reduces rates of pneumonia in infants; preventive measures for HIV transmission from mother to child may also be efficient. Suctioning the mouth and throat of infants with meconium-stained amniotic fluid has not been found to reduce the rate of aspiration pneumonia and may cause potential harm, thus this practice is not recommended in the majority of situations. In the frail elderly good oral health care may lower the risk of aspiration pneumonia, even though there is no good evidence that one approach to mouth care is better than others in preventing nursing home acquired pneumonia. Zinc supplementation in children 2 months to five years old appears to reduce rates of pneumonia.\nFor people with low levels of vitamin C in their diet or blood, taking vitamin C supplements may be suggested to decrease the risk of pneumonia, although there is no strong evidence of benefit. There is insufficient evidence to recommend that the general population take vitamin C to prevent or treat pneumonia.\nFor adults and children in the hospital who require a respirator, there is no strong evidence indicating a difference between heat and moisture exchangers and heated humidifiers for preventing pneumonia. There is tentative evidence that lying flat on the back compared to semi-raised increases pneumonia risks in people who are intubated.\nManagement.\nAntibiotics by mouth, rest, simple analgesics, and fluids usually suffice for complete resolution. Antibiotics therapy for children aged 2 to 59 months with non\u2010severe pneumonia with wheeze may reduce of treatment failure by 20%, however results in little or no difference to clinical cure, in little or no difference to relapse, and treatment harms. However, those with other medical conditions, the elderly, or those with significant trouble breathing may require more advanced care. If the symptoms worsen, the pneumonia does not improve with home treatment, or complications occur, hospitalization may be required. Worldwide, approximately 7\u201313% of cases in children result in hospitalization, whereas in the developed world between 22 and 42% of adults with community-acquired pneumonia are admitted. The CURB-65 score is useful for determining the need for admission in adults. If the score is 0 or 1, people can typically be managed at home; if it is 2, a short hospital stay or close follow-up is needed; if it is 3\u20135, hospitalization is recommended. In children those with respiratory distress or oxygen saturations of less than 90% should be hospitalized. The utility of chest physiotherapy in pneumonia has not yet been determined. Over-the-counter cough medicine has not been found to be effective, nor has the use of zinc supplementation in children. There is insufficient evidence for mucolytics. There is no strong evidence to recommend that children who have non-measles related pneumonia take vitamin A supplements. Vitamin D, as of 2023, is of unclear benefit in children. Vitamin C administration in pneumonia needs further research, despite found lower mortality and reduced severity for most ill patient, although it can be given to patient of low plasma vitamin C because it is not expensive and low risk.\nPneumonia can cause severe illness in a number of ways, and pneumonia with evidence of organ dysfunction may require intensive care unit admission for observation and specific treatment. The main impact is on the respiratory and the circulatory system. Respiratory failure not responding to normal oxygen therapy may require heated humidified high-flow therapy delivered through nasal cannulae, non-invasive ventilation, or in severe cases mechanical ventilation through an endotracheal tube. Regarding circulatory problems as part of sepsis, evidence of poor blood flow or low blood pressure is initially treated with 30 mL/kg of crystalloid infused intravenously. In situations where fluids alone are ineffective, vasopressor medication may be required.\nFor adults with moderate or severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) undergoing mechanical ventilation, there is a reduction in mortality when people lie on their front for at least 12 hours a day. However, this increases the risk of endotracheal tube obstruction and pressure sores.\nBacterial.\nAntibiotics improve outcomes in those with bacterial pneumonia. The first dose of antibiotics should be given as soon as possible. Increased use of antibiotics, however, may lead to the development of antimicrobial resistant strains of bacteria. Antibiotic choice depends initially on the characteristics of the person affected, such as age, underlying health, and the location the infection was acquired. Antibiotic use is also associated with side effects such as nausea, diarrhea, dizziness, taste distortion, or headaches. In the UK, treatment before culture results with amoxicillin is recommended as the first line for community-acquired pneumonia, with doxycycline or clarithromycin as alternatives. In North America, amoxicillin, doxycycline, and in some areas a macrolide (such as azithromycin or erythromycin) is the first-line outpatient treatment in adults. In children with mild or moderate symptoms, amoxicillin taken by mouth is the first line. The use of fluoroquinolones in uncomplicated cases is discouraged due to concerns about side-effects and generating resistance in light of there being no greater benefit.\nFor those who require hospitalization and caught their pneumonia in the community the use of a \u03b2-lactam such as cephazolin plus a macrolide such as azithromycin is recommended. A fluoroquinolone may replace azithromycin but is less preferred. Antibiotics by mouth and by injection appear to be similarly effective in children with severe pneumonia.\nThe duration of treatment has traditionally been seven to ten days, but increasing evidence suggests that shorter courses (3\u20135 days) may be effective for certain types of pneumonia and may reduce the risk of antibiotic resistance. Research in children showed that a shorter, 3-day course of amoxicillin was as effective as a longer, 7-day course for treating pneumonia in this population. For pneumonia that is associated with a ventilator caused by non-fermenting Gram-negative bacilli (NF-GNB), a shorter course of antibiotics increases the risk that the pneumonia will return. Recommendations for hospital-acquired pneumonia include third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, and vancomycin. These antibiotics are often given intravenously and used in combination. In those treated in hospital, more than 90% improve with the initial antibiotics. For people with ventilator-acquired pneumonia, the choice of antibiotic therapy will depend on the person's risk of being infected with a strain of bacteria that is multi-drug resistant. Once clinically stable, intravenous antibiotics should be switched to oral antibiotics. For those with \"Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus\" (MRSA) or \"Legionella\" infections, prolonged antibiotics may be beneficial.\nThe addition of corticosteroids to standard antibiotic treatment appears to improve outcomes, reducing death and morbidity for adults with severe community acquired pneumonia, and reducing death for adults and children with non-severe community acquired pneumonia. A 2017 review therefore recommended them in adults with severe community acquired pneumonia. A 2019 guideline however recommended against their general use, unless refractory shock was present. Side effects associated with the use of corticosteroids include high blood sugar. There is some evidence that adding corticosteroids to the standard PCP pneumonia treatment may be beneficial for people who are infected with HIV.\nThe use of granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) along with antibiotics does not appear to reduce mortality and routine use for treating pneumonia is not supported by evidence.\nViral.\nNeuraminidase inhibitors may be used to treat viral pneumonia caused by influenza viruses (influenza A and influenza B). No specific antiviral medications are recommended for other types of community acquired viral pneumonias including SARS coronavirus, adenovirus, hantavirus, and parainfluenza virus. Influenza A may be treated with rimantadine or amantadine, while influenza A or B may be treated with oseltamivir, zanamivir or peramivir. These are of most benefit if they are started within 48 hours of the onset of symptoms. Many strains of H5N1 influenza A, also known as avian influenza or \"bird flu\", have shown resistance to rimantadine and amantadine. The use of antibiotics in viral pneumonia is recommended by some experts, as it is impossible to rule out a complicating bacterial infection. The British Thoracic Society recommends that antibiotics be withheld in those with mild disease. The use of corticosteroids is controversial.\nAspiration.\nIn general, aspiration pneumonitis is treated conservatively with antibiotics indicated only for aspiration pneumonia. The choice of antibiotic will depend on several factors, including the suspected causative organism and whether pneumonia was acquired in the community or developed in a hospital setting. Common options include clindamycin, a combination of a beta-lactam antibiotic and metronidazole, or an aminoglycoside.\nCorticosteroids are sometimes used in aspiration pneumonia, but there is limited evidence to support their effectiveness.\nFollow-up.\nThe British Thoracic Society recommends that a follow-up chest radiograph be taken in people with persistent symptoms, smokers, and people older than 50. American guidelines vary, from generally recommending a follow-up chest radiograph to not mentioning any follow-up.\nPrognosis.\nWith treatment, most types of bacterial pneumonia will stabilize in 3\u20136\u00a0days. It often takes a few weeks before most symptoms resolve. X-ray findings typically clear within four weeks and mortality is low (less than 1%). In the elderly or people with other lung problems, recovery may take more than 12\u00a0weeks. In persons requiring hospitalization, mortality may be as high as 10%, and in those requiring intensive care it may reach 30\u201350%. Pneumonia is the most common hospital-acquired infection that causes death. Before the advent of antibiotics, mortality was typically 30% in those that were hospitalized. However, for those whose lung condition deteriorates within 72 hours, the problem is usually due to sepsis. If pneumonia deteriorates after 72 hours, it could be due to nosocomial infection or excerbation of other underlying comorbidities. About 10% of those discharged from hospital are readmitted due to underlying co-morbidities such as heart, lung, or neurological disorders, or due to new onset of pneumonia.\nComplications may occur in particular in the elderly and those with underlying health problems. This may include, among others: empyema, lung abscess, bronchiolitis obliterans, acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, and worsening of underlying health problems.\nClinical prediction rules.\nClinical prediction rules have been developed to more objectively predict outcomes of pneumonia. These rules are often used to decide whether to hospitalize the person.\nPleural effusion, empyema, and abscess.\nIn pneumonia, a collection of fluid may form in the space that surrounds the lung. Occasionally, microorganisms will infect this fluid, causing an empyema. To distinguish an empyema from the more common simple parapneumonic effusion, the fluid may be collected with a needle (thoracentesis), and examined. If this shows evidence of empyema, complete drainage of the fluid is necessary, often requiring a drainage catheter. In severe cases of empyema, surgery may be needed. If the infected fluid is not drained, the infection may persist, because antibiotics do not penetrate well into the pleural cavity. If the fluid is sterile, it must be drained only if it is causing symptoms or remains unresolved.\nIn rare circumstances, bacteria in the lung will form a pocket of infected fluid called a lung abscess. Lung abscesses can usually be seen with a chest X-ray but frequently require a chest CT scan to confirm the diagnosis. Abscesses typically occur in aspiration pneumonia, and often contain several types of bacteria. Long-term antibiotics are usually adequate to treat a lung abscess, but sometimes the abscess must be drained by a surgeon or radiologist.\nRespiratory and circulatory failure.\nPneumonia can cause respiratory failure by triggering acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which results from a combination of infection and inflammatory response. The lungs quickly fill with fluid and become stiff. This stiffness, combined with severe difficulties extracting oxygen due to the alveolar fluid, may require long periods of mechanical ventilation for survival. Other causes of circulatory failure are hypoxemia, inflammation, and increased coagulability.\nSepsis is a potential complication of pneumonia but usually occurs in people with poor immunity or hyposplenism. The organisms most commonly involved are \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", \"Haemophilus influenzae\", and \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\". Other causes of the symptoms should be considered such as a myocardial infarction or a pulmonary embolism.\nEpidemiology.\nPneumonia is a common illness affecting approximately 450\u00a0million people a year and occurring in all parts of the world. It is a major cause of death among all age groups resulting in 4\u00a0million deaths (7% of the world's total death) yearly. Rates are greatest in children less than five, and adults older than 75\u00a0years. It occurs about five times more frequently in the developing world than in the developed world. Viral pneumonia accounts for about 200\u00a0million cases. In the United States, as of 2009[ [update]], pneumonia is the 8th leading cause of death.\nChildren.\nIn 2008, pneumonia occurred in approximately 156\u00a0million children (151\u00a0million in the developing world and 5\u00a0million in the developed world). In 2010, it resulted in 1.3\u00a0million deaths, or 18% of all deaths in those under five years, of which 95% occurred in the developing world. Countries with the greatest burden of disease include India (43\u00a0million), China (21\u00a0million) and Pakistan (10\u00a0million). It is the leading cause of death among children in low income countries. Many of these deaths occur in the newborn period. The World Health Organization estimates that one in three newborn infant deaths is due to pneumonia. Approximately half of these deaths can be prevented, as they are caused by the bacteria for which an effective vaccine is available. The IDSA has recommended that children and infants with symptoms of CAP should be hospitalized so they have access to pediatric nursing care. In 2011, pneumonia was the most common reason for admission to the hospital after an emergency department visit in the U.S. for infants and children.\nHistory.\nPneumonia has been a common disease throughout human history. The word is from Greek \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u03cd\u03bc\u03c9\u03bd (pne\u00fam\u014dn) meaning \"lung\". The symptoms were described by Hippocrates (c.\u2009460\u2013370 BC): \"Peripneumonia, and pleuritic affections, are to be thus observed: If the fever be acute, and if there be pains on either side, or in both, and if expiration be if cough be present, and the sputa expectorated be of a blond or livid color, or likewise thin, frothy, and florid, or having any other character different from the common... When pneumonia is at its height, the case is beyond remedy if he is not purged, and it is bad if he has dyspnoea, and urine that is thin and acrid, and if sweats come out about the neck and head, for such sweats are bad, as proceeding from the suffocation, rales, and the violence of the disease which is obtaining the upper hand.\" However, Hippocrates referred to pneumonia as a disease \"named by the ancients\". He also reported the results of surgical drainage of empyemas. Maimonides (1135\u20131204 AD) observed: \"The basic symptoms that occur in pneumonia and that are never lacking are as follows: acute fever, sticking pleuritic pain in the side, short rapid breaths, serrated pulse and cough.\" This clinical description is quite similar to those found in modern textbooks, and it reflected the extent of medical knowledge through the Middle Ages into the 19th century.\nEdwin Klebs was the first to observe bacteria in the airways of persons having died of pneumonia in 1875. Initial work identifying the two common bacterial causes, \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" and \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\", was performed by Carl Friedl\u00e4nder and Albert Fraenkel in 1882 and 1884, respectively. Friedl\u00e4nder's initial work introduced the Gram stain, a fundamental laboratory test still used today to identify and categorize bacteria. Christian Gram's paper describing the procedure in 1884 helped to differentiate the two bacteria, and showed that pneumonia could be caused by more than one microorganism. In 1887, Jaccond demonstrated pneumonia may be caused by opportunistic bacteria always present in the lung.\nSir William Osler, known as \"the father of modern medicine\", appreciated the death and disability caused by pneumonia, describing it as the \"captain of the men of death\" in 1918, as it had overtaken tuberculosis as one of the leading causes of death at the time. This phrase was originally coined by John Bunyan in reference to \"consumption\" (tuberculosis). Osler also described pneumonia as \"the old man's friend\" as death was often quick and painless when there were much slower and more painful ways to die.\nViral pneumonia was first described by Hobart Reimann in 1938. Reimann, Chairman of the Department of Medicine at Jefferson Medical College, had established the practice of routinely typing the pneumococcal organism in cases where pneumonia presented. Out of this work, the distinction between viral and bacterial strains was noticed.\nSeveral developments in the 1900s improved the outcome for those with pneumonia. With the advent of penicillin and other antibiotics, modern surgical techniques, and intensive care in the 20th century, mortality from pneumonia, which had approached 30%, dropped precipitously in the developed world. Vaccination of infants against \"Haemophilus influenzae\" type B began in 1988 and led to a dramatic decline in cases shortly thereafter. Vaccination against \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\" in adults began in 1977, and in children in 2000, resulting in a similar decline.\nSociety and culture.\nAwareness.\nDue to the relatively low awareness of the disease, 12 November was declared in 2009 as the annual World Pneumonia Day, a day for concerned citizens and policy makers to take action against the disease.\nCosts.\nThe global economic cost of community-acquired pneumonia has been estimated at $17\u00a0billion annually. Other estimates are considerably higher. In 2012 the estimated aggregate costs of treating pneumonia in the United States were $20\u00a0billion; the median cost of a single pneumonia-related hospitalization is over $15,000. According to data released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, average 2012 hospital charges for inpatient treatment of uncomplicated pneumonia in the U.S. were $24,549 and ranged as high as $124,000. The average cost of an emergency room consult for pneumonia was $943 and the average cost for medication was $66. Aggregate annual costs of treating pneumonia in Europe have been estimated at \u20ac10\u00a0billion.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52136", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52136", "title": "Citrus", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nCitrus is a genus of flowering trees and shrubs in the family Rutaceae. Plants in the genus produce citrus fruits, such as citrons, mandarins, and pomelos. Many important citrus crops have been developed through extensive hybridization, including oranges, lemons, grapefruits, and limes, all of which have many cultivars.\n\"Citrus\" is native to South Asia, East Asia, Southeast Asia, Melanesia, and Australia. Indigenous people in these areas have used and domesticated various species since ancient times. Its cultivation first spread into Micronesia and Polynesia through the Austronesian expansion (c.\u20093000\u20131500 BCE). Later, it was spread to the Middle East and the Mediterranean (c.\u20091200 BCE) via the incense trade route, and then from Europe to the Americas.\nRenowned for their highly fragrant aromas and complex flavor, citrus are among the most popular fruits in cultivation. With a propensity to hybridize between species, making their taxonomy complicated, there are numerous varieties encompassing a wide range of appearance and fruit flavors.\nEvolution.\nEvolutionary history.\nThe large citrus fruit of today evolved originally from small, edible berries over millions of years. Citrus species began to diverge from a common ancestor about 15 million years ago, at about the same time that \"Severinia\" (such as the Chinese box orange) diverged from the same ancestor. About 7 million years ago, the ancestors of \"Citrus\" split into the main genus, \"Citrus\", and the \"Poncirus\" group (such as the trifoliate orange), which some taxonomies consider a separate genus and others include in \"Citrus\" \"Poncirus\"\nis closely enough related that it can still be hybridized with all other citrus and used as rootstock. These estimates are made using genetic mapping of plant chloroplasts. A DNA study published in \"Nature\" in 2018 concludes that the genus \"Citrus\" evolved in the foothills of the Himalayas, in the area of Assam (India), western Yunnan (China), and northern Myanmar.\nThe three ancestral species in the genus \"Citrus\" associated with modern \"Citrus\" cultivars are the mandarin orange, pomelo, and citron. Almost all of the common commercially important citrus fruits (sweet oranges, lemons, grapefruit, limes, and so on) are hybrids between these three species, their main progenies, and other wild \"Citrus\" species within the last few thousand years.\nCitrus plants are native to subtropical and tropical regions of Asia, Island Southeast Asia, Near Oceania, and northeastern and central Australia. Domestication of citrus species involved much hybridization and introgression, leaving much uncertainty about when and where domestication first happened. A genomic, phylogenic, and biogeographical analysis by Wu \"et al.\" (2018) has shown that the center of origin of the genus \"Citrus\" is likely the southeast foothills of the Himalayas, in a region stretching from eastern Assam, northern Myanmar, to western Yunnan. It diverged from a common ancestor with \"Poncirus trifoliata\". A change in climate conditions during the Late Miocene (11.63 to 5.33 mya) resulted in a sudden speciation event. The species resulting from this event include the citrons (\"Citrus\u00a0medica\") of South Asia; the pomelos (\"C.\u00a0maxima\") of Mainland Southeast Asia; the mandarins (\"C.\u00a0reticulata\"), kumquats (\"C.\u00a0japonica\"), mangshanyegan (\"C.\u00a0mangshanensis\"), and ichang papedas (\"C.\u00a0cavaleriei\") of southeastern China; the kaffir limes (\"C.\u00a0hystrix\") of Island Southeast Asia; and the biasong and samuyao (\"C.\u00a0micrantha\") of the Philippines. \nThis was followed by the spread of citrus species into Taiwan and Japan in the Early Pliocene (5.33 to 3.6 mya), resulting in the tachibana orange (\"C.\u00a0tachibana\"); and beyond the Wallace Line into Papua New Guinea and Australia during the Early Pleistocene (2.5\u00a0million to 800,000 years ago), where further speciation events created the Australian limes.\nFossil record.\nA fossil leaf from the Pliocene of Valdarno, Italy is described as \u2020\"Citrus meletensis\".\nIn China, fossil leaf specimens of \u2020\"Citrus linczangensis\" have been collected from late Miocene coal-bearing strata of the Bangmai Formation in Yunnan province. \"C. linczangensis\" resembles \"C. meletensis\" in having an intramarginal vein, an entire margin, and an articulated and distinctly winged petiole.\nTaxonomy.\nMany cultivated \"Citrus\" species are natural or artificial hybrids of a small number of core ancestral species, including the citron, pomelo, and mandarin. Natural and cultivated citrus hybrids include commercially important fruit such as oranges, grapefruit, lemons, limes, and some tangerines. The multiple hybridisations have made the taxonomy of \"Citrus\" complex.\nKumquats and \"Clymenia\" spp. are now generally considered to belong within the genus \"Citrus\". The false oranges, \"Oxanthera\" from New Caledonia, have been transferred to the \"Citrus\" genus on phylogenetic evidence. A recent taxonomy reincorporates the trifoliate orange (\"Poncirus\") into an enlarged \"Citrus\", but recognizes that many botanists still follow Swingle in splitting it off.\nHistory.\nThe earliest introductions of citrus species by human migrations was during the Austronesian expansion (c.\u20093000\u20131500 BCE), where \"Citrus hystrix\", \"Citrus macroptera\", and \"Citrus maxima\" were among the canoe plants carried by Austronesian voyagers eastwards into Micronesia and Polynesia.\nThe citron (\"Citrus medica\") was also introduced early into the Mediterranean basin from India and Southeast Asia, via two ancient trade routes: an overland route through Persia, the Levant and the Mediterranean islands, and a maritime route through the Arabian Peninsula and Ptolemaic Egypt into North Africa. Although the exact date of the original introduction is unknown due to the sparseness of archaeobotanical remains, the earliest evidence is seeds recovered from the Hala Sultan Tekke site of Cyprus, dated to around 1200 BCE. Other archaea botanical evidence includes pollen from Carthage, dating back to the 4th century BCE, and carbonized seeds from Pompeii dated to around the 3rd to 2nd century BCE. The earliest complete description of the citron was written by Theophrastus, c.\u2009310 BCE. \nLemons, pomelos, and sour oranges were introduced to the Mediterranean by Arab traders around the 10th century CE. Sweet oranges were brought to Europe by the Genoese and Portuguese from Asia during the 15th to 16th century. Mandarins were not introduced until the 19th century. Oranges were introduced to Florida by Spanish colonists. In cooler parts of Europe, citrus fruit was grown in orangeries starting in the 17th century; many were as much status symbols as functional agricultural structures.\nEtymology.\nThe generic name \"Citrus\" originates from Latin, where it denoted either the citron (\"C. medica\") or a conifer tree (\"Thuja\"). The Latin word is related to the ancient Greek word for the cedar of Lebanon, (), perhaps from a perceived similarity of the smell of citrus leaves and fruit with that of cedar.\nDescription.\nTree.\n\"Citrus\" plants are large shrubs or small to moderate-sized trees, reaching tall, with spiny shoots and alternately arranged evergreen leaves with an entire margin. The flowers are solitary or in small corymbs, each flower diameter, with five (rarely four) white petals and numerous stamens; they are often very strongly scented, due to the presence of essential oil glands.\nFruit.\nThe fruit is a hesperidium, a specialised berry with multiple carpels, globose to elongated, long and diameter, with a leathery rind or \"peel\" called a pericarp. The outermost layer of the pericarp is an \"exocarp\" called the flavedo, commonly referred to as the zest. The middle layer of the pericarp is the mesocarp, which in citrus fruits consists of the white, spongy albedo or pith. The innermost layer of the pericarp is the endocarp. This surrounds a variable number of carpels, shaped as radial segments. The seeds, if present, develop inside the carpels. The space inside each segment is a locule filled with juice vesicles, or pulp. From the endocarp, string-like \"hairs\" extend into the locules, which provide nourishment to the fruit as it develops. The genus is commercially important with cultivars of many species grown for their fruit. Some cultivars have been developed to be easy to peel and seedless, meaning they are parthenocarpic.\nThe fragrance of citrus fruits is conferred by flavonoids and limonoids in the rind. The flavonoids include various flavanones and flavones. The carpels are juicy; they contain a high quantity of citric acid, which with other organic acids including ascorbic acid (vitamin C) give them their characteristic sharp taste. \"Citrus\" fruits are diverse in size and shape, as well as in color and flavor, reflecting their biochemistry; for instance, grapefruit is made bitter-tasting by a flavanone, naringin.\nCultivation.\nMost commercial citrus cultivation uses trees produced by grafting the desired fruiting cultivars onto rootstocks selected for disease resistance and hardiness. The trees are not generally frost hardy. They thrive in a consistently sunny, humid environment with fertile soil and adequate water.\nThe color of citrus fruits only develops in climates with a (diurnal) cool winter. In tropical regions with no winter at all, citrus fruits remain green until maturity, hence the tropical \"green oranges\". The terms 'ripe' and 'mature' are widely used synonymously, but they mean different things. A mature fruit is one that has completed its growth phase. Ripening is the sequence of changes within the fruit from maturity to the beginning of decay. These changes involve the conversion of starches to sugars, a decrease in acids, softening, and a change in the fruit's color. \"Citrus\" fruits are non-climacteric and respiration slowly declines and the production and release of ethylene is gradual. \nProduction.\nAccording to the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, world production of all citrus fruits in 2016 was 124 million tonnes, with about half of this production as oranges. At US $15.2 billion equivalent in 2018, citrus trade makes up nearly half of the world fruit trade, which was US$32.1 billion that year. According to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, citrus production grew during the early 21st century mainly by the increase in cultivation areas, improvements in transportation and packaging, rising incomes and consumer preference for healthy foods. In 2019\u201320, world production of oranges was estimated to be 47.5 million tonnes, led by Brazil, Mexico, the European Union, and China as the largest producers.\nPests and diseases.\nAmong the diseases of citrus plantations are citrus black spot (a fungus), citrus canker (a bacterium), citrus greening (a bacterium, spread by an insect pest), and sweet orange scab (a fungus, \"Elsin\u00f6e australis\"). Citrus plants are liable to infestation by ectoparasites which act as vectors to plant diseases: for example, aphids transmit the damaging citrus tristeza virus, while the aphid-like Asian citrus psyllid can carry the bacterium which causes the serious citrus greening disease. This threatens production in Florida, California, and worldwide. Citrus groves are attacked by parasitic Nematodes including citrus (\"Tylenchulus semipenetrans\") and sheath nematodes (\"Hemicycliophora\" spp.).\nDeficiency diseases.\nCitrus plants can develop the deficiency condition chlorosis, characterized by yellowing leaves. The condition is often caused by an excessively high pH (alkaline soil), which prevents the plant from absorbing nutrients such as iron, magnesium, and zinc needed to produce chlorophyll.\nEffects on humans.\nSome \"Citrus\" species contain significant amounts of furanocoumarins. In humans, some of these act as strong photosensitizers when applied topically to the skin, while others interact with medications when taken orally in the grapefruit juice effect. Due to the photosensitizing effects of certain furanocoumarins, some \"Citrus\" species cause phytophotodermatitis, a potentially severe skin inflammation resulting from contact with a light-sensitizing botanical agent followed by exposure to ultraviolet light. In \"Citrus\" species, the primary photosensitizing agent appears to be bergapten, a linear furanocoumarin derived from psoralen. This claim has been confirmed for lime and bergamot. In particular, bergamot essential oil has a higher concentration of bergapten (3\u20133.6 g/kg) than any other \"Citrus\"-based essential oil.\nA systematic review indicates that citrus fruit consumption is associated with a 10% reduction of risk for developing breast cancer.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nMany citrus fruits, such as oranges, tangerines, grapefruits, and clementines, are generally eaten fresh. They are typically peeled and can be easily split into segments. Grapefruit is more commonly halved and eaten out of the skin with a spoon. Lemonade is a popular beverage prepared by diluting the juice and adding sugar. Lemon juice is mixed in salad dressings and squeezed over fruit salad to stop it from turning brown: its acidity suppresses oxidation by polyphenol oxidase enzymes.\nA variety of flavors can be derived from different parts and treatments of citrus fruits. The colorful outer skin of some citrus fruits, known as zest, is used as a flavoring in cooking.\nThe whole of the bitter orange (and sometimes other citrus fruits) including the peel with its essential oils is cooked with sugar to make marmalade.\nAs ornamental plants.\nBy the 17th century, orangeries were added to great houses in Europe, both to enable the fruit to be grown locally and for prestige, as seen in the Versailles Orangerie. Some modern hobbyists grow dwarf citrus in containers or greenhouses in areas where the weather is too cold to grow it outdoors; \"Citrofortunella\" hybrids have good cold resistance.\nIn art and culture.\nLemons appear in paintings, pop art, and novels. A wall painting in the tomb of Nakht in 15th century BC Egypt depicts a woman in a festival, holding a lemon. In the 17th century, Giovanna Garzoni painted a \"Still Life with Bowl of Citrons\", the fruits still attached to leafy flowering twigs, with a wasp on one of the fruits. The impressionist Edouard Manet depicted a lemon on a pewter plate. In modern art, Arshile Gorky painted \"Still Life with Lemons\" in the 1930s. \nCitrus fruits \"were the clear status symbols of the nobility in the ancient Mediterranean\", according to the paleoethnobotanist Dafna Langgut. In Louisa May Alcott's 1868 novel \"Little Women\", the character Amy March states that \"It's nothing but limes now, for everyone is sucking them in their desks in schooltime, and trading them off for pencils, bead rings, paper dolls, or something else\u2026 If one girl likes another, she gives her a lime; if she's mad with her, she eats one before her face, and doesn't offer even a suck.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52137", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52137", "title": "GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research", "text": "German research institute\nThe GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research () is a federally and state co-funded heavy ion (Schwerion) research center in Darmstadt, Germany. It was founded in 1969 as the Society for Heavy Ion Research (, GSI), to conduct research on and with heavy-ion accelerators. It is the only major user research center in the State of Hesse.\nThe laboratory performs basic and applied research in physics and related natural sciences. Main fields of study include plasma physics, atomic physics, nuclear structure and reactions research, biophysics and medical research. The lab is a member of the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres.\nShareholders are the German Federal Government (90%) and the State of Hesse, Thuringia and Rhineland-Palatinate. As a member of the Helmholtz Association, the current name was given to the facility on 7 October 2008 in order to bring it sharper national and international awareness.\nThe GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research has strategic partnerships with the Technische Universit\u00e4t Darmstadt, Goethe University Frankfurt, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz and the Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies.\nPrimary research.\nThe chief tool is the heavy ion accelerator facility consisting of:\nThe UNILAC was commissioned in 1975; the SIS 18 and the ESR were added in 1990 boosting the ion acceleration from 10% of light speed to 90%.\nElements discovered at GSI: bohrium (1981), meitnerium (1982), hassium (1984), darmstadtium (1994), roentgenium (1994), and copernicium (1996).\nElements confirmed at GSI: nihonium (2012), flerovium (2009), moscovium (2012), livermorium (2010), and tennessine (2012).\nHistory.\nOn the initiative of the University of Darmstadt, the University of Frankfurt, and the University of Marburg, the GSI Helmholtz Centre for Heavy Ion Research (GSI) was founded on 17 December 1969 as the \"Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Schwerionenforschung mbH (GSI)\". The site chosen was a wooded area in the north of Darmstadt. Construction costs amounted to about 180 million Deutsche Marks. The UNILAC linear accelerator, developed by Christoph Schmelzer\u2014who also became GSI's first managing director in 1971\u2014was realized as the first part of the accelerator complex. From 1975 onwards, the facility delivered its first ion beams for experiments.\nIn the 1980s, several superheavy elements were synthesized for the first time at GSI using the UNILAC beam. During this period, the heavy-ion synchrotron SIS18 and the ESR were planned, built, and commissioned in 1990. Scientific directors at that time were Gisbert zu Putlitz (1978\u20131983) and Paul Kienle (1984\u20131992).\nUnder Hans Joachim Specht (1992\u20131999), discussions began on further expansion of GSI's accelerator facilities and experimental capabilities. These discussions, during the tenure of Walter Henning (1999\u20132007), led to the project proposal for the FAIR. \nFrom 2007 to 2015, Horst St\u00f6cker served as scientific director of GSI. He was succeeded by Ursula Weyrich, J\u00f6rg Blaurock and Paolo Giubellino as joint managing directors of GSI and FAIR. The current joint managing directors are Thomas Nilsson (Scientific), Katharina Stummeyer (Administrative), and J\u00f6rg Blaurock (Technical).\nTechnological developments.\nAnother important technology developed at the GSI is the use of heavy ion beams for cancer treatment (from 1997). Instead of using X-ray radiation, carbon ions are used to irradiate the patient. The technique allows tumors which are close to vital organs to be treated, which is not possible with X-rays. This is because the Bragg peak of carbon ions is much sharper than the peak of X-ray photons. A facility based on this technology, called Heidelberger Ionenstrahl-Therapiezentrum (HIT), built at the University of Heidelberg Medical Center began treating patients in November 2009.\nFuture evolution.\nIn the years to come, GSI will evolve to an international structure named \"FAIR\" for Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research: one new synchrotron (with respective magnetic rigidity 100\u00a0T\u22c5m), a \"Super-FRS\" and several new rings among which one that can be used for antimatter research. The major part of the facility will be commissioned in 2022; full operation is planned for 2025.\nThe creation of FAIR was co-signed on 7 November 2007 by 10 countries: Finland, France, Germany, India, Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom, and Poland. Representatives included Annette Schavan, the German federal minister of science and Roland Koch, the prime minister of the state of Hesse.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52138", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52138", "title": "Caridea", "text": "Infraorder of crustacean; \"true\" shrimp\nThe Caridea, commonly known as caridean shrimp or true shrimp, from Ancient Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03c1\u03af\u03c2, \u03ba\u03b1\u03c1\u03af\u03b4\u03bf\u03c2 (\"kar\u00eds\", \"kar\u00eddos\", \"shrimp\"), are an infraorder of shrimp within the order Decapoda. This infraorder contains all species of true shrimp. They are found widely around the world in both fresh and salt water. Many other animals with similar names \u2013 such as the mud shrimp of Axiidea and the boxer shrimp of Stenopodidea \u2013 are not true shrimp, but many have evolved features similar to true shrimp.\nBiology.\nCarideans are found in every kind of aquatic habitat, with the majority of species being marine. Around a quarter of the described species are found in fresh water, however, including almost all the members of the species-rich family Atyidae and the Palaemonidae subfamily Palaemoninae. They include several commercially important species, such as \"Macrobrachium rosenbergii\", and are found on every continent except Antarctica. The marine species are found at depths to , and from the tropics to the polar regions.\nIn addition to the great variety in habitat, carideans vary greatly in form, from species a few millimetres long when fully grown, to those that grow to over long. Except where secondarily lost, shrimp have one pair of stalked eyes, although they are sometimes covered by the carapace, which protects the cephalothorax. The carapace also surrounds the gills, through which water is pumped by the action of the mouthparts.\nMost carideans are omnivorous, but some are specialised for particular modes of feeding. Some are filter feeders, using their setose (bristly) legs as a sieve; some scrape algae from rocks. The snapping shrimp of the genus \"Alpheus\" snap their claws to create a shock wave that stuns prey. Many cleaner shrimp, which groom reef fish and feed on their parasites and necrotic tissue, are carideans. In turn, carideans are eaten by various animals, particularly fish and seabirds, and frequently host bopyrid parasites.\nLifecycle.\nUnlike Dendrobranchiates, Carideans brood their eggs rather than releasing them into the water. Caridean larvae undergo all naupliar development within the egg, and eclose as a zoea. The zoea stage feeds on phytoplankton. There can be as few as two zoea stages, (e.g. some freshwater Palaemonidae), or as many as 13, (e.g. some Pandalidae). The post-zoeal larva, often called a decapodid, resembles a miniature adult, but retains some larval characteristics. The decapodid larva will metamorphose a final time into a post-larval juvenile: a young shrimp having all the characteristics of adults. Most adult carideans are benthic animals living primarily on the sea floor.\nCommon species include \"Pandalus borealis\" (the \"pink shrimp\"), \"Crangon crangon\" (the \"brown shrimp\") and the snapping shrimp of the genus \"Alpheus\". Depending on the species and location, they grow from about long, and live between 1.0 and 6.5 years.\nCommercial fishing.\nThe most significant commercial species among the carideans is \"Pandalus borealis\", followed by \"Crangon crangon\". The wild-capture production of \"P.\u00a0borealis\" is about ten times that of \"C.\u00a0crangon\". In 1950, the position was reversed, with the capture of \"C.\u00a0crangon\" about ten times that of \"P.\u00a0borealis\".\nIn 2010, the global aquaculture of all shrimp and prawn species (3.5 million tonnes) slightly exceeded the global wild capture (3.2 million tonnes). No carideans were significantly involved in aquaculture, but about 430,000 tonnes were captured in the wild. That is, about 13% of the global wild capture, or about 6% of the total production of all shrimp and prawns, were carideans.\nSystematics and related taxa.\nShrimp of the infraorder Caridea are more closely related to lobsters and crabs than they are to the members of the sub-order Dendrobranchiata (prawns). Biologists distinguish these two groups based on differences in their gill structures. The gill structure is lamellar in carideans but branching in dendrobranchiates. The easiest practical way to separate true shrimp from dendrobranchiates is to examine the second abdominal segment. The second segment of a carideans overlaps both the first and the third segment, while the second segment of a dendrobranchiate overlaps only the third segment. They also differ in that carideans typically have two pairs of chelae (claws), while dendrobranchiates have three. A third group, the Stenopodidea, contains around 70 species and differs from the other groups in that the third pairs of legs is greatly enlarged.\nProcarididea are the sister group to the Caridea, comprising only eleven species.\nThe cladogram below shows Caridea's relationships to other relatives within Decapoda, from analysis by Wolfe \"et al.\", 2019.\nThe below cladogram shows the internal relationships of eight selected families within Caridea, with the Atyidae (freshwater shrimp) being the most basal:\nTaxonomy.\nThe infraorder Caridea is divided into 15 superfamilies:\nFossil record.\nThe fossil record of the Caridean is sparse, with only 57 exclusively fossil species known. The earliest of these cannot be assigned to any family, but date from the Lower Jurassic and Cretaceous. A number of extinct genera cannot be placed in any superfamily:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52139", "revid": "36346239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52139", "title": "Audrey Hepburn", "text": "British actress (1929\u20131993)\nAudrey Kathleen Hepburn (n\u00e9e Ruston; 4 May 1929 \u2013 20 January 1993) was a British actress. Recognised as a film and fashion icon, she was ranked by the American Film Institute as the third-greatest female screen legend from the Classical Hollywood cinema. She was inducted into the International Best Dressed Hall of Fame and is one of a few entertainers who have won competitive Academy, Emmy, Grammy and Tony Awards.\nBorn into an aristocratic family in Ixelles, Brussels, Hepburn spent parts of her childhood in Belgium, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. She attended boarding school in Kent from 1936 to 1939. Hepburn returned to the Netherlands with the Second World War's outbreak. She studied ballet at the Arnhem Conservatory during the war. By 1944, Hepburn was performing ballet to raise money to support the resistance. She studied with Sonia Gaskell in Amsterdam from 1945 to 1948 and then with Marie Rambert in London.\nHepburn began performing as a chorus girl in West End musical theatre productions and then had minor appearances in several films. She rose to stardom in the romantic comedy \"Roman Holiday\" (1953) alongside Gregory Peck, for which she became the first actress to win an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a BAFTA Award for a single performance. The same year, Hepburn won a Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Play for her performance in \"Ondine\". She went on to star in a number of successful films, such as \"Sabrina\" (1954), with Humphrey Bogart and William Holden; \"Funny Face\" (1957), a musical in which she sang her own parts; the drama \"The Nun's Story\" (1959); the romantic comedy \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1961); the thriller-romance \"Charade\" (1963), opposite Cary Grant; and the musical \"My Fair Lady\" (1964).\nIn 1967, Hepburn starred in the thriller \"Wait Until Dark\", receiving Academy Award, Golden Globe and BAFTA nominations. After that role, she only occasionally appeared in films, one being \"Robin and Marian\" (1976) with Sean Connery. Her last recorded performances were in \"Always\" (1989), an American romantic fantasy film directed and produced by Steven Spielberg, and the 1990 documentary television series \"Gardens of the World with Audrey Hepburn\", for which she won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement \u2013 Informational Programming. \nLater in life, Hepburn devoted much of her time to UNICEF, to which she had contributed since 1954. Between 1988 and 1992, she worked in some of the poorest communities of Africa, South America and Asia.\nHepburn won three BAFTA Awards for Best British Actress in a Leading Role. In recognition of her film career, she received BAFTA's Lifetime Achievement Award, the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award and the Special Tony Award. In December 1992, Hepburn received the US Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of her work as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. A month later, she died of appendix cancer at her home in Tolochenaz, Switzerland. In 1994, Hepburn's contributions to a spoken-word recording titled \"Audrey Hepburn's Enchanted Tales\" earned her a posthumous Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children.\nEarly life.\n1929\u20131938: Family and early childhood.\nAudrey Kathleen Ruston (later, Hepburn-Ruston) was born on 4 May 1929 at number 48 Rue Keyenveld in Ixelles, a municipality of Brussels, Belgium. She was known to her family as \"Adriaantje\". She was raised Protestant and remained one throughout her life. \nHepburn's mother, Baroness Ella van Heemstra (1900\u20131984), was a Dutch noblewoman. She was the daughter of Baron Aarnoud van Heemstra (1871\u20131957), who served as the mayor of Arnhem from 1910 to 1920 and as the governor of Dutch Guiana from 1921 to 1928, and Baroness Elbrig Willemine Henriette van Asbeck (1873\u20131939), a granddaughter of Count Dirk van Hogendorp (1797\u20131845). At the age of 19, she married Jonkheer Hendrik Gustaaf Adolf Quarles van Ufford, an oil executive based in Batavia, Dutch East Indies, where the couple subsequently lived. Before divorcing in 1925, they had two sons, Jonkheer Arnoud Robert Alexander \"Alex\" Quarles van Ufford (1920\u20131979) and Jonkheer Ian Edgar Bruce Quarles van Ufford (1924\u20132010).\nHepburn's father, Joseph Victor Anthony Ruston (1889\u20131980), was a British subject born in Auschitz, Kingdom of Bohemia, Austria-Hungary. He was the son of Victor John George Ruston, who was of British and German-Austrian background, and Anna Juliana Franziska Karolina Wels, who was of German-Austrian origin and born in Kovarce. He was an Honorary British Consul in Semarang, Dutch East Indies, from 1923 to 1924. Joseph was married to Cornelia Bisschop, a Dutch heiress, prior to his marriage to Ella. He later changed his surname to the more \"aristocratic\" double-barrelled Hepburn-Ruston, perhaps at Ella's insistence, due to mistakenly believing himself descended from James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell.\nElla and Joseph married in Batavia in 1926. Joseph was working for a trading company at the time. Soon after the marriage, the couple moved to Europe, where he began working for a loan company; reportedly tin merchants MacLaine, Watson, and Company in London. After a year in London, they moved to Brussels, where he had been assigned to open a branch office. After three years spent travelling between Brussels, Arnhem, The Hague and London, the family settled in the suburban Brussels municipality of Linkebeek in 1932. Hepburn's early childhood was sheltered and privileged. Due to Joseph's job, the family travelled back and forth among three countries, enhancing her multinational background.\nIn the mid-1930s, Ella and Joseph recruited and collected donations for the British Union of Fascists (BUF). Ella met Adolf Hitler and wrote favourable articles about him for the BUF. Joseph left the family abruptly in 1935 after a \"scene\" in Brussels. He subsequently moved to London, where he became more deeply involved in the Fascist activity and never visited Hepburn abroad. The same year, Ella moved to her family's estate in Arnhem with Hepburn and sent Alex and Ian to The Hague to live with relatives. Joseph wanted Hepburn to be educated in the United Kingdom, so in 1937, she was sent to live in Kent, where she, known as Audrey Ruston or \"Little Audrey\", was educated at a small private school in Elham. Ella and Joseph officially divorced the next year. Later in her life, Hepburn often spoke of the effect on a child of being \"dumped\" as \"children need two parents\"; she stated that Joseph's departure was \"the most traumatic event of my life\". In the 1960s, Hepburn renewed contact with Joseph after locating him in Dublin through the Red Cross; she supported him financially until his death although he remained emotionally detached.\n1939\u20131945: Experiences during World War II.\nAfter Britain declared war on Germany in September 1939, Hepburn's mother moved her daughter back to Arnhem in the hope that, as during the First World War, the Netherlands would remain neutral and be spared a German attack. While there, Hepburn attended the Arnhem Conservatory from 1939 to 1945. She had begun taking ballet lessons during her last years at boarding school, and continued training in Arnhem under the tutelage of Winja Marova, becoming her \"star pupil\". After the Germans invaded the Netherlands in 1940, Hepburn used the name Edda van Heemstra, because an \"English-sounding\" name was considered dangerous during the German occupation. Her family was profoundly affected by the occupation, with Hepburn later stating that \"had we known that we were going to be occupied for five years, we might have all shot ourselves. We thought it might be over next week\u2026 six months\u2026 next year\u2026 that's how we got through\".\nIn 1942, her uncle, Otto van Limburg Stirum (husband of her mother's older sister, Miesje), was executed in retaliation for an act of sabotage by the resistance movement; while he had not been involved in the act, he was targeted due to his family's prominence in Dutch society. These family events were the turning point in the attitude of Hepburn's mother, who had flirted with Nazism up to this point. Hepburn's half-brother Ian was deported to Berlin to work in a German labour camp, and her other half-brother Alex went into hiding to avoid the same fate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We saw young men put against the wall and shot, and they'd close the street and then open it, and you could pass by again... Don't discount anything awful you hear or read about the Nazis. It's worse than you could ever imagine.\"\n\u2014Hepburn on the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands\nAfter her uncle's death, Hepburn, Ella, and Miesje left Arnhem to live with her grandfather, Baron Aarnoud van Heemstra, in nearby Velp. Around that time Hepburn gave silent dance performances that reportedly raised money for the Dutch resistance effort. It was long believed that she participated in the Dutch resistance itself, but in 2016 the Airborne Museum 'Hartenstein' reported that after extensive research it had not found any evidence of such activities. A 2019 book by Robert Matzen provided evidence, based on Hepburn's personal statements, that she had supported the resistance by giving \"underground concerts\" to raise money, delivering the underground newspaper, and taking messages and food to downed Allied flyers hiding in the woodlands north of Velp. She also volunteered at a hospital that was the center of resistance activities in Velp, and, according to Hepburn, her family temporarily hid a British paratrooper in their home during the Battle of Arnhem. Matzen also claims that Hepburn carried messages for the Dutch Resistance, including to downed British paratroopers.\nIn addition to other traumatic events, she witnessed the transportation of Dutch Jews to concentration camps, later stating that \"more than once I was at the station seeing trainloads of Jews being transported, seeing all these faces over the top of the wagon. I remember, very sharply, one little boy standing with his parents on the platform, very pale, very blond, wearing a coat that was much too big for him, and he stepped on the train. I was a child observing a child.\"\nAfter the Allied landing on D-Day, living conditions grew worse, and Arnhem was subsequently heavily damaged during Operation Market Garden. During the 1944\u201345 Dutch famine, the Germans hindered or reduced the already limited food and fuel supplies to civilians in retaliation for Dutch railway strikes that were held to disrupt the occupation. Like others, Hepburn's family resorted to making flour out of tulip bulbs to bake cakes and biscuits, a source of starchy carbohydrates; Dutch doctors provided recipes for using tulip bulbs throughout the famine. Suffering from the effects of malnutrition, after the war ended Hepburn became gravely ill with jaundice, anaemia, oedema, and a respiratory infection. In October 1945, a letter from Ella asking for help was received by Micky Burn, a former lover and British Army officer with whom she had corresponded while he was a prisoner of war in Colditz Castle. He sent back thousands of cigarettes, which she was able to sell on the black market and thus buy the penicillin which saved Hepburn's life. The Van Heemstra family's financial situation changed significantly through the occupation, during which time many of their properties (including their principal estate in Arnhem) were damaged or destroyed.\nEntertainment career.\n1945\u20131952: Ballet studies and early acting roles.\nAfter the war ended in 1945, Hepburn moved with her mother and siblings to Amsterdam, where she began ballet training under Sonia Gaskell, a leading figure in Dutch ballet, and Russian teacher Olga Tarasova. Due to the loss of the family fortune, Ella had to support them by working as a cook and housekeeper for a wealthy family. Hepburn made her film debut playing an air stewardess in \"Dutch in Seven Lessons\" (1948), an educational travel film made by Charles van der Linden and Henry Josephson.\nLater that year, Hepburn moved to London after accepting a ballet scholarship with Ballet Rambert, which was then based in Notting Hill. She supported herself with part-time work as a model, and dropped \"Ruston\" from her surname. After she was told by Rambert that despite her talent, her height and weak constitution (the after-effect of wartime malnutrition) would make the status of prima ballerina unattainable, she decided to concentrate on acting. While Ella worked in menial jobs to support them, Hepburn appeared as a chorus girl in the West End musical theatre revues \"High Button Shoes\" (1948) at the London Hippodrome, and Cecil Landeau's \"Sauce Tartare\" (1949) and \"Sauce Piquante\" (1950) at the Cambridge Theatre. Also, in 1950, she worked as a dancer in an exceptionally \"ambitious\" revue, \"Summer Nights,\" at Ciro's London, a prominent nightclub.\nDuring her theatrical work, she took elocution lessons with actor Felix Aylmer to develop her voice. After being spotted by the Ealing Studios casting director, Margaret Harper-Nelson, while performing in \"Sauce Piquante\", Hepburn was registered as a freelance actress with the Associated British Picture Corporation (ABPC). She appeared in the BBC Television play \"The Silent Village\", and in minor roles in the films \"One Wild Oat\", \"Laughter in Paradise\", \"Young Wives' Tale\", and \"The Lavender Hill Mob\" (all 1951). She was cast in her first major supporting role in Thorold Dickinson's \"Secret People\" (1952), as a prodigious ballerina, performing all of her own dancing sequences.\nHepburn then took a small role in a bilingual film, \"Monte Carlo Baby\" (French: \"Nous Irons \u00e0 Monte Carlo\", 1952), which was filmed in Monte Carlo. Coincidentally, French novelist Colette was at the H\u00f4tel de Paris in Monte Carlo during the filming, and decided to cast Hepburn in the title role in the Broadway play \"Gigi\". Hepburn went into rehearsals having never spoken on stage, and required private coaching. When \"Gigi\" opened at the Fulton Theatre on 24 November 1951, she received praise for her performance, despite criticism that the stage version was inferior to the French film adaptation. \"Life\" called her a \"hit\", while \"The New York Times\" stated that \"her quality is so winning and so right that she is the success of the evening\". Hepburn also received a Theatre World Award for the role. The play ran for 219 performances, closing on 31 May 1952, before going on tour, which began 13 October 1952 in Pittsburgh and visited Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, Washington, D. C., and Los Angeles, before closing on 16 May 1953 in San Francisco.\n1953\u20131960: \"Roman Holiday\" and stardom.\nHepburn had her first starring role in \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), playing Princess Ann, a European princess who escapes the reins of royalty and has a wild night out with an American newsman (Gregory Peck). On 18 September 1951, shortly after \"Secret People\" was finished but before its premiere, Thorold Dickinson made a screen test with the young starlet and sent it to director William Wyler, who was in Rome preparing \"Roman Holiday\". Wyler wrote a glowing note of thanks to Dickinson, saying that \"as a result of the test, a number of the producers at Paramount have expressed interest in casting her.\" The producers of the film had initially wanted Elizabeth Taylor for the role, but Wyler was so impressed by Hepburn's screen test that he cast her instead. Wyler later commented, \"She had everything I was looking for: charm, innocence, and talent. She also was very funny. She was absolutely enchanting, and we said, 'That's the girl!'\" Originally, the film was to have had only Gregory Peck's name above its title, with \"Introducing Audrey Hepburn\" beneath in smaller font. Peck suggested Wyler elevate her to equal billing so her name appears before the title, and in type as large as his: \"You've got to change that because she'll be a big star, and I'll look like a big jerk.\"\nThe film was a box-office success, and Hepburn gained critical acclaim for her portrayal, unexpectedly winning an Academy Award for Best Actress, a BAFTA Award for Best British Actress in a Leading Role, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Drama in 1953. In his review in \"The New York Times\", A. H. Weiler wrote: \"Although she is not precisely a newcomer to films, Audrey Hepburn, the British actress who is being starred for the first time as Princess Anne, is a slender, elfin, and wistful beauty, alternately regal and childlike in her profound appreciation of newly-found, simple pleasures and love. Although she bravely smiles her acknowledgement of the end of that affair, she remains a pitifully lonely figure facing a stuffy future.\"\nHepburn was signed to a seven-picture contract with Paramount, with 12 months in between films to allow her time for stage work. She was featured on 7 September 1953 cover of \"Time\" magazine, and also became known for her personal style. Following her success in \"Roman Holiday\", Hepburn starred in Billy Wilder's romantic Cinderella-story comedy \"Sabrina\" (1954), in which wealthy brothers (Humphrey Bogart and William Holden) compete for the affections of their chauffeur's innocent daughter (Hepburn). For her performance, she was nominated for the 1954 Academy Award for Best Actress, while winning the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role the same year. Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" stated that she was \"a young lady of extraordinary range of sensitive and moving expressions within such a frail and slender frame. She is even more luminous as the daughter and pet of the servants' hall than she was as a princess last year, and no more than that can be said.\"\nHepburn also returned to the stage in 1954, playing a water nymph who falls in love with a human in the fantasy play \"Ondine\" on Broadway. A critic for \"The New York Times\" commented that \"somehow, Miss Hepburn is able to translate [its intangibles] into the language of the theatre without artfulness or precociousness. She gives a pulsing performance that is all grace and enchantment, disciplined by an instinct for the realities of the stage\". Her performance won her the 1954 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play three days after she won the Academy Award for \"Roman Holiday\", making her one of three actresses to receive the Academy and Tony Awards for Best Actress in the same year (the other two are Shirley Booth and Ellen Burstyn). During the production, Hepburn and her co-star Mel Ferrer began a relationship, and were married on 25 September 1954 in Switzerland.\nAlthough she appeared in no new film releases in 1955, Hepburn received the Golden Globe for World Film Favorite that year. Having become one of Hollywood's most popular box-office attractions, she starred in a series of successful films during the remainder of the decade, including her BAFTA- and Golden Globe-nominated role as Natasha Rostova in \"War and Peace\" (1956), an adaptation of the Tolstoy novel set during the Napoleonic wars, starring Henry Fonda and her husband Mel Ferrer. She exhibited her dancing abilities in her debut musical film, \"Funny Face\" (1957), wherein Fred Astaire, a fashion photographer, discovers a beatnik bookshop clerk (Hepburn) who, lured by a free trip to Paris, becomes a beautiful model. Hepburn starred in another romantic comedy, \"Love in the Afternoon\" (also 1957), alongside Gary Cooper and Maurice Chevalier.\nHepburn played Sister Luke in \"The Nun's Story\" (1959), which focuses on the character's struggle to succeed as a nun, alongside co-star Peter Finch. The role produced a third Academy Award nomination for Hepburn, and earned her a second BAFTA Award. A review in \"Variety\" reads: \"Hepburn has her most demanding film role, and she gives her finest performance\", while Henry Hart in \"Films in Review\" stated that her performance \"will forever silence those who have thought her less an actress than a symbol of the sophisticated child/woman. Her portrayal of Sister Luke is one of the great performances of the screen.\" Hepburn spent a year researching and working on the role, saying, \"I gave more time, energy, and thought to this role than to any of my previous screen performances\".\nFollowing \"The Nun's Story\", Hepburn received a lukewarm reception for starring with Anthony Perkins in the romantic adventure \"Green Mansions\" (1959), in which she played Rima, a jungle girl who falls in love with a Venezuelan traveller, and \"The Unforgiven\" (1960), her only western film, in which she appeared opposite Burt Lancaster and Lillian Gish in a story of racism against a group of Native Americans.\n1961\u20131967: \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" and continued success.\nHepburn next starred as New Yorker Holly Golightly in Blake Edwards's \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1961), a film loosely based on the Truman Capote novella of the same name. Capote disapproved of many changes that were made to sanitise the story for the film adaptation, and would have preferred Marilyn Monroe to have been cast in the role, although he also stated that Hepburn \"did a terrific job\". The character is considered one of the best-known in American cinema, and a defining role for Hepburn. The dress she wears during the opening credits has been considered an icon of the 20th century, and perhaps the most famous \"little black dress\" of all time. Hepburn stated that the role was \"the jazziest of my career\" yet admitted: \"I'm an introvert. Playing the extroverted girl was the hardest thing I ever did.\" She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance.\nThe same year, Hepburn also starred in William Wyler's drama \"The Children's Hour\" (1961), in which she and Shirley MacLaine play teachers whose lives are destroyed after two pupils accuse them of being lesbians. Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" writes that the film \"is not too well acted\", with the exception of Hepburn, who \"gives the impression of being sensitive and pure\" of its \"muted theme\". \"Variety\" magazine also compliments Hepburn's \"soft sensitivity, marvelous projection and emotional understatement\", adding that Hepburn and MacLaine \"beautifully complement each other\".\nHepburn next appeared opposite Cary Grant in the comic thriller \"Charade\" (1963), playing a young widow pursued by several men who chase after the fortune stolen by her murdered husband. The 59-year-old Grant, who had previously withdrawn from the starring male lead roles in \"Roman Holiday\" and \"Sabrina\", was sensitive about his age difference with 34-year-old Hepburn, and was uncomfortable about the romantic interplay. To satisfy his concerns, the filmmakers agreed to alter the screenplay so that Hepburn's character was pursuing him. The film turned out to be a positive experience for him; he said, \"All I want for Christmas is another picture with Audrey Hepburn.\" The role earned Hepburn her third, and final, competitive BAFTA Award, and another Golden Globe nomination. Critic Bosley Crowther was less kind to her performance, stating that, \"Hepburn is cheerfully committed to a mood of how-nuts-can-you-be in an obviously comforting assortment of expensive Givenchy costumes.\"\nAlthough filmed in the summer of 1962 before \"Charade,\" Hepburn reunited with her \"Sabrina\" co-star William Holden in \"Paris When It Sizzles\" (1964), a screwball comedy in which she played the young assistant of a Hollywood screenwriter, who aids his writer's block by acting out his fantasies of possible plots. Its production was troubled by several problems. Holden unsuccessfully tried to rekindle a romance with the now-married Hepburn, and his alcoholism was beginning to affect his work. After principal photography began, she demanded the dismissal of cinematographer Claude Renoir after seeing what she felt were unflattering dailies. Superstitious, she also insisted on dressing room 55 because that was her lucky number and required that Hubert de Givenchy, her long-time designer, be given a credit in the film for her perfume. Dubbed \"marshmallow-weight hokum\" by \"Variety\" upon its release in April, the film was \"uniformly panned\" but critics were kinder to Hepburn's performance, describing her as \"a refreshingly individual creature in an era of the exaggerated curve\".\nHepburn's second film released in 1964 was George Cukor's film adaptation of the stage musical \"My Fair Lady\", which premiered in October. \"Soundstage\" wrote that \"not since \"Gone with the Wind\" has a motion picture created such universal excitement as \"My Fair Lady\"\", although Hepburn's casting in the role of Cockney flower girl Eliza Doolittle was a source of dispute. Julie Andrews, who had originated the role on stage, was not offered the part because producer Jack L. Warner thought Hepburn was a more \"bankable\" proposition. Hepburn initially asked Warner to give the role to Andrews but was eventually cast. Further friction was created when, although non-singer Hepburn had sung in \"Funny Face\" and had lengthy vocal preparation for the role in \"My Fair Lady\", her vocals were dubbed by Marni Nixon, whose voice was considered more suitable to the role. Hepburn was initially upset and walked off the set when informed.\nCritics applauded Hepburn's performance. Crowther wrote that, \"The happiest thing about [\"My Fair Lady\"] is that Audrey Hepburn superbly justifies the decision of Jack Warner to get her to play the title role.\" Gene Ringgold of \"Soundstage\" also commented that, \"Audrey Hepburn is magnificent. She is Eliza for the ages\", while adding, \"Everyone agreed that if Julie Andrews was not to be in the film, Audrey Hepburn was the perfect choice.\" The reviewer in \"Time\" magazine said her \"graceful, glamorous performance\" was \"the best of her career\". Andrews won an Academy Award for \"Mary Poppins\" at the 1964 37th Academy Awards and Hepburn earned Best Actress nominations for Golden Globe and New York Film Critics Circle awards.\nHepburn appeared in an assortment of genres including the heist comedy \"How to Steal a Million\" (1966). Hepburn played the daughter of a famous art collector, whose collection consists entirely of forgeries that are about to be exposed as fakes. Her character plays the part of a dutiful daughter trying to help her father with the help of a man played by Peter O'Toole. The film was followed by two films in 1967. The first was \"Two for the Road\", a non-linear and innovative British dramedy that traces the course of a couple's troubled marriage. Director Stanley Donen said that Hepburn was freer and happier than he had ever seen her, and he credited that to co-star Albert Finney. The second, \"Wait Until Dark\", is a suspense thriller in which Hepburn demonstrated her acting range by playing the part of a terrorised blind woman. Filmed on the brink of her divorce, it was a difficult film for her, as husband Mel Ferrer was its producer. She lost 15 pounds under the stress, but she found solace in co-star Richard Crenna and director Terence Young. Hepburn earned her fifth and final competitive Academy Award nomination for Best Actress; Bosley Crowther affirmed, \"Hepburn plays the poignant role, the quickness with which she changes and the skill with which she manifests terror attract sympathy and anxiety to her and give her genuine solidity in the final scenes.\"\n1968\u20131993: Semi-retirement and final projects.\nAfter 1967, Hepburn chose to devote more time to her family and acted only occasionally. She attempted a comeback playing Maid Marian in the period piece \"Robin and Marian\" (1976) with Sean Connery co-starring as Robin Hood, which was moderately successful. Roger Ebert praised Hepburn's chemistry with Connery, writing, \"Connery and Hepburn seem to have arrived at a tacit understanding between themselves about their characters. They glow. They really do seem in love. And they project as marvellously complex, fond, tender people; the passage of 20 years has given them grace and wisdom.\" Hepburn reunited with director Terence Young in the production of \"Bloodline\" (1979), sharing top-billing with Ben Gazzara, James Mason, and Romy Schneider. The film, an international intrigue amid the jet-set, was a critical and box-office failure. Hepburn's last starring role in a feature film was opposite Gazzara in the comedy \"They All Laughed\" (1981), directed by Peter Bogdanovich. The film was overshadowed by the murder of one of its stars, Dorothy Stratten, and received only a limited release. Six years later, Hepburn co-starred with Robert Wagner in a made-for-television caper film, \"Love Among Thieves\" (1987).\nAfter finishing her last motion picture role \u2013 a cameo appearance as an angel in Steven Spielberg's \"Always\" (1989) \u2013 Hepburn completed only two more entertainment-related projects, both critically acclaimed. \"Gardens of the World with Audrey Hepburn\" was a PBS documentary series, which was filmed on location in seven countries in the spring and summer of 1990. A one-hour special preceded it in March 1991, and the series itself began its national PBS premiere on 24 January 1993, the day of her funeral services in Tolochenaz. For the \"Flower Gardens\" episode, Hepburn was posthumously awarded the 1993 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement \u2013 Informational Programming. The other project was a spoken word album, \"Audrey Hepburn's Enchanted Tales\", which features readings of classic children's stories and was recorded in 1992. It earned her a posthumous Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children.\nHumanitarian work.\nIn the 1950s, Hepburn narrated two radio programmes for UNICEF, re-telling children's stories of war. In 1989, Hepburn was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador of UNICEF. On her appointment, she stated that she was grateful for receiving international aid after enduring the German occupation as a child, and wanted to show her gratitude to the organisation.\n1988\u20131992.\nHepburn's first field mission for UNICEF was to Ethiopia in 1988. She visited an orphanage in Mek'ele that housed 500 starving children and had UNICEF send food. Of the trip, she said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have a broken heart. I feel desperate. I can't stand the idea that two million people are in imminent danger of starving to death, many of them children, [and] not because there isn't tons of food sitting in the northern port of Shoa. It can't be distributed. Last spring, Red Cross and UNICEF workers were ordered out of the northern provinces because of two simultaneous civil wars... I went into rebel country and saw mothers and their children who had walked for ten days, even three weeks, looking for food, settling onto the desert floor into makeshift camps where they may die. Horrible. That image is too much for me. The 'Third World' is a term I don't like very much, because we're all one world. I want people to know that the largest part of humanity is suffering.\nIn August 1988, Hepburn went to Turkey on an immunisation campaign. She called Turkey \"the loveliest example\" of UNICEF's capabilities. Of the trip, she said, \"The army gave us their trucks, the fishmongers gave their wagons for the vaccines, and once the date was set, it took ten days to vaccinate the whole country. Not bad.\" In October, Hepburn went to South America. Of her experiences in Venezuela and Ecuador, Hepburn told the United States Congress, \"I saw tiny mountain communities, slums, and shantytowns receive water systems for the first time by some miracle \u2013 and the miracle is UNICEF. I watched boys build their own schoolhouse with bricks and cement provided by UNICEF.\"\nHepburn toured Central America in February 1989, and met with leaders in Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala. In April, she visited Sudan with Wolders as part of a mission called \"Operation Lifeline\". Because of civil war, food from aid agencies had been cut off. The mission was to ferry food to southern Sudan. Hepburn said, \"I saw but one glaring truth: These are not natural disasters but man-made tragedies for which there is only one man-made solution \u2013 peace.\" In October 1989, Hepburn and Wolders went to Bangladesh. John Isaac, a UN photographer, said, \"Often the kids would have flies all over them, but she would just go hug them. I had never seen that. Other people had a certain amount of hesitation, but she would just grab them. Children would just come up to hold her hand, touch her \u2013 she was like the Pied Piper.\"\nIn October 1990, Hepburn went to Vietnam, in an effort to collaborate with the government for national UNICEF-supported immunisation and clean water programmes. In September 1992, four months before she died, Hepburn went to Somalia. Calling it \"apocalyptic\", she said, \"I walked into a nightmare. I have seen famine in Ethiopia and Bangladesh, but I have seen nothing like this \u2013 so much worse than I could possibly have imagined. I wasn't prepared for this.\" Though scarred by what she had seen, Hepburn still had hope stating: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As we move into the twenty-first century, there is much to reflect upon. We look around us and see that the promises of yesterday have to come to pass. People still live in abject poverty, people are still hungry, people still struggle to survive. And among these people we see the children, always the children: their enlarged bellies, their sad eyes, their wise faces that show the suffering, all the suffering they have endured in their short years.\nRecognition.\nUnited States president George H. W. Bush presented Hepburn with the Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of her work with UNICEF, and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences posthumously awarded her the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award for her contribution to humanity. In 2002, at the United Nations Special Session on Children, UNICEF honoured Hepburn's legacy of humanitarian work by unveiling a statue, \"The Spirit of Audrey\", at UNICEF's New York headquarters. Her service for children is also recognised through the United States Fund for UNICEF's Audrey Hepburn Society.\nPersonal life and final years.\nMultilingualism.\nAlongside her native English and Dutch, Hepburn also had some fluency in French (which she learned at school in Belgium), German, Italian, and Spanish. Throughout her life, Hepburn lived in many countries, including spending her childhood in Belgium, England, and the Netherlands, and her adult years in the United States, Italy, and Switzerland, and travelled extensively during her later years of life as part of her humanitarian work with UNICEF.\nMarriages, relationships, and children.\nIn 1952, Hepburn became engaged to industrialist James Hanson, whom she had known since her early days in London. She called it \"love at first sight\", but after having her wedding dress fitted and the date set, she decided the marriage would not work because the demands of their careers would keep them apart most of the time. She issued a public statement about her decision, saying \"When I get married, I want to be really married\". In the early 1950s, she also dated future \"Hair\" producer Michael Butler.\nAt a cocktail party hosted by mutual friend Gregory Peck, Hepburn met American actor Mel Ferrer, and suggested that they star together in a play. The meeting led them to collaborate in \"Ondine\", during which they began a relationship. Eight months later, on 25 September 1954, they were married in B\u00fcrgenstock, Switzerland, while preparing to star together in the film \"War and Peace\" (1956). \nShe and Ferrer had a son, Sean Hepburn Ferrer, born on 17 June 1960. Prior to Sean's birth, Hepburn had two other pregnancies that ended in miscarriages, the second one at six months. Ferrer was rumoured to be too controlling, and had been referred to by others as being her \"Svengali\" \u2013 an idea that Hepburn laughed off. William Holden was quoted as saying, \"I think Audrey allows Mel to think he influences her.\" After a 14-year marriage, the couple divorced in 1968.\nIn 1960, Hepburn settled in Switzerland, having decided to reduce her film work and live in the country where her first son Sean was born. Looking for a house, she focused on the French-speaking part of Switzerland, the \"Romandie\", to avoid Sean learning German in school \u2013 an echo of her traumatic wartime childhood. She bought the 21-room country estate \"La Paisible\" (\"The Peaceful One\") in the country village of Tolochenaz, Vaud. The remote estate, surrounded by high walls, suited her desire for privacy, and Hepburn was fond of cooking with the produce from its extensive vegetable gardens.\nHepburn met her second husband, Italian psychiatrist Andrea Dotti, on a Mediterranean cruise with friends in June 1968. She believed she would have more children and possibly stop working. They married on 18 January 1969, and their son Luca Andrea Dotti was born on 8 February 1970. While pregnant with Luca in 1969, Hepburn was more careful, resting for months before delivering the baby via caesarean section. Hepburn suffered a miscarriage in 1974.\nDotti and Hepburn were both unfaithful, he with younger women and she with actor Ben Gazzara during the filming of \"Bloodline\" (1979). The marriage lasted 12 years and was dissolved in 1982.\nFrom 1980 until her death in 1993, Hepburn was in a relationship with Dutch actor Robert Wolders, the widower of actress Merle Oberon. She had met Wolders through a friend during the later years of her second marriage. In 1989, she called the nine years she had spent with him the happiest years of her life, and stated that she considered them married, just not officially.\nIllness and death.\nUpon returning to Switzerland from Somalia in late September 1992, Hepburn developed abdominal pain. While initial medical tests in Switzerland had inconclusive results, a laparoscopy performed at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles in early November revealed a rare form of abdominal cancer belonging to a group of cancers known as pseudomyxoma peritonei. Having grown slowly over several years, the cancer had metastasised as a thin coating over her small intestine. After surgery, Hepburn began chemotherapy.\nHepburn and her family returned home to Switzerland to celebrate her last Christmas. As she was still recovering from surgery, she was unable to fly on commercial aircraft. Her long-time friend, fashion designer Hubert de Givenchy, arranged for socialite Rachel Lambert \"Bunny\" Mellon to send her private Gulfstream jet, filled with flowers, to take Hepburn from Los Angeles to Geneva. She spent her last days in hospice care at her home in Tolochenaz, Vaud, and was occasionally well enough to take walks in her garden, but gradually became more confined to bedrest.\nOn the evening of 20 January 1993, Hepburn died in her sleep at her home. She was 63. After her death, Gregory Peck recorded a tribute to Hepburn in which he tearfully recited the poem \"Unending Love\" by Rabindranath Tagore. Funeral services were held at the village church of Tolochenaz on 24 January 1993. Maurice Eindiguer, the same pastor who wed Hepburn and Mel Ferrer and baptised her son Sean in 1960, presided over her funeral, while Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan delivered a eulogy. Many family members and friends attended the funeral, including her sons, partner Robert Wolders, half-brother Ian Quarles van Ufford, ex-husbands Andrea Dotti and Mel Ferrer, Hubert de Givenchy, executives of UNICEF, and fellow actors Alain Delon and Roger Moore. Flower arrangements were sent to the funeral by Peck, Elizabeth Taylor, and the Dutch royal family.\nLater on the same day, Hepburn was interred at the Tolochenaz Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nHepburn's legacy has endured long after her death. The American Film Institute named Hepburn third among the greatest female stars of American cinema. She is one of few entertainers who have won Academy, Emmy, Grammy and Tony Awards. She won a record three BAFTA Awards for Best British Actress in a Leading Role. She received a tribute from the Film Society of Lincoln Center in 1991 and she was a frequent presenter at the Academy Awards. She received the BAFTA Lifetime Achievement Award in 1992. She was the recipient of numerous posthumous awards, including the 1993 Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award and competitive Grammy and Emmy Awards. In January 2009, Hepburn was named on \"The Times\"' list of the top 10 British actresses of all time. In 2010, Emma Thompson opined that Hepburn \"can't sing and she can't really act\"; some people agreed, others disagreed. Hepburn's son Sean later said \"My mother would be the first person to say that she wasn't the best actress in the world. But she was a movie star.\"\nShe has been the subject of many biographies since her death, including the 2000 dramatisation of her life titled \"The Audrey Hepburn Story\" which starred Jennifer Love Hewitt and Emmy Rossum as the older and younger Hepburn respectively. Her son and granddaughter, Sean and Emma Ferrer, helped produce a biographical documentary directed by Helena Coan, entitled \"Audrey\" (2020). The film was released to positive reception. \nIn 2012, Hepburn was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his best known artwork \u2013 the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" album cover \u2013 to celebrate the British cultural figures of his lifetime thus far that he most admires. On 4 May 2014, Google featured a doodle on its homepage on what would have been Hepburn's 85th birthday.\nSean Ferrer founded the Audrey Hepburn Children's Fund in memory of his mother shortly after her death. The US Fund for UNICEF also founded the Audrey Hepburn Society: the Society hosted annual charity balls for fundraising, until Ferrer became involved in lawsuits in the late 2010s on behalf of his mother's estate. Dotti also became patron of the Pseudomyxoma Survivor charity, dedicated to providing support to patients of the rare cancer that was fatal to Hepburn, pseudomyxoma peritonei, and Sean Ferrer became the rare disease ambassador since 2014 and for 2015 on behalf of European Organisation for Rare Diseases. A year after his mother's death in 1993, Ferrer founded the Audrey Hepburn Children's Fund (originally named Hollywood for Children Inc.), a charity funded by exhibitions of Audrey Hepburn memorabilia. He directed the charity in cooperation with his half-brother Luca Dotti, and Robert Wolders, his mother's partner, which aimed to continue the humanitarian work of Audrey Hepburn. Ferrer brought the exhibition \"Timeless Audrey\" on a world tour to raise money for the foundation. He served as Chairman of the Fund before resigning in 2012, turning over the position to Dotti. In 2017, Ferrer was sued by the Fund for alleged self-serving conduct. In October 2017, Ferrer responded by suing the Fund for trademark infringement, claiming that the Fund no longer had the right to use Hepburn's name or likeness. Ferrer's suit against the Fund was dismissed in March 2018 due to the complaint's failure to include Dotti as a defendant. In 2019, the court sided with Ferrer, with the judge ruling there was no merit to the charity's claims it had the independent right to use Audrey Hepburn's name and likeness, or to enter into contracts with third parties without Ferrer's consent.\nHepburn's image is widely used in advertising campaigns across the world. In Japan, a series of commercials used colourised and digitally enhanced clips of Hepburn in \"Roman Holiday\" to advertise Kirin black tea. In the United States, Hepburn was featured in a 2006 Gap commercial that used clips of her dancing from \"Funny Face\", set to AC/DC's \"Back in Black\", with the tagline \"It's Back \u2013 The Skinny Black Pant\". To celebrate its \"Keep it Simple\" campaign, the Gap made a sizeable donation to the Audrey Hepburn Children's Fund. In 2013, a computer-manipulated representation of Hepburn was used in a television advert for the British chocolate bar Galaxy. In 2025, she was the subject of \"Audrey Hepburn\", a song by singer-songwriter Maisie Peters.\nPublic image and style icon.\nHepburn was known for her fashion choices and distinctive look, to the extent that journalist Mark Tungate has described her as a recognisable brand. When she first rose to stardom in \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), she was seen as an alternative feminine ideal that appealed more to women than men, compared to the more sexual and curvy Marilyn Monroe and Elizabeth Taylor. With her short hairstyle, thick eyebrows, slim body, and \"gamine\" looks, she presented a look that young women found easier to emulate than those of more sexual film stars. In 1954, fashion photographer Cecil Beaton declared Hepburn the \"public embodiment of our new feminine ideal\" in \"Vogue\", and wrote that \"Nobody ever looked like her before World War II ... Yet we recognise the rightness of this appearance in relation to our historical needs. The proof is that thousands of imitations have appeared.\" The magazine and its British version frequently reported on her style throughout the following decade. Alongside model Twiggy, Hepburn has been cited as one of the key public figures who made being very slim fashionable. \"Vogue\" has referred to her as \"the acme of classic beauty\". \nAdded to the International Best Dressed List in 1961, Hepburn was associated with a minimalistic style, usually wearing clothes with simple silhouettes that emphasised her slim body, such as monochromatic colours with occasional statement accessories. In the late 1950s, Hepburn popularised plain black leggings. She was in particular associated with French fashion designer Hubert de Givenchy, who was first hired to design her on-screen wardrobe for her second Hollywood film, \"Sabrina\" (1954), when she was still unknown as a film actor and he a young couturier just starting his fashion house. Although initially disappointed that \"Miss Hepburn\" was not Katharine Hepburn as he had mistakenly thought, Givenchy and Hepburn formed a life-long friendship. \nIn addition to \"Sabrina\", Givenchy designed her costumes for \"Love in the Afternoon\" (1957), \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1961), \"Funny Face\" (1957), \"Charade\" (1963), \"Paris When It Sizzles\" (1964), and \"How to Steal a Million\" (1966), as well as clothing her off screen. According to Moseley, fashion plays an unusually central role in many of Hepburn's films, stating that \"the costume is not tied to the character, functioning 'silently' in the mise-en-sc\u00e8ne, but as 'fashion' becomes an attraction in the aesthetic in its own right\". She also became the face of Givenchy's first perfume, \"L'Interdit\", in 1957. In addition to her partnership with Givenchy, Hepburn was credited with boosting the sales of Burberry trench coats when she wore one in \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\", and was associated with Italian footwear brand Tod's.\nIn her private life, Hepburn preferred to wear casual and comfortable clothes, contrary to the haute couture she wore on screen and at public events. Despite being admired for her beauty, she never considered herself attractive, stating in a 1959 interview that \"you can even say that I hated myself at certain periods. I was too fat, or maybe too tall, or maybe just plain too ugly... you can say my definiteness stems from underlying feelings of insecurity and inferiority. I couldn't conquer these feelings by acting indecisive. I found the only way to get the better of them was by adopting a forceful, concentrated drive.\" In 1989, she stated that \"my look is attainable ... Women can look like Audrey Hepburn by flipping out their hair, buying the large glasses and the little sleeveless dresses.\"\nHepburn's influence as a style icon still continued several decades after the height of her acting career in the 1950s and 1960s. Moseley notes that especially after her death in 1993, she became increasingly admired, with magazines frequently advising readers on how to get her look, and fashion designers using her as inspiration. Throughout her career and after her death, Hepburn received numerous accolades for her stylish appearance and attractiveness. For example, she was named the \"most beautiful woman of all time\" and \"most beautiful woman of the 20th century\" in polls by Evian and QVC respectively, and in 2015, was voted \"the most stylish Brit of all time\" in a poll commissioned by Samsung. Her film costumes fetch large sums of money in auctions: one of the \"little black dresses\" designed by Givenchy for \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" was sold by Christie's for a record sum of \u00a3467,200 in 2006.\nIn 1999, HarperCollins published \"Audrey's Style\" by Pamela Keogh, a 340-page tome devoted to Hepburn's personality, beliefs and style. The book included interviews with some of the people who knew her best, and also included many photographs of her, some of which had been rarely seen before.\nFilmography and stage roles.\nHepburn was considered by some to be one of the most beautiful women of all time. Remembered as a film and style icon, she was ranked as the third greatest screen legend in American cinema by the American Film Institute. Her debut was as a flight stewardess in the 1948 Dutch film \"Dutch in Seven Lessons\". Hepburn then performed on the British stage as a chorus girl in the musicals \"High Button Shoes\" (1948), and \"Sauce Tartare\" (1949). Two years later she made her Broadway debut as the title character in the play \"Gigi\". Hepburn's Hollywood debut as a runaway princess in William Wyler's \"Roman Holiday\" (1953) opposite Gregory Peck made her a star. For her performance she received the Academy Award for Best Actress, the BAFTA Award for Best British Actress, and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture\u00a0\u2013 Drama. In 1954 she played a chauffeur's daughter caught in a love triangle in Billy Wilder's romantic comedy \"Sabrina\" opposite Humphrey Bogart and William Holden. In the same year Hepburn garnered the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for portraying the titular water nymph in the play \"Ondine\".\nAwards and honours.\nHepburn received numerous awards and honours during her career. Hepburn won, or was nominated for, awards for her work in motion pictures, television, spoken-word recording, on stage, and humanitarian work. She was five-times nominated for an Academy Award, and she was awarded the 1953 Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in \"Roman Holiday\" and the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award in 1993, posthumously, for her humanitarian work. From five nominations, she won a record three BAFTA Awards for Best British Actress in a Leading Role, and received a BAFTA Special Award in 1992.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52140", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52140", "title": "United Nations Iraq\u2013Kuwait Observation Mission", "text": "United Nation operation\nThe United Nations Iraq\u2013Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM) was established on April 9, 1991 following the Gulf War by Security Council Resolution 689 (1991) and fully deployed by early May 1991.\nThe task of joint military observers was to monitor the demilitarized zone (DMZ) along the Iraq-Kuwait border and the Khawr 'Abd Allah waterway, deter border violations and report any hostile action. On February 5, 1993, under Security Council Resolution 806, the mandate was extended to include physical action to prevent violations and the force was expanded to an intended three mechanized infantry battalions plus support.\nThe mandate of UNIKOM was completed on October 6, 2003.\nThe force's headquarters were in Umm Qasr, Iraq, within the DMZ. The maximum strength of the force was 1,187 on February 28, 1995. The Security Council extended its mandate for a final time in July 2003. The mission ended on September 30, 2003. There were over 135 military observers and civilian staff at the time, mainly protecting the border checkpoints. Ultimately, a new conflict, the War in Iraq, would dissolve the \"peacekeeping\" mission. Swarms of military equipment would gather in Kuwait and cross into Iraq's borders during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. During the mission, there were 18 fatalities.\nContributors are Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh (including the mechanized infantry battalion), Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation (Soviet Union before December 24, 1991), Senegal, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela\nIn addition, during the setting-up phase (April\u2013October 1991), UNIKOM included a Canadian combat engineer regiment (1 CER), a Security Battalion consisting of a multinational Bn Staff (SWE-FIN-NOR) and five infantry companies, drawn from UNFICYP and UNIFIL. Those troops were provided by Austria, Denmark, Fiji, Ghana, Nepal, and United States. There was also a maintenance/repair &amp; recovery unit from Norway and a HQ logistic company from Sweden drawn from UNIFIL.\nReferences.\nBury, Jan (2003). \"The UN Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission\". \"International Peacekeeping\", 10 (2): 71\u201388. http://"}
{"id": "52141", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52141", "title": "Inversion (meteorology)", "text": "Deviation from the normal change of an atmospheric property with altitude\nIn meteorology, an inversion (or temperature inversion) is a phenomenon in which a layer of warmer air overlies cooler air. Normally, air temperature gradually decreases as altitude increases, but this relationship is reversed in an inversion.\nAn inversion traps air pollution, such as smog, near the ground. An inversion can also suppress convection by acting as a \"cap\". If this cap is broken for any of several reasons, convection of any humidity can then erupt into violent thunderstorms. Temperature inversion can cause freezing rain in cold climates.\nNormal atmospheric conditions.\nUsually, within the lower atmosphere (the troposphere) the air near the surface of the Earth is warmer than the air above it, largely because the atmosphere is heated from below as solar radiation warms the Earth's surface, which in turn then warms the layer of the atmosphere directly above it, e.g., by thermals (convective heat transfer). Air temperature also decreases with an increase in altitude because higher air is at lower pressure, and lower pressure results in a lower temperature, following the ideal gas law and adiabatic lapse rate.\nDescription.\nUnder the right conditions, the normal vertical temperature gradient is inverted so that the air is colder near the surface of the Earth. This can occur when, for example, a warmer, less-dense air mass moves over a cooler, denser air mass. This type of inversion occurs in the vicinity of warm fronts, and also in areas of oceanic upwelling such as along the California coast in the United States. With sufficient humidity in the cooler layer, fog is typically present below the inversion cap. An inversion is also produced whenever radiation from the surface of the earth exceeds the amount of radiation received from the sun, which commonly occurs at night, or during the winter when the sun is very low in the sky. This effect is virtually confined to land regions as the ocean retains heat far longer. In the polar regions during winter, inversions are nearly always present over land.\nA warmer air mass moving over a cooler one can \"shut off\" any convection which may be present in the cooler air mass: this is known as a capping inversion. However, if this cap is broken, either by extreme convection overcoming the cap or by the lifting effect of a front or a mountain range, the sudden release of bottled-up convective energy\u2014like the bursting of a balloon\u2014can result in severe thunderstorms. Such capping inversions typically precede the development of tornadoes in the Midwestern United States. In this instance, the \"cooler\" layer is quite warm but is still denser and usually cooler than the lower part of the inversion layer capping it.\nSubsidence inversion.\nAn inversion can develop aloft as a result of air gradually sinking over a wide area and being warmed by adiabatic compression, usually associated with subtropical high-pressure areas. A stable marine layer may then develop over the ocean as a result. As this layer moves over progressively warmer waters, however, turbulence within the marine layer can gradually lift the inversion layer to higher altitudes, and eventually even pierce it, producing thunderstorms, and under the right circumstances, tropical cyclones. The accumulated smog and dust under the inversion quickly taints the sky reddish, easily seen on sunny days.\nAtmospheric consequences.\nTemperature inversions stop atmospheric convection (which is normally present) from happening in the affected area and can lead to high concentrations of atmospheric pollutants. Cities especially suffer from the effects of temperature inversions because they both produce more atmospheric pollutants and have higher thermal masses than rural areas, resulting in more frequent inversions with higher concentrations of pollutants. The effects are even more pronounced when a city is surrounded by hills or mountains since they form an additional barrier to air circulation. During a severe inversion, trapped air pollutants form a brownish haze that can cause respiratory problems. The Great Smog of 1952 in London, England, is one of the most serious examples of such an inversion. It was blamed for an estimated 10,000 to 12,000 deaths.\nSometimes the inversion layer is at a high enough altitude that cumulus clouds can condense but can only spread out under the inversion layer. This decreases the amount of sunlight reaching the ground and prevents new thermals from forming. As the clouds disperse, sunny weather replaces cloudiness in a cycle that can occur more than once a day.\nIn winter, an inversion can lead to the development of ice pellets and freezing rain. Both these phenomena occur when snow melts in a warm layer aloft and falls into a colder layer near the surface. If the layer of cold air near the surface is thick enough, it will lead to the development of ice pellets as the raindrops re-freeze. A shallow layer does not give the raindrops enough time to freeze as they quickly fall through it, leading to the development of freezing rain.\nWave propagation.\nLight.\nAs the temperature of air increases, the index of refraction of air decreases, a side effect of hotter air being less dense. Normally this results in distant objects being shortened vertically, an effect that is easy to see at sunset when the sun is visible as an oval. In an inversion, the normal pattern is reversed, and distant objects are instead stretched out or appear to be above the horizon, leading to the phenomenon known as a Fata Morgana or mirage.\nInversions can magnify the so-called \"green flash\"\u2014a phenomenon occurring at sunrise or sunset, usually visible for a few seconds, in which the sun's green light is isolated due to dispersion. The shorter wavelength is refracted most, with the blue component of sunlight \"completely scattered out by Rayleigh scattering\", making green the first or last light from the upper rim of the solar disc to be seen.\nRadio waves.\nVery high frequency radio waves can be refracted by inversions, making it possible to hear FM radio or watch VHF low-band television broadcasts from long distances on foggy nights. The signal, which would normally be refracted up and away into space, is instead refracted down towards the earth by the temperature-inversion boundary layer. This phenomenon is called tropospheric ducting. Along coastlines during Autumn and Spring, due to multiple stations being simultaneously present because of reduced propagation losses, many FM radio stations are plagued by severe signal degradation disrupting reception.\nIn higher frequencies such as microwaves, such refraction causes multipath propagation and fading.\nSound.\nWhen an inversion layer is present, if a sound or explosion occurs at ground level, the sound wave is refracted by the temperature gradient (which affects sound speed) and returns to the ground. The sound, therefore, travels much better than normal. This is noticeable in areas around airports, where the sound of aircraft taking off and landing often can be heard at greater distances around dawn than at other times of day, and inversion thunder which is significantly louder and travels further than when it is produced by lightning strikes under normal conditions.\nShock waves.\nThe shock wave from an explosion can be reflected by an inversion layer in much the same way as it bounces off the ground in an air-burst and can cause additional damage as a result. This phenomenon killed two people in the Soviet RDS-37 nuclear test when a building collapsed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52143", "revid": "25212220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52143", "title": "Megacity", "text": "Metropolitan area with a total population in excess of ten million people\nA megacity is a very large city, typically with a population of more than 10 million people. The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA) in its \"World Urbanization Prospects\" report defines megacities as urban agglomerations with over 10 million inhabitants. A University of Bonn report holds that they are \"usually defined as metropolitan areas with a total population of 10 million or more people\". Elsewhere in other sources, from five to eight million is considered the minimum threshold, along with a population density of at least 2,000 per square kilometre. The terms conurbation, metropolis, and metroplex are also applied to the latter.\nThe total number of megacities in the world varies between different sources and their publication dates. The world had 32 according to EU Global Human Settlement Layer (in 2024), 33 according to UN DESA (in 2025), 39 according to the OECD, 42 according to \"Demographia\" (in 2025), and 45 according to \"CityPopulation.de\" (in 2023). The later two add 13 additional cities that are calculated outside the range otherwise. In total, at most 53 unique places are mentioned as megacities across these sources, although some of these are just agglomerated differently between them. A good percentage of these urban agglomerations are in China and India. The other three-to-five countries with more than one megacity are Brazil, Indonesia, Japan, Pakistan, and the United States. African megacities are present in Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Nigeria and South Africa; European megacities are present in France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and Turkey (also in Asia); megacities can be found in Latin America in the countries of Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Peru, and Argentina.\nMany recent satellite image-based sources identify the Pearl River Delta in China as the largest megacity and continuously built up area of the world, the UN claims Jakarta as of 2025 seeing the both main PRD's metros of Guangzhou and Shenzhen as disjointed megacities, while older sources list the Greater Tokyo Area as the largest.\nList of megacities.\nNumbers in red with an asterisk (*) do not meet the 10 million threshold to be considered a megacity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nIn the Antiquity era, for almost five hundred years, Rome was the largest, wealthiest, and most politically important city of the ancient world, ruling over Europe, Western Asia and Northern Africa. Population estimates of 750,000\u20131,000,000 people by the end of the 1st century BC are generally given by scholars; however, that would require population densities as high as 72,150 per square kilometre. If densities were similar to those in the well-preserved cities of Pompeii and Ostia, the population would be around 500,000. Rome's population started declining in 402 AD when Flavius Honorius, Western Roman Emperor from 395 to 423, moved the government to Ravenna and Rome's population declined to a mere 20,000 during the Early Middle Ages, reducing the sprawling city to groups of inhabited buildings interspersed among large areas of ruins and vegetation.\nBaghdad was likely the largest city in the world from shortly after its foundation in 762 AD until the 930s, with some estimates putting its population at over one million. Chinese capital cities Chang'an and Kaifeng also experienced huge population booms during prosperous empires. According to the census in the year 742 recorded in the \"New Book of Tang\", 362,921 families with 1,960,188 persons were counted in Jingzhao Fu (), the metropolitan area including small cities in the vicinity of Chang'an. The medieval settlement surrounding Angkor, the one-time capital of the Khmer Empire which flourished between the 9th and 15th centuries, could have supported a population of up to one million people.\nFormation of Megacities.\nIn 1800, only 3% of the world's population lived in cities, a figure that rose to 47% by the end of the twentieth century. The term \"megacity\" entered common use in the late 19th or early 20th centuries; one of the earliest documented uses of the term was by the University of Texas in 1904. Initially the United Nations used the term to describe cities of 8 million or more inhabitants, but now uses the threshold of 10 million. In the mid 1970s the term was coined by urbanist Janice Perlman referring to the phenomenon of very large urban agglomerations.\nFrom around 1825 to 1918 London was the largest city in the world, with the population growing rapidly; it was the first city to reach a population of over 5 million in 1900. In 1950, New York City was the only urban area with a population of over 10 million. This increase has happened as the world's population moves towards the high (75\u201385%) urbanization levels of North America and Western Europe.\nSince the 2000s, the largest megacity has been the Greater Tokyo Area. The population of this urban agglomeration includes areas such as Yokohama and Kawasaki, and is estimated to be between 37 and 38 million. This variation in estimates can be accounted for by different definitions of what the area encompasses. While the prefectures of Tokyo, Chiba, Kanagawa, and Saitama are commonly included in statistical information, the Japan Statistics Bureau only includes the area within 50 kilometers of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Offices in Shinjuku, thus arriving at a smaller population estimate.\nA characteristic issue of megacities is the difficulty in defining their outer limits and accurately estimating the populations. To correct for this an Urban Metric System was proposed, including measurement of Paropolis, that has tantamount calculation values to megacities. It has been applied limitedly, f.e. by Canada in cases since 2018. Another list defines megacities as urban agglomerations instead of metropolitan areas. \nGrowth.\nAcceleration of urbanization led geographers to identify nine megacities in 1985, 19 in 2004 and 25 such areas as of October 2005. Among the 27 megacities with populations over 10 million globally in 2007, 15 were situated in Asia. The top eight provincial capital cities in China with urban areas exceeding 400 km2\u2014Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangzhou, Chongqing, Hangzhou, Wuhan, and Xi'an\u2014accounted for 54.8% of the total urban area of all provincial capital cities in the country in 2015. Other sources list Nagoya and the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region as megacities.\nIn 2010, UN forecasted that urban population of 3.2 billion would rise to nearly 5 billion by 2030, when three out of five, or 60%, of people would live in cities. This increase will be most dramatic on the least-urbanized continents, Asia and Africa. By 2025, Asia's growth alone modeled having at least 30 megacities.\nSurveys and projections indicate that all urban growth over the next 25 years will be in developing countries. One billion people, almost one-seventh of the world's population, now live in shanty towns. In many poor countries, overcrowded slums exhibit high rates of disease due to unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and lack of basic health care. By 2030, over 2 billion people in the world will be living in slums. Over 90% of the urban population of Ethiopia, Malawi and Uganda, three of the world's most rural countries, already live in slums.\nChallenges.\nSlums.\nAccording to the United Nations, the proportion of urban dwellers living in slums or informal settlements decreased from 47 percent to 37 percent in the developing world between 1990 and 2005. However, due to rising population, the absolute number of slum dwellers is rising and passed 1 billion in 2018. The increase in informal settlement population has been caused by massive migration, both internal and transnational, into cities, which has caused growth rates of urban populations and spatial concentrations not seen before in history. The majority of these are located in informal settlements which often lack sufficient quality housing, sanitation, drainage, water access, and officially recognized addresses. These issues raise problems in the political, social, and economic arenas. People who live in slums or informal settlements often have minimal or no access to education, healthcare, or the urban economy.\nCrime.\nAs with any large concentration of people, there is usually crime. High population densities often result in higher crime rates, as visibly seen in growing megacities such as Karachi, Delhi, Cairo, Rio de Janeiro, and Lagos.\nHomelessness.\nMegacities often have significant numbers of homeless people. The actual legal definition of homelessness varies from country to country, or among different entities or institutions in the same country or region.\nIn 2002, research showed that children and families were the largest growing segment of the homeless population in the United States, and this has presented new challenges, especially in services, to agencies. In the US, the government asked many major cities to come up with a ten-year plan to end homelessness. One of the results of this was a \"Housing first\" solution, rather than to have a homeless person remain in an emergency homeless shelter it was thought to be better to quickly get the person permanent housing of some sort and the necessary support services to sustain a new home. But there are many complications with this kind of program and these must be dealt with to make such an initiative work successfully in the middle to long term.\nTraffic congestion.\nTraffic congestion is a condition on road networks that occurs as use increases, and is characterized by slower speeds, longer trip times, increased pollution, and increased vehicular queueing. The Texas Transportation Institute estimated that, in 2000, the 75 largest metropolitan areas experienced 3.6 billion vehicle-hours of delay, resulting in 5.7 billion U.S. gallons (21.6 billion liters) in wasted fuel and $67.5 billion in lost productivity, or about 0.7% of the nation's GDP. It also estimated that the annual cost of congestion for each driver was approximately $1,000 in very large cities and $200 in small cities. Traffic congestion is increasing in major cities and delays are becoming more frequent in smaller cities and rural areas. It also can result in various issues, including economic losses, energy waste, air and noise pollution, and more.\nUrban sprawl.\nUrban sprawl, also known as suburban sprawl, is a multifaceted concept, which includes the spreading outwards of a city and its suburbs to its outskirts to low-density, auto-dependent development on rural land, with associated design features that encourage car dependency. As a result, some critics argue that sprawl has certain disadvantages including longer transport distances to work, high car dependence, inadequate facilities (e.g. health, cultural. etc.) and higher per-person infrastructure costs. Discussions and debates about sprawl are often obfuscated by the ambiguity associated with the phrase. For example, some commentators measure sprawl only with the average number of residential units per acre in a given area. But others associate it with decentralization (spread of population without a well-defined center), discontinuity (leapfrog development), segregation of uses, etc.\nGentrification.\nGentrification and urban gentrification are terms for the socio-cultural changes in an area as a result of wealthier people buying property in a less prosperous community. As living costs rise, lower-income residents are forced to move out of the community leading to an increase in average income, which in turn makes the area more desirable to other wealthier property or business owners, further pushing the living costs up. This process also tends to lead to a decrease in average family size in the area. This type of population change reduces industrial land use when it is redeveloped for commerce and housing.\nAir pollution.\nAir pollution is the introduction into the atmosphere of chemicals, particulate matter, or biological materials that cause harm or discomfort to humans or other living organisms, or damages the natural environment. This issue is particularly prevalent in developing nations. As part of the Global Environment Monitoring System, WHO and UNEP established an air pollution monitoring network that oversees 50 cities. Many urban areas have significant problems with smog, a type of air pollution derived from vehicle emissions from internal combustion engines and industrial fumes that react in the atmosphere with sunlight to form secondary pollutants that also combine with the primary emissions to form photochemical smog.\nEnergy and material resources.\nThe sheer size and complexity of megacities gives rise to enormous social and environmental challenges. Whether megacities can develop sustainably depends to a large extent on how they obtain, share, and manage their energy and material resources. There are correlations between electricity consumption, heating and industrial fuel use, ground transportation energy use, water consumption, waste generation, and steel production in terms of level of consumption and how efficiently they use resources.\nIn fiction.\nMegacities are a common backdrop in dystopian science fiction, with examples such as the Sprawl in William Gibson's \"Neuromancer\", and Mega-City One, a megalopolis of between 50 and 800 million people (fluctuations due to war and disaster) across the east coast of the United States, in the \"Judge Dredd\" comic. In \"Demolition Man\" a megacity called \"San Angeles\" was formed from the joining of Los Angeles, Santa Barbara, San Diego and the surrounding metropolitan regions following a massive earthquake in 2010. Fictional planet-wide megacities (ecumenopoleis) include Trantor in Isaac Asimov's \"Foundation\" series of books and Coruscant (population two trillion) in the \"Star Wars\" universe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52145", "revid": "46712419", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52145", "title": "Gabriel Lam\u00e9", "text": "French mathematician (1795\u20131870)\nGabriel Lam\u00e9 (22 July 1795 \u2013 1 May 1870) was a French mathematician who contributed to the theory of partial differential equations by the use of curvilinear coordinates, and the mathematical theory of elasticity (for which linear elasticity and finite strain theory elaborate the mathematical abstractions).\nBiography.\nLam\u00e9 was born in Tours, in today's \"d\u00e9partement\" of Indre-et-Loire.\nHe became well known for his general theory of curvilinear coordinates and his notation and study of classes of ellipse-like curves, now known as Lam\u00e9 curves or superellipses, and defined by the equation:\n formula_1\nwhere \"n\" is any positive real number.\nHe is also known for his running time analysis of the Euclidean algorithm, marking the beginning of computational complexity theory. In 1844, using Fibonacci numbers, he proved that when finding the greatest common divisor of integers \"a\" and \"b\", the algorithm runs in no more than 5\"k\" steps, where \"k\" is the number of (decimal) digits of \"b\". He also proved a special case of Fermat's Last Theorem. He actually thought that he found a complete proof for the theorem, but his proof was flawed.\nThe Lam\u00e9 functions are part of the theory of ellipsoidal harmonics.\nHe worked on a wide variety of different topics. Often problems in the engineering tasks he undertook led him to study mathematical questions. For example, his work on the stability of vaults and on the design of suspension bridges led him to work on elasticity theory. In fact this was not a passing interest, for Lam\u00e9 made substantial contributions to this topic. Another example is his work on the conduction of heat which led him to his theory of curvilinear coordinates.\nCurvilinear coordinates proved a very powerful tool in Lam\u00e9's hands. He used them to transform Laplace's equation into ellipsoidal coordinates and so separate the variables and solve the resulting equation.\nHis most significant contribution to engineering was to accurately define the stresses and capabilities of a press fit joint, such as that seen in a dowel pin in a housing.\nIn 1854, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nLam\u00e9 died in Paris in 1870. His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower."}
{"id": "52146", "revid": "20466351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52146", "title": "Julius Pl\u00fccker", "text": "German mathematician and physicist\nJulius Pl\u00fccker (16 July 1801 \u2013 22 May 1868) was a German mathematician and physicist. He made fundamental contributions to the field of analytical geometry and was a pioneer in the investigations of cathode rays that led eventually to the discovery of the electron. He also vastly extended the study of Lam\u00e9 curves.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nPl\u00fccker was born at Elberfeld (now part of Wuppertal) on July 16th, 1801. After being educated at D\u00fcsseldorf and at the universities of Bonn, Heidelberg and Berlin he went to Paris in 1823, where he came under the influence of the great school of French geometers, whose founder, Gaspard Monge, had only recently died.\nIn 1825 he returned to Bonn, and in 1828 was made professor of mathematics.\nIn the same year he published the first volume of his \"Analytisch-geometrische Entwicklungen\", which introduced the method of \"abridged notation\".\nIn 1831 he published the second volume, in which he clearly established on a firm and independent basis projective duality. \nCareer.\nIn 1836, Pl\u00fccker was made professor of physics at University of Bonn. In 1858, after a year of working with vacuum tubes of his Bonn colleague Heinrich Gei\u00dfler, he published his first classical researches on the action of the magnet on the electric discharge in rarefied gases. He found that the discharge caused a fluorescent glow to form on the glass walls of the vacuum tube, and that the glow could be made to shift by applying an electromagnet to the tube, thus creating a magnetic field. It was later shown that the glow was produced by cathode rays.\nPl\u00fccker, first by himself and afterwards in conjunction with Johann Hittorf, made many important discoveries in the spectroscopy of gases. He was the first to use the vacuum tube with the capillary part now called a Geissler tube, by means of which the luminous intensity of feeble electric discharges was raised sufficiently to allow of spectroscopic investigation. He anticipated Robert Wilhelm Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff in announcing that the lines of the spectrum were characteristic of the chemical substance which emitted them, and in indicating the value of this discovery in chemical analysis. According to Hittorf, he was the first who saw the three lines of the hydrogen spectrum, which a few months after his death, were recognized in the spectrum of the solar protuberances.\nIn 1865, Pl\u00fccker returned to the field of geometry and invented what was known as \"line geometry\" in the nineteenth century. In projective geometry, Pl\u00fccker coordinates refer to a set of homogeneous co-ordinates introduced initially to embed the space of lines in projective space formula_1 as the Klein quadric in formula_2. The construction uses 2\u00d72 minor determinants, or equivalently the second exterior power of the underlying vector space of dimension 4. It is now part of the theory of Grassmannians formula_3\n(formula_4-dimensional subspaces of an formula_5-dimensional vector space formula_6), to which the generalization of these co-ordinates to formula_7 minors of the formula_8 matrix of homogeneous coordinates, also known as Pl\u00fccker coordinates, apply. The embedding of the Grassmannian formula_3 \ninto the projectivization formula_10 of the formula_11th exterior power of formula_12\nis known as the Pl\u00fccker embedding.\nAwards.\nPl\u00fccker was the recipient of the Copley Medal from the Royal Society in 1866.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52147", "revid": "43905122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52147", "title": "Sawtooth wave", "text": "Non-sinusoidal waveform\nThe sawtooth wave (or saw wave) is a kind of non-sinusoidal waveform. It is so named based on its resemblance to the teeth of a plain-toothed saw with a zero rake angle. A single sawtooth, or an intermittently triggered sawtooth, is called a ramp waveform.\nThe convention is that a sawtooth wave ramps upward and then sharply drops. In a reverse (or inverse) sawtooth wave, the wave ramps downward and then sharply rises. It can also be considered the extreme case of an asymmetric triangle wave.\nThe equivalent piecewise linear functions\nformula_1\nformula_2\nbased on the floor function of time \"t\" is an example of a sawtooth wave with period 1.\nA more general form, in the range \u22121 to 1, and with period \"p\", is \nformula_3\nThis sawtooth function has the same phase as the sine function.\nWhile a square wave is constructed from only odd harmonics, a sawtooth wave's sound is harsh and clear and its spectrum contains both even and odd harmonics of the fundamental frequency. Because it contains all the integer harmonics, it is one of the best waveforms to use for subtractive synthesis of musical sounds, particularly bowed string instruments like violins and cellos, since the slip-stick behavior of the bow drives the strings with a sawtooth-like motion.\nA sawtooth can be constructed using additive synthesis. For period \"p\" and amplitude \"a\", the following infinite Fourier series converge to a sawtooth and a reverse (inverse) sawtooth wave:\nformula_4\nformula_5\nformula_6\nIn digital synthesis, these series are only summed over \"k\" such that the highest harmonic, \"N\"max, is less than the Nyquist frequency (half the sampling frequency). This summation can generally be more efficiently calculated with a fast Fourier transform. If the waveform is digitally created directly in the time domain using a non-bandlimited form, such as \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"x\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0floor(\"x\"), infinite harmonics are sampled and the resulting tone contains aliasing distortion.\nAn audio demonstration of a sawtooth played at 440\u00a0Hz (A4) and 880\u00a0Hz (A5) and 1,760\u00a0Hz (A6) is available below. Both bandlimited (non-aliased) and aliased tones are presented.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52150", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52150", "title": "Battle of Covadonga", "text": "722 opening battle of the Reconquista of Spain\nThe Battle of Covadonga took place in 722 between the army of Pelagius of Asturias and the army of commanders Alqama and Munuza, as part of the Umayyad Caliphate. Fought near Covadonga, in the Picos de Europa, it resulted in a victory for the Christian forces of Pelagius. It is traditionally regarded as the foundational event of the Kingdom of Asturias and thus the initial point of the Christian \"\" (\"reconquest\") of Iberia after the Umayyad conquest of 711.\nPrelude.\nAccording to texts written by Mozarabs in northern Hispania during the late ninth century, the Visigoths in 718 elected a nobleman named Pelagius (c.685\u2013737) as their \"princeps\", or leader. Pelagius, the first monarch of the Asturian Kingdom, son of Favila, who had been a dignitary at the court of the Visigoth King Egica (687\u2013700), established his headquarters at Cangas de On\u00eds, Asturias and incited an uprising against the Umayyad Muslims.\nFrom the beginning of the Muslim invasion of Hispania, refugees and combatants from the south of the peninsula had been moving north to avoid Islamic authority. Some had taken refuge in the remote mountains of Asturias in the northwestern part of the Iberian Peninsula. There, from among the dispossessed of the south, Pelagius recruited his band of fighters.\nHistorian Joseph F. O'Callaghan says the remnants of the Hispano-Gothic aristocracy still played an important role in the society of Hispania. At the end of Visigothic rule, the assimilation of Hispano-Romans and Visigoths was occurring at a fast pace. Their nobility had begun to think of themselves as constituting one people, the \"gens Gothorum\" or the \"Hispani\". An unknown number of them fled and took refuge in Asturias or Septimania. In Asturias they supported Pelagius's uprising, and joining with the indigenous leaders, formed a new aristocracy. The population of the mountain region consisted of native Astures, Galicians, Cantabri, Basques and other groups unassimilated into Hispano-Gothic society.\nPelagius's first acts were to refuse to pay the \"jizya\" (tax on non-Muslims) to the Muslims any longer and to assault the small Umayyad garrisons that had been stationed in the area. Eventually, he managed to expel a provincial governor named Munuza from Asturias. He held the territory against a number of attempts to re-establish Muslim control, and soon founded the Kingdom of Asturias, which became a Christian stronghold against further Muslim expansion.\nFor the first few years, this rebellion posed no threat to the new masters of Hispania, whose seat of power had been established at C\u00f3rdoba. Consequently, there was only a minor perfunctory reaction. Pelagius was not always able to keep the Muslims out of Asturias but neither could they defeat him, and as soon as the Moors left, he would always re-establish control. Islamic forces were focused on raiding Narbonne and Gaul, and there was a shortage of manpower for putting down an inconsequential insurrection in the mountains. Pelagius never attempted to force the issue, and it was an Umayyad defeat elsewhere that probably set the stage for the Battle of Covadonga. On July 9, 721, a Muslim force that had crossed the Pyrenees and invaded Francia was defeated by them in the Battle of Toulouse (721) (now France). This was the first serious setback in the Muslim campaign in southwestern Europe. Reluctant to return to C\u00f3rdoba with such unalloyed bad news, the Umayyad w\u0101li, Anbasa ibn Suhaym al-Kalbi, decided that putting down the rebellion in Asturias on his way home would afford his troops an easy victory and raise their flagging morale.\nBattle.\nIn 722, forces commanded by the Umayyad commanders Alqama and Munuza, and (according to legend) accompanied by Bishop Oppas of Seville, were sent to Asturias. As Alqama overran much of the region, folklore suggests that Oppas attempted to broker the surrender of his fellow Christians, but he failed in the effort. Pelagius and his force retreated deep into the mountains of Asturias, eventually retiring into a narrow valley flanked by mountains, which was easily defensible due to the impossibility of launching a broad-fronted attack. Pelagius may have had as few as three hundred men with him.\nAlqama eventually arrived at Covadonga, and sent forward an envoy to convince Pelagius to surrender. He refused, so Alqama ordered his best troops into the valley to fight. The Asturians shot arrows and stones from the slopes of the mountains, and then, at the climactic moment, Pelagius personally led some of his soldiers out into the valley. They had been hiding in a cave, unseen by the Muslims. The Christian accounts of the battle claim that the slaughter among the Muslims was horrific, while Umayyad accounts describe it as a mere skirmish. Alqama himself fell in the battle, and his soldiers withdrew from the battlefield.\nIn the aftermath of Pelagius's victory, the people of the conquered villages of Asturias now emerged with their weapons, and killed hundreds of Alqama's retreating troops. Munuza, learning of the defeat, organized another force, and gathered what was left of the survivors of Covadonga. At some later date, he confronted Pelagius and his now greatly augmented force, near the modern town of Proaza. Again Pelagius won, and Munuza was killed in the fighting. The battle is commemorated at the shrine of Our Lady of Covadonga.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52151", "revid": "45222757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52151", "title": "Triangle wave", "text": "Non-sinusoidal waveform\n \\sin \\left(2 \\pi \\left( 2 k - 1 \\right) t\\right)&lt;/math&gt;\nA triangular wave or triangle wave is a non-sinusoidal waveform named for its triangular shape. It is a periodic, piecewise linear, continuous real function.\nLike a square wave, the triangle wave contains only odd harmonics. However, the higher harmonics roll off much faster than in a square wave (proportional to the inverse square of the harmonic number as opposed to just the inverse).\nDefinitions.\nDefinition.\nA triangle wave of period \"p\" that spans the range [0,\u00a01] is defined as\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the floor function. This can be seen to be the absolute value of a shifted sawtooth wave.\nFor a triangle wave spanning the range [\u22121,\u00a01] the expression becomes\nformula_3\nA more general equation for a triangle wave with amplitude formula_4 and period formula_5 using the modulo operation and absolute value is\nformula_6\nFor example, for a triangle wave with amplitude 5 and period 4:\nformula_7\nA phase shift can be obtained by altering the value of the formula_8 term, and the vertical offset can be adjusted by altering the value of the formula_9 term.\nAs this only uses the modulo operation and absolute value, it can be used to simply implement a triangle wave on hardware electronics.\nNote that in many programming languages, the codice_1 operator is a remainder operator (with result the same sign as the dividend), not a modulo operator; the modulo operation can be obtained by using codice_2 in place of codice_3. In e.g. JavaScript, this results in an equation of the form codice_4.\nRelation to the square wave.\nThe triangle wave can also be expressed as the integral of the square wave:\nformula_10\nExpression in trigonometric functions.\nA triangle wave with period \"p\" and amplitude \"a\" can be expressed in terms of sine and arcsine (whose value ranges from \u2212\"\u03c0\"/2 to \"\u03c0\"/2):\nformula_11\nThe identity formula_12 can be used to convert from a triangle \"sine\" wave to a triangular \"cosine\" wave. This phase-shifted triangle wave can also be expressed with cosine and arccosine:\nformula_13\nExpressed as alternating linear functions.\nAnother definition of the triangle wave, with range from \u22121 to 1 and period \"p\", is\nformula_14\nHarmonics.\nIt is possible to approximate a triangle wave with additive synthesis by summing odd harmonics of the fundamental while multiplying every other odd harmonic by \u22121 (or, equivalently, changing its phase by \u03c0) and multiplying the amplitude of the harmonics by one over the square of their mode number, \"n\" (which is equivalent to one over the square of their relative frequency to the fundamental).\nThe above can be summarised mathematically as follows:\nformula_15\nwhere N is the number of harmonics to include in the approximation, t is the independent variable (e.g. time for sound waves), formula_16 is the fundamental frequency, and i is the harmonic label which is related to its mode number by formula_17.\nThis infinite Fourier series converges quickly to the triangle wave as N tends to infinity, as shown in the animation.\nArc length.\nThe arc length per period for a triangle wave, denoted by \"s\", is given in terms of the amplitude \"a\" and period length \"p\" by\nformula_18\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52152", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52152", "title": "Gujerat", "text": ""}
{"id": "52153", "revid": "49018132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52153", "title": "Cree language", "text": "Aboriginal language continuum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCree ( ; also known as Cree\u2013Montagnais\u2013Naskapi) is a dialect continuum of Algonquian languages spoken by approximately 86,475 people across Canada in 2021, from the Northwest Territories to Alberta to Labrador. If considered one language, it is the aboriginal language with the highest number of speakers in Canada. The only region where Cree has any official status is in the Northwest Territories, alongside eight other aboriginal languages. There, Cree is spoken mainly in Fort Smith and Hay River.\nNames.\nEndonyms are:\nOrigin and diffusion.\nCree is believed to have begun as a dialect of the Proto-Algonquian language spoken between 2,500 and 3,000 years ago in the original Algonquian homeland, an undetermined area thought to be near the Great Lakes. The speakers of the proto-Cree language are thought to have moved north, and diverged rather quickly into two different groups on each side of James Bay. The eastern group then began to diverge into separate dialects, whereas the western grouping probably broke into distinct dialects much later. After this point it is very difficult to make definite statements about how different groups emerged and moved around, because there are no written works in the languages to compare, and descriptions by Europeans are not systematic; as well, Algonquian people have a tradition of bilingualism and even of outright adopting a new language from neighbours.\nA traditional view among 20th-century anthropologists and historians of the fur trade posits that the Western Woods Cree and the Plains Cree (and therefore their dialects) did not diverge from other Cree peoples before 1670, when the Cree expanded out of their homeland near James Bay because of access to European firearms. By contrast, James Smith of the Museum of the American Indian stated, in 1987, that the weight of archeological and linguistic evidence puts the Cree as far west as the Peace River Region of Alberta before European contact.\nDialect criteria.\nThe Cree dialect continuum can be divided by many criteria. Dialects spoken in northern Ontario and the southern James Bay, Lanaudi\u00e8re, and Mauricie regions of Quebec differentiate (sh as in \"she\") and , while those to the west have merged the two phonemes as and in the east the phonemes are merged as either or . In several dialects, including northern Plains Cree and Woods Cree, the long vowels and have merged into a single vowel, . In the Quebec communities of Chisasibi, Whapmagoostui, and Kawawachikamach, the long vowel has merged with .\nHowever, the most transparent phonological variation between different Cree dialects are the reflexes of Proto-Algonquian *l in the modern dialects, as shown below:\nThe Plains Cree, speakers of the y dialect, refer to their language as ', whereas Woods Cree speakers say ', and Swampy Cree speakers say \"\".\nAnother important phonological variation among the Cree dialects involves the palatalisation of Proto-Algonquian *k: East of the Ontario\u2013Quebec border (except for Atikamekw), Proto-Algonquian *k has changed into or before front vowels. See the table above for examples in the * column.\nVery often the Cree dialect continuum is divided into two languages: Cree and Montagnais. Cree includes all dialects which have not undergone the *k &gt; sound change (BC\u2013QC) while Montagnais encompasses the territory where this sound change has occurred (QC\u2013NL). These labels are very useful from a linguistic perspective but are confusing as \"East Cree\" then qualifies as Montagnais. For practical purposes, Cree usually covers the dialects which use syllabics as their orthography (including Atikamekw but excluding Kawawachikamach Naskapi), the term Montagnais then applies to those dialects using the Latin script (excluding Atikamekw and including Kawawachikamach Naskapi). The term Naskapi typically refers to Kawawachikamach (y-dialect) and Natuashish (n-dialect).\nDialect groups.\nThe Cree dialects can be broadly classified into nine groups. Roughly from west to east:\nPhonology.\nThis table shows the possible consonant phonemes in the Cree language or one of its varieties.\nIn dictionaries focused on Eastern Swampy Cree, Western Swampy Cree may readily substitute \u27e8sh\u27e9 with \u27e8s\u27e9, while Lowland Moose Cree may readily substitute \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9 with their \u27e8l\u27e9. In dictionaries focused on Southern Plains Cree, Northern Plains Cree may readily substitute \u27e8\u0113\u27e9 with \u27e8\u012b\u27e9, while materials accommodating Rocky Cree will indicate the Plains Cree that is in Rocky Cree as \u27e8\u00fd\u27e9. Similarly, in dictionaries focused on Western Swampy Cree, Woods Cree may readily substitute \u27e8\u0113\u27e9 with \u27e8\u012b\u27e9, while materials accommodating Woods Cree will indicate the Western Swampy Cree that is in Woods Cree as \u27e8\u0144\u27e9. Atikamekw uses \u27e8c\u27e9 [], \u27e8tc\u27e9 [], and \u27e8i\u27e9 [] (which also serves as \u27e8i\u27e9 []). Eastern James Bay Cree prefers to indicate long vowels (other than ) by doubling the vowel, while the western Cree use either a macron or circumflex diacritic; as is always long, often it is written as just \u27e8e\u27e9 without doubling or using a diacritic. While Western Cree dialects make use of \u27e8o\u27e9 and either \u27e8\u014d\u27e9 or \u27e8\u00f4\u27e9, Eastern Cree dialects instead make use of \u27e8u\u27e9 and either \u27e8uu\u27e9, \u27e8\u016b\u27e9, or \u27e8\u00fb\u27e9.\nSyntax.\nCree features a complex polysynthetic morphosyntax. A common grammatical feature in Cree dialects, in terms of sentence structure, is non-regulated word order. Word order is not governed by a specific set of rules or structure; instead, \"subjects and objects are expressed by means of inflection on the verb\". Subject, Verb, and Object (SVO) in a sentence can vary in order, for example, SVO, VOS, OVS, and SOV.\nObviation is also a key aspect of the Cree language(s). In a sense, the obviative can be defined as any third-person ranked lower on a hierarchy of discourse salience than some other (proximate) discourse-participant. \"Obviative animate nouns, [in the Plains Cree dialect for instance], are marked by [a suffix] ending , and are used to refer to third persons who are more peripheral in the discourse than the proximate third person\". For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe suffix marks Susan as the obviative, or 'fourth' person, the person furthest away from the discourse.\nThe Cree language has grammatical gender in a system that classifies nouns as animate or inanimate. The distribution of nouns between animate or inanimate is not semantically transparent, which means gender must be learned along with the noun.\nAs is common in polysynthetic languages, a Cree word can be very long, and express something that takes a series of words in English. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis means that changing the word order in Cree can place emphasis on different pieces of the sentence. Wolfart and Carroll give the following example by transposing the two Cree words:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWriting.\nCree dialects, except for those spoken in eastern Quebec and Labrador, are traditionally written using Cree syllabics, a variant of Canadian Aboriginal syllabics, but can be written with the Latin script as well. Both writing systems represent the language phonetically. Cree is always written from left to right horizontally. The easternmost dialects are written using the Latin script exclusively. The dialects of Plains Cree, Woods Cree, and western Swampy Cree use Western Cree syllabics and the dialects of eastern Swampy Cree, East Cree, Moose Cree, and Naskapi use Eastern Cree syllabics.\nSyllabics.\nIn Cree syllabics, each symbol, which represents a consonant, can be written four ways, each direction representing its corresponding vowel. Some dialects of Cree have up to seven vowels, so additional diacritics are placed after the syllabic to represent the corresponding vowels. Finals represent stand-alone consonants. The Cree language also has two semivowels. The semivowels may follow other consonants or be on their own in a word.\nThe following tables show the syllabaries of Eastern and Western Cree dialects, respectively:\nSpeakers of various Cree dialects have begun creating dictionaries to serve their communities. Some projects, such as the Cree Language Resource Project, are developing an online bilingual Cree dictionary for the Cree language.\nCree syllabics has not commonly or traditionally used the period (\u27e8.\u27e9). Instead, either a full-stop glyph (\u27e8\u166e\u27e9) or a double em-width space has been used between words to signal the transition from one sentence to the next.\nRomanization.\nFor Plains Cree and Swampy Cree, Standard Roman Orthography (SRO) uses fourteen letters of the ISO basic Latin alphabet to denote the dialect's ten consonants (\u27e8p\u27e9, \u27e8t\u27e9, \u27e8c\u27e9, \u27e8k\u27e9, \u27e8s\u27e9, \u27e8m\u27e9, \u27e8n\u27e9, \u27e8w\u27e9, \u27e8y\u27e9 and \u27e8h\u27e9) and seven vowels (\u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8i\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9, \u27e8\u0101\u27e9, \u27e8\u012b\u27e9, \u27e8\u014d\u27e9 and \u27e8\u0113\u27e9). Upper case letters are not used. For more details on the phonetic values of these letters or variant orthographies, see the \u00a7 Phonology section above.\nThe sound of Woods Cree is written \u27e8th\u27e9, or \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 in more recent material. Plains and Swampy material written to be cross-dialectical often modify \u27e8y\u27e9 to \u27e8\u00fd\u27e9 and \u27e8n\u27e9 to \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9 when those are pronounced in Swampy. \u27e8\u0161\u27e9 is used in Eastern dialects where \"s\" and \"\u0161\" are distinct phonemes. In other dialects, \"s\" is used even when pronounced like .\n\u27e8l\u27e9 and \u27e8r\u27e9 are used natively in Moose and Attikamek Cree, but in other dialects only for loanwords.\nThe stops, \"p\", \"t\", \"k\", and the affricate, \"c\", can be pronounced either voiced or unvoiced, but the symbols used for writing these sounds all correspond to the unvoiced pronunciation, e.g. \u27e8p\u27e9 not \u27e8b\u27e9, \u27e8t\u27e9 not \u27e8d\u27e9, etc. The phoneme is represented by \u27e8c\u27e9, as it is in various other languages.\nLong vowels are denoted with either a macron, as in \u27e8\u0101\u27e9, or a circumflex, as in \u27e8\u00e2\u27e9. Use of either the macron or circumflex is acceptable, but usage should be consistent within a work. The vowel \"\u0113\" , used in southern Plains Cree, is always long and the grapheme \u27e8e\u27e9 is never used. In northern Plains Cree the sound has merged with \"\u012b\", and thus \u27e8\u0113\u27e9 is not used at all.\nThe use of unmarked \u27e8o\u27e9 and marked \u27e8\u014d\u27e9 for the phonemes and emphasizes the relationship that can exist between these two vowels. There are situations where \"o\" can be lengthened to \"\u014d\", as for example in 'sing (now)!' and 'sing (later)!'.\nIn alphabetic writing, the use of punctuation has been inconsistent. For instance, in the Plains Cree dialect, the interrogative enclitic \"c\u00ee\" can be included in the sentence to mark a yes\u2013no question such that this is sometimes considered to be sufficient without including a question mark (?). However, in many modern publications and text collections (\"cf.\" \"The Counselling Speeches of Jim K\u00e2-N\u00eepit\u00eaht\u00eaw\" (1998)) full punctuation is used.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdditionally, other interrogatives (\"where, when, what, why, who\") can be used, as in other languages, and questions marks can thus be used for such questions in Cree as well.\nHyphenation can be used to separate a particle from the root word that it prefixes, especially particles that precede verbs (\"preverbs\" or \"indeclinable preverbs\") or nouns (\"prenouns\" or \"indeclinable prenouns\"). One example is ('start speaking!'), derived from . Note that can neither stand alone as a separate word, nor is it an essential part of a stem. There are some more complex situations where it is difficult to determine whether an element is a particle. Some frequently used compound words can be written as unhyphenated. Stress can be predicted in some cases based on hyphenation.\nVowel reduction or vowel dropping, as is common of unstressed short \"i\" , is not denoted in order to be more cross-dialectal\u2014instead of using apostrophes, the full unreduced vowels are written.\nRepresentation of sandhi (such as \u2192 ) can be written or not written, as sandhi representation introduces greater complexity. There are additional rules regarding \"h\" and \"iy\" that may not match a given speaker's speech, to enable a standardized transcription.\nContact languages.\nCree is also a component language in at least five contact languages: Michif, Northern Michif, Bungi, Oji-Cree, and Nehipwat. Michif and Bungi are spoken by members of the M\u00e9tis, and historically by some Voyageurs and European settlers of Western Canada and in parts of the Northern United States. Nehipwat and Oji-Cree are blends of Cree with Assiniboine (Nehipwat) and Ojibwe (Oji-Cree).\nMichif is a mixed language which combines Cree with French. For the most part, Michif uses Cree verbs, question words, and demonstratives while using French nouns. Michif is unique to the Canadian prairie provinces as well as to North Dakota and Montana in the United States. Michif is still spoken in central Canada and in North Dakota.\nBungi is a creole based on Scottish English, Scots, Scottish Gaelic, Cree, and Ojibwe. Some French words have also been incorporated into its lexicon. This language flourished at and around the Red River Settlement (the modern-day location of Winnipeg, Manitoba) by the mid- to late-1800s. Bungi is now virtually extinct, as its features are being abandoned in favour of standard English.\nCree has also been incorporated into another mixed language within Canada, Nehipwat, which is a blending of Cree with Assiniboine. Nehipwat is found only in a few southern Saskatchewan reserves and is now nearing extinction. Nothing is known of its structure.\nLoss of language.\nDoug Cuthand argues three reasons for the loss of the Cree language among many speakers over the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. First, residential schools cultivated the prejudice that their language was inferior. While students were still speaking their native language at home, their learning stopped at school. When they left residential schools as adults, they went home and their vocabulary and knowledge of language did not include concepts or forms that an adult speaker who had not been taken to a residential school would have.\nCuthand also argues that the loss of the Cree language can be attributed to the migration of native families away from the reserve, voluntarily or not. Oftentimes, the elders are left on the reserve. This breaks up the traditional intergenerational flow of lingual knowledge from elder to youth.\nThe third point Cuthand argues is that Cree language loss was adopted by the speakers. Parents stopped teaching their children their native language in the belief that doing so would help their children find economic success or avoid discrimination.\nLegal status.\nThe social and legal status of Cree varies across Canada. Cree is one of the eleven official languages of the Northwest Territories, but is only spoken by a small number of people there in the area around the town of Fort Smith. It is also one of two principal languages of the regional government of Eeyou Istchee James Bay in Northern Quebec, the other being French.\nRobert Falcon Ouellette, a Cree Member of Parliament, played a pivotal role in promoting Indigenous languages especially Cree within the Canadian Parliament and Canadian House of Commons. He was instrumental in obtaining unanimous consent from all political parties to change the standing orders to allow Indigenous languages to be spoken in the House of Commons, with full translation services provided. This historic change enabled Ouellette to deliver a speech in Cree with interpretation supported by language educator Kevin Lewis, marking the first use of an Indigenous language in the House of Commons on Jan 28, 2019.\nFurthermore, Bill C-91, the \"Indigenous Languages Act\" passed in 2019, was enacted to support and revitalize Indigenous languages across Canada. This legislation, aims to reclaim, revitalize, and maintain Indigenous languages through sustainable funding and the establishment of the Office of the Commissioner of Indigenous Languages. Ouellette was the chair of the Indigenous caucus in the House of Commons and helped ensure it passage before the election of 2019.\nSupport and revitalization.\nAs of 2017, Cree had about 117,000 documented speakers. They are still a minority language given the dominance of English and French in Canada. There are programs in place to maintain and revitalize the language, though. In the Quebec James Bay Cree community, a resolution was put into action in 1988 that made Cree the language of education in primary schools and eventually elementary schools.\nThe Mistissini council decided to require their employees to learn Cree syllabics in 1991.\nThe Cree School Board now has its annual report available in both English and Cree.\nThere is a push to increase the availability of Cree stations on the radio.\nIn 2013, free Cree language electronic books for beginners became available for Alberta language teachers.\nThe Government of the Northwest Territories releases an annual report on First Nations languages. The 2016\u20132017 report features successes they have had in revitalizing and supporting and projects they are working on. For example, they released a Medicinal Plant Guide that had information in both Cree and English. An important part of making the guide was input from the elders. Another accomplishment was the dubbing of a movie in Cree. They are working on broadcasting a radio station that \"will give listeners music and a voice for our languages\".\nJoshua Whitehead is one writer who has used the Cree language as part of his poetry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52156", "revid": "42683364", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52156", "title": "Slater (disambiguation)", "text": "A slater is a tradesperson who works with slate.\nSlater may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nCommunities.\n\"All in the United States; listed alphabetically by state\"\nScience.\n\"Named after American physicist John C. Slater\"\nStructures.\n\"All in the United States\"\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52160", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52160", "title": "1230s BC", "text": "The 1230s BC is a decade that lasted from 1239 BC to 1230 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52161", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52161", "title": "720s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 729 BC \u2013 720 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52162", "revid": "12824384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52162", "title": "10 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 10 BC was either a common year starting on Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday or a leap year starting on Tuesday or Wednesday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Sunday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Maximus and Antonius (or, less frequently, year 744 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 10 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52163", "revid": "21054272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52163", "title": "11 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 11 BC was either a common year starting on Monday or Tuesday or a leap year starting on Sunday, Monday or Tuesday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Saturday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Tubero and Maximus (or, less frequently, year 743 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 11 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52164", "revid": "892947443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52164", "title": "Woodlice", "text": ""}
{"id": "52165", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52165", "title": "13 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 13 BC was either a common year starting on Friday, Saturday or Sunday or a leap year starting on Friday or Saturday of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Proleptic Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Nero and Varus (or, less frequently, year 741 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 13 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52166", "revid": "15946673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52166", "title": "Grooks", "text": ""}
{"id": "52167", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52167", "title": "Grook", "text": "Form of poetry created by Danish polymath Piet Hein\nA grook () is a form of short aphoristic poem or rhyming aphorism created by the Danish poet, designer, inventor, and scientist Piet Hein. He wrote over 7,000 of them from 1939 until his death in 1996, mostly in Danish. The grooks are multi-faceted and characterized by irony, paradox, brevity, precise use of language, rhythm and rhyme, and an often satiric nature. Many of the grooks have an accompanying line drawing, which provides additional meaning.\nSome say that the name \"gruk\" is short for \"grin &amp; suk\" (lit.\u2009'laugh &amp; sigh'), but Piet Hein said he felt that the word had come out of thin air. The contemporary \"Hunden Grog\" (\"Grog the Dog\") stories by fellow cartoonist Storm P. have, in public opinion, been regarded as an inspiration.\nGrooks as passive resistance.\nPiet Hein was president of the Anti-Nazi Union when the Germans invaded Denmark in 1940. He became an underground passive resister. He found a way to encourage resistance\nthrough the use of poems, which he called \"gruks\" (\"grooks\" in English),\nand began publishing them in the daily newspaper \"Politiken\" under the pseudonym\n\"Kumbel Kumbell\".\nGrooks in English.\nBeginning in the 1960s, seven volumes of English translations of 53 grooks each (all translated by Jens Arup) were published and became popular in the U.S. counterculture of the time:\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Piet Hein and/or his estate have also published the following books of grooks:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52168", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52168", "title": "1280s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1280s BC was a decade that lasted from 1289 BC to 1280 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52169", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52169", "title": "Prawns", "text": ""}
{"id": "52170", "revid": "47914024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52170", "title": "730s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 739 BC \u2013 730 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52171", "revid": "38411991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52171", "title": "Dendrobranchiata", "text": "Suborder of prawns\nDendrobranchiata is a suborder of decapods, commonly known as prawns (though this may be ambiguous). There are 540 extant species in seven families, and a fossil record extending back to the Devonian. They differ from related animals, such as Caridea and Stenopodidea, by the branching form of the gills (hence their scientific name Dendrobrachiata) and by the fact that they do not brood their eggs, but release them directly into the water. They may reach a length of over and a mass of , and are widely fished and farmed for human consumption.\nNomenclature.\nWhile Dendrobranchiata and Caridea belong to different suborders of Decapoda, they are very similar in appearance, and in many contexts such as commercial farming and fisheries, they are both often referred to as \"shrimp\" and \"prawn\" interchangeably. In the United Kingdom, Australia and some other Commonwealth nations, the word \"prawn\" is used almost exclusively, while the opposite is the case in North America. The term \"prawn\" is also loosely used to describe any large shrimp, especially those that come 15 (or fewer) to the pound (such as \"king prawns\", yet sometimes known as \"jumbo shrimp\").\nDue to their superficial similarity, Dendrobranchiata and Caridea were historically grouped together, though it is currently understood that they are distantly related. The classification of these groups is explained below. \nDescription.\nTogether with other swimming Decapoda, Dendrobranchiata show the \"caridoid facies\", or shrimp-like form. The body is typically robust, and can be divided into a cephalothorax (fusion of the head or \"cephalon\" and thorax) and a pleon (abdomen). The body is generally slightly flattened side-to-side. The largest species, \"Penaeus monodon\", can reach a mass of and a length of .\nHead.\nThe most conspicuous appendages arising from the head are the antennae; the first pair are biramous (having two flagella), except in Luciferidae, and are relatively small. The second pair can be 2\u20133 times the length of the body and are always uniramous (having a single flagellum). The mouthparts comprise pairs of mandibles, maxillules and maxillae, arising from the head, and three pairs of maxillipeds, arising from the thorax. A pair of stalked eyes points forwards from the head.\nThorax.\nThe carapace originates from the thorax to cover the cephalothorax, and extends forwards between the eyes into a rostrum. This is only as long as the stalked eyes in Benthesicymidae, Luciferidae and Sergestidae, but considerably longer in Aristeidae.\nAs well as the three pairs of maxillipeds, the thorax also bears five pairs of pereiopods, or walking legs; the first three of these end in small chelae (pincers). The last two pereiopods are absent in Luciferidae and \"Acetes\", but much longer than the preceding pereiopods in \"Hymenopenaeus\" and \"Xiphopenaeus\".\nThe thoracic appendages carry gills, which are protected beneath the carapace. The gills are typically branched, and so resemble trees, lending the group its scientific name, Dendrobranchiata, from the Greek words (', tree) and (', gills).\nPleon.\nThe pleon, or abdomen, is similar in length to the cephalothorax. It has six segments, the first five bearing lamellar pleopods, and the last one bearing uropods. The pleopods are biramous, except in Sicyoniidae, where they are uniramous. The uropods and telson collectively form the tail fan; the uropods are not divided by a diaeresis, as they are in many other decapods. The telson is pointed and is usually armed with four pairs of setae or spines.\nInternal anatomy.\nMost of the musculature of a prawn is used for bending the pleon, and almost all the space in the pleon is filled by muscle. More than 17 muscles operate each of the pleopods, and a further 16 power the tail fan in the rapid backward movement of the caridoid escape reaction. These muscles, collectively, are the meat for which prawns are commercially fished and farmed.\nThe nervous system of prawns comprises a dorsal brain, and a ventral nerve cord, connected by two commissures around the oesophagus. The chief sensory inputs are visual input from the eyes, chemoreceptors on the antennae and in the mouth, and mechanoreceptors on the antennae and elsewhere.\nThe digestive system comprises a foregut, a midgut and a hindgut, and is situated dorsally. The foregut begins at the mouth, passes through the oesophagus, and opens into a sac that contains the grinding apparatus of the gastric mill. The hepatopancreas feeds into the midgut, where digestive enzymes are released, and nutrients taken up. The hindgut forms faecal pellets, which are then passed out through the muscular anus.\nThe circulatory system is based around a compact, triangular heart, which pumps blood into three main arteries. Excretion is carried out through the gills, and by specialised glands located at the base of the antennae, and is mostly in the form of ammonia.\nLife cycle.\nPrawns may be divided into two groups based on the structure of the female genitalia, known as thelycum: those with an open thelycum and those with a closed thelycum. In the open-thelycum species, mating takes place towards the end of the moulting cycle, and usually at sunset. In closed-thelycum species, mating takes place shortly after moulting, when the exoskeleton is still soft, and usually occurs in the night. Courtship and mating may take up to 3 hours in \"Penaeus monodon\", while in \"Farfantepenaeus paulensis\", mating lasts just 4\u20135 seconds. Spawning may occur several times during the moulting cycle, and usually occurs at night.\nWith the exception of Luciferidae, the eggs of prawns are shed directly into the water, rather than being brooded. The eggs hatch into nauplius larvae, which are followed by zoea larvae (initially protozoea, and later mysis) and then a postlarva, before reaching adulthood. The changes between moults are gradual, and so the development is anamorphic rather than metamorphic.\nUniquely among the Decapoda, the nauplii of Dendrobranchiata are free-swimming. There are five to eight naupliar stages. The earlier stages have three pairs of appendages that are used for locomotion \u2013 two pairs of antennae and the mandibles. Later stages also have rudiments of other mouthparts, but the nauplius is unable to feed, and only lasts 24 to 68 hours. The body ends at a two-lobed telson, and the beginnings of a carapace emerge at this stage.\nThere are typically five or six zoea stages in Dendrobranchiata, divided into protozoea and mysis. In the protozoea larvae, the antennae are still used for locomotion, but the mandibles become specialised for mastication. All the thoracic somites (body segments) have formed, and a carapace is present, covering part of the thorax. It is smooth in the family Penaeidae, but bears many spines in the family Solenoceridae. The pleon (abdomen) is unsegmented in the first protozoea, and ends in a bilobed telson, which may be used for cleaning other appendages, or for steering. By the second protozoea, segmentation appears on the pleon, and by the third protozoea, which may also be called the metazoea, the uropods have appeared.\nBy the mysis stages, the pereiopods (thoracic appendages) start to be used instead of the antennae for locomotion. The larva swims backwards, with its tail upwards, spinning slowly as it goes. The carapace covers most of the segments of the thorax, and claws appear on the first three pereiopods. By the last mysis stage, the beginnings of pleopods have appeared on the first five segments of the abdomen.\nThe post-larva or juvenile stage is characterised by the use of the pleopods for locomotion. The claws become functional, but the gills are still rudimentary. The telson is narrower and only retains traces of its two-lobed development. Through a series of gradual changes over following moults, the animal takes on its adult form.\nSystematics.\nDendrobranchiata were traditionally grouped together with Caridean shrimp as \"Natantia\" (the swimming decapoda), as opposed to the Reptantia (the walking decapods). In 1888, Charles Spence Bate recognised the differences in gill morphology, and separated Natantia into Dendrobranchiata, Phyllobranchiata and Trichobranchiata. Recent analyses using cladistics and molecular phylogenetics recognise Dendrobranchiata as the sister group to all other Decapoda, collectively called Pleocyemata.\nThe cladogram below shows Dendrobranchiata's placement within the larger order Decapoda, from analysis by Wolfe \"et al.\", 2019.\nBefore 2010, the earliest known fossil prawns come from rocks in Madagascar of Permo-Triassic age, https://\u00a0million years ago. In 2010, however, the discovery of \"Aciculopoda\" from Famennian\u2013stage rocks in Oklahoma extended the group's fossil record back to https://\u00a0million years ago. The best known fossil prawns are from the Jurassic Solnhofen limestones from Germany.\nLiving prawns are divided among seven families, five in the superfamily Penaeoidea, and two in the Sergestoidea, although molecular evidence disagrees with some aspects of the current classifications. Collectively, these include 540 extant species, and nearly 100 exclusively fossil species. A further two families are known only from fossils.\nThe cladogram below shows Dendrobranchiata's internal relationships of extant families (excluding Solenoceridae):\nDiversity.\n&lt;br&gt;\nDendrobranchiata comprises the following superfamilies and families:&lt;br&gt;\nSuperfamily Penaeoidea \n\u2020 Aciculopodidae \u2013 a single Famennian species, \"Aciculopoda mapesi\" \n\u2020 Aegeridae \u2013 two Mesozoic genera: \"Aeger\" and \"Acanthochirana\" \nAristeidae \u2013 26 extant species in 9 genera, and one fossil genus \nBenthesicymidae \u2013 41 species in 4 genera \n\u2020 Carpopenaeidae \u2013 two Cretaceous species of \"Carpopenaeus\" \nPenaeidae \u2013 216 extant species in 26 genera, and several extinct genera, mostly Mesozoic \nSicyoniidae \u2013 43 species of \"Sicyonia\" \nSolenoceridae \u2013 81 species in 9 genera \nSuperfamily Sergestoidea \nLuciferidae \u2013 7 species in 2 genera\nSergestidae \u2013 90 extant species in six genera, and two extinct monotypic genera \nDistribution.\nThe biodiversity of Dendrobranchiata decreases markedly at increasing latitudes; most species are only found in a region between 40\u00b0 north and 40\u00b0 south. Some species may occur at higher latitudes. For instance, \"Bentheogennema borealis\" is abundant at 57\u00b0 north in the Pacific Ocean, while collections of \"Gennadas kempi\" have been made as far south as 61\u00b0 south in the Antarctic Ocean.\nEcology and behaviour.\nThere is a great deal of ecological variation within the suborder Dendrobranchiata. Some species of Sergestidae live in fresh water, but most prawns are exclusively marine. Species of Sergestidae and Benthesicymidae mostly live in deep water, and Solenoceridae species live offshore, while most Penaeidae species live in shallow inshore waters, and \"Lucifer\" is planktonic. Some species burrow in mud on the sea floor during the day and emerge at night to feed.\nPrawns are \"opportunistic omnivores\", and their diet can include a range of food items from fine particles to large organisms. These may include fish, chaetognaths, krill, copepods, radiolarians, phytoplankton, nematocysts, ostracods and detritus. Prawns eat less around the time of ecdysis (moulting), probably because of the softness of the mouthparts, and must eat more than usual to compensate, once ecdysis is complete.\nPrawns are an attractive food for predators, with a higher energy content than most other invertebrates. The larvae are prey to comb jellies, jellyfish, chaetognaths, fish and other crustaceans (such as mantis shrimp and crabs), and only a tiny proportion survive. Juveniles are targeted by a number of fish, cephalopods and birds; \"Litopenaeus vannamei\" juveniles experience 90% mortality in the 6\u201312 weeks they spend in Mexican lagoons, and this is thought to be due almost entirely to predation. Adult prawns are less susceptible to predation, but can fall prey to some fish.\nEconomic importance.\nDendrobranchiata are of huge economic importance. While in some countries, such as the United States, production is almost entirely through fisheries, other countries have concentrated on aquaculture (shrimp farms), including Ecuador where 95% of production is farmed; some countries produce similar amounts from fisheries and aquaculture, including Mexico, China, India and Indonesia.\nSpecies from the family Aristeidae are important to deep-water fisheries, particularly in the Mediterranean Sea, where \"Aristaeomorpha foliacea\" is caught by trawlers. In Brazil, \"Aristaeomorpha foliacea\", \"Aristaeopsis edwardsiana\" and \"Aristeus antillensis\" are of commercial importance. The shallow-water Penaeidae are of greater importance, however, and the most important species for fisheries is \"Fenneropenaeus chinensis\", with a catch in 2005 of over 100,000 tons.\nThe most important species for aquaculture are \"Marsupenaeus japonicus\" (Kuruma prawn), \"Fenneropenaeus chinensis\" (Chinese prawn), \"Penaeus monodon\" (giant tiger prawn) and \"Litopenaeus vannamei\" (whiteleg prawn).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52172", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52172", "title": "Natantia", "text": "Historic group of crustaceans\nNatantia (Boas, 1880) is an obsolete taxon of decapod crustaceans, comprising those families that move predominantly by swimming \u2013 the shrimp (comprising Caridea and Procarididea), prawns (Dendrobranchiata) and boxer shrimp. The remaining Decapoda were placed in the Reptantia, and consisted of crabs, lobsters and other large animals that move chiefly by walking along the bottom. The division between Natantia and Reptantia was replaced in 1963, when Martin Burkenroad erected the suborder Pleocyemata for those animals that brood their eggs on the pleopods, leaving Dendrobranchiata for the prawns. Under this system, Natantia is a paraphyletic group. Burkenroad's primary division of Decapoda into Dendrobranchiata and Pleocyemata has since been corroborated by molecular analyses.\nThe name Natantia Owen, 1851 was utilized in a phylogenetic context by Madzia and Cau (2017) as the most exclusive mosasaurid clade including \"Mosasaurus\" and \"Tylosaurus\" but not \"Halisaurus\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52173", "revid": "23150529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52173", "title": "740s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 749 BC \u2013 740 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52175", "revid": "50186069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52175", "title": "1290s BC", "text": "The 1290s BC is a decade that lasted from 1299 BC to 1290 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52176", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52176", "title": "1300s BC (decade)", "text": "The 1300s BC is a decade that lasted from 1309 BC to 1300 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52177", "revid": "14495", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52177", "title": "750s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 759 BC \u2013 750 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52178", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52178", "title": "760s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 769 BC \u2013 760 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52179", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52179", "title": "770s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 779 BC \u2013 770 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52180", "revid": "1284850077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52180", "title": "780s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 789 BC \u2013 780 BC.\nDecade"}
{"id": "52181", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52181", "title": "790s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 799 BC \u2013 790 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52182", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52182", "title": "800s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 809 BC \u2013 800 BC.\nDecade\nCalendar year\n \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52184", "revid": "49745431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52184", "title": "20th century BC", "text": "One hundred years, from 2000 BC to 1901 BC\nThe 20th century BC was a century that lasted from the year 2000 BC to 1901 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52186", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52186", "title": "2130s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52187", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52187", "title": "2140s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52188", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52188", "title": "2150s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52189", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52189", "title": "2160s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52190", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52190", "title": "2170s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52191", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52191", "title": "2180s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52192", "revid": "241822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52192", "title": "Public domain resources", "text": ""}
{"id": "52193", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52193", "title": "2190s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52194", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52194", "title": "2200s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52195", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52195", "title": "2120s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52198", "revid": "43032607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52198", "title": "Perfect square", "text": "A perfect square is an element of algebraic structure that is equal to the square of another element.\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52199", "revid": "87054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52199", "title": "Reconstruction archaeology", "text": ""}
{"id": "52200", "revid": "43768634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52200", "title": "2110s BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "52201", "revid": "9889660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52201", "title": "Jean Racine", "text": "17th-century French dramatist (1639\u20131699)\nJean-Baptiste Racine ( , ; ; 22 December 1639 \u2013 21 April 1699) was a French dramatist, one of the three great playwrights of 17th-century France, along with Moli\u00e8re and Corneille, as well as an important literary figure in the Western tradition and world literature. Racine was primarily a tragedian, producing such \"examples of neoclassical perfection\" as \"Ph\u00e8dre\", \"Andromaque\", and \"Athalie\". He did write one comedy, \"Les Plaideurs\", and a muted tragedy, \"Esther\", for the young.\nRacine's plays displayed his mastery of the dodecasyllabic (12 syllable) French alexandrine. His writing is renowned for its elegance, purity, speed, and fury, and for what American poet Robert Lowell described as a \"diamond-edge\", and the \"glory of its hard, electric rage\". Racine's dramaturgy is marked by his psychological insight, the prevailing passion of his characters, and the nakedness of both plot and stage.\nBiography.\nRacine was born on 21 December 1639 in La Fert\u00e9-Milon (Aisne), in the province of Picardy in northern France. Orphaned by the age of four (his mother died in 1641 and his father in 1643), he came into the care of his grandparents. At the death of his grandfather in 1649, his grandmother, Marie des Moulins, went to live in the convent of Port-Royal and took her grandson with her. He received a classical education at the Petites \u00e9coles de Port-Royal, a religious institution which would greatly influence other contemporary figures including Blaise Pascal. Port-Royal was run by followers of Jansenism, a theology condemned as heretical by the French bishops and the Pope. Racine's interactions with the Jansenists in his years at this academy would have great influence over him for the rest of his life. At Port-Royal, he excelled in his studies of the classics and the themes of Greek and Roman mythology would play large roles in his future works.\nHe was expected to study law at the \"Coll\u00e8ge d'Harcourt\" in Paris, but instead found himself drawn to a more artistic lifestyle. Experimenting with poetry drew high praise from France's greatest literary critic, Nicolas Boileau, with whom Racine would later become great friends; Boileau would often claim that he was behind the budding poet's work. Racine eventually took up residence in Paris where he became involved in theatrical circles.\nHis first play, \"Amasie\", never reached the stage. On 20 June 1664, Racine's tragedy \"La Th\u00e9ba\u00efde ou les fr\u00e8res ennemis\" (\"The Thebans or the enemy Brothers\") was produced by Moli\u00e8re's troupe at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Palais-Royal, in Paris. The following year, Moli\u00e8re also put on Racine's second play, \"Alexandre le Grand\". However, this play garnered such good feedback from the public that Racine secretly negotiated with a rival play company, the H\u00f4tel de Bourgogne, to perform the play \u2013 since they had a better reputation for performing tragedies. Thus, \"Alexandre\" premiered for the second time, by a different acting troupe, eleven days after its first showing. Moli\u00e8re could never forgive Racine for this betrayal, and Racine simply widened the rift between him and his former friend by seducing Moli\u00e8re's leading actress, Th\u00e9r\u00e8se du Parc, into becoming his companion both professionally and personally. From this point on the H\u00f4tel de Bourgogne troupe performed all of Racine's secular plays.\nThough both \"La Th\u00e9ba\u00efde\" (1664) and its successor, \"Alexandre\" (1665), had classical themes, Racine was already entering into controversy and forced to field accusations that he was polluting the minds of his audiences. He broke all ties with Port-Royal, and proceeded with \"Andromaque\" (1667), which told the story of Andromache, widow of Hector, and her fate following the Trojan War. Amongst his rivals were Pierre Corneille and his brother, Thomas Corneille. Tragedians often competed with alternative versions of the same plot: for example, Michel le Clerc produced an \"Iphig\u00e9nie\" in the same year as Racine (1674), and Jacques Pradon also wrote a play about \"Ph\u00e8dre\" (1677). The success of Pradon's work (the result of the activities of a claque) was one of the events which caused Racine to renounce his work as a dramatist at that time, even though his career up to this point was so successful that he was the first French author to live almost entirely on the money he earned from his writings. Others, including the historian Warren Lewis, attribute his retirement from the theater to qualms of conscience.\nHowever, one major incident which seems to have contributed to Racine's departure from public life was his implication in a court scandal of 1679. He got married at about this time to the pious Catherine de Romanet, and his religious beliefs and devotion to the Jansenist sect were revived. He and his wife eventually had two sons and five daughters. Around the time of his marriage and departure from the theatre, Racine accepted a position as a royal historiographer in the court of King Louis XIV, alongside his friend Boileau. He kept this position in spite of the minor scandals he was involved in. In 1672, he was elected to the \"Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise\", eventually gaining much power over this organisation. Two years later, he was given the title of \"treasurer of France\", and he was later distinguished as an \"ordinary gentleman of the king\" (1690), and then as a secretary of the king (1696). Because of Racine's flourishing career in the court, Louis XIV provided for his widow and children after his death. When at last he returned to the theatre, it was at the request of Madame de Maintenon, morganatic second wife of King Louis XIV, with the moral fables, \"Esther\" (1689) and \"Athalie\" (1691), both of which were based on Old Testament stories and intended for performance by the pupils of the school of the Maison royale de Saint-Louis in Saint-Cyr (a commune neighboring Versailles, and now known as \"Saint-Cyr l'\u00c9cole\").\nJean Racine died in 1699 from cancer of the liver. He requested burial in Port-Royal, but after Louis XIV had this site razed in 1710, his remains were moved to the Saint-\u00c9tienne-du-Mont church in Paris.\nStyle.\nThe quality of Racine's poetry is perhaps his greatest contribution to French literature. His use of the alexandrine poetic line is considered exceptionally skilful.\nRacine's work faced many criticisms from his contemporaries. One was the lack of historic veracity in plays such as \"Britannicus\" (1669) and \"Mithridate\" (1673). Racine was quick to point out that his greatest critics \u2013 his rival dramatists \u2013 were among the biggest offenders in this respect. Another major criticism levelled at him was the lack of incident in his tragedy \"B\u00e9r\u00e9nice\" (1670). Racine's response was that the greatest tragedy does not necessarily consist in bloodshed and death.\nGeneral characteristics.\nRacine restricts his vocabulary to 2500 words. He rules out all workaday expressions since, although the Greeks could call a spade a spade, he does not believe that this is possible in Latin or French. The classical unities are strictly observed, for only the final stage of a prolonged crisis is described. The number of characters, all of them royal, is kept down to the barest minimum. Action on stage is all but eliminated. The mangled Hippolyte is not brought back, as is the \"Hippolytus\" of Euripides. The one exception to this is that Atalide stabs herself before the audience in \"Bajazet\"; but this is acceptable in a play conspicuous for its savagery and Oriental colour.\nFundamental nature of tragedy.\nTragedy shows how men fall from prosperity to disaster. The higher the position from which the hero falls, the greater is the tragedy. Except for the confidants, of whom Narcisse (in \"Britannicus\") and \u0152none (in \"Ph\u00e8dre\") are the most significant, Racine describes the fate of kings, queens, princes and princesses, liberated from the constricting pressures of everyday life and able to speak and act without inhibition.\nNature of Greek tragedy.\nGreek tragedy, from which Racine borrowed so plentifully, tended to assume that humanity was under the control of gods indifferent to its sufferings and aspirations. In the \"\u0152dipus Tyrannus\" Sophocles's hero becomes gradually aware of the terrible fact that, however hard his family has tried to avert the oracular prophecy, he has nevertheless killed his father and married his mother and must now pay the penalty for these unwitting crimes. The same awareness of a cruel fate that leads innocent men and women into sin and demands retribution of the equally innocent children, pervades \"La Th\u00e9ba\u00efde\", a play that itself deals with the legend of \u0152dipus.\nRacine\u2019s tragic vision.\nRacine is often said to have been deeply influenced by the Jansenist sense of fatalism. However, the link between Racine's tragedy and Jansenism has been disputed on multiple grounds; for example, Racine himself denied any connection to Jansenism. As a Christian, Racine could no longer assume, as did \u00c6schylus and Sophocles, that God is merciless in leading men to a doom which they do not foresee. Instead, destiny becomes (at least, in the secular plays) the uncontrollable frenzy of unrequited love.\nAs already in the works of Euripides, the gods have become more symbolic. Venus represents the unquenchable force of sexual passion within the human being in Euripides' \"Hippolytus\"; but closely allied to this \u2013 indeed, indistinguishable from it \u2013 is the atavistic strain of monstrous aberration that had caused her mother Pasipha\u00eb to mate with a bull and give birth to the Minotaur.\nThus, in Racine the \"hamartia\", which the thirteenth chapter of Aristotle\u2019s \"Poetics\" had declared a characteristic of tragedy, is not merely an action performed in all good faith which subsequently has the direst consequences (\u0152dipus's killing a stranger on the road to Thebes, and marrying the widowed Queen of Thebes after solving the Sphinx's riddle), nor is it simply an error of judgment (as when Deianira, in the \"Hercules Furens\" of Seneca the Younger, kills her husband when intending to win back his love); it is a flaw of character.\nRacine\u2019s concept of love.\nIn a second important respect, Racine is at variance with the Greek pattern of tragedy. His tragic characters are aware of, but can do nothing to overcome, the blemish which leads them on to a catastrophe. And the tragic recognition, or \"anagnorisis\", of wrongdoing is not confined, as in the \"\u0152dipus Tyrannus\", to the end of the play, when the fulfilment of the prophecy is borne in upon \u0152dipus; Ph\u00e8dre realizes from the very beginning the monstrousness of her passion, and preserves throughout the play a lucidity of mind that enables her to analyse and reflect upon this fatal and hereditary weakness. Hermione's situation is rather closer to that of Greek tragedy. Her love for Pyrrhus is perfectly natural and is not in itself a flaw of character. But despite her extraordinary lucidity (II 1; V 1) in analysing her violently fluctuating states of mind, she is blind to the fact that the King does not really love her (III 3), and this weakness on her part, which leads directly to the tragic \"peripeteia\" of III 7, is the \"hamartia\" from which the tragic outcome arises.\nFor Racine, love closely resembles a physiological disorder. It is a fatal illness with alternating moods of calm and crisis, and with deceptive hopes of recovery or fulfilment (\"Andromaque\", ll. 1441\u20131448; \"Ph\u00e8dre\", ll. 767-768), the final remission culminating in a quick death. His main characters are monsters, and stand out in glaring contrast to the regularity of the plays' structure and versification. The suffering lover Hermione, Roxane or Ph\u00e8dre is aware of nothing except her suffering and the means whereby it can be relieved. Her love is not founded upon esteem of the beloved and a concern for his happiness and welfare, but is essentially selfish. In a torment of jealousy, she tries to relieve the \"pangs of despised love\" by having (or, in Ph\u00e8dre's case, allowing) him to be put to death, and thus associating him with her own suffering. The depth of tragedy is reached when Hermione realizes that Pyrrhus's love for Andromaque continues beyond the grave, or when Ph\u00e8dre contrasts the young lovers' purity with her unnaturalness which should be hidden from the light of day. Racine's most distinctive contribution to literature is his conception of the ambivalence of love: \"ne puis-je savoir si j'aime, ou si je hais?\"\nThe passion of these lovers is totally destructive of their dignity as human beings, and usually kills them or deprives them of their reason. Except for Titus and B\u00e9r\u00e9nice, they are blinded by it to all sense of duty. Pyrrhus casts off his fianc\u00e9e in order to marry a slave from an enemy country, for whom he is prepared to repudiate his alliances with the Greeks. Orestes' duties as an ambassador are subordinate to his aspirations as a lover, and he finally murders the king to whom he has been sent. N\u00e9ron's passion for Junie causes him to poison Britannicus and thus, after two years of virtuous government, to inaugurate a tyranny.\nThe characteristic Racinian framework is that of the eternal triangle: two young lovers, a prince and a princess, being thwarted in their love by a third person, usually a queen whose love for the young prince is unreciprocated. Ph\u00e8dre destroys the possibility of a marriage between Hippolyte and Aricie. Bajazet and Atalide are prevented from marrying by the jealousy of Roxane. N\u00e9ron divides Britannicus from Junie. In \"B\u00e9r\u00e9nice\" the amorous couple are kept apart by considerations of state. In \"Andromaque\" the system of unrequited passions borrowed from tragicomedy alters the dramatic scheme, and Hermione destroys a man who has been her fianc\u00e9, but who has remained indifferent to her, and is now marrying a woman who does not love him. The young princes and princesses are agreeable, display varying degrees of innocence and optimism and are the victims of evil machinations and the love/hatred characteristic of Racine.\nThe major roles in Racinian tragedy.\nThe king (Pyrrhus, N\u00e9ron, Titus, Mithridate, Agamemnon, Th\u00e9s\u00e9e) holds the power of life and death over the other characters. Pyrrhus forces Andromaque to choose between marrying him and seeing her son killed. After keeping his fianc\u00e9e waiting in Epirus for a year, he announces his intention of marrying her, only to change his mind almost immediately afterwards. Mithridate discovers Pharnace's love for Monime by spreading a false rumour of his own death. By pretending to renounce his fianc\u00e9e, he finds that she had formerly loved his other son Xiphar\u00e8s. Wrongly informed that Xiphar\u00e8s has been killed fighting Pharnace and the Romans, he orders Monime to take poison. Dying, he unites the two lovers. Th\u00e9s\u00e9e is a rather nebulous character, primarily important in his influence upon the mechanism of the plot. Ph\u00e8dre declares her love to Hippolyte on hearing the false news of his death. His unexpected return throws her into confusion and lends substance to \u0152none's allegations. In his all-too-human blindness, he condemns to death his own son on a charge of which he is innocent. Only Amurat does not actually appear on stage, and yet his presence is constantly felt. His intervention by means of the letter condemning Bajazet to death (IV 3) precipitates the catastrophe.\nThe queen shows greater variations from play to play than anyone else, and is always the most carefully delineated character. Hermione (for she, rather than the pathetic and emotionally stable Andromaque, has a r\u00f4le equivalent to that generally played by the queen) is young, with all the freshness of a first and only love; she is ruthless in using Oreste as her instrument of vengeance; and she is so cruel in her brief moment of triumph that she refuses to intercede for Astyanax's life. Agrippine, an ageing and forlorn woman, \"fille, femme, s\u0153ur et m\u00e8re de vos ma\u00eetres\", who has stopped at nothing in order to put her own son on the throne, vainly tries to reassert her influence over N\u00e9ron by espousing the cause of a prince whom she had excluded from the succession. Roxane, the fiercest and bravest in Racine's gallery of queens, has no compunction in ordering Bajazet's death and indeed banishes him from her presence even before he has finished justifying himself. Clytemnestre is gentle and kind, but quite ineffectual in rescuing her daughter Iphig\u00e9nie from the threat of sacrifice. Ph\u00e8dre, passive and irresolute, allows herself to be led by \u0152none; deeply conscious of the impurity of her love, she sees it as an atavistic trait and a punishment of the gods; and she is so consumed by jealousy that she can do nothing to save her beloved from the curse.\nThe confidants' primary function is to make monologues unnecessary. Only very rarely do they further the action. They invariably reflect the character of their masters and mistresses. Thus, Narcisse and Burrhus symbolize the warring elements of evil and good within the youthful N\u00e9ron. But Narcisse is more than a reflection: he betrays and finally poisons his master Britannicus. Burrhus, on the other hand, is the conventional \"good angel\" of the medieval morality play. He is a much less colourful character than his opposite number. \u0152none, Ph\u00e8dre's evil genius, persuades her mistress to tell Hippolyte of her incestuous passion, and incriminates the young prince on Th\u00e9s\u00e9e's unexpected return. C\u00e9phise, knowing how deeply attached Pyrrhus is to her mistress, urges the despairing Andromaque to make a last appeal to him on her son's behalf, and so changes the course of the play.\nObservance of the dramatic unities.\nRacine observes the dramatic unities more closely than the Greek tragedians had done. The philosopher Aristotle points out the ways in which tragedy differs from epic poetry:\n\"Tragedy generally tries to limit its action to a period of twenty-four hours, or not much exceeding that, whilst epic poetry is unlimited in point of time.\"\nWriting centuries after the great Attic tragedians and using their works as a basis for generalization, he does not insist that the action of a tragedy must be confined to a single revolution of the sun, or that it must take place in one locality. He merely says that this limitation was often practised by writers of tragedy, but he well knew that there were many plays in which no such limitation existed. For instance, \u00c6schylus's \"Agamemnon\" compresses into about fifteen minutes a journey (from Troy to Argos) which must have taken several days.\nNor was the unity of place a general feature of Attic tragedy. \u00c6schylus's \"The Eumenides\" has two settings and in \"The Suppliants\" of Euripides, it is sometimes impossible to tell where the action is taking place at all. But the circumstances of the Greek theatre, which had no curtain and no distinctive scenery and in which the chorus almost always remained on stage throughout the play, were such that it was frequently desirable to confine the action to a single day and a single place.\nThe only rule which Aristotle lays down concerning the dramatic action is that, in common with all other forms of art, a tragedy must have an internal unity, so that every part of it is in an organic relationship to the whole and no part can be changed or left out without detracting from the economy of the play. No dramatic critic has ever dissented from this \"unity of action\"; but the unities of time and place were in fact read into the \"Poetics\" by theoreticians of the New Learning (Jean de La Taille) and other writers (Jean Vauquelin de la Fresnaye and Jean Mairet). The support which the unities received from Cardinal Richelieu eventually secured their complete triumph and Pierre Corneille, who had not conformed to them in his earlier plays, did so from the time of \"Le Cid\" (1636) onwards. But even he found them a tiresome imposition. Only by a very ready suspension of disbelief can we accept that in the space of twenty-four hours El Cid kills Chim\u00e8ne's father in a duel, overwhelms the Moorish invaders during the night and fights a second duel only a few hours after the enemy has fled. These discrepancies \u2013 and others besides, which Corneille admits to in his \"Examen\" of the play \u2013 are obvious even to the most inattentive spectator.\nUnlike his rival, who crams into his plays \"quantit\u00e9 d'incidents qui ne se pourraient passer qu'en un mois\", Racine describes fluctuating states of mind which, in the rapidly mounting tension, are brought abruptly to a crisis from which there is no retreat. The so-called Aristotelian rules happen to suit this type of drama perfectly since they lead the playwright to concentrate the tragic action on those few hours when, after months or years of emotional tension, a new event supervenes and precipitates the catastrophe.\nThe most striking evidence of Racine's success in fitting his tragedies into this very stringent framework is that, when watching them, the audience ceases to be aware that the unities exist. Not long before he wrote \"Ph\u00e8dre\", the same subject had been dealt with by Gabriel Gilbert and Mathieu Bidar, both of whom had kept Hippolyte off stage after Act IV. Racine, on the other hand, brings him into Act V scene 1, the last line of which is only seventy or eighty lines earlier than Th\u00e9ram\u00e8ne's r\u00e9cit in V 6. In the four minutes which these lines take to recite the young prince has gone out with Th\u00e9ram\u00e8ne, has met, fought and been killed by the monster, and Th\u00e9ram\u00e8ne has come back to announce his master's death. Furthermore, Aricie only leaves the stage at the end of V 3, and therefore in the space of two short scenes has met her dying lover on the seashore and has taken her leave of him! These chronological inconsistencies pass unnoticed in the theatre.\nRacine invariably observes the unity of place. A room in Pyrrhus's palace at Buthrotum; an antechamber separating the apartments of Titus and B\u00e9r\u00e9nice in Rome; Agamemnon's camp at Aulis; an antechamber in the temple at Jerusalem: by choosing such vague and remote settings Racine gives his plays a universal character, and the presentation of conflicting and hesitating states of mind is not hampered by an undue insistence on material surroundings. At times, of course, the unity of place leads to slightly far-fetched meetings: why, for instance, does Pyrrhus come to see Oreste (Act I Sc. 2), rather than the other way around, except to conform to this rule? Lastly, the unity of place necessitates the r\u00e9cit and this again is in complete harmony with Racine's fundamental aims: how would \"Andromaque\" gain by our being able to see Pyrrhus and his bride approach and enter the temple? The important fact is the effect of Cl\u00e9one's words upon Hermione. Oreste's relating to Hermione the murder of Pyrrhus is the supreme irony of the play. Th\u00e9ram\u00e8ne's r\u00e9cit describes, in the most memorable and poetic language, an event which would be infinitely less moving if it were to be seen it imperfectly represented upon the stage.\nAs regards the unity of action, Racine differs sharply from William Shakespeare in excluding minor plots (compare the parallel themes of blind and unnatural fatherhood and the retribution it invokes, in \"King Lear\") and in ruling out the comic element. The fact that Act II scene 5 of \"Andromaque\" or many of the scenes of \"Alexandre le Grand\" and \"Mithridate\" have comic undertones is beside the point. Will Andromaque agree to marry Pyrrhus? Will Agamemnon sacrifice Iphig\u00e9nie? Can Esther persuade her husband to spare the Jews? The plots of \"Bajazet\", \"Ph\u00e8dre\" and \"Athalie\" are scarcely more complex than the rest.\nTempo of Racinian tragedy.\nUnlike such plays as \"Hamlet\" and \"The Tempest\", in which a dramatic first scene precedes the exposition, a Racinian tragedy opens very quietly, but even so in a mood of suspense. In \"Andromaque\" Pyrrhus's unenviable wavering between Hermione and the eponymous heroine has been going on for a year and has exasperated all three. Up to the time when \"Britannicus\" begins, N\u00e9ron has been a good ruler, a faithful disciple of Seneca and Burrhus, and a dutiful son; but he is now beginning to show a spirit of independence. With the introduction of a new element (Oreste's demand that Astyanax should be handed over to the Greeks; Junie's abduction; Abner's unconscious disclosure that the time to proclaim Joas has finally come), an already tense situation becomes, or has become, critical. In a darkening atmosphere, a succession of fluctuating states of mind on the part of the main characters brings us to the resolution \u2013 generally in the fourth Act, but not always (\"Bajazet\", \"Athalie\") \u2013 of what by now is an unbearable discordance. Hermione entrusts the killing of Pyrrhus to Oreste; wavers for a moment when the King comes into her presence; then, condemns him with her own mouth. No sooner has Burrhus regained his old ascendancy over N\u00e9ron, and reconciled him with his half-brother, than Narcisse most skilfully overcomes the emperor's scruples of conscience and sets him on a career of vice of which Britannicus's murder is merely the prelude. By the beginning of Act IV of \"Ph\u00e8dre\", \u0152none has besmirched Hippolyte's character, and the Queen does nothing during that Act to exculpate him. With the working-out of a situation usually decided by the end of Act IV, the tragedies move to a swift conclusion.\nTreatment of sources.\nIn the religious plays, Racine is fairly scrupulous in adhering to his Old Testament sources, taking care to put into the mouth of Joad (the Second Jehoiada) only those prophetic utterances that are to be found in the Bible. Nevertheless, he takes advantage of a verse in II \"Chronicles\" XXIV attributing the gift of prophecy to Joad's son Zacharie (Zechariah ben Jehoiada) in order to suppose that the father (whom the Bible does not describe as a prophet) likewise had prophetic powers. And thinking a child of seven \u2013 the age of Joas (Jehoash of Judah) in the Second \"Book of Kings\" \u2013 too young to have the part given him in \"Athalie\", Racine makes him into a boy of nine or ten on the evidence of the Septuagint version of II \"Chronicles\" XXIII 1.\nIn the secular plays, he takes far greater liberties. The frequently conflicting sources of Greek and Roman mythology enable him to fashion the plot he thinks suitable to his characters and, above all, to present the old stories in a modern light. Whereas Euripides, in his \"Iphigenia in Aulis\", averts the heroine's death only by causing Artemis to spirit her away to Tauris, putting a hart in her place on the sacrificial altar. Racine, determined to avoid the miraculous, borrows from a minor Greek writer, the geographer Pausanias, the character of \u00c9riphile. The disclosure that Iphig\u00e9nie's treacherous rival was herself called Iphigeneia at birth and should be sacrificed in the heroine's place prevents a tragic outcome.\nIn creating Andromaque, Racine believes he must \"[se] conformer \u00e0 l'id\u00e9e que nous avons maintenant de cette princesse\". Astyanax, whom Euripides describes (in \"The Trojan Women\" and the \"Andromache\") as having been thrown from the walls of Troy and killed, and whose death is foreshadowed in book 24 of the \"Iliad\", is made to survive the capture of Troy and the extinction of his dynasty. In another respect also, Racine departs from the lines laid down by the \"Andromache\", for whereas in the earlier play the heroine fears that the son she has had by Pyrrhus may suffer death if she refuses to marry the father, the later heroine fears for the life of a legitimate son. The reason for these changes in the Homeric and Euripidean traditions is obvious: if Andromaque had been Pyrrhus's mistress (as in Euripides), why should she refuse to marry him? Racine, like Homer, conceives her as sublimely faithful to Hector; yet the tension (III 8) between maternal love and a reluctance to marry Pyrrhus must (as in Euripides) be paramount. And so Astyanax is brought back to life.\n\"Ph\u00e8dre\" differs from Euripides's \"Hippolytus\" and Seneca the Younger's \"Ph\u00e6dra\" in the very important respect that, taking the character of Aricie from Virgil, Racine introduces the jealousy motive. Despite the fact that Hippolyte, \"ce fils chaste et respectueux\", is indifferent to her, Ph\u00e8dre will not consent to \u0152none's suggesting to Th\u00e9s\u00e9e that the son has made improper advances to the stepmother \u2013 until (IV 5) she discovers that he has loved Aricie all along.\nCriticism.\nRacine's works have evoked in audiences and critics a wide range of responses, ranging from reverence to revulsion. In his book \"Racine: A Study\" (1974), Philip Butler of the University of Wisconsin broke the main criticisms of Racine down by century to show the almost constantly shifting perception of the playwright and his works.\n17th century.\nIn his own time, Racine found himself compared constantly with his contemporaries, especially the great Pierre Corneille. In his own plays, Racine sought to abandon the ornate and almost otherworldly intricacy that Corneille so favored. Audiences and critics were divided over the worth of Racine as an up-and-coming playwright. Audiences admired his return to simplicity and their ability to relate to his more human characters, while critics insisted on judging him according to the traditional standards of Aristotle and his Italian commentators from which he tended to stray. Attitudes shifted, however, as Racine began to eclipse Corneille. In 1674, the highly respected poet and critic Boileau published his \"Art Po\u00e9tique\" which deemed Racine's model of tragedy superior to that of Corneille. This erased all doubts as to Racine's abilities as a dramatist and established him as one of the period's great literary minds.\nButler describes this period as Racine's \"apotheosis,\" his highest point of admiration. Racine's ascent to literary fame coincided with other prodigious cultural and political events in French history. This period saw the rise of literary giants like Moli\u00e8re, Jean de La Fontaine, Boileau, and Fran\u00e7ois de La Rochefoucauld, as well as Louis Le Vau's historic expansion of the Palace of Versailles, Jean-Baptiste Lully's revolution in Baroque music, and most importantly, the ascension of Louis XIV to the throne of France.\nDuring Louis XIV's reign, France rose up from a long period of civil discord (see the Fronde) to new heights of international prominence. Political achievement coincided with cultural and gave birth to an evolution of France's national identity, known as \"l'esprit fran\u00e7ais.\" This new self-perception acknowledged the superiority of all things French; the French believed France was home to the greatest king, the greatest armies, the greatest people, and, subsequently, the greatest culture. In this new national mindset, Racine and his work were practically deified, established as the perfect model of dramatic tragedy by which all other plays would be judged. Butler blames the consequential \"withering\" of French drama on Racine's idolized image, saying that such rigid adherence to one model eventually made all new French drama a stale imitation.\n19th century.\nThe French installation of Racine into the dramatic and literary pantheon evoked harsh criticism from many sources who argued against his 'perfection.' Germans like Friedrich Schiller and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe dismissed Racine as \"h\u00f6fisches Drama,\" or \"courtly drama\" too restricted by the \"\u00e9tiquette\" and conventions of a royal court for the true expression of human passion. French critics, too, revolted. Racine came to be dismissed as merely \"an historical document\" that painted a picture only of 17th century French society and nothing else; there could be nothing new to say about him. However, as writers like Charles Baudelaire and Gustave Flaubert came onto the scene to soundly shake the foundations of French literature, conservative readers retreated to Racine for the nostalgia of his simplicity.\nAs Racine returned to prominence at home, his critics abroad remained hostile due mainly, Butler argues, to Francophobia. The British were especially damning, preferring Shakespeare and Sir Walter Scott to Racine, whom they dismissed as \"didactic\" and \"commonplace.\" This did not trouble the French, however, as \"Racine, La Fontaine, or generally speaking the \"chefs-d'\u0153uvre de l'esprit humain\" could not be understood by foreigners.\"\n20th century.\nThe 20th century saw a renewed effort to rescue Racine and his works from the chiefly historical perspective to which he had been consigned. Critics called attention to the fact that plays such as \"Ph\u00e8dre\" could be interpreted as realist drama, containing characters that were universal and that could appear in any time period. Other critics cast new light upon the underlying themes of violence and scandal that seem to pervade the plays, creating a new angle from which they could be examined. In general, people agreed that Racine would only be fully understood when removed from the context of the 18th century. Jean-Yves Tadi\u00e9 noted that Marcel Proust developed a fondness for Racine at an early age, \"whom he considered a brother and someone very much like himself...\"\nIn his essay, \"The Theatre and Cruelty\", Antonin Artaud claimed that 'the misdeeds of the psychological theater descended from Racine have made us unaccustomed to that immediate and violent action which the theater should possess' (p.\u00a084).\n21st century.\nAt present, Racine is still widely considered a literary genius of revolutionary proportions. His work is still widely read and frequently performed. Racine's influence can be seen in A.S. Byatt's tetralogy (\"The Virgin in the Garden 1978, Still Life 1985, Babel Tower 1997 and A Whistling Woman 2002\"). Byatt tells the story of Frederica Potter, an English young woman in the early 1950s (when she is first introduced), who is very appreciative of Racine, and specifically of \"Phedre\".\nTranslations.\nThe linguistic effects of Racine's poetry are widely considered to be untranslatable, although many eminent poets have attempted to translate Racine's work into English, including Lowell, Richard Wilbur, Ted Hughes, Tony Harrison, and Derek Mahon. Friedrich Schiller translated Racine into the German language, and Monsignor P\u00e1draig de Br\u00fan into the Irish language.\nRacine's plays have been translated into English by Robert David MacDonald, Alan Hollinghurst (\"Berenice\", \"Bajazet\"), by RADA director Edward Kemp (\"Andromache\"), Neil Bartlett, and poet Geoffrey Alan Argent, who earned a 2011 American Book Award for the translating \"The Complete Plays of Jean Racine\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52202", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52202", "title": "Magic square", "text": "Square of numbers with equal row, column and diagonal totals\nIn mathematics, especially historical and recreational mathematics, a square array of numbers, usually positive integers, is called a magic square if the sums of the numbers in each row, each column, and both main diagonals are the same. The \"order\" of the magic square is the number of integers along one side (\"n\"), and the constant sum is called the \"magic constant\". If the array includes just the positive integers formula_1, the magic square is said to be \"normal\". Many authors take magic square to mean normal magic square.\nMagic squares that include repeated entries do not fall under this definition and are referred to as \"trivial\". Some well-known examples, including the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia magic square are trivial in this sense. When all the rows and columns but not both diagonals sum to the magic constant, this gives a \"semimagic square\" (sometimes called \"orthomagic square\").\nThe mathematical study of magic squares typically deals with its construction, classification, and enumeration. Although completely general methods for producing all the magic squares of all orders do not exist, historically three general techniques have been discovered: by bordering, by making composite magic squares, and by adding two preliminary squares. There are also more specific strategies like the continuous enumeration method that reproduces specific patterns. Magic squares are generally classified according to their order \"n\" as: odd if \"n\" is odd, evenly even (also referred to as \"doubly even\") if \"n\" is a multiple of 4, oddly even (also known as \"singly even\") if \"n\" is any other even number. This classification is based on different techniques required to construct odd, evenly even, and oddly even squares. Beside this, depending on further properties, magic squares are also classified as associative magic squares, pandiagonal magic squares, most-perfect magic squares, and so on. More challengingly, attempts have also been made to classify all the magic squares of a given order as transformations of a smaller set of squares. Except for \"n\" \u2264 5, the enumeration of higher-order magic squares is still an open challenge. The enumeration of most-perfect magic squares of any order was only accomplished in the late 20th century.\nMagic squares have a long history, dating back to at least 190 BCE in China. At various times they have acquired occult or mythical significance, and have appeared as symbols in works of art. In modern times they have been generalized a number of ways, including using extra or different constraints, multiplying instead of adding cells, using alternate shapes or more than two dimensions, and replacing numbers with shapes and addition with geometric operations.\nHistory.\nThe third-order magic square was known to Chinese mathematicians as early as 190 BCE, and explicitly given by the first century of the common era. The first dateable instance of the fourth-order magic square occurred in 587 CE in India. Specimens of magic squares of order 3 to 9 appear in an encyclopedia from Baghdad c.\u2009983, the \"Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity\" (\"Rasa'il Ikhwan al-Safa\"). By the end of the 12th century, the general methods for constructing magic squares were well established. Around this time, some of these squares were increasingly used in conjunction with magic letters, as in Shams Al-ma'arif, for occult purposes. In India, all the fourth-order pandiagonal magic squares were enumerated by Narayana in 1356. Magic squares were made known to Europe through translation of Arabic sources as occult objects during the Renaissance, and the general theory had to be re-discovered independent of prior developments in China, India, and Middle East. Also notable are the ancient cultures with a tradition of mathematics and numerology that did not discover the magic squares: Greeks, Babylonians, Egyptians, and Pre-Columbian Americans.\nChina.\nWhile ancient references to the pattern of even and odd numbers in the 3\u00d73 magic square appear in the \"I Ching\", the first unequivocal instance of this magic square appears in the chapter called \"Mingtang\" (Bright Hall) of a 1st-century book \"Da Dai Liji\" (Record of Rites by the Elder Dai), which purported to describe ancient Chinese rites of the Zhou dynasty. \n These numbers also occur in a possibly earlier mathematical text called \"Shushu jiyi\" (Memoir on Some Traditions of Mathematical Art), said to be written in 190 BCE. This is the earliest appearance of a magic square on record; and it was mainly used for divination and astrology. The 3\u00d73 magic square was referred to as the \"Nine Halls\" by earlier Chinese mathematicians. The identification of the 3\u00d73 magic square to the legendary Luoshu chart was only made in the 12th century, after which it was referred to as the Luoshu square. The oldest surviving Chinese treatise that displays magic squares of order larger than 3 is Yang Hui's \"Xugu zheqi suanfa\" (Continuation of Ancient Mathematical Methods for Elucidating the Strange) written in 1275. The contents of Yang Hui's treatise were collected from older works, both native and foreign; and he only explains the construction of third and fourth-order magic squares, while merely passing on the finished diagrams of larger squares. He gives a magic square of order 3, two squares for each order of 4 to 8, one of order nine, and one semi-magic square of order 10. He also gives six magic circles of varying complexity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe above magic squares of orders 3 to 9 are taken from Yang Hui's treatise, in which the Luo Shu principle is clearly evident. The order 5 square is a bordered magic square, with central 3\u00d73 square formed according to Luo Shu principle. The order 9 square is a composite magic square, in which the nine 3\u00d73 sub squares are also magic. After Yang Hui, magic squares frequently occur in Chinese mathematics such as in Ding Yidong's \"Dayan suoyin\" (c.\u20091300), Cheng Dawei's \"Suanfa tongzong\" (1593), Fang Zhongtong's \"Shuduyan\" (1661) which contains magic circles, cubes and spheres, Zhang Chao's \"Xinzhai zazu\" (c.\u20091650), who published China's first magic square of order ten, and lastly Bao Qishou's \"Binaishanfang ji\" (c.\u20091880), who gave various three dimensional magic configurations. However, despite being the first to discover the magic squares and getting a head start by several centuries, the Chinese development of the magic squares are much inferior compared to the Indian, Middle Eastern, or European developments. The high point of Chinese mathematics that deals with the magic squares seems to be contained in the work of Yang Hui; but even as a collection of older methods, this work is much more primitive, lacking general methods for constructing magic squares of any order, compared to a similar collection written around the same time by the Byzantine scholar Manuel Moschopoulos. This is possibly because of the Chinese scholars' enthralment with the Lo Shu principle, which they tried to adapt to solve higher squares; and after Yang Hui and the fall of Yuan dynasty, their systematic purging of the foreign influences in Chinese mathematics.\nJapan.\nJapan and China have similar mathematical traditions and have repeatedly influenced each other in the history of magic squares. The Japanese interest in magic squares began after the dissemination of Chinese works\u2014Yang Hui's \"Suanfa\" and Cheng Dawei's \"Suanfa tongzong\"\u2014in the 17th century, and as a result, almost all the \"wasans\" devoted their time to its study.\nIn the 1660 edition of \"Ketsugi-sho\", Isomura Kittoku gave both odd and even ordered bordered magic squares as well as magic circles; while the 1684 edition of the same book contained a large section on magic squares, demonstrating that he had a general method for constructing bordered magic squares. In \"Jinko-ki\" (1665) by Muramatsu Kudayu Mosei, both magic squares and magic circles are displayed. The largest square Mosei constructs is of 19th order. Various magic squares and magic circles were also published by Nozawa Teicho in \"Dokai-sho\" (1666), Sato Seiko in \"Kongenki\" (1666), and Hosino Sanenobu in \"Ko-ko-gen Sho\" (1673). One of Seki Takakazu's \"Seven Books\" (\"Hojin Yensan\") (1683) is devoted completely to magic squares and circles. This is the first Japanese book to give a general treatment of magic squares in which the algorithms for constructing odd, singly even and doubly even bordered magic squares are clearly described. In 1694 and 1695, Yueki Ando gave different methods to create the magic squares and displayed squares of order 3 to 30. A fourth-order magic cube was constructed by Yoshizane Tanaka (1651\u20131719) in \"Rakusho-kikan\" (1683). The study of magic squares was continued by Seki's pupils, notably by Katahiro Takebe, whose squares were displayed in the fourth volume of \"Ichigen Kappo\" by Shukei Irie, Yoshisuke Matsunaga in \"Hojin-Shin-jutsu\", Yoshihiro Kurushima in \"Kyushi Iko\" who rediscovered a method to produce the odd squares given by Agrippa, and Naonobu Ajima. Thus by the beginning of the 18th century, the Japanese mathematicians were in possession of methods to construct magic squares of arbitrary order. After this, attempts at enumerating the magic squares was initiated by Nushizumi Yamaji.\nIndia.\nThe 3\u00d73 magic square first appears in India in \"Gargasamhita\" by Garga, who recommends its use to pacify the nine planets (\"navagraha\"). The oldest version of this text dates from 100 CE, but the passage on planets could not have been written earlier than 400 CE. The first dateable instance of 3\u00d73 magic square in India occur in a medical text \"Siddhayog\" (c.\u2009966 CE) by Vrnda, which was prescribed to women in labor in order to have easy delivery.\nThe oldest dateable fourth order magic square in the world is found in an encyclopaedic work written by Varahamihira around 587 CE called \"Brhat Samhita\". The magic square is constructed for the purpose of making perfumes using 4 substances selected from 16 different substances. Each cell of the square represents a particular ingredient, while the number in the cell represents the proportion of the associated ingredient, such that the mixture of any four combination of ingredients along the columns, rows, diagonals, and so on, gives the total volume of the mixture to be 18. Although the book is mostly about divination, the magic square is given as a matter of combinatorial design, and no magical properties are attributed to it. The special features of this magic square were commented on by Bhattotpala (c.\u2009900 CE) \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe square of Varahamihira as given above has sum of 18. Here the numbers 1 to 8 appear twice in the square. It is a pan-diagonal magic square. Four different magic squares can be obtained by adding 8 to one of the two sets of 1 to 8 sequence. The sequence is selected such that the number 8 is added exactly twice in each row, each column and each of the main diagonals. One of the possible magic squares shown in the right side. This magic square is remarkable in that it is a 90 degree rotation of a magic square that appears in the 13th century Islamic world as one of the most popular magic squares.\nThe construction of 4th-order magic square is detailed in a work titled \"Kaksaputa\", composed by the alchemist Nagarjuna around 10th century CE. All of the squares given by Nagarjuna are 4\u00d74 magic squares, and one of them is called \"Nagarjuniya\" after him. Nagarjuna gave a method of constructing 4\u00d74 magic square using a primary skeleton square, given an odd or even magic sum. The Nagarjuniya square is given below, and has the sum total of 100.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Nagarjuniya square is a pan-diagonal magic square. It is made up of two arithmetic progressions starting from 6 and 16 with eight terms each, with a common difference between successive terms as 4. When these two progressions are reduced to the normal progression of 1 to 8, the adjacent square is obtained.\nAround 12th-century, a 4\u00d74 magic square was inscribed on the wall of Parshvanath temple in Khajuraho, India. Several Jain hymns teach how to make magic squares, although they are undateable.\nAs far as is known, the first systematic study of magic squares in India was conducted by Thakkar Pheru, a Jain scholar, in his \"Ganitasara Kaumudi\" (c. 1315). This work contains a small section on magic squares which consists of nine verses. Here he gives a square of order four, and alludes to its rearrangement; classifies magic squares into three (odd, evenly even, and oddly even) according to its order; gives a square of order six; and prescribes one method each for constructing even and odd squares. For the even squares, Pheru divides the square into component squares of order four, and puts the numbers into cells according to the pattern of a standard square of order four. For odd squares, Pheru gives the method using horse move or knight's move. Although algorithmically different, it gives the same square as the De la Loubere's method.\nThe next comprehensive work on magic squares was taken up by Narayana Pandit, who in the fourteenth chapter of his \"Ganita Kaumudi\" (1356) gives general methods for their construction, along with the principles governing such constructions. It consists of 55 verses for rules and 17 verses for examples. Narayana gives a method to construct all the pan-magic squares of fourth order using knight's move; enumerates the number of pan-diagonal magic squares of order four, 384, including every variation made by rotation and reflection; three general methods for squares having any order and constant sum when a standard square of the same order is known; two methods each for constructing evenly even, oddly even, and odd squares when the sum is given. While Narayana describes one older method for each species of square, he claims the method of superposition for evenly even and odd squares and a method of interchange for oddly even squares to be his own invention. The superposition method was later re-discovered by De la Hire in Europe. In the last section, he conceives of other figures, such as circles, rectangles, and hexagons, in which the numbers may be arranged to possess properties similar to those of magic squares. Below are some of the magic squares constructed by Narayana:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe order 8 square is interesting in itself since it is an instance of the most-perfect magic square. Incidentally, Narayana states that the purpose of studying magic squares is to construct \"yantra\", to destroy the ego of bad mathematicians, and for the pleasure of good mathematicians. The subject of magic squares is referred to as \"bhadraganita\" and Narayana states that it was first taught to men by god Shiva.\nMiddle East, North Africa, Muslim Iberia.\nAlthough the early history of magic squares in Persia and Arabia is not known, it has been suggested that they were known in pre-Islamic times. It is clear, however, that the study of magic squares was common in medieval Islam, and it was thought to have begun after the introduction of chess into the region. The first dateable appearance of a magic square of order 3 occurs in J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n's (fl. c. 721 \u2013 c. 815) \"Kitab al-mawazin al-Saghir\" (The Small Book of Balances) where the magic square and its related numerology is associated with alchemy. While it is known that treatises on magic squares were written in the 9th century, the earliest extant treaties date from the 10th-century: one by Abu'l-Wafa al-Buzjani (c.\u2009998) and another by Ali b. Ahmad al-Antaki (c.\u2009987). These early treatises were purely mathematical, and the Arabic designation for magic squares used is \"wafq al-a'dad\", which translates as \"harmonious disposition of the numbers\". By the end of 10th century, the two treatises by Buzjani and Antaki makes it clear that the Middle Eastern mathematicians had understood how to construct bordered squares of any order as well as simple magic squares of small orders (\"n\" \u2264 6) which were used to make composite magic squares. A specimen of magic squares of orders 3 to 9 devised by Middle Eastern mathematicians appear in an encyclopedia from Baghdad c.\u2009983, the Rasa'il Ikhwan al-Safa (the \"Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity\"). The squares of order 3 to 7 from Rasa'il are given below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 11th century saw the finding of several ways to construct simple magic squares for odd and evenly even orders; the more difficult case of oddly even case (\"n = 4k + 2\") was solved by Ibn al-Haytham with \"k\" even (c. 1040), and completely by the beginning of 12th century, if not already in the latter half of the 11th century. Around the same time, pandiagonal squares were being constructed. Treaties on magic squares were numerous in the 11th and 12th century. These later developments tended to be improvements on or simplifications of existing methods. From the 13th century onwards, magic squares were increasingly put to occult purposes. However, much of these later texts written for occult purposes merely depict certain magic squares and mention their attributes, without describing their principle of construction, with only some authors keeping the general theory alive. One such occultist was the Algerian Ahmad al-Buni (c. 1225), who gave general methods on constructing bordered magic squares; some others were the 17th century Egyptian Shabramallisi and the 18th century Nigerian al-Kishnawi.\nThe magic square of order three was described as a child-bearing charm since its first literary appearances in the alchemical works of J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n (fl. c. 721 \u2013 c. 815) and al-Ghaz\u0101l\u012b (1058\u20131111) and it was preserved in the tradition of the planetary tables. The earliest occurrence of the association of seven magic squares to the virtues of the seven heavenly bodies appear in Andalusian scholar Ibn Zarkali's (known as Azarquiel in Europe) (1029\u20131087) \"Kit\u0101b tadb\u012br\u0101t al-kaw\u0101kib\" (\"Book on the Influences of the Planets\"). A century later, the Algerian scholar Ahmad al-Buni attributed mystical properties to magic squares in his highly influential book \"Shams al-Ma'arif\" (\"The Book of the Sun of Gnosis and the Subtleties of Elevated Things\"), which also describes their construction. This tradition about a series of magic squares from order three to nine, which are associated with the seven planets, survives in Greek, Arabic, and Latin versions. There are also references to the use of magic squares in astrological calculations, a practice that seems to have originated with the Arabs.\nLatin Europe.\nUnlike in Persia and Arabia, better documentation exists of how the magic squares were transmitted to Europe. Around 1315, influenced by Arab sources, the Greek Byzantine scholar Manuel Moschopoulos wrote a mathematical treatise on the subject of magic squares, leaving out the mysticism of his Middle Eastern predecessors, where he gave two methods for odd squares and two methods for evenly even squares. Moschopoulos was essentially unknown to the Latin Europe until the late 17th century, when Philippe de la Hire rediscovered his treatise in the Royal Library of Paris. However, he was not the first European to have written on magic squares; and the magic squares were disseminated to rest of Europe through Spain and Italy as occult objects. The early occult treaties that displayed the squares did not describe how they were constructed. Thus the entire theory had to be rediscovered.\nMagic squares had first appeared in Europe in \"Kit\u0101b tadb\u012br\u0101t al-kaw\u0101kib\" (\"Book on the Influences of the Planets\") written by Ibn Zarkali of Toledo, Al-Andalus, as planetary squares by 11th century. The magic square of three was discussed in numerological manner in early 12th century by Jewish scholar Abraham ibn Ezra of Toledo, which influenced later Kabbalists. Ibn Zarkali's work was translated as \"Libro de Astromagia\" in the 1280s, due to Alfonso X of Castille. In the Alfonsine text, magic squares of different orders are assigned to the respective planets, as in the Islamic literature; unfortunately, of all the squares discussed, the Mars magic square of order five is the only square exhibited in the manuscript.\nMagic squares surface again in Florence, Italy in the 14th century. A 6\u00d76 and a 9\u00d79 square are exhibited in a manuscript of the \"Trattato d'Abbaco\" (Treatise of the Abacus) by Paolo Dagomari. It is interesting to observe that Paolo Dagomari, like Pacioli after him, refers to the squares as a useful basis for inventing mathematical questions and games, and does not mention any magical use. Incidentally, though, he also refers to them as being respectively the Sun's and the Moon's squares, and mentions that they enter astrological calculations that are not better specified. As said, the same point of view seems to motivate the fellow Florentine Luca Pacioli, who describes 3\u00d73 to 9\u00d79 squares in his work \"De Viribus Quantitatis\" by the end of 15th century.\nEurope after 15th century.\nThe planetary squares had disseminated into northern Europe by the end of the 15th century. For instance, the Cracow manuscript of \"Picatrix\" from Poland displays magic squares of orders 3 to 9. The same set of squares as in the Cracow manuscript later appears in the writings of Paracelsus in \"Archidoxa Magica\" (1567), although in highly garbled form. In 1514 Albrecht D\u00fcrer immortalized a 4\u00d74 square in his famous engraving \"Melencolia I.\" Paracelsus' contemporary Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim published his famous three volume book \"De occulta philosophia\" in 1531, where he devoted Chapter 22 of Book II to the planetary squares shown below. The same set of squares given by Agrippa reappear in 1539 in \"Practica Arithmetice\" by Girolamo Cardano, where he explains the construction of the odd ordered squares using \"diamond method\", which was later reproduced by Bachet. The tradition of planetary squares was continued into the 17th century by Athanasius Kircher in \"Oedipi Aegyptici\" (1653). In Germany, mathematical treaties concerning magic squares were written in 1544 by Michael Stifel in \"Arithmetica Integra\", who rediscovered the bordered squares, and Adam Riese, who rediscovered the continuous numbering method to construct odd ordered squares published by Agrippa. However, due to the religious upheavals of that time, these works were unknown to the rest of Europe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1624 France, Claude Gaspard Bachet described the \"diamond method\" for constructing Agrippa's odd ordered squares in his book \"Probl\u00e8mes Plaisants\". During 1640 Bernard Frenicle de Bessy and Pierre Fermat exchanged letters on magic squares and cubes, and in one of the letters Fermat boasts of being able to construct 1,004,144,995,344 magic squares of order 8 by his method. An early account on the construction of bordered squares was given by Antoine Arnauld in his \"Nouveaux \u00e9l\u00e9ments de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie\" (1667). In the two treatise \"Des quarrez ou tables magiques\" and \"Table g\u00e9n\u00e9rale des quarrez magiques de quatre de c\u00f4t\u00e9\", published posthumously in 1693, twenty years after his death, Bernard Frenicle de Bessy demonstrated that there were exactly 880 distinct magic squares of order four. Frenicle gave methods to construct magic square of any odd and even order, where the even ordered squares were constructed using borders. He also showed that interchanging rows and columns of a magic square produced new magic squares. In 1691, Simon de la Loub\u00e8re described the Indian continuous method of constructing odd ordered magic squares in his book \"Du Royaume de Siam\", which he had learned while returning from a diplomatic mission to Siam, which was faster than Bachet's method. In an attempt to explain its working, de la Loubere used the primary numbers and root numbers, and rediscovered the method of adding two preliminary squares. This method was further investigated by Abbe Poignard in \"Trait\u00e9 des quarr\u00e9s sublimes\" (1704), by Philippe de La Hire in \"M\u00e9moires de l'Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences\" for the Royal Academy (1705), and by Joseph Sauveur in \"Construction des quarr\u00e9s magiques\" (1710). Concentric bordered squares were also studied by De la Hire in 1705, while Sauveur introduced magic cubes and lettered squares, which was taken up later by Euler in 1776, who is often credited for devising them. In 1750 d'Ons-le-Bray rediscovered the method of constructing doubly even and singly even squares using bordering technique; while in 1767 Benjamin Franklin published a semi-magic square which had the properties of eponymous Franklin square. By this time the earlier mysticism attached to the magic squares had completely vanished, and the subject was treated as a part of recreational mathematics.\nIn the 19th century, Bernard Violle gave a comprehensive treatment of magic squares in his three volume \"Trait\u00e9 complet des carr\u00e9s magiques\" (1837\u20131838), which also described magic cubes, parallelograms, parallelopipeds, and circles. Pandiagonal squares were extensively studied by Andrew Hollingworth Frost, who learned it while in the town of Nasik, India, (thus calling them Nasik squares) in a series of articles: \"On the knight's path\" (1877), \"On the General Properties of Nasik Squares\" (1878), \"On the General Properties of Nasik Cubes\" (1878), \"On the construction of Nasik Squares of any order\" (1896). He showed that it is impossible to have normal singly-even pandiagonal magic square. Frederick A.P. Barnard constructed inlaid magic squares and other three dimensional magic figures like magic spheres and magic cylinders in \"Theory of magic squares and of magic cubes\" (1888). In 1897, Emroy McClintock published \"On the most perfect form of magic squares\", coining the words \"pandiagonal square\" and \"most perfect square\", which had previously been referred to as perfect, or diabolic, or Nasik.\nSome famous magic squares.\nLuo Shu magic square.\nLegends dating from as early as 650 BCE tell the story of the Lo Shu (\u6d1b\u66f8) or \"scroll of the river Lo\". According to the legend, there was at one time in ancient China a huge flood. While the great king Yu was trying to channel the water out to sea, a turtle emerged from it with a curious pattern on its shell: a 3\u00d73 grid in which circular dots of numbers were arranged, such that the sum of the numbers in each row, column and diagonal was the same: 15. According to the legend, thereafter people were able to use this pattern in a certain way to control the river and protect themselves from floods. The Lo Shu Square, as the magic square on the turtle shell is called, is the unique normal magic square of order three in which 1 is at the bottom and 2 is in the upper right corner. Every normal magic square of order three is obtained from the Lo Shu by rotation or reflection.\nMagic square in Parshavnath temple.\nThere is a well-known 12th-century 4\u00d74 normal magic square inscribed on the wall of the Parshvanath temple in Khajuraho, India.\nThis is known as the \"Chautisa Yantra\" (\"Chautisa\", 34; \"Yantra\", lit. \"device\"), since its magic sum is 34. It is one of the three 4\u00d74 pandiagonal magic squares and is also an instance of the most-perfect magic square. The study of this square led to the appreciation of pandiagonal squares by European mathematicians in the late 19th century. Pandiagonal squares were referred to as Nasik squares or Jain squares in older English literature.\nAlbrecht D\u00fcrer's magic square.\nThe order four normal magic square Albrecht D\u00fcrer immortalized in his 1514 engraving \"Melencolia I\", referred to above, is believed to be the first seen in European art. The square associated with Jupiter appears as a talisman used to drive away melancholy. It is very similar to Yang Hui's square, which was created in China about 250 years before D\u00fcrer's time. As with every order 4 normal magic square, the magic sum is 34. But in the Durer square this sum is also found \nin each of the quadrants, in the center four squares, and in the corner squares (of the 4\u00d74 as well as the four contained 3\u00d73 grids). This sum can also be found in the four outer numbers clockwise from the corners (3+8+14+9) and likewise the four counter-clockwise (the locations of four queens in the two solutions of the 4 queens puzzle), the two sets of four symmetrical numbers (2+8+9+15 and 3+5+12+14), the sum of the middle two entries of the two outer columns and rows (5+9+8+12 and 3+2+15+14), and in four kite or cross shaped quartets (3+5+11+15, 2+10+8+14, 3+9+7+15, and 2+6+12+14). The two numbers in the middle of the bottom row give the date of the engraving: 1514. The numbers 1 and 4 at either side of the date correspond respectively to the letters \"A\" and \"D\", the initials of the artist.\nD\u00fcrer's magic square can also be extended to a magic cube.\nSagrada Fam\u00edlia magic square.\nThe Passion fa\u00e7ade of the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia church in Barcelona, conceptualized by Antoni Gaud\u00ed and designed by sculptor Josep Subirachs, features a trivial order 4 magic square: The magic constant of the square is 33, the age of Jesus at the time of the Passion. Structurally, it is very similar to the Melancholia magic square, but it has had the numbers in four of the cells reduced by 1.\nTrivial squares such as this one are not generally mathematically interesting and only have historical significance. Lee Sallows has pointed out that, due to Subirachs's ignorance of magic square theory, the renowned sculptor made a needless blunder, and supports this assertion by giving several examples of non-trivial 4\u00d74 magic squares showing the desired magic constant of 33.\nSimilarly to D\u00fcrer's magic square, the Sagrada Familia's magic square can also be extended to a magic cube.\nProperties of magic squares.\nMagic constant.\nThe constant that is the sum of any row, or column, or diagonal is called the magic constant or magic sum, \"M.\" Every normal magic square has a constant dependent on the order n, calculated by the formula formula_2. This can be demonstrated by noting that the sum of formula_1 is formula_4. Since the sum of each row is formula_5, the sum of formula_6 rows is formula_7, which when divided by the order n yields the magic constant as formula_2. For normal magic squares of orders \"n\" = 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, the magic constants are, respectively: 15, 34, 65, 111, 175, and 260 (sequence in the OEIS).\nMagic square of order 1 is trivial.\nThe 1\u00d71 magic square, with only one cell containing the number 1, is called \"trivial\", because it is typically not under consideration when discussing magic squares; but it is indeed a magic square by definition, if a single cell is regarded as a square of order one.\nMagic square of order 2 cannot be constructed.\nNormal magic squares of all sizes can be constructed except 2\u00d72 (that is, where order \"n\" = 2).\nCenter of mass.\nIf the numbers in the magic square are seen as masses located in various cells, then the center of mass of a magic square coincides with its geometric center.\nMoment of inertia.\nThe \"moment of inertia\" of a magic square has been defined as the sum over all cells of the number in the cell times the squared distance from the center of the cell to the center of the square; here the unit of measurement is the width of one cell. (Thus for example a corner cell of a 3\u00d73 square has a distance of formula_9 a non-corner edge cell has a distance of 1, and the center cell has a distance of 0.) Then all magic squares of a given order have the same moment of inertia as each other. For the order-3 case the moment of inertia is always 60, while for the order-4 case the moment of inertia is always 340. In general, for the \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" case the moment of inertia is formula_10\nBirkhoff\u2013von Neumann decomposition.\nDividing each number of the magic square by the magic constant will yield a doubly stochastic matrix, whose row sums and column sums equal to unity. However, unlike the doubly stochastic matrix, the diagonal sums of such matrices will also equal to unity. Thus, such matrices constitute a subset of doubly stochastic matrix. The Birkhoff\u2013von Neumann theorem states that for any doubly stochastic matrix formula_11, there exists real numbers formula_12, where formula_13 and permutation matrices formula_14 such that\nformula_15\nThis representation may not be unique in general. By Marcus-Ree theorem, however, there need not be more than formula_16 terms in any decomposition. Clearly, this decomposition carries over to magic squares as well, since a magic square can be recovered from a doubly stochastic matrix by multiplying it by the magic constant.\nClassification of magic squares.\nWhile the classification of magic squares can be done in many ways, some useful categories are given below. An \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" square array of integers 1, 2, ..., \"n\"2 is called:\nEnumeration of magic squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in mathematics\nMore unsolved problems in mathematics\nThere is only one (trivial) magic square of order 1 and no magic square of order 2. As mentioned above, the set of normal squares of order three constitutes a single equivalence class-all equivalent to the Lo Shu square. Thus there is basically just one normal magic square of order 3.\nThe number of different \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" magic squares for \"n\" from 1 to 6, not counting rotations and reflections is:\n 1, 0, 1, 880, 275305224, 17753889197660635632. (sequence in the OEIS)\nCross-referenced to the above sequence, a new classification enumerates the magic tori that display these magic squares. The number of magic tori of order \"n\" from 1 to 5, is: \n 1, 0, 1, 255, 251449712 (sequence in the OEIS).\nThe number of distinct normal magic squares rapidly increases for higher orders.\nThe 880 magic squares of order 4 are displayed on 255 magic tori of order 4 and the 275,305,224 squares of order 5 are displayed on 251,449,712 magic tori of order 5. The numbers of magic tori and distinct normal squares are not yet known for orders beyond 5 and 6, respectively.\nAlgorithms tend to only generate magic squares of a certain type or classification, making counting all possible magic squares quite difficult. Since traditional counting methods have proven unsuccessful, statistical analysis using the Monte Carlo method has been applied. The basic principle applied to magic squares is to randomly generate \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrices of elements 1 to \"n\"2 and check if the result is a magic square. The probability that a randomly generated matrix of numbers is a magic square is then used to approximate the number of magic squares.\nMore intricate versions of the Monte Carlo method, such as the exchange Monte Carlo, and Monte Carlo backtracking have produced even more accurate estimations. Using these methods it has been shown that the probability of magic squares decreases rapidly as n increases. Using fitting functions give the curves seen to the right.\nTransformations that preserve the magic property.\nFor any magic square.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nformula_17\nwhere \"a\" is the initial term, \"c\" is the common difference of the arithmetic progressions, and \"d\" is the common difference among the initial terms of each progression. The new magic constant will be \nformula_18\nIf \"s\" = \"r\" = \"n\", then we have the simplification\nformula_19\nIf we further have \"a\" = \"c\" = 1 and \"d\" = \"n\", we obtain the usual \"M\" = \"n\"(\"n\"2+1)/2. For given \"M\" we can find the required \"a\", \"c\", and \"d\" by solving the linear Diophantine equation. In the examples below, we have order 4 normal magic square on the left most side. The second square is a corresponding non-normal magic square with \"r\" = 8, \"s\" = 2, \"a\" = 1, \"c\" = 1, and \"d\" = 10 such that the new magic constant is \"M\" = 38. The third square is an order 5 normal magic square, which is a 90 degree clockwise rotated version of the square generated by De la Loubere method. On the right most side is a corresponding non-normal magic square with \"a\" = 4, \"c\" = 1, and \"d\" = 6 such that the new magic constant is \"M\" = 90. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor associative magic squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor pan-diagonal magic squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor bordered magic squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecial methods of construction.\nOver the millennia, many ways to construct magic squares have been discovered. These methods can be classified as general methods and special methods, in the sense that general methods allow us to construct more than a single magic square of a given order, whereas special methods allow us to construct just one magic square of a given order. Special methods are specific algorithms whereas general methods may require some trial-and-error.\nSpecial methods are the most simple ways to construct magic squares. They follow certain algorithms which generate regular patterns of numbers in a square. The correctness of these special methods can be proved using one of the general methods given in later sections. After a magic square has been constructed using a special method, the transformations described in the previous section can be applied to yield further magic squares. Special methods are usually referred to using the name of the author(s) (if known) who described the method, for e.g. De la Loubere's method, Starchey's method, Bachet's method, etc.\nMagic squares are believed to exist for all orders, except for order 2. Magic squares can be classified according to their order as odd, doubly even (\"n\" divisible by four), and singly even (\"n\" even, but not divisible by four). This classification is based on the fact that entirely different techniques need to be employed to construct these different species of squares. Odd and doubly even magic squares are easy to generate; the construction of singly even magic squares is more difficult but several methods exist, including John Horton Conway's LUX method for magic squares and the Strachey method for magic squares.\nA method for constructing a magic square of order 3.\nIn the 19th century, \u00c9douard Lucas devised the general formula for order 3 magic squares. Consider the following table made up of positive integers \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\":\nThese nine numbers will be distinct positive integers forming a magic square with the magic constant 3\"c\" so long as 0 &lt; \"a\" &lt; \"b\" &lt; \"c\" \u2212 \"a\" and \"b\" \u2260 2\"a\". Moreover, every 3\u00d73 magic square of distinct positive integers is of this form.\nIn 1997 Lee Sallows discovered that leaving aside rotations and reflections, then every distinct parallelogram drawn on the Argand diagram defines a unique 3\u00d73 magic square, and vice versa, a result that had never previously been noted.\nA method for constructing a magic square of odd order.\nA method for constructing magic squares of odd order was published by the French diplomat de la Loub\u00e8re in his book, \"A new historical relation of the kingdom of Siam\" (Du Royaume de Siam, 1693), in the chapter entitled \"The problem of the magical square according to the Indians\". The method operates as follows:\nThe method prescribes starting in the central column of the first row with the number 1. After that, the fundamental movement for filling the squares is diagonally up and right, one step at a time. If a square is filled with a multiple of the order \"n\", one moves vertically down one square instead, then continues as before. When an \"up and to the right\" move would leave the square, it is wrapped around to the last row or first column, respectively.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStarting from other squares rather than the central column of the first row is possible, but then only the row and column sums will be identical and result in a magic sum, whereas the diagonal sums will differ. The result will thus be a semimagic square and not a true magic square. Moving in directions other than north east can also result in magic squares.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA method of constructing a magic square of doubly even order.\nDoubly even means that \"n\" is an even multiple of an even integer; or 4\"p\" (e.g. 4, 8, 12), where \"p\" is an integer.\nGeneric pattern.\nAll the numbers are written in order from left to right across each row in turn, starting from the top left hand corner. Numbers are then either retained in the same place or interchanged with their diametrically opposite numbers in a certain regular pattern. In the magic square of order four, the numbers in the four central squares and one square at each corner are retained in the same place and the others are interchanged with their diametrically opposite numbers.\nA construction of a magic square of order 4.\nStarting from top left, go left to right through each row of the square, counting each cell from 1 to 16 and filling the cells along the diagonals with its corresponding number. Once the bottom right cell is reached, continue by going right to left, starting from the bottom right of the table through each row, and fill in the non-diagonal cells counting up from 1 to 16 with its corresponding number. As shown below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAn extension of the above example for Orders 8 and 12.\nFirst generate a pattern table, where a '1' indicates selecting from the square where the numbers are written in order 1 to n2 (left-to-right, top-to-bottom), and a '0' indicates selecting from the square where the numbers are written in reverse order \"n\"2 to 1. For \"M\" = 4, the pattern table is as shown below (third matrix from left). With the unaltered cells (cells with '1') shaded, a criss-cross pattern is obtained.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe patterns are a) there are equal number of '1's and '0's in each row and column; b) each row and each column are \"palindromic\"; c) the left- and right-halves are mirror images; and d) the top- and bottom-halves are mirror images (c and d imply b). The pattern table can be denoted using hexadecimals as (9, 6, 6, 9) for simplicity (1-nibble per row, 4 rows). The simplest method of generating the required pattern for higher ordered doubly even squares is to copy the generic pattern for the fourth-order square in each four-by-four sub-squares.\nFor M = 8, possible choices for the pattern are (99, 66, 66, 99, 99, 66, 66, 99); (3C, 3C, C3, C3, C3, C3, 3C, 3C); (A5, 5A, A5, 5A, 5A, A5, 5A, A5) (2-nibbles per row, 8 rows).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor M = 12, the pattern table (E07, E07, E07, 1F8, 1F8, 1F8, 1F8, 1F8, 1F8, E07, E07, E07) yields a magic square (3-nibbles per row, 12 rows.) It is possible to count the number of choices one has based on the pattern table, taking rotational symmetries into account.\nMethod of superposition.\nThe earliest discovery of the superposition method was made by the Indian mathematician Narayana in the 14th century. The same method was later re-discovered and studied in early 18th century Europe by de la Loubere, Poignard, de La Hire, and Sauveur; and the method is usually referred to as de la Hire's method. Although Euler's work on magic square was unoriginal, he famously conjectured the impossibility of constructing the evenly odd ordered mutually orthogonal Graeco-Latin squares. This conjecture was disproved in the mid 20th century. For clarity of exposition, two important variations of this method can be distinguished.\nEuler's method.\nThis method consists in constructing two preliminary squares, which when added together gives the magic square. As a running example, a 3\u00d73 magic square is considered. Each number of the 3\u00d73 natural square by a pair of numbers can be labeled as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere every pair of Greek and Latin alphabets, e.g. \"\u03b1a\", are meant to be added together, i.e. \"\u03b1a\" = \"\u03b1\" + \"a\". Here, (\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\") = (0, 3, 6) and (\"a\", \"b\", \"c\") = (1, 2, 3). The numbers 0, 3, and 6 are referred to as the \"root numbers\" while the numbers 1, 2, and 3 are referred to as the \"primary numbers\". An important general constraint here is\nThus, the original square can now be split into two simpler squares:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe lettered squares are referred to as \"Greek square\" or \"Latin square\" if they are filled with Greek or Latin letters, respectively. A magic square can be constructed by ensuring that the Greek and Latin squares are magic squares too. The converse of this statement is also often, but not always (e.g. bordered magic squares), true: A magic square can be decomposed into a Greek and a Latin square, which are themselves magic squares. Thus the method is useful for both synthesis as well as analysis of a magic square. Lastly, by examining the pattern in which the numbers are laid out in the finished square, it is often possible to come up with a faster algorithm to construct higher order squares that replicate the given pattern, without the necessity of creating the preliminary Greek and Latin squares.\nDuring the construction of the 3\u00d73 magic square, the Greek and Latin squares with just three unique terms are much easier to deal with than the original square with nine different terms. The row sum and the column sum of the Greek square will be the same, \"\u03b1\" + \"\u03b2\" + \"\u03b3\", if\nThis can be achieved by cyclic permutation of \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", and \"\u03b3\". Satisfaction of these two conditions ensures that the resulting square is a semi-magic square; and such Greek and Latin squares are said to be \"mutually orthogonal\" to each other. For a given order \"n\", there are at most \"n\" \u2212 1 squares in a set of mutually orthogonal squares, not counting the variations due to permutation of the symbols. This upper bound is exact when \"n\" is a prime number.\nIn order to construct a magic square, we should also ensure that the diagonals sum to magic constant. For this, we have a third condition:\nThe mutually orthogonal Greek and Latin squares that satisfy the first part of the third condition (that all letters appear in both the diagonals) are said to be \"mutually orthogonal doubly diagonal Graeco-Latin squares\".\nOdd squares: For the 3\u00d73 odd square, since \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", and \"\u03b3\" are in arithmetic progression, their sum is equal to the product of the square's order and the middle term, i.e. \"\u03b1\" + \"\u03b2\" + \"\u03b3\" = 3 \"\u03b2\". Thus, the diagonal sums will be equal if we have \"\u03b2\"s in the main diagonal and \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\" in the skew diagonal. Similarly, for the Latin square. The resulting Greek and Latin squares and their combination will be as below. The Latin square is just a 90 degree anti-clockwise rotation of the Greek square (or equivalently, flipping about the vertical axis) with the corresponding letters interchanged. Substituting the values of the Greek and Latin letters will give the 3\u00d73 magic square.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor the odd squares, this method explains why the Siamese method (method of De la Loubere) and its variants work. This basic method can be used to construct odd ordered magic squares of higher orders. To summarise:\nA peculiarity of the construction method given above for the odd magic squares is that the middle number (\"n\"2 + 1)/2 will always appear at the center cell of the magic square. Since there are (\"n\" \u2212 1)! ways to arrange the skew diagonal terms, we can obtain (\"n\" \u2212 1)! Greek squares this way; same with the Latin squares. Also, since each Greek square can be paired with (\"n\" \u2212 1)! Latin squares, and since for each of Greek square the middle term may be arbitrarily placed in the main diagonal or the skew diagonal (and correspondingly along the skew diagonal or the main diagonal for the Latin squares), we can construct a total of 2 \u00d7 (\"n\" \u2212 1)! \u00d7 (\"n\" \u2212 1)! magic squares using this method. For \"n\" = 3, 5, and 7, this will give 8, 1152, and 1,036,800 different magic squares, respectively. Dividing by 8 to neglect equivalent squares due to rotation and reflections, we obtain 1, 144, and 129,600 essentially different magic squares, respectively.\nAs another example, the construction of 5\u00d75 magic square is given. Numbers are directly written in place of alphabets. The numbered squares are referred to as \"primary square\" or \"root square\" if they are filled with primary numbers or root numbers, respectively. The numbers are placed about the skew diagonal in the root square such that the middle column of the resulting root square has 0, 5, 10, 15, 20 (from bottom to top). The primary square is obtained by rotating the root square counter-clockwise by 90 degrees, and replacing the numbers. The resulting square is an associative magic square, in which every pair of numbers symmetrically opposite to the center sum up to the same value, 26. For e.g., 16+10, 3+23, 6+20, etc. In the finished square, 1 is placed at center cell of bottom row, and successive numbers are placed via elongated knight's move (two cells right, two cells down), or equivalently, bishop's move (two cells diagonally down right). When a collision occurs, the break move is to move one cell up. All the odd numbers occur inside the central diamond formed by 1, 5, 25 and 21, while the even numbers are placed at the corners. The occurrence of the even numbers can be deduced by copying the square to the adjacent sides. The even numbers from four adjacent squares will form a cross. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA variation of the above example, where the skew diagonal sequence is taken in different order, is given below. The resulting magic square is the flipped version of the famous Agrippa's Mars magic square. It is an associative magic square and is the same as that produced by Moschopoulos's method. Here the resulting square starts with 1 placed in the cell which is to the right of the centre cell, and proceeds as De la Loubere's method, with downwards-right move. When a collision occurs, the break move is to shift two cells to the right.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the previous examples, for the Greek square, the second row can be obtained from the first row by circularly shifting it to the right by one cell. Similarly, the third row is a circularly shifted version of the second row by one cell to the right; and so on. Likewise, the rows of the Latin square is circularly shifted to the left by one cell. The row shifts for the Greek and Latin squares are in mutually opposite direction. It is possible to circularly shift the rows by more than one cell to create the Greek and Latin square.\nThis essentially re-creates the knight's move. All the letters will appear in both the diagonals, ensuring correct diagonal sum. Since there are \"n\"! permutations of the Greek letters by which we can create the first row of the Greek square, there are thus \"n\"! Greek squares that can be created by shifting the first row in one direction. Likewise, there are \"n\"! such Latin squares created by shifting the first row in the opposite direction. Since a Greek square can be combined with any Latin square with opposite row shifts, there are \"n\"! \u00d7 \"n\"! such combinations. Lastly, since the Greek square can be created by shifting the rows either to the left or to the right, there are a total of 2 \u00d7 \"n\"! \u00d7 \"n\"! magic squares that can be formed by this method. For \"n\" = 5 and 7, since they are prime numbers, this method creates 28,800 and 50,803,200 pandiagonal magic squares. Dividing by 8 to neglect equivalent squares due to rotation and reflections, we obtain 3,600 and 6,350,400 equivalent squares. Further dividing by \"n\"2 to neglect equivalent panmagic squares due to cyclic shifting of rows or columns, we obtain 144 and 129,600 essentially different panmagic squares. For order 5 squares, these are the only panmagic square there are. The condition that the square's order not be divisible by 3 means that we cannot construct squares of orders 9, 15, 21, 27, and so on, by this method.\nIn the example below, the square has been constructed such that 1 is at the center cell. In the finished square, the numbers can be continuously enumerated by the knight's move (two cells up, one cell right). When collision occurs, the break move is to move one cell up, one cell left. The resulting square is a pandiagonal magic square. This square also has a further diabolical property that any five cells in quincunx pattern formed by any odd sub-square, including wrap around, sum to the magic constant, 65. For e.g., 13+7+1+20+24, 23+1+9+15+17, 13+21+10+19+2 etc. Also the four corners of any 5\u00d75 square and the central cell, as well as the middle cells of each side together with the central cell, including wrap around, give the magic sum: 13+10+19+22+1 and 20+24+12+8+1. Lastly the four rhomboids that form elongated crosses also give the magic sum: 23+1+9+24+8, 15+1+17+20+12, 14+1+18+13+19, 7+1+25+22+10. Such squares with 1 at the center cell are also called God's magic squares in Islamic amulet design, where the center cell is either left blank or filled with God's name.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWe can also combine the Greek and Latin squares constructed by different methods. In the example below, the primary square is made using knight's move. We have re-created the magic square obtained by De la Loubere's method. As before, we can form 8 \u00d7 (\"n\" \u2212 1)! \u00d7 \"n\"! magic squares by this combination. For \"n\" = 5 and 7, this will create 23,040 and 29,030,400 magic squares. After dividing by 8 in order to neglect equivalent squares due to rotation and reflection, we get 2,880 and 3,628,800 squares. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor order 5 squares, these three methods give a complete census of the number of magic squares that can be constructed by the method of superposition. Neglecting the rotation and reflections, the total number of magic squares of order 5 produced by the superposition method is 144 + 3,600 + 2,880 = 6,624.\nEven squares: We can also construct even ordered squares in this fashion. Since there is no middle term among the Greek and Latin alphabets for even ordered squares, in addition to the first two constraint, for the diagonal sums to yield the magic constant, all the letters in the alphabet should appear in the main diagonal and in the skew diagonal.\nAn example of a 4\u00d74 square is given below. For the given diagonal and skew diagonal in the Greek square, the rest of the cells can be filled using the condition that each letter appear only once in a row and a column.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUsing these two Graeco-Latin squares, we can construct 2 \u00d7 4! \u00d7 4! = 1,152 magic squares. Dividing by 8 to eliminate equivalent squares due to rotation and reflections, we get 144 essentially different magic squares of order 4. These are the only magic squares constructible by the Euler method, since there are only two mutually orthogonal doubly diagonal Graeco-Latin squares of order 4.\nSimilarly, an 8\u00d78 magic square can be constructed as below. Here the order of appearance of the numbers is not important; however the quadrants imitate the layout pattern of the 4\u00d74 Graeco-Latin squares. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEuler's method has given rise to the study of Graeco-Latin squares. Euler's method for constructing magic squares is valid for any order except 2 and 6.\nVariations: Magic squares constructed from mutually orthogonal doubly diagonal Graeco-Latin squares are interesting in themselves since the magic property emerges from the relative position of the alphabets in the square, and not due to any arithmetic property of the value assigned to them. This means that we can assign any value to the alphabets of such squares and still obtain a magic square. This is the basis for constructing squares that display some information (e.g. birthdays, years, etc.) in the square and for creating \"reversible squares\". For example, we can display the number \"\u03c0\" \u2248 at the bottom row of a 4\u00d74 magic square using the Graeco-Latin square given above by assigning (\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b4\") = (10, 0, 90, 15) and (\"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\") = (0, 2, 3, 4). We will obtain the following non-normal magic square with the magic sum 124:\nNarayana-De la Hire's method for even orders.\nNarayana-De la Hire's method for odd square is the same as that of Euler's. However, for even squares, we drop the second requirement that each Greek and Latin letter appear only once in a given row or column. This allows us to take advantage of the fact that the sum of an arithmetic progression with an even number of terms is equal to the sum of two opposite symmetric terms multiplied by half the total number of terms. Thus, when constructing the Greek or Latin squares,\nAs a running example, if we take a 4\u00d74 square, where the Greek and Latin terms have the values (\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b4\") = (0, 4, 8, 12) and (\"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\") = (1, 2, 3, 4), respectively, then we have \"\u03b1\" + \"\u03b2\" + \"\u03b3\" + \"\u03b4\" = 2 (\"\u03b1\" + \"\u03b4\") = 2 (\"\u03b2\" + \"\u03b3\"). Similarly, \"a\" + \"b\" + \"c\" + \"d\" = 2 (\"a\" + \"d\") = 2 (\"b\" + \"c\"). This means that the complementary pair \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b4\" (or \"\u03b2\" and \"\u03b3\") can appear twice in a column (or a row) and still give the desired magic sum. Thus, we can construct:\nIn the example given below, the main diagonal (from top left to bottom right) is filled with sequence ordered as \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b4\", while the skew diagonal (from bottom left to top right) filled in the same order. The remaining cells are then filled column wise such that the complementary letters appears only once within a row, but twice within a column. In the first column, since \"\u03b1\" appears on the 1st and 4th row, the remaining cells are filled with its complementary term \"\u03b4\". Similarly, the empty cells in the 2nd column are filled with \"\u03b3\"; in 3rd column \"\u03b2\"; and 4th column \"\u03b1\". Each Greek letter appears only once along the rows, but twice along the columns. As such, the row sums are \"\u03b1\" + \"\u03b2\" + \"\u03b3\" + \"\u03b4\" while the column sums are either 2 (\"\u03b1\" + \"\u03b4\") or 2 (\"\u03b2\" + \"\u03b3\"). Likewise for the Latin square, which is obtained by flipping the Greek square along the main diagonal and interchanging the corresponding letters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe above example explains why the \"criss-cross\" method for doubly even magic square works. Another possible 4\u00d74 magic square, which is also pan-diagonal as well as most-perfect, is constructed below using the same rule. However, the diagonal sequence is chosen such that all four letters \"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b4\" appear inside the central 2\u00d72 sub-square. Remaining cells are filled column wise such that each letter appears only once within a row. In the 1st column, the empty cells need to be filled with one of the letters selected from the complementary pair \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b4\". Given the 1st column, the entry in the 2nd row can only be \"\u03b4\" since \"\u03b1\" is already there in the 2nd row; while, in the 3rd row the entry can only be \"\u03b1\" since \"\u03b4\" is already present in the 3rd row. We proceed similarly until all cells are filled. The Latin square given below has been obtained by flipping the Greek square along the main diagonal and replacing the Greek alphabets with corresponding Latin alphabets. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWe can use this approach to construct singly even magic squares as well. However, we have to be more careful in this case since the criteria of pairing the Greek and Latin alphabets uniquely is not automatically satisfied. Violation of this condition leads to some missing numbers in the final square, while duplicating others. Thus, here is an important proviso:\nBelow is a construction of a 6\u00d76 magic square, where the numbers are directly given, rather than the alphabets. The second square is constructed by flipping the first square along the main diagonal. Here in the first column of the root square the 3rd cell is paired with its complement in the 4th cells. Thus, in the primary square, the numbers in the 1st and 6th cell of the 3rd row are same. Likewise, with other columns and rows. In this example the flipped version of the root square satisfies this proviso.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs another example of a 6\u00d76 magic square constructed this way is given below. Here the diagonal entries are arranged differently. The primary square is constructed by flipping the root square about the main diagonal. In the second square the proviso for singly even square is not satisfied, leading to a non-normal magic square (third square) where the numbers 3, 13, 24, and 34 are duplicated while missing the numbers 4, 18, 19, and 33.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe last condition is a bit arbitrary and may not always need to be invoked, as in this example, where in the root square each cell is vertically paired with its complement: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs one more example, we have generated an 8\u00d78 magic square. Unlike the criss-cross pattern of the earlier section for evenly even square, here we have a checkered pattern for the altered and unaltered cells. Also, in each quadrant the odd and even numbers appear in alternating columns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVariations: A number of variations of the basic idea are possible: \"a complementary pair can appear \"n\"/2 times or less in a column\". That is, a column of a Greek square can be constructed using more than one complementary pair. This method allows us to imbue the magic square with far richer properties. The idea can also be extended to the diagonals too. An example of an 8\u00d78 magic square is given below. In the finished square each of four quadrants are pan-magic squares as well, each quadrant with same magic constant 130.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMethod of borders.\nBordering method for order 3.\nIn this method, the objective is to wrap a border around a smaller magic square which serves as a core. Consider the 3\u00d73 square for example. Subtracting the middle number 5 from each number 1, 2, ..., 9, we obtain 0, \u00b11, \u00b12, \u00b13, and \u00b14, which we will, for lack of better words, following S. Harry White, refer to as bone numbers. The magic constant of a magic square, which we will refer to as the skeleton square, made by these bone numbers will be zero since adding all the rows of a magic square will give \"nM\" = \u03a3 \"k\" = 0; thus \"M\" = 0.\nIt is not difficult to argue that the middle number should be placed at the center cell: let \"x\" be the number placed in the middle cell, then the sum of the middle column, middle row, and the two diagonals give \u03a3 \"k\" + 3 \"x\" = 4 \"M\". Since\u03a3 \"k\" = 3 \"M\", we have \"x\" = \"M\" / 3. Here \"M\" = 0, so \"x\" = 0.\nPutting the middle number 0 in the center cell, we want to construct a border such that the resulting square is magic. Let the border be given by:\nSince the sum of each row, column, and diagonals must be a constant (which is zero), we have\n \"a\" + \"a\"\u2217 = 0, \n \"b\" + \"b\"\u2217 = 0, \n \"u\" + \"u\"\u2217 = 0,\n \"v\" + \"v\"\u2217 = 0.\nNow, if we have chosen \"a\", \"b\", \"u\", and \"v\", then we have \"a\"\u2217 = \u2212\"a\", \"b\"\u2217 = \u2212\"b\", \"u\"\u2217 = \u2212\"u\", and \"v\"\u2217 = \u2212\"v\". This means that if we assign a given number to a variable, say \"a\" = 1, then its complement will be assigned to \"a\"\u2217, i.e. \"a\"\u2217 = \u22121. Thus out of eight unknown variables, it is sufficient to specify the value of only four variables. We will consider \"a\", \"b\", \"u\", and \"v\" as independent variables, while \"a\"\u2217, \"b\"\u2217, \"u\"\u2217, and \"v\"\u2217 as dependent variables. This allows us to consider a bone number \u00b1\"x\" as a single number regardless of sign because (1) its assignment to a given variable, say \"a\", will automatically imply that the same number of opposite sign will be shared with its complement \"a\"\u2217, and (2) two independent variables, say \"a\" and \"b\", cannot be assigned the same bone number. But how should we choose \"a\", \"b\", \"u\", and \"v\"? We have the sum of the top row and the sum of the right column as\n \"u\" + \"a\" + \"v\" = 0,\n \"v\" + \"b\" + \"u\"\u2217 = 0.\nSince 0 is an even number, there are only two ways that the sum of three integers will yield an even number: 1) if all three were even, or 2) if two were odd and one was even. Since in our choice of numbers we only have two even non-zero number (\u00b12 and \u00b14), the first statement is false. Hence, it must be the case that the second statement is true: that two of the numbers are odd and one even.\nThe only way that both the above two equations can satisfy this parity condition simultaneously, and still be consistent with the set of numbers we have, is when \"u\" and \"v\" are odd. For on the contrary, if we had assumed \"u\" and \"a\" to be odd and \"v\" to be even in the first equation, then \"u\"\u2217 = \u2212\"u\" will be odd in the second equation, making \"b\" odd as well, in order to satisfy the parity condition. But this requires three odd numbers (\"u\", \"a\", and \"b\"), contradicting the fact that we only have two odd numbers (\u00b11 and \u00b13) which we can use. This proves that the odd bone numbers occupy the corners cells. When converted to normal numbers by adding 5, this implies that the corners of a 3\u00d73 magic square are all occupied by even numbers.\nThus, taking \"u\" = 1 and \"v\" = 3, we have \"a\" = \u22124 and \"b\" = \u22122. Hence, the finished skeleton square will be as in the left. Adding 5 to each number, we get the finished magic square.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSimilar argument can be used to construct larger squares. Since there does not exist a 2\u00d72 magic square around which we can wrap a border to construct a 4\u00d74 magic square, the next smallest order for which we can construct bordered square is the order 5.\nBordering method for order 5.\nConsider the fifth-order square. For this, we have a 3\u00d73 magic core, around which we will wrap a magic border. The bone numbers to be used will be \u00b15, \u00b16, \u00b17, \u00b18, \u00b19, \u00b110, \u00b111, and \u00b112. Disregarding the signs, we have 8 bone numbers, 4 of which are even and 4 of which are odd. In general, for a square of any order \"n\", there will be 4(\"n\" \u2212 1) border cells, which are to be filled using 2(\"n\" \u2212 1) bone numbers. Let the magic border be given as\nAs before, we should\nIt is sufficient to determine the numbers \"u, v, a, b, c, d, e, f\" to describe the magic border. As before, we have the two constraint equations for the top row and right column:\n \"u\" + \"a\" + \"b\" + \"c\" + \"v\" = 0\n \"v\" + \"d\" + \"e\" + \"f\" + \"u*\" = 0.\nMultiple solutions are possible. The standard procedure is to\nThere are 28 ways of choosing two numbers from the set of 8 bone numbers for the corner cells \"u\" and \"v\". However, not all pairs are admissible. Among the 28 pairs, 16 pairs are made of an even and an odd number, 6 pairs have both as even numbers, while 6 pairs have them both as odd numbers.\nWe can prove that the corner cells \"u\" and \"v\" cannot have an even and an odd number. This is because if this were so, then the sums \"u\" + \"v\" and \"v\" + \"u\"\u2217 will be odd, and since 0 is an even number, the sums \"a\" + \"b\" + \"c\" and \"d\" + \"e\" + \"f\" should be odd as well. The only way that the sum of three integers will result in an odd number is when 1) two of them are even and one is odd, or 2) when all three are odd. Since the corner cells are assumed to be odd and even, neither of these two statements are compatible with the fact that we only have 3 even and 3 odd bone numbers at our disposal. This proves that \"u\" and \"v\" cannot have different parity. This eliminates 16 possibilities.\nUsing similar type reasoning we can also draw some conclusions about the sets {\"a\", \"b\", \"c\"} and {\"d\", \"e\", \"f\"}. If \"u\" and \"v\" are both even, then both the sets should have two odd numbers and one even number. If \"u\" and \"v\" are both odd, then one of the sets should have three even numbers while the other set should have one even number and two odd numbers.\nAs a running example, consider the case when both \"u\" and \"v\" are even. The 6 possible pairs are: (6, 8), (6, 10), (6, 12), (8, 10), (8, 12), and (10, 12). Since the sums \"u\" + \"v\" and \"v\" + \"u\"\u2217 are even, the sums \"a\" + \"b\" + \"c\" and \"d\" + \"e\" + \"f\" should be even as well. The only way that the sum of three integers will result in an even number is when 1) two of them are odd and one is even, or 2) when all three are even. The fact that the two corner cells are even means that we have only 2 even numbers at our disposal. Thus, the second statement is not compatible with this fact. Hence, it must be the case that the first statement is true: two of the three numbers should be odd, while one be even.\nNow let \"a, b, d, e\" be odd numbers while \"c\" and \"f\" be even numbers. Given the odd bone numbers at our disposal: \u00b15, \u00b17, \u00b19, and \u00b111, their differences range from \"D\" = {\u00b12, \u00b14, \u00b16} while their sums range from \"S\" = {\u00b112, \u00b114, \u00b116, \u00b118, \u00b120}. It is also useful to have a table of their sum and differences for later reference. Now, given the corner cells (\"u\", \"v\"), we can check its admissibility by checking if the sums \"u\" + \"v\" + \"c\" and \"v\" + \"u\"\u2217 + \"f\" fall within the set \"D\" or \"S\". The admissibility of the corner numbers is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the solution to exist.\nFor example, if we consider the pair (\"u\", \"v\") = (8, 12), then \"u\" + \"v\" = 20 and \"v\" + \"u*\" = 6; and we will have \u00b16 and \u00b110 even bone numbers at our disposal. Taking \"c\" = \u00b16, we have the sum \"u\" + \"v\" + \"c\" to be 26 and 14, depending on the sign of \u00b16 taken, both of which do not fall within the sets \"D\" or \"S\". Likewise, taking \"c\" = \u00b110, we have the sum \"u\" + \"v\" + \"c\" to be 30 and 10, both of which again do not fall within the sets \"D\" or \"S\". Thus, the pair (8, 12) is not admissible. By similar process of reasoning, we can also rule out the pair (6, 12).\nAs another example, if we consider the pair (\"u\", \"v\") = (10, 12), then \"u\" + \"v\" = 22 and \"v\" + \"u\"\u2217 = 2; and we will have \u00b1 6 and \u00b1 8 even bone numbers at our disposal. Taking \"c\" = \u00b16, we have the sum \"u\" + \"v\" + \"c\" to be 28 and 16. While 28 does not fall within the sets \"D\" or \"S\", 16 falls in set \"S\". By inspection, we find that if (\"a\", \"b\") = (\u22127, \u2212 9), then \"a\" + \"b\" = \u221216; and it will satisfy the first constraint equation. Also, taking \"f\" = \u00b1 8, we have the sum \"v\" + \"u\"\u2217 + \"f\" to be 10 and -6. While 10 does not fall within the sets \"D\" or \"S\", \u22126 falls in set \"D\". Since \u22127 and \u22129 have already been assigned to \"a\" and \"b\", clearly (\"d\", \"e\") = (-5, 11) so that \"d\" + \"e\" = 6; and it will satisfy the second constraint equation.\nLikewise, taking \"c\" = \u00b18, we have the sum \"u\" + \"v\" + \"c\" to be 30 and 14. While 30 does not fall within the sets \"D\" or \"S\", 14 falls in set \"S\". By inspection, we find that if (\"a\", \"b\") = (\u22125, \u22129), then \"a\" + \"b\" = \u221214. Also, taking \"f\" = \u00b1 6, we have the sum \"v\" + \"u\"\u2217 + \"f\" to be 8 and -4. While 8 does not fall within the sets \"D\" or \"S\", \u22124 falls in set \"D\". Clearly, (\"d\", \"e\") = (\u22127, 11) so that \"d\" + \"e\" = 4, and the second constraint equation will be satisfied.\nHence the corner pair (\"u\", \"v\") = (10, 12) is admissible; and it admits two solutions: &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The finished skeleton squares are given below. The magic square is obtained by adding 13 to each cells.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUsing similar process of reasoning, we can construct the following table for the values of \"u, v, a, b, c, d, e, f\" expressed as bone numbers as given below. There are only 6 possible choices for the corner cells, which leads to 10 possible border solutions.\nGiven this group of 10 borders, we can construct 10\u00d78\u00d7(3!)2 = 2880 essentially different bordered magic squares. Here the bone numbers \u00b15, ..., \u00b112 were consecutive. More bordered squares can be constructed if the numbers are not consecutive. If non-consecutive bone numbers were also used, then there are a total of 605 magic borders. Thus, the total number of order 5 essentially different bordered magic squares (with consecutive and non-consecutive numbers) is 174,240. See history. The number of fifth-order magic squares constructible via the bordering method is about 26 times larger than via the superposition method.\nContinuous enumeration methods.\nExhaustive enumeration of all the borders of a magic square of a given order, as done previously, is very tedious. As such a structured solution is often desirable, which allows us to construct a border for a square of any order. Below we give three algorithms for constructing border for odd, doubly even, and singly even squares. These continuous enumeration algorithms were discovered in 10th century by Arab scholars; and their earliest surviving exposition comes from the two treatises by al-Buzjani and al-Antaki, although they themselves were not the discoverers. Since then many more such algorithms have been discovered.\nOdd-ordered squares: The following is the algorithm given by al-Buzjani to construct a border for odd squares. A peculiarity of this method is that for order \"n\" square, the two adjacent corners are numbers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nStarting from the cell above the lower left corner, we put the numbers alternately in left column and bottom row until we arrive at the middle cell. The next number is written in the middle cell of the bottom row just reached, after which we fill the cell in the upper left corner, then the middle cell of the right column, then the upper right corner. After this, starting from the cell above middle cell of the right column already filled, we resume the alternate placement of the numbers in the right column and the top row. Once half of the border cells are filled, the other half are filled by numbers complementary to opposite cells. The subsequent inner borders is filled in the same manner, until the square of order 3 is filled.\nBelow is an example for 9th-order square.\nDoubly even order: The following is the method given by al-Antaki. Consider an empty border of order \"n\" = 4\"k\" with \"k\" \u2265 3. The peculiarity of this algorithm is that the adjacent corner cells are occupied by numbers \"n\" and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nStarting at the upper left corner cell, we put the successive numbers by groups of four, the first one next to the corner, the second and the third on the bottom, and the fourth at the top, and so on until there remains in the top row (excluding the corners) six empty cells. We then write the next two numbers above and the next four below. We then fill the upper corners, first left then right. We place the next number below the upper right corner in the right column, the next number on the other side in the left column. We then resume placing groups of four consecutive numbers in the two columns as before. Once half of the border cells are filled, the other half are filled by numbers complementary to opposite cells.\nThe example below gives the border for order 16 square.\nFor order 8 square, we just begin directly with the six cells.\nSingly even order: For singly even order, we have the algorithm given by al-Antaki. Here the corner cells are occupied by \"n\" and \"n\" \u2212 1. Below is an example of 10th-order square.\nStart by placing 1 at the bottom row next to the left corner cell, then place 2 in the top row. After this, place 3 at the bottom row and turn around the border in anti-clockwise direction placing the next numbers, until \"n\" \u2212 2 is reached on the right column. The next two numbers are placed in the upper corners (\"n\" \u2212 1 in upper left corner and \"n\" in upper right corner). Then, the next two numbers are placed on the left column, then we resume the cyclic placement of the numbers until half of all the border cells are filled. Once half of the border cells are filled, the other half are filled by numbers complementary to opposite cells.\nMethod of composition.\nFor squares of order \"m \u00d7 n\" where \"m\", \"n\" &gt; 2.\nThis is a method reminiscent of the Kronecker product of two matrices, that builds an \"nm\" \u00d7 \"nm\" magic square from an \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" magic square and an \"m\" \u00d7 \"m\" magic square. The \"product\" of two magic squares creates a magic square of higher order than the two multiplicands. Let the two magic squares be of orders \"m\" and \"n\". The final square will be of order \"m \u00d7 n\". Divide the square of order \"m \u00d7 n\" into \"m \u00d7 m\" sub-squares, such that there are a total of \"n\"2 such sub-squares. In the square of order \"n\", reduce by 1 the value of all the numbers. Multiply these reduced values by \"m\"2, and place the results in the corresponding sub-squares of the \"m \u00d7 n\" whole square. The squares of order \"m\" are added \"n\"2 times to the sub-squares of the final square. The peculiarity of this construction method is that each magic subsquare will have different magic sums. The square made of such magic sums from each magic subsquare will again be a magic square. The smallest composite magic square of order 9, composed of two order 3 squares is given below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSince each of the 3\u00d73 sub-squares can be independently rotated and reflected into 8 different squares, from this single 9\u00d79 composite square we can derive 89 = 134,217,728 essentially different 9\u00d79 composite squares. Plenty more composite magic squares can also be derived if we select non-consecutive numbers in the magic sub-squares, like in Yang Hui's version of the 9\u00d79 composite magic square. The next smallest composite magic squares of order 12, composed of magic squares of order 3 and 4 are given below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor the base squares, there is only one essentially different 3rd order square, while there 880 essentially different 4th-order squares that we can choose from. Each pairing can produce two different composite squares. Since each magic sub-squares in each composite square can be expressed in 8 different forms due to rotations and reflections, there can be 1\u00d7880\u00d789 + 880\u00d71\u00d7816 \u2248 2.476\u00d71017 essentially different 12\u00d712 composite magic squares created this way, with consecutive numbers in each sub-square. In general, if there are \"c\"m and \"c\"n essentially different magic squares of order \"m\" and \"n\", then we can form \"c\"m \u00d7 \"c\"n \u00d7 ( 8\"m\"2 + 8\"n\"2) composite squares of order \"mn\", provided \"m\" \u2260 \"n\". If \"m\" = \"n\", then we can form (\"c\"m)2 \u00d7 8\"m\"2 composite squares of order \"m\"2.\nFor squares of doubly even order.\nWhen the squares are of doubly even order, we can construct a composite magic square in a manner more elegant than the above process, in the sense that every magic subsquare will have the same magic constant. Let \"n\" be the order of the main square and \"m\" the order of the equal subsquares. The subsquares are filled one by one, in any order, with a continuous sequence of \"m\"2/2 smaller numbers (i.e. numbers less than or equal to \"n\"2/2) together with their complements to \"n\"2 + 1. Each subsquare as a whole will yield the same magic sum. The advantage of this type of composite square is that each subsquare is filled in the same way and their arrangement is arbitrary. Thus, the knowledge of a single construction of even order will suffice to fill the whole square. Furthermore, if the subsquares are filled in the natural sequence, then the resulting square will be pandiagonal. The magic sum of the subsquares is related to the magic sum of the whole square by formula_34 where \"n\" = \"km\".\nIn the examples below, we have divided the order 12 square into nine subsquares of order 4 filled each with eight smaller numbers and, in the corresponding bishop's cells (two cells diagonally across, including wrap arounds, in the 4\u00d74 subsquare), their complements to \"n\"2 + 1 = 145. Each subsquare is pandiagonal with magic constant 290; while the whole square on the left is also pandiagonal with magic constant 870.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn another example below, we have divided the order 12 square into four order 6 squares. Each of the order 6 squares are filled with eighteen small numbers and their complements using bordering technique given by al-Antaki. If we remove the shaded borders of the order 6 subsquares and form an order 8 square, then this order 8 square is again a magic square. In its full generality, we can take any \"m\"2/2 smaller numbers together with their complements to \"n\"2 + 1 to fill the subsquares, not necessarily in continuous sequence.\nMedjig method for squares of even order 2\"n\", where \"n\" &gt; 2.\nIn this method a magic square is \"multiplied\" with a Medjig square to create a larger magic square. The namesake of this method derives from mathematical game called Medjig created by Willem Barink in 2006, although the method itself is much older. An early instance of a magic square constructed using this method occurs in Yang Hui's text for order 6 magic square. The LUX method to construct singly even magic squares is a special case of the Medjig method, where only 3 out of 24 patterns are used to construct the Medjig square.\nThe pieces of the Medjig puzzle are 2\u00d72 squares on which the numbers 0, 1, 2 and 3 are placed. There are three basic patterns by which the numbers 0, 1, 2 and 3 can be placed in a 2\u00d72 square, where 0 is at the top left corner:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEach pattern can be reflected and rotated to obtain 8 equivalent patterns, giving us a total of 3\u00d78 = 24 patterns. The aim of the puzzle is to take \"n\"2 Medjig pieces and arrange them in an \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" \"Medjig square\" in such a way that each row, column, along with the two long diagonals, formed by the Medjig square sums to 3\"n\", the magic constant of the Medjig square. An \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" Medjig square can create a 2\"n\" \u00d7 2\"n\" magic square where \"n\" &gt; 2.\nGiven an \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" Medjig square and an \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" magic square base, a magic square of order 2\"n\"\u00d72\"n\" can be constructed as follows:\nAssuming that we have an initial magic square base, the challenge lies in constructing a Medjig square. For reference, the sums of each Medjig piece along the rows, columns and diagonals, denoted in italics, are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDoubly even squares: The smallest even ordered Medjig square is of order 2 with magic constant 6. While it is possible to construct a 2\u00d72 Medjig square, we cannot construct a 4\u00d74 magic square from it since 2\u00d72 magic squares required to \"multiply\" it does not exist. Nevertheless, it is worth constructing these 2\u00d72 Medjig squares. The magic constant 6 can be partitioned into two parts in three ways as 6 = 5 + 1 = 4 + 2 = 3 + 3. There exist 96 such 2\u00d72 Medjig squares. In the examples below, each 2\u00d72 Medjig square is made by combining different orientations of a single Medjig piece.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWe can use the 2\u00d72 Medjig squares to construct larger even ordered Medjig squares. One possible approach is to simply combine the 2\u00d72 Medjig squares together. Another possibility is to wrap a smaller Medjig square core with a Medjig border. The pieces of a 2\u00d72 Medjig square can form the corner pieces of the border. Yet another possibility is to append a row and a column to an odd ordered Medjig square. An example of an 8\u00d78 magic square is constructed below by combining four copies of the left most 2\u00d72 Medjig square given above:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe next example is constructed by bordering a 2\u00d72 Medjig square core.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSingly even squares: Medjig square of order 1 does not exist. As such, the smallest odd ordered Medjig square is of order 3, with magic constant 9. There are only 7 ways of partitioning the integer 9, our magic constant, into three parts. If these three parts correspond to three of the Medjig pieces in a row, column or diagonal, then the relevant partitions for us are:\n 9 = 1 + 3 + 5 = 1 + 4 + 4 = 2 + 3 + 4 = 2 + 2 + 5 = 3 + 3 + 3.\nA 3\u00d73 Medjig square can be constructed with some trial-and-error, as in the left most square below. Another approach is to add a row and a column to a 2\u00d72 Medjig square. In the middle square below, a left column and bottom row has been added, creating an L-shaped Medjig border, to a 2\u00d72 Medjig square given previously. The right most square below is essentially same as the middle square, except that the row and column has been added in the middle to form a cross while the pieces of 2\u00d72 Medjig square are placed at the corners.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOnce a 3\u00d73 Medjig square has been constructed, it can be converted into a 6\u00d76 magic square. For example, using the left most 3\u00d73 Medjig square given above:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere are 1,740,800 such 3\u00d73 Medjig squares. An easy approach to construct higher order odd Medjig square is by wrapping a smaller odd ordered Medjig square with a Medjig border, just as with even ordered Medjig squares. Another approach is to append a row and a column to an even ordered Medjig square. Approaches such as the LUX method can also be used. In the example below, a 5\u00d75 Medjig square is created by wrapping a Medjig border around a 3\u00d73 Medjig square given previously:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSolving partially completed magic squares.\nSolving partially completed magic squares is a popular mathematical pastime. The techniques needed are similar to those used in Sudoku or KenKen puzzles, and involve deducing the values of unfilled squares using logic and permutation group theory (Sudoku grids are \"not\" magic squares but are based on a related idea called Graeco-Latin squares).\nVariations of the magic square.\nExtra constraints.\nCertain extra restrictions can be imposed on magic squares.\nIf raising each number to the \"n\"th power yields another magic square, the result is a bimagic (n\u00a0=\u00a02), a trimagic (n\u00a0=\u00a03), or, in general, a multimagic square.\nA magic square in which the number of letters in the name of each number in the square generates another magic square is called an alphamagic square.\nThere are magic squares consisting entirely of primes. Rudolf Ondrejka (1928\u20132001) discovered the following 3\u00d73 magic square of primes, in this case nine Chen primes:\nThe Green\u2013Tao theorem implies that there are arbitrarily large magic squares consisting of primes.\nThe following \"reversible magic square\" has a magic constant of 264 both upside down and right way up:\nWhen the extra constraint is to display some date, especially a birth date, then such magic squares are called birthday magic square. An early instance of such birthday magic square was created by Srinivasa Ramanujan. He created a 4\u00d74 square in which he entered his date of birth in DD\u2013MM\u2013CC\u2013YY format in the top row and the magic happened with additions and subtractions of numbers in squares. Not only do the rows, columns, and diagonals add up to the same number, but the four corners, the four middle squares (17, 9, 24, 89), the first and last rows two middle numbers (12, 18, 86, 23), and the first and last columns two middle numbers (88, 10, 25, 16) all add up to the sum of 139.\nMultiplicative magic squares.\nInstead of \"adding\" the numbers in each row, column and diagonal, one can apply some other operation. For example, a multiplicative magic square has a constant \"product\" of numbers. A multiplicative magic square can be derived from an additive magic square by raising 2 (or any other integer) to the power of each element, because the logarithm of the product of 2 numbers is the sum of logarithm of each. Alternatively, if any 3 numbers in a line are 2\"a\", 2\"b\" and 2\"c\", their product is 2\"a\"+\"b\"+\"c\", which is constant if \"a\"+\"b\"+\"c\" is constant, as they would be if \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" were taken from ordinary (additive) magic square. For example, the original Lo-Shu magic square becomes:\nOther examples of multiplicative magic squares include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMultiplicative magic squares of complex numbers.\nStill using Ali Skalli's non iterative method, it is possible to produce an infinity of multiplicative magic squares of complex numbers belonging to formula_35 set. On the example below, the real and imaginary parts are integer numbers, but they can also belong to the entire set of real numbers formula_36.\nThe product is: \u2212352,507,340,640 \u2212 400,599,719,520 \"i\".\nAdditive-multiplicative magic and semimagic squares.\nAdditive-multiplicative magic squares and semimagic squares satisfy properties of both ordinary and multiplicative magic squares and semimagic squares, respectively.\nIt is unknown if any additive-multiplicative magic squares smaller than 7\u00d77 exist, but it has been proven that no 3\u00d73 or 4\u00d74 additive-multiplicative magic squares and no 3\u00d73 additive-multiplicative semimagic squares exist.\nGeometric magic squares.\nMagic squares may be constructed which contain geometric shapes instead of numbers. Such squares, known as geometric magic squares, were invented and named by Lee Sallows in 2001.\nIn the example shown the shapes appearing are two dimensional. It is clear that \"all\" magic squares are geometric, in that the numbers that appear in numerical magic squares can be interpreted as a shorthand notation which indicates the lengths of straight line segments that are the geometric 'shapes' occurring in the square. That is, numerical magic squares are that special case of a geometric magic square using one dimensional shapes.\nArea magic squares.\nIn 2017, following initial ideas of http:// and https://, the first linear area magic square (L-AMS) was constructed by Walter Trump.\nOther magic shapes.\nOther two dimensional shapes than squares can be considered. The general case is to consider a design with \"N\" parts to be magic if the \"N\" parts are labeled with the numbers 1 through \"N\" and a number of identical sub-designs give the same sum. Examples include magic circles, magic rectangles, magic triangles magic stars, magic hexagons, magic diamonds. Going up in dimension results in magic spheres, magic cylinders, magic cubes, magic parallelepiped, magic solids, and other magic hypercubes.\nPossible magic shapes are constrained by the number of equal-sized, equal-sum subsets of the chosen set of labels. For example, if one proposes to form a magic shape labeling the parts with {1, 2, 3, 4}, the sub-designs will have to be labeled with {1,4} and {2,3}.\nRelated problems.\n\"n\"-Queens problem.\nIn 1992, Demir\u00f6rs, Rafraf, and Tanik published a method for converting some magic squares into \"n\"-queens solutions, and vice versa.\nMagic squares in occultism.\nMagic squares of order 3 through 9, assigned to the seven planets, and described as means to attract the influence of planets and their angels (or demons) during magical practices, can be found in several manuscripts all around Europe starting at least since the 15th century. Among the best known, the \"Liber de Angelis\", a magical handbook written around 1440, is included in Cambridge Univ. Lib. MS Dd.xi.45. The text of the \"Liber de Angelis\" is very close to that of \"De septem quadraturis planetarum seu quadrati magici\", another handbook of planetary image magic contained in the Codex 793 of the Biblioteka Jagiello\u0144ska (Ms BJ 793). The magical operations involve engraving the appropriate square on a plate made with the metal assigned to the corresponding planet, as well as performing a variety of rituals. For instance, the 3\u00d73 square, that belongs to Saturn, has to be inscribed on a lead plate. It will, in particular, help women during a difficult childbirth.\nIn about 1510 Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa wrote \"De Occulta Philosophia\", drawing on the Hermetic and magical works of Marsilio Ficino and Pico della Mirandola. In its 1531 edition, he expounded on the magical virtues of the seven magical squares of orders 3 to 9, each associated with one of the astrological planets, much in the same way as the older texts did. This book was very influential throughout Europe until the Counter-Reformation, and Agrippa's magic squares, sometimes called kameas, continue to be used within modern ceremonial magic in much the same way as he first prescribed.\nThe most common use for these kameas is to provide a pattern upon which to construct the sigils of spirits, angels or demons; the letters of the entity's name are converted into numbers, and lines are traced through the pattern that these successive numbers make on the kamea.\nIn a magical context, the term \"magic square\" is also applied to a variety of word squares or number squares found in magical grimoires, including some that do not follow any obvious pattern, and even those with differing numbers of rows and columns. They are generally intended for use as talismans. For instance the following squares are: The Sator square, one of the most famous magic squares found in a number of grimoires including the \"Key of Solomon\"; a square \"to overcome envy\", from \"The Book of Power\"; and two squares from \"The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage\", the first to cause the illusion of a superb palace to appear, and the second to be worn on the head of a child during an angelic invocation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52203", "revid": "372693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52203", "title": "Tenor clef", "text": ""}
{"id": "52204", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52204", "title": "Squarefree", "text": ""}
{"id": "52205", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52205", "title": "Alto clef", "text": ""}
{"id": "52206", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52206", "title": "Nanowire", "text": "Wire with a diameter in the nanometres\nA nanowire is a nanostructure in the form of a wire with the diameter of the order of a nanometre (10\u22129\u00a0m). More generally, nanowires can be defined as structures that have a thickness or diameter constrained to tens of nanometers or less and an unconstrained length. At these scales, quantum mechanical effects are important\u2014which coined the term \"quantum wires\".\nMany different types of nanowires exist, including superconducting (e.g. YBCO), metallic (e.g. Ni, Pt, Au, Ag), semiconducting (e.g. silicon nanowires (SiNWs), InP, GaN) and insulating (e.g. SiO2, TiO2).\nMolecular nanowires are composed of repeating molecular units either organic (e.g. DNA) or inorganic (e.g. Mo6S9\u2212\"x\"I\"x\").\nCharacteristics.\nTypical nanowires exhibit aspect ratios (length-to-width ratio) of 1000 or more. As such they are often referred to as one-dimensional (1-D) materials. Nanowires have many interesting properties that are not seen in bulk or 3-D (three-dimensional) materials. This is because electrons in nanowires are quantum confined laterally and thus occupy energy levels that are different from the traditional continuum of energy levels or bands found in bulk materials.\nA consequence of this quantum confinement in nanowires is that they exhibit discrete values of the electrical conductance. Such discrete values arise from a quantum mechanical constraint on the number electronic transport channels at the nanometer scale, and they are often approximately equal to integer multiples of the quantum of conductance:\n formula_1\nThis conductance is twice the reciprocal of the resistance unit called the von Klitzing constant, \"R\"K\u00a0=\u00a0, defined as \"R\"K = \"h\"/\"e\"2 and named for Klaus von Klitzing, the discoverer of the integer quantum Hall effect.\nExamples of nanowires include inorganic molecular nanowires (Mo6S9\u2212\"x\"I\"x\", Li2Mo6Se6), which can have a diameter of 0.9\u00a0nm and be hundreds of micrometers long. Other important examples are based on semiconductors such as InP, Si, GaN, etc., dielectrics (e.g. SiO2,TiO2), or metals (e.g. Ni, Pt).\nThere are many applications where nanowires may become important in electronic, opto-electronic and nanoelectromechanical devices, as additives in advanced composites, for metallic interconnects in nanoscale quantum devices, as field-emitters and as leads for biomolecular nanosensors.\nSynthesis.\nThere are two basic approaches to synthesizing nanowires: top-down and bottom-up. A top-down approach reduces a large piece of material to small pieces, by various means such as lithography, milling or thermal oxidation. A bottom-up approach synthesizes the nanowire by combining constituent adatoms. Most synthesis techniques use a bottom-up approach. Initial synthesis via either method may often be followed by a nanowire thermal treatment step, often involving a form of self-limiting oxidation, to fine tune the size and aspect ratio of the structures. After the bottom-up synthesis, nanowires can be integrated using pick-and-place techniques.\nNanowire production uses several common laboratory techniques, including suspension, electrochemical deposition, vapor deposition, and VLS growth. Ion track technology enables growing homogeneous and segmented nanowires down to 8\u00a0nm diameter. As nanowire oxidation rate is controlled by diameter, thermal oxidation steps are often applied to tune their morphology.\nSuspension.\nA suspended nanowire is a wire produced in a high-vacuum chamber held at the longitudinal extremities. Suspended nanowires can be produced by:\nVLS growth.\nA common technique for creating a nanowire is vapor\u2013liquid\u2013solid method (VLS), which was first reported by Wagner and Ellis in 1964 for silicon whiskers with diameters ranging from hundreds of nm to hundreds of \u03bcm. This process can produce high-quality crystalline nanowires of many semiconductor materials, for example, VLS\u2013grown single crystalline silicon nanowires (SiNWs) with smooth surfaces could have excellent properties, such as ultra-large elasticity. This method uses a source material from either laser ablated particles or a feed gas such as silane.\nVLS synthesis requires a catalyst. For nanowires, the best catalysts are liquid metal (such as gold) nanoclusters, which can either be self-assembled from a thin film by dewetting, or purchased in colloidal form and deposited on a substrate.\nThe source enters these nanoclusters and begins to saturate them. On reaching supersaturation, the source solidifies and grows outward from the nanocluster. Simply turning off the source can adjust the final length of the nanowire. Switching sources while still in the growth phase can create compound nanowires with super-lattices of alternating materials. For example, a method termed ENGRAVE (Encoded Nanowire GRowth and Appearance through VLS and Etching) developed by the Cahoon Lab at UNC-Chapel Hill allows for nanometer-scale morphological control via rapid \"in situ\" dopant modulation.\nA single-step vapour phase reaction at elevated temperature synthesises inorganic nanowires such as Mo6S9\u2212\"x\"I\"x\". From another point of view, such nanowires are cluster polymers.\nSimilar to VLS synthesis, VSS (vapor-solid-solid) synthesis of nanowires (NWs) proceeds through thermolytic decomposition of a silicon precursor (typically phenylsilane). Unlike VLS, the catalytic seed remains in solid state when subjected to high temperature annealing of the substrate. This such type of synthesis is widely used to synthesise metal silicide/germanide nanowires through VSS alloying between a copper substrate and a silicon/germanium precursor.\nSolution-phase synthesis.\nSolution-phase synthesis refers to techniques that grow nanowires in solution. They can produce nanowires of many types of materials. Solution-phase synthesis has the advantage that it can produce very large quantities, compared to other methods. In one technique, the polyol synthesis, ethylene glycol is both solvent and reducing agent. This technique is particularly versatile at producing nanowires of gold, lead, platinum, and silver.\nThe supercritical fluid-liquid-solid growth method can be used to synthesize semiconductor nanowires, e.g., Si and Ge. By using metal nanocrystals as seeds, Si and Ge organometallic precursors are fed into a reactor filled with a supercritical organic solvent, such as toluene. Thermolysis results in degradation of the precursor, allowing release of Si or Ge, and dissolution into the metal nanocrystals. As more of the semiconductor solute is added from the supercritical phase (due to a concentration gradient), a solid crystallite precipitates, and a nanowire grows uniaxially from the nanocrystal seed.\nLiquid Bridge Induced Self-assembly.\nProtein nanowires in spider silk have been formed by rolling a droplet of spider silk solution over a superhydrophobic pillar structure.\nNon-catalytic growth.\nThe vast majority of nanowire-formation mechanisms are explained through the use of catalytic nanoparticles, which drive the nanowire growth and are either added intentionally or generated during the growth. However, nanowires can be also grown without the help of catalysts, which gives an advantage of pure nanowires and minimizes the number of technological steps. The mechanisms for catalyst-free growth of nanowires (or whiskers) were known from 1950s.\nThe simplest methods to obtain metal oxide nanowires use ordinary heating of the metals, e.g. metal wire heated with battery, by Joule heating in air can be easily done at home. Spontaneous nanowire formation by non-catalytic methods were explained by the dislocation present in specific directions or the growth anisotropy of various crystal faces. Nanowires can grow by screw dislocations or twin boundaries were demonstrated. The picture on the right shows a single atomic layer growth on the tip of CuO nanowire, observed by in situ TEM microscopy during the non-catalytic synthesis of nanowire.\nAtomic-scale nanowires can also form completely self-organised without need for defects. For example, rare-earth silicide (RESi2) nanowires of few nm width and height and several 100\u00a0nm length form on silicon(001) substrates which are covered with a sub-monolayer of a rare earth metal and subsequently annealed. The lateral dimensions of the nanowires confine the electrons in such a way that the system resembles a (quasi-)one-dimensional metal. Metallic RESi2 nanowires form on silicon(\"hhk\") as well. This system permits tuning the dimensionality between two-dimensional and one-dimensional by the coverage and the tilt angle of the substrate.\nDNA-templated metallic nanowire synthesis.\nAn emerging field is to use DNA strands as scaffolds for metallic nanowire synthesis. This method is investigated both for the synthesis of metallic nanowires in electronic components and for biosensing applications, in which they allow the transduction of a DNA strand into a metallic nanowire that can be electrically detected. Typically, ssDNA strands are stretched, whereafter they are decorated with metallic nanoparticles that have been functionalised with short complementary ssDNA strands.\nCrack-Defined Shadow Mask Lithography.\nOptical lithography is a simple method to produce nanowires . In this approach, optical lithography is used to generate nanogaps using controlled crack formation. These nanogaps are then used as shadow mask for generating individual nanowires with precise lengths and widths. This technique allows to produce individual nanowires below 20\u00a0nm in width in a scalable way out of several metallic and metal oxide materials.\nPhysics.\nConductivity.\nSeveral physical reasons predict that the conductivity of a nanowire will be much less than that of the corresponding bulk material. First, there is scattering from the wire boundaries, whose effect will be very significant whenever the wire width is below the free electron mean free path of the bulk material. In copper, for example, the mean free path is 40\u00a0nm. Copper nanowires less than 40\u00a0nm wide will shorten the mean free path to the wire width. Silver nanowires have very different electrical and thermal conductivity from bulk silver.\nNanowires also show other peculiar electrical properties due to their size. Unlike single wall carbon nanotubes, whose motion of electrons can fall under the regime of ballistic transport (meaning the electrons can travel freely from one electrode to the other), nanowire conductivity is strongly influenced by edge effects. The edge effects come from atoms that lay at the nanowire surface and are not fully bonded to neighboring atoms like the atoms within the bulk of the nanowire. The unbonded atoms are often a source of defects within the nanowire, and may cause the nanowire to conduct electricity more poorly than the bulk material. As a nanowire shrinks in size, the surface atoms become more numerous compared to the atoms within the nanowire, and edge effects become more important.\nThe conductance in a nanowire is described as the sum of the transport by separate \"channels\", each having a different electronic wavefunction normal to the wire. The thinner the wire is, the smaller the number of channels available to the transport of electrons. As a result, wires that are only one or a few atoms wide exhibit quantization of the conductance: i.e. the conductance can assume only discrete values that are multiples of the conductance quantum \"G\"0 = 2\"e\"2/\"h\" (where \"e\" is the elementary charge and \"h\" is the Planck constant) (see also \"Quantum Hall effect\"). This quantization has been observed by measuring the conductance of a nanowire suspended between two electrodes while pulling it progressively longer: as its diameter reduces, its conductivity decreases in a stepwise fashion and the plateaus correspond approximately to multiples of \"G\"0.\nThe quantization of conductivity is more pronounced in semiconductors like Si or GaAs than in metals, because of their lower electron density and lower effective mass. It can be observed in 25\u00a0nm wide silicon fins, and results in increased threshold voltage. In practical terms, this means that a MOSFET with such nanoscale silicon fins, when used in digital applications, will need a higher gate (control) voltage to switch the transistor on.\nWelding.\nNanowires can be welded together: a sacrificial metal nanowire is placed adjacent to the ends of the pieces to be joined (using the manipulators of a scanning electron microscope); then an electric current is applied, which fuses the wire ends. The technique fuses wires as small as 10\u00a0nm.\nFor nanowires with diameters less than 10\u00a0nm, existing welding techniques, which require precise control of the heating mechanism and which may introduce the possibility of damage, will not be practical. Single-crystalline ultrathin gold nanowires with diameters \u2248\u00a03\u201310\u00a0nm can be \"cold-welded\" together within seconds by mechanical contact alone, and under remarkably low applied pressures (unlike macro- and micro-scale cold welding process). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy and in situ measurements reveal that the welds are nearly perfect, with the same crystal orientation, strength and electrical conductivity as the rest of the nanowire. The high quality of the welds is attributed to the nanoscale sample dimensions, oriented-attachment mechanisms and mechanically assisted fast surface diffusion. Nanowire welds were also demonstrated between gold and silver, and silver nanowires (with diameters \u2248\u00a05\u201315\u00a0nm) at near room temperature, indicating that this technique may be generally applicable for ultrathin metallic nanowires. Combined with other nano- and microfabrication technologies, cold welding is anticipated to have potential applications in the future bottom-up assembly of metallic one-dimensional nanostructures.\nMechanical properties.\nThe study of nanowire mechanics has boomed since the advent of the atomic force microscope (AFM), and associated technologies which have enabled direct study of the response of the nanowire to an applied load. Specifically, a nanowire can be clamped from one end, and the free end displaced by an AFM tip. In this cantilever geometry, the height of the AFM is precisely known, and the force applied is precisely known. This allows for construction of a force vs. displacement curve, which can be converted to a stress vs. strain curve if the nanowire dimensions are known. From the stress-strain curve, the elastic constant known as the Young's Modulus can be derived, as well as the toughness, and degree of strain-hardening.\nYoung's modulus.\nThe elastic component of the stress-strain curve described by the Young's Modulus, has been reported for nanowires, however the modulus depends very strongly on the microstructure. Thus a complete description of the modulus dependence on diameter is lacking. Analytically, continuum mechanics has been applied to estimate the dependence of modulus on diameter: formula_2 in tension, where formula_3 is the bulk modulus, formula_4 is the thickness of a shell layer in which the modulus is surface dependent and varies from the bulk, formula_5 is the surface modulus, and formula_6 is the diameter. This equation implies that the modulus increases as the diameter decreases. However, various computational methods such as molecular dynamics have predicted that modulus should decrease as diameter decreases.\nExperimentally, gold nanowires have been shown to have a Young's modulus which is effectively diameter independent. Similarly, nano-indentation was applied to study the modulus of silver nanowires, and again the modulus was found to be 88 GPa, very similar to the modulus of bulk Silver (85 GPa) These works demonstrated that the analytically determined modulus dependence seems to be suppressed in nanowire samples where the crystalline structure highly resembles that of the bulk system.\nIn contrast, Si solid nanowires have been studied, and shown to have a decreasing modulus with diameter The authors of that work report a Si modulus which is half that of the bulk value, and they suggest that the density of point defects, and or loss of chemical stoichiometry may account for this difference.\nYield strength.\nThe plastic component of the stress strain curve (or more accurately the onset of plasticity) is described by the yield strength. The strength of a material is increased by decreasing the number of defects in the solid, which occurs naturally in nanomaterials where the volume of the solid is reduced. As a nanowire is shrunk to a single line of atoms, the strength should theoretically increase all the way to the molecular tensile strength. Gold nanowires have been described as 'ultrahigh strength' due to the extreme increase in yield strength, approaching the theoretical value of \"E\"/10. This huge increase in yield is determined to be due to the lack of dislocations in the solid. Without dislocation motion, a 'dislocation-starvation' mechanism is in operation. The material can accordingly experience huge stresses before dislocation motion is possible, and then begins to strain-harden. For these reasons, nanowires (historically described as 'whiskers') have been used extensively in composites for increasing the overall strength of a material. Moreover, nanowires continue to be actively studied, with research aiming to translate enhanced mechanical properties to novel devices in the fields of MEMS or NEMS.\nPossible applications.\nElectronic devices.\nNanowires have been proposed for use as MOSFETs (MOS field-effect transistors). MOS transistors are used widely as fundamental building elements in today's electronic circuits. As predicted by Moore's law, the dimension of MOS transistors is shrinking smaller and smaller into nanoscale. One of the key challenges of building future nanoscale MOS transistors is ensuring good gate control over the channel. In general, having a wider gate relative to the total transistor length affords greater gate control. Therefore, the high aspect ratio of nanowires potentially allows for good gate control.\nDue to their one-dimensional structure with unusual optical properties, the nanowire are of interest for photovoltaic devices. Compared with its bulk counterparts, the nanowire solar cells are less sensitive to impurities due to bulk recombination, and thus silicon wafers with lower purity can be used to achieve acceptable efficiency, leading to the reduction on material consumption.\nAfter p-n junctions were built with nanowires, the next logical step was to build logic gates. Connecting several p-n junctions creates the basis of all logic circuits: the AND, OR, and NOT gates have all been built from semiconductor nanowire crossings.\nNAND gates have been produced from undoped silicon nanowires. This avoids the problem of how to achieve precision doping of complementary nanocircuits, which is unsolved. They were able to control the Schottky barrier to achieve low-resistance contacts by placing a silicide layer in the metal-silicon interface.\nIt is possible that semiconductor nanowire crossings will be important to the future of digital computing. Though there are other uses for nanowires beyond these, the only ones that actually take advantage of physics in the nanometer regime are electronic.\nIn addition, nanowires are also being studied for use as photon ballistic waveguides as interconnects in quantum dot/quantum effect well photon logic arrays. Photons travel inside the tube, electrons travel on the outside shell.\nWhen two nanowires acting as photon waveguides cross each other the juncture acts as a quantum dot.\nConducting nanowires offer the possibility of connecting molecular-scale entities in a molecular computer. Dispersions of conducting nanowires in different polymers are being investigated for use as transparent electrodes for flexible flat-screen displays.\nBecause of their high Young's moduli, their use in mechanically enhancing composites is being investigated. Because nanowires appear in bundles, they may be used as tribological additives to improve friction characteristics and reliability of electronic transducers and actuators.\nBecause of their high aspect ratio, nanowires are also suited to dielectrophoretic manipulation, which offers a low-cost, bottom-up approach to integrating suspended dielectric metal oxide nanowires in electronic devices such as UV, water vapor, and ethanol sensors.\nDue to their large surface-to-volume ratio, physico-chemical reactions are facilitated on the surface of nanowires.\nSingle nanowire devices for gas and chemical sensing.\nThe high aspect ratio of nanowires makes this nanostructures suitable for electrochemical sensing with the potential for ultimate sensitivity. One of the challenge for the use of nanowires in commercial products is related to the isolation, handling, and integration of nanowires in an electrical circuit when using the conventional and manual pick-and-place approach, leading to a very limited throughput. Nanowire can be produced by parallel production.\nNanowire lasers.\nNanowire lasers are nano-scaled lasers with potential as optical interconnects and optical data communication on chip. Nanowire lasers are built from III\u2013V semiconductor heterostructures, the high refractive index allows for low optical loss in the nanowire core. Nanowire lasers are subwavelength lasers of only a few hundred nanometers. Nanowire lasers are Fabry\u2013Perot resonator cavities defined by the end facets of the wire with high-reflectivity, have demonstrated repetition rates greater than 200\u00a0GHz offering possibilities for optical chip level communications.\nSensing of proteins and chemicals using semiconductor nanowires.\nIn an analogous way to FET devices in which the modulation of conductance (flow of electrons/holes) in the semiconductor, between the input (source) and the output (drain) terminals, is controlled by electrostatic potential variation (gate-electrode) of the charge carriers in the device conduction channel, the methodology of a Bio/Chem-FET is based on the detection of the local change in charge density, or so-called \"field effect\", that characterizes the recognition event between a target molecule and the surface receptor.\nThis change in the surface potential influences the Chem-FET device exactly as a 'gate' voltage does, leading to a detectable and measurable change in the device conduction. When these devices are fabricated using semiconductor nanowires as the transistor element the binding of a chemical or biological species to the surface of the sensor can lead to the depletion or accumulation of charge carriers in the \"bulk\" of the nanometer diameter nanowire i.e. (small cross section available for conduction channels). Moreover, the wire, which serves as a tunable conducting channel, is in close contact with the sensing environment of the target, leading to a short response time, along with orders of magnitude increase in the sensitivity of the device as a result of the huge S/V ratio of the nanowires.\nWhile several inorganic semiconducting materials such as Si, Ge, and metal oxides (e.g. In2O3, SnO2, ZnO, etc.) have been used for the preparation of nanowires, Si is usually the material of choice when fabricating nanowire FET-based chemo/biosensors.\nSeveral examples of the use of silicon nanowire(SiNW) sensing devices include the ultra sensitive, real-time sensing of biomarker proteins for cancer, detection of single virus particles, and the detection of nitro-aromatic explosive materials such as 2,4,6-tri-nitrotoluene (TNT) in sensitives superior to these of canines.\nSilicon nanowires could also be used in their twisted form, as electromechanical devices, to measure intermolecular forces with great precision.\nLimitations of sensing with silicon nanowire FET devices.\nGenerally, the charges on dissolved molecules and macromolecules are screened by dissolved counterions, since in most cases molecules bound to the devices are separated from the sensor surface by approximately 2\u201312\u00a0nm (the size of the receptor proteins or DNA linkers bound to the sensor surface). As a result of the screening, the electrostatic potential that arises from charges on the analyte molecule decays exponentially toward zero with distance. Thus, for optimal sensing, the Debye length must be carefully selected for nanowire FET measurements.\nOne approach of overcoming this limitation employs fragmentation of the antibody-capturing units and control over surface receptor density, allowing more intimate binding to the nanowire of the target protein. This approach proved useful for dramatically enhancing the sensitivity of cardiac biomarkers (e.g. Troponin) detection directly from serum for the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.\nNanowire assisted transfer of sensitive TEM samples.\nFor a minimal introduction of stress and bending to transmission electron microscopy (TEM) samples (lamellae, thin films, and other mechanically and beam sensitive samples), when transferring inside a focused ion beam (FIB), flexible metallic nanowires can be attached to a typically rigid micromanipulator.\nThe main advantages of this method include a significant reduction of sample preparation time (quick welding and cutting of nanowire at low beam current), and minimization of stress-induced bending, Pt contamination, and ion beam damage.\nThis technique is particularly suitable for in situ electron microscopy sample preparation.\nCorn-like nanowires.\nCorn-like nanowire is a one-dimensional nanowire with interconnected nanoparticles on the surface, providing a large percentage of reactive facets. TiO2 corn-like nanowires were first prepared by a surface modification concept using surface tension stress mechanism through a two consecutive hydrothermal operation, and showed an increase of 12% in dye-sensitized solar cell efficiency the light scattering layer. CdSe corn-like nanowires grown by chemical bath deposition and corn-like \u03b3-Fe2O3@SiO2@TiO2 photocatalysts induced by magnetic dipole interactions have been also reported previously.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52210", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52210", "title": "Super Ellipse", "text": ""}
{"id": "52211", "revid": "70", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52211", "title": "Superellipse", "text": "Family of closed mathematical curves\n \nA superellipse, also known as a Lam\u00e9 curve after Gabriel Lam\u00e9, is a closed curve resembling the ellipse, retaining the geometric features of semi-major axis and semi-minor axis, and symmetry about them, but defined by an equation that allows for various shapes between a rectangle and an ellipse.\nIn two dimensional Cartesian coordinate system, a superellipse is defined as the set of all points formula_1 on the curve that satisfy the equationformula_2where formula_3 and formula_4 are positive numbers referred to as semi-diameters or semi-axes of the superellipse, and formula_5 is a positive parameter that defines the shape. When formula_6, the superellipse is an ordinary ellipse. For formula_7, the shape is more rectangular with rounded corners, and for formula_8, it is more pointed.\nIn the polar coordinate system, the superellipse equation is (the set of all points formula_9 on the curve satisfy the equation):formula_10\nSpecific cases.\nThis formula defines a closed curve contained in the rectangle \u2212\"a\" \u2264 \"x\" \u2264 +\"a\" and \u2212\"b\" \u2264 \"y\" \u2264 +\"b\". The parameters formula_3 and formula_4 are the semi-diameters or semi-axes of the curve. The overall shape of the curve is determined by the value of the exponent formula_5, as shown in the following table:\nIf formula_14, the figure is also called a hypoellipse; if formula_7, a hyperellipse. When formula_16 and formula_17, the superellipse is the boundary of a ball of formula_18 in the formula_5-norm. The extreme points of the superellipse are (formula_20) and (formula_21), and its four \"corners\" are (formula_22,formula_23), where formula_24 (sometimes called the \"superness\").\nMathematical properties.\nWhen \"n\" is a positive rational number formula_25 (in lowest terms), then each quadrant of the superellipse is a plane algebraic curve of order formula_25. In particular, when formula_27 and \"n\" is an even integer, then it is a Fermat curve of degree \"n\". In that case it is non-singular, but in general it will be singular. If the numerator is not even, then the curve is pieced together from portions of the same algebraic curve in different orientations.\nThe curve is given by the parametric equations (with parameter formula_28 having no elementary geometric interpretation)formula_29where each formula_30 can be chosen separately so that each value of formula_28 gives four points on the curve. Equivalently, letting formula_28 range over formula_33formula_34where the sign function isformula_35Here formula_28 is not the angle between the positive horizontal axis and the ray from the origin to the point, since the tangent of this angle equals formula_37 while in the parametric expressions formula_38\nArea.\nThe area inside the superellipse can be expressed in terms of the gamma function asformula_39or in terms of the beta function as\nformula_40\nPerimeter.\nThe perimeter of a superellipse, like that of an ellipse, does not admit closed-form solution purely using elementary functions. Exact solutions for the perimeter of a superellipse exist using infinite summations; these could be truncated to obtain approximate solutions. Numerical integration is another option to obtain perimeter estimates at arbitrary precision.\nA closed-form approximation obtained via symbolic regression is also an option that balances parsimony and accuracy. Consider a superellipse centered on the origin of a 2D plane. Now, imagine that the superellipse (with shape parameter formula_5) is stretched such that the first quadrant (e.g., formula_42, formula_43) is an arc from formula_44 to formula_45, with formula_46. Then, the arc length of the superellipse within that single quadrant is approximated as the following function of formula_47 and formula_5:\ncodice_1\nThis single-quadrant arc length approximation is accurate to within \u00b10.2% for across all values of formula_5, and can be used to efficiently estimate the total perimeter of a superellipse.\nPedal curve.\nThe pedal curve is relatively straightforward to compute. Specifically, the pedal offormula_50is given in polar coordinates byformula_51 \nGeneralizations.\nThe generalization of these shapes can involve several approaches.The generalizations of the superellipse in higher dimensions retain the fundamental mathematical structure of the superellipse while adapting it to different contexts and applications.\nHigher dimensions.\nThe generalizations of the superellipse in higher dimensions retain the fundamental mathematical structure of the superellipse while adapting it to different contexts and applications.\nDifferent exponents.\nUsing different exponents for each term in the equation, allowing more flexibility in shape formation.\nFor two-dimensional case the equation is formula_62 where formula_63 either equals to or differs from \"formula_5\". If formula_65, it is the Lam\u00e9's superellipses. If formula_66, the curve possesses more flexibility of behavior, and is better possible fit to describe some experimental information.\nFor the three-dimensional case, three different positive powers formula_63\", formula_5\" and formula_69 can be used in the equation formula_70. If formula_71, a super-ellipsoid is obtained. If any two or all three powers differ from each other, a solid is obtained that may possess more flexibility in representing real structural data than the super ellipsoid. A three-dimensional super-ellipsoid with formula_72, formula_73 and the semi-diameters formula_27, formula_75 represents the structure of the National Centre for the Performing Arts in China.\nIn the general formula_76\u2013dimensional case, the equation is formula_77, where In general, formula_78 may differ from each other. It is the superellipsoid only if formula_79.\nRelated shapes.\nSuperquadrics are a family of shapes that include superellipsoids as a special case. They are used in computer graphics and geometric modeling to create complex, smooth shapes with easily adjustable parameters. While not a direct generalization of superellipses, hyperspheres also share the concept of extending geometric shapes into higher dimensions. These related shapes demonstrate the versatility and broad applicability of the fundamental principles underlying superellipses.\nAnisotropic scaling.\nAnisotropic scaling involves scaling the shape differently along different axes, providing additional control over the geometry. This approach can be applied to superellipses, superellipsoids, and their higher-dimensional analogues to produce a wider variety of forms and better fit specific requirements in applications such as computer graphics, structural design, and data visualization. For instance, anisotropic scaling allows the creation of shapes that can model real-world objects more accurately by adjusting the proportions along each axis independently.\nHistory.\nThe general Cartesian notation of the form comes from the French mathematician Gabriel Lam\u00e9 (1795\u20131870), who generalized the equation for the ellipse.\nHermann Zapf's typeface Melior, published in 1952, uses superellipses for letters such as \"o\". Thirty years later Donald Knuth would build the ability to choose between true ellipses and superellipses (both approximated by cubic splines) into his Computer Modern type family.\nThe superellipse was named by the Danish poet and scientist Piet Hein (1905\u20131996) though he did not discover it as it is sometimes claimed. In 1959, city planners in Stockholm, Sweden announced a design challenge for a roundabout in their city square Sergels Torg. Piet Hein's winning proposal was based on a superellipse with \"n\" = 2.5 and \"a\"/\"b\" = 6/5. As he explained it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Man is the animal that draws lines which he himself then stumbles over. In the whole pattern of civilization there have been two tendencies, one toward straight lines and rectangular patterns and one toward circular lines. There are reasons, mechanical and psychological, for both tendencies. Things made with straight lines fit well together and save space. And we can move easily \u2014 physically or mentally \u2014 around things made with round lines. But we are in a straitjacket, having to accept one or the other, when often some intermediate form would be better. To draw something freehand \u2014 such as the patchwork traffic circle they tried in Stockholm \u2014 will not do. It isn't fixed, isn't definite like a circle or square. You don't know what it is. It isn't esthetically satisfying. The super-ellipse solved the problem. It is neither round nor rectangular, but in between. Yet it is fixed, it is definite \u2014 it has a unity.\"\nSergels Torg was completed in 1967. Meanwhile, Piet Hein went on to use the superellipse in other artifacts, such as beds, dishes, tables, etc. By rotating a superellipse around the longest axis, he created the superegg, a solid egg-like shape that could stand upright on a flat surface, and was marketed as a novelty toy.\nIn 1968, when negotiators in Paris for the Vietnam War could not agree on the shape of the negotiating table, Balinski, Kieron Underwood and Holt suggested a superelliptical table in a letter to the New York Times. The superellipse was used for the shape of the 1968 Azteca Olympic Stadium, in Mexico City.\nThe second floor of the original World Trade Center in New York City consisted of a large, superellipse-shaped overhanging balcony.\nWaldo R. Tobler developed a map projection, the Tobler hyperelliptical projection, published in 1973, in which the meridians are arcs of superellipses.\nThe logo for news company The Local consists of a tilted superellipse matching the proportions of Sergels Torg. Three connected superellipses are used in the logo of the Pittsburgh Steelers.\nIn computing, mobile operating system iOS uses a superellipse curve for app icons, replacing the rounded corners style used up to version 6.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52213", "revid": "1886421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52213", "title": "Original Dixieland Jass Band", "text": "American jazz band\nThe Original Dixieland Jass Band (ODJB) was a Dixieland jazz band that made the first jazz recordings in early 1917. Their \"Livery Stable Blues\" became the first jazz record ever issued. The group composed and recorded many jazz standards, the most famous being \"Tiger Rag\". In late 1917, the spelling of the band's name was changed to Original Dixieland Jazz Band.\nThe band consisted of five musicians who had played in the Papa Jack Laine bands.\nODJB billed itself as \"the Creators of Jazz\". It was the first band to record jazz commercially and to have hit recordings in the genre. Band leader and cornetist Nick LaRocca argued that ODJB deserved recognition as the first band to record jazz commercially and the first band to establish jazz as a musical idiom or genre.\nThe original quintet disbanded in 1926. Ten years later, Nick LaRocca recruited most of the quintet to form a new swing band featuring the ODJB members. The full quintet reunited in 1936 to great acclaim, and finally disbanded in 1938.\nOrigins.\nIn early 1916, a promoter from Chicago approached clarinetist Alcide Nunez and drummer Johnny Stein about bringing a New Orleans-style band to Chicago, where the similar Brown's Band From Dixieland, led by trombonist Tom Brown, was enjoying success. They then assembled trombonist Eddie Edwards, pianist Henry Ragas, and cornetist Frank Christian. Shortly before they were to leave, Christian backed out, and Nick LaRocca was hired as a last-minute replacement.\nOn March 3, 1916 the musicians began their job at Schiller's Cafe in Chicago under the name Stein's Dixie Jass Band. The band was a hit and received offers of higher pay elsewhere. Since Stein as leader was the only musician under contract by name, the rest of the band broke off, sent to New Orleans for drummer Tony Sbarbaro, and on June 5, started playing under the name, The Dixie Jass Band. LaRocca and Nunez had personality conflicts, and on October 30 Tom Brown's Band and ODJB agreed to swap clarinetists, bringing Larry Shields into the Original Dixieland Jass Band. The band attracted the attention of theatrical agent Max Hart, who booked the band in New York City. At the start of 1917 the band began an engagement playing for dancing at Reisenweber's Cafe, on Columbus Circle, in Manhattan.\nFirst recordings.\nWhile a couple of other New Orleans bands had passed through New York City slightly earlier, they were part of vaudeville acts. ODJB, on the other hand, played for dancing and hence, were the first \"jass\" band to get a following of fans in New York and then record at a time when the American recording industry was essentially centered in the northeastern United States, primarily in New York City and Camden, New Jersey.\nShortly after arriving in New York, a letter dated January 29, 1917, offered the band an audition for the Columbia Graphophone Company. The session took place on Wednesday, January 31, 1917. Nothing from this test session was issued.\nThe band then recorded two sides for the Victor Talking Machine Company, \"Livery Stable Blues\" and \"Dixieland Jass Band One-Step\", on February 26, 1917 at Victor's New York studios. These titles were released as Victor 18255 in May 1917, the first issued jazz record. The band's recordings, first marketed as a novelty, were a surprise hit, and gave many Americans their first taste of jazz. Musician Joe Jordan sued, since the \"One Step\" incorporated portions of his 1909 ragtime composition \"That Teasin' Rag\". The record labels subsequently were changed to \"Introducing 'That Teasin' Rag' by Joe Jordan\". A court case dispute over the authorship of \"Livery Stable Blues\" resulted in the judge declaring the tune in the \"public domain\".\nIn the wake of the group's success of the Victor record, the ODJB returned to Columbia in May, recording two selections of popular tunes of the day chosen for them by the label (possibly hoping to avoid the copyright problems which arose after Victor recorded two of the band's supposedly original compositions) \"Darktown Strutters' Ball\" and \"(Back Home Again in) Indiana\" as catalogue A-2297.\nNumerous jazz bands were formed in the wake of the success of ODJB that copied and replicated its style and sound. Also bands were brought from Chicago and California (such as the Frisco Jass Band) in an attempts to join the jazz craze. Established bands of different types and bandleaders such as Wilbur Sweatman began billing their groups as \"jass\" or \"jazz\" bands. Earl Fuller, bandleader at a competing New York venue, was ordered by management to form a \"jass\" band.\nW. C. Handy recorded one of the earliest cover versions of an ODJB tune when he released a recording of \"Livery Stable Blues\" by Handy's Orchestra of Memphis for Columbia in 1917.\nIn 1918, the song \"When You Hear That Dixieland Jazz Band Play\" by Shelton Brooks, \"the King of Ragtime Writers\", was published by Will Rossiter in Chicago. It was a tribute to the Original Dixieland Jazz Band, who were featured on the cover.\nOriginal New Orleans Jazz Band.\nWhen the New Orleans Jazz style swept New York by storm in 1917 with the arrival of the Original Dixieland Jazz Band, Jimmy Durante was part of the audience at Reisenweber's Cafe on Columbus Circle when ODJB played that venue. Durante was very impressed with the band and invited them to play at a club called the Alamo in Harlem where Jimmy played piano.\nDurante had his friend, Johnny Stein (the previous drummer and leader of the group), assemble a group of like-minded New Orleans musicians to accompany his act at the Alamo. Stein did so, with a band consisting of fellow veterans of the Laine bands in New Orleans, other than pianist Durante. In late 1918 they recorded two sides for Okeh under the name of the New Orleans Jazz Band. They recorded the same two numbers a couple of months later for Gennett under the name of Original New Orleans Jazz Band, and in 1920 the same group recorded again for Gennett as Jimmy Durante's Jazz Band. They later billed themselves as \"Durante's Jazz and Novelty Band\".\nSicilian influence.\nBoth LaRocca and Sbarbaro were children of immigrants from the Italian region of Sicily. The Sicilian capital of Palermo had long held cotton and citrus fruit trade with New Orleans. This resulted in the establishment of a direct shipping line between the two port cities which enabled a vast number of Sicilians to migrate to New Orleans, and other American cities, between the late 1800s and early 1900s. With this migration, Sicilian sound was brought to New Orleans and integrated with regional African-American music. The band would capitalize on this growing integration.\nLater history of the band.\nAfter their initial recording for the Victor Company, the ODJB recorded for Columbia Records (after the first Victor session, not before as has sometimes been reported) and Aeolian-Vocalion in 1917, then returned to Victor the following year, while enjoying continued popularity in New York. Trombonist Edwards was drafted for World War I in 1918 and replaced by Emile Christian, and pianist Henry Ragas died of influenza in the 1918 flu pandemic the following year and he was replaced by pianist and composer J. Russel Robinson.\nRobinson's compositions for the band recorded and released in 1920, include the classic \"Margie\" and \"Palesteena (Lena from Palesteena)\", were among the most popular and best-selling hits of 1920. \"Aggravatin' Papa\" was composed with lyricist Roy Turk and Addie Britt and was recorded by Alberta Hunter in 1923 with Fletcher Henderson's Dance Orchestra and also by Bessie Smith, Sophie Tucker, Florence Mills, Lucille Hegamin, and Pearl Bailey. Robinson also collaborated with Roy Turk on the compositions \"Sweet Man O' Mine\" and \"A-Wearin' Away the Blues\", and he wrote \"Mama Whip! Mama Spank! (If Her Daddy Don't Come Home)\" for blues and jazz singer Mamie Smith and her Jazz Band in 1921, which were released on the Okeh label. Robinson was a member of the band until 1923; he rejoined the band when it reformed in 1936.\n\"Margie\", composed by J. Russel Robinson with Con Conrad, with lyrics added by Benny Davis, has been covered over a hundred times. \"Margie\" has been recorded by Louis Armstrong, who also covered the band's \"Tiger Rag\", Ray Charles, Al Jolson, Duke Ellington and His Orchestra in 1935, the Billy Kyle Swing Club Band, Claude Hopkins, Red Nichols, Django Reinhardt, George Paxton, the Dutch Swing College Band, Fats Domino, Sidney Bechet, Don Redman, Cab Calloway, Jim Reeves, Gene Krupa, and Benny Goodman.\n\"Margie\" was a no. 9 hit for ODJB in 1921 with J. Russel Robinson on piano. Eddie Cantor had the biggest hit version of the ODJB classic, spending five weeks at no. 1 in 1921. The song also was featured in the movie \"The Eddie Cantor Story\" and was the theme of the television series of the same name in 1961\u20131962. Cantor also recorded ODJB's \"Palesteena (Lena from Palesteena)\". Gene Rodemich and His Orchestra reached no. 7 with their version in 1920. Ted Lewis and His Band reached no. 4 in 1921. Frank Crumit had a no. 7 hit in 1921. Claude Hopkins and His Orchestra reached no. 5 in 1934 with Orlando Peterson on vocals. Don Redman and His Orchestra got to no. 15 in 1939 with a cover of the ODJB song. Dave Brubeck, Bix Beiderbecke, Bing Crosby, Jo Stafford, Erroll Garner, Oscar Peterson, Charlie Shavers, Jimmy Smith, Joe Venuti, Ray Barretto, and Shelly Manne also have recorded the song. Jimmie Lunceford recorded the song in 1938 with a Sy Oliver arrangement that featured Trummy Young.\nLondon tour.\nOther New Orleans musicians, including Nunez, Tom Brown, and Frank Christian, followed ODJB's example and went to New York to play jazz as well, giving the band competition. LaRocca decided to take the band to London, where they would once again enjoy being the only authentic New Orleans jazz band in the metropolis, and again present themselves as the Originators of Jazz because they were the first band to record the new genre of music dubbed jass or jazz. The band's April 7, 1919 appearance in the revue \"Joy Bells\" at the London Hippodrome was the first official live jazz performance by any band in the United Kingdom and was followed by a command performance for King George V at Buckingham Palace. The concert did not start auspiciously, with the assembled aristocracy, which included French Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain, peering through opera glasses at the band \"as though there were bugs on us\", according to LaRocca. The audience loosened up, however, after the king laughed and loudly applauded their rendition of \"The Tiger Rag\". The British tour ended with the band being chased to the Southampton docks by Lord Harrington, who was infuriated that his daughter was being romanced by the lead singer of the band. In London, they made twenty more recordings for the British branch of Columbia. While in London, they recorded the second, more commercially successful, version of their hit song \"Soudan\" (also known as \"Oriental Jass\").\nThe band returned to the United States in July 1920 and toured for four years. This version of the band played in a more commercial style, adding a saxophone to the arrangements in the manner of other popular orchestras. Jazz pianist and composer Frank Signorelli, who collaborated on the jazz standards \"A Blues Serenade\" recorded by Glenn Miller and Duke Ellington, \"Gypsy\", and \"Stairway to the Stars\", joined the ODJB for a brief time in 1921.\nIn November 1925 Nick LaRocca announced that he was retiring from the music business. He was replaced by 19-year-old trumpeter Henry Levine, who in 1940 brought this kind of repertoire to the NBC radio show \"The Chamber Music Society of Lower Basin Street\". With LaRocca's departure Tony Sbarbaro, now the only original member of the ODJB, became the bandleader. The personnel for this final incarnation of the \"original\" ODJB was Tony Sbarbaro (drums), Henry Levine (trumpet), Artie Seaberg (clarinet), Al Caplan (trombone), and Wilder Chase (piano). The band finished out its contract with New York's Cinderella Ballroom in February 1926, and then disbanded.\nBreak-ups and reunions.\nThe band broke up in 1926 because its brand of free-wheeling jazz was then considered old-fashioned. As Abel Green of \"Variety\" put it: \"[Paul] Whiteman with his symphonic syncopation came along and made America and the world conscious of his arranged sweet foxtrotology. Then the Dixieland Band folded for good.\"\nThe band members scattered. Leader/trumpeter Nick LaRocca returned to his construction business in New Orleans. Clarinetist Larry Shields moved to Chicago, then to New Orleans where he worked for a Bible publisher. Trombonist Eddie Edwards was discovered operating a newsstand in New York City; newspaper publicity resulted in Edwards fronting a local nightclub band. Drummer Tony Sbarbaro was now a mechanic. Pianist J. Russel Robinson was in radio, a musical director for the NBC network. Although \"Variety\" reported in November 1932 that Victor planned to use the band in new remakes of their old hits, only Eddie Edwards and Tony Sbarbaro were mentioned, with nightclub emcee Kendall Capps set to front the \"Original Dixieland Jazz Band\" in live performances. Nothing came of this and no recordings resulted.\nIn October 1935 Tony Sbarbaro recorded four sides for Vocalion with his own quintet, billed as \"Original Dixieland Jazz Band\". In early 1936 Nick LaRocca and Larry Shields reunited in New Orleans for a hotel date. Encouraged by the response, they continued to play local clubs and private functions. LaRocca, gauging the audiences for dance-band music, listened to the latest swing records and decided that the ODJB could appeal to those listeners as well. He assembled a 14-piece swing band featuring four members of the ODJB: himself, Larry Shields, J. Russel Robinson, and Tony Sbarbaro. \"Nick LaRocca and The Original Dixieland Band\" recorded nine sides for Victor in September 1936. Trade columnists welcomed these new big-band versions of the old hits, with the technological advance of electrical recording (with microphones) yielding a tremendous improvement in fidelity over the old acoustic recordings. Clarinetist Larry Shields received particularly positive attention: \"It is here that one of the all too few opportunities to hear and judge Shields by himself is found,\" wrote \"The Record Changer\". \"It is Larry Shields who packs the punch, much as he did in the regular, smaller band.\"\nEddie Edwards, the only ODJB member absent from the first big-band session on September 2, showed up at the studio toward the end of the second big-band session on September 25. The original quintet ran through \"Skeleton Jangle\" without the big band. The take went so well that Victor invited the quintet back into the studio to record five more songs on November 10, 1936. Victor credited these records to \"The Original Dixieland Five\" to avoid confusion with Victor's \"Original Dixieland Band\" records then in circulation. Benny Goodman (who was present at the quintet's Victor recording session) named Shields as an important early influence, and invited the band to appear on his network radio show, where the ODJB was a sensation. The band was booked into New York's famous Paramount theater in April 1937, one month after Goodman's spectacular showing at the Paramount. Victor even coupled the new Goodman recording of \"St. Louis Blues\" with the Original Dixieland Five's recording of \"Clarinet Marmalade\" on the same 78-rpm disc.\nThe ODJB reunion received widespread publicity, including a \"March of Time\" newsreel re-creating the group's first recording session and showing their successful performance in Boston on December 31, 1936. J. Russel Robinson compared the band's style to modern swing, which reporter Abel Green encapsulated: \"Swing is no different basically than the old Dixieland style. The sole difference is that today it is closer harmony, because it's arranged. The arranger scores the supposed improvisations because otherwise it would sound like bedlam. When a small combo of four or five jams it out, no arrangement is necessary because each instrumentalist merely takes the chorus lead in sequence.\"\nKen Murray, always a fan of bygone acts, hired the band in late 1936 for a tour of personal appearances. Bass violinist Harry Barth was added to the band in January 1937 for these stage shows. A \"Variety\" reviewer caught the Baltimore engagement and disapproved of Murray's handling: \"Unfortunately boys aren't getting the spotlight they deserve. They're part of Murray's act and, with two brief exceptions, there's something in front of band [at] all times. To many, that old act has been mythical, especially in last year-and-half. Murray didn't even adequately explain band's background when intro'ing it. Comic should certainly take advantage of what he has in his own act.\"\nAfter the stint with Murray, the band's radio and stage appearances were now being arranged by veteran band booker and manager Ed Kirkeby. The band opened Billy Rose's opulent Frontier Fiesta club in Fort Worth, Texas in July 1937. They played throughout the summer at the Dallas-Fort Worth Exposition, and returned to New York on October 1 for a booking at the Old New York nightclub. Toward the end of the tour, there were disagreements about LaRocca's leadership; Harry Barth had left angrily on August 7 when he asked LaRocca for a raise and was refused. LaRocca and Edwards also argued back and forth. On January 17, 1938, LaRocca served notice on both the band members and the musicians' union in New York that the ODJB would be disbanding. The band officially broke up on February 1, 1938.\nIn the immediate aftermath, two factions competed as the Original Dixieland Jazz Band. Edwards, Shields, and Sbarbaro had one more recording date with Victor on February 18, 1938; they were augmented by New York-area sidemen and vocalist Lola Bard. They recorded six songs for Victor's Bluebird label, and the records were credited to the \"Original Dixieland Jazz Band with Shields, Edwards and Sbarbaro; vocal refrain by Lola Bard.\" The Edwards band toured the southern United States in the spring of 1938. Meanwhile the other two members, LaRocca and Robinson, had \"their own combo in New York\".\nMost of the ODJB veterans continued to work after Nick La Rocca retired completely from the musical scene. In November 1943 Tony Sbarbaro, claiming ownership of the ODJB name, brought back Eddie Edwards (and went after Larry Shields) to appear with the Original Dixieland Jazz Band in Sol Hurok's stage production \"Tropical Review\" in Forrest, New York. In 1944, a new version of \"Tiger Rag\" was released as V-Disc 214, featuring Edwards and Sbarbaro under the ODJB name; \"Sensation Rag\" also was released as V-Disc 214B2. V-Discs were non-commercial recordings issued only to the U.S. armed forces. In 1946 Tony Sbarbaro (now using the name Tony Spargo) led a new eight-man group, \"The Emperors of Jazz\", with ODJB alumnus Frank Signorelli on piano. J. Russel Robinson moved to California and continued to write songs, forming his own publishing company Southern California Music in 1952.\nIn 1960 the book, \"The Story of the Original Dixieland Jazz Band\", was published. Writer H. O. Brunn based it on Nick LaRocca's recollections, which sometimes differ from that of other sources.\nOf the veteran quintet, only Tony Sbarbaro lived to witness RCA Victor's commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Original Dixieland Jazz Band. Larry Shields died in 1953, Nick LaRocca in 1961, Eddie Edwards and J. Russel Robinson in 1963, and Tony Sbarbaro in 1969.\nBack in New Orleans, LaRocca licensed bandleader Phil Zito to use the ODJB name for many years. Nick LaRocca's son, Jimmy LaRocca, continues to lead bands under the name The Original Dixieland Jazz Band, which LaRocca the younger has trademarked.\nInfluence.\nThe ODJB was the first band to record jazz successfully, establishing and creating jazz as a new musical idiom and genre of music. Bix Beiderbecke was influenced by the ODJB to become a jazz musician and was heavily influenced by Nick LaRocca's cornet and trumpet style. Louis Armstrong acknowledged the importance of ODJB:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Only four years before I learned to play the trumpet in the Waif's Home, or in 1909, the first great jazz orchestra was formed in New Orleans by a cornet player named Dominick James LaRocca. They called him 'Nick' LaRocca. His orchestra had only five pieces but they were the hottest five pieces that had ever been known before. LaRocca named this band 'The Old Dixieland Jass Band'. He had an instrumentation different from anything before, an instrumentation that made the old songs sound new. Besides himself at the cornet, LaRocca had Larry Shields, clarinet, Eddie Edwards, trombone, Ragas, piano, and Sbarbaro, drums. They all came to be famous players and the Dixieland Band has gone down now in musical history.\u2014\u200a\nFilm appearances.\nIn 1917, the band made the first appearance of a jazz band in a motion picture, a silent movie entitled, \"The Good for Nothing\" (1917), directed by Carlyle Blackwell, who also played the lead role as Jack Burkshaw. Written by Alexander Thomas, it also featured Evelyn Greeley and Kate Lester and was produced by William Brady. Nick LaRocca, Larry Shields, Tony Sbarbaro, and Henry Ragas appeared in the film as a band, with LaRocca on cornet, Shields on clarinet, Ragas on piano, and Sbarbaro on drums. The film was released on December 10, 1917, produced by Peerless Productions, and distributed by World Pictures.\nNick LaRocca and the reunited Original Dixieland Jass Band performed \"Tiger Rag\" in \"The March of Time\" newsreel segment titled \"Birth of Swing\", released to U.S. theaters on February 19, 1937.\nMusic of ODJB.\n\"Tiger Rag\".\nThe band's 1917 composition \"Tiger Rag\" became one of the most popular and ubiquitous of jazz standards. There were 136 cover versions of ODJB's copyright jazz standard and classic \"Tiger Rag\" by 1942. It has been standard ever since.\nTheir first release, \"Livery Stable Blues\", featured instruments doing barnyard imitations and the fully loaded trap set, wood blocks, cowbells, gongs, and Chinese gourds. This musical innovation represented one of the first experimental exercises in jazz. At the time, their music was liberating; the barnyard sounds were experiments in altering the tonal qualities of the instruments, and clattering wood blocks broke up the rhythm. The music was very lively when compared to the pop music of the time.\nMany of the tunes first composed and recorded by the Original Dixieland Jass Band, such as \"Tiger Rag\" and \"Margie\", were recorded by many of the major jazz bands and orchestras of the twentieth century, black and white. \"Tiger Rag\" was recorded by many artists, from Louis Armstrong to Duke Ellington to Glenn Miller to Benny Goodman. \"Tiger Rag\", in particular, became popular with many colleges and universities having a tiger as a mascot. In the biography \"John Coltrane: His Life and Music\", published in 1999, Lewis Porter noted that ODJB's classic, \"Margie\", was a \"specialty\" of John Coltrane, a song he performed regularly in his early career. \"Tiger Rag\", \"Margie\", \"Clarinet Marmalade\", \"At The Jazz Band Ball\", \"Sensation Rag\", and \"Fidgety Feet\" remain much played classics in the repertory of contemporary Dixieland and traditional jazz bands. Their tunes were published as collaborations by some or all of the entire ensemble, including band leader Nick La Rocca.\nThe Original Dixieland Jazz Band recording of \"Tiger Rag\" was no. 1 for two weeks on the U.S. Hit Parade charts beginning on December 11, 1918. The Mills Brothers recorded \"Tiger Rag\" in 1931 with lyrics and spent four weeks at no. 1 on the charts in 1931\u20131932 with their version of the ODJB song.\nThe Eddie Edwards composition \"Sensation Rag\" (aka \"Sensation\") was performed at the 1938 landmark Benny Goodman jazz concert at Carnegie Hall released on the album \"The Famous 1938 Carnegie Hall Jazz Concert\".\nCompared to later jazz, the ODJB recordings have only modest improvisation in mostly ensemble tunes. Clarinetist Larry Shields is perhaps the most interesting player, showing a good fluid tone, and if his melodic variations and breaks now seem overly familiar, this is because they were imitated widely by musicians who followed in the band's footsteps.\nTheir concept of arrangement was somewhat limited, and their recordings can seem rather repetitive. The lack of a bass player is scarcely compensated for by the piano on their earlier, acoustically recorded sessions. Nonetheless, ODJB arrangements were wild, impolite, and definitely had a jazz feel, and that style still is referred to as the style of music known as Dixieland.\nCovers.\nODJB's songs were recorded by other musicians, such as Fletcher Henderson and His Orchestra, one of the most popular and influential jazz bands of the 1920s.\nBix Beiderbecke recorded nine compositions associated with the ODJB from 1924 to 1930: \"Fidgety Feet\", his first recording in 1924, \"Tiger Rag\", \"Sensation\", \"Lazy Daddy\", \"Ostrich Walk\", \"Clarinet Marmalade\", \"Singin' the Blues\" with Frankie Trumbauer and Eddie Lang, \"Margie\", and \"At the Jazz Band Ball\".\nDiscography.\nThe band's seminal 78-rpm recordings include the following (on Victor, Columbia, and Aeolian Vocalion):\nSoundtracks.\nThe soundtrack album to the 2011 \"Boardwalk Empire\" series on HBO includes performances of three songs recorded by the Original Dixieland Jazz Band: \"Livery Stable Blues\", \"Mournin' Blues\", and \"Margie\", performed by Vince Giordano and the Nighthawks Orchestra. The soundtrack won the Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media at the 54th Grammy Awards.\nHonors.\nIn 1977, the ODJB classic \"Singin' the Blues\", co-written by ODJB pianist J. Russel Robinson, was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in a landmark 1927 recording by Frankie Trumbauer and His Orchestra featuring Bix Beiderbecke on cornet and Eddie Lang on guitar, as Okeh 40772-B, recorded on February 4, 1927.\nOn April 3, 1992, the City Council of New Orleans issued a proclamation honoring the members of the band. In 2003, the 1918 ODJB recording of \"Tiger Rag\" was placed on the U.S. Library of Congress National Recording Registry. In 2006, the Original Dixieland Jazz Band's recording of \"Darktown Strutters' Ball\", released in 1917 as Columbia single A2297, was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.\nThe Original Dixieland Jazz Band was posthumously inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have \"qualitative or historical significance\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52216", "revid": "1325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52216", "title": "Original Dixieland Jazz Band", "text": ""}
{"id": "52217", "revid": "1434753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52217", "title": "Free-rider problem", "text": "Market failure benefitting non-paying users\nIn economics, the free-rider problem is a type of market failure that occurs when those who benefit from resources, public goods and common pool resources do not pay for them or under-pay. Free riders may overuse common pool resources by not paying for them, neither directly through fees or tolls, nor indirectly through taxes. Consequently, the common pool resource may be under-produced, overused, or degraded. Additionally, despite evidence that people tend to be cooperative by nature (a prosocial behaviour), the presence of free-riders has been shown to cause cooperation to deteriorate, perpetuating the free-rider problem.\nIn social science, the free-rider problem is the question of how to limit free riding and its negative effects in these situations, such as the free-rider problem of when property rights are not clearly defined and imposed. The free-rider problem is common with public goods which are non-excludable and non-rivalrous. The non-excludability and non-rivalry of public goods results in there being little incentive for consumers to contribute to a collective resource as they enjoy its benefits.\nA free rider may enjoy a non-excludable and non-rivalrous good such as a government-provided road system without contributing to paying for it. Another example is if a coastal town builds a lighthouse, ships from many regions and countries will benefit from it, even though they are not contributing to its costs, and are thus \"free riding\" on the navigation aid. A third example of non-excludable and non-rivalrous consumption would be a crowd watching fireworks. The number of viewers, whether they paid for the entertainment or not, does not diminish the fireworks as a resource. In each of these examples, the cost of excluding non-payers would be prohibitive, while the collective consumption of the resource does not decrease how much is available.\nAlthough the term \"free rider\" was first used in economic theory of public goods, similar concepts have been applied to other contexts, including collective bargaining, antitrust law, psychology, political science, and vaccines. For example, some individuals in a team or community may reduce their contributions or performance if they believe that one or more other members of the group may free ride.\nThe economic free-rider problem is equally pertinent within the realm of global politics, often presenting challenges in international cooperation and collective action. In global politics, states are confronted with scenarios where certain actors reap the benefits of collective goods or actions without bearing the costs or contributing to the efforts required to achieve these shared objectives. This phenomenon creates imbalances and hampers cooperative endeavors, particularly in addressing transnational challenges like climate change, global security, or humanitarian crises. For instance, in discussions on climate change mitigation, countries with lesser contributions to greenhouse gas emissions might still benefit from global efforts to reduce emissions, enjoying a stable climate without proportionally shouldering the costs of emission reductions. This creates a disparity between states' contributions and their gains, leading to challenges in negotiating and implementing effective international agreements. The economic free-rider problem's manifestation in global politics underscores the complexities and obstacles encountered in fostering collective action and equitable burden-sharing among nations to address pressing global issues.\nIncentive.\nThe underlying incentive which generates the free-rider problem can be explained via the application of the prisoner's dilemma within the context of contributing to a public good. Suppose two people were to split a contribution to a public service (such as for a fire station) with society benefiting from their contribution. According to the prisoner's dilemma, certain conclusions can be drawn from the results of this scenario:\nThis demonstrates that the free-rider problem is generated by individuals' willingness to let others pay when they themselves can receive the benefit at zero cost. This is reinforced by the economic theory of rational choice, which states that people make choices which they infer will provide them with the greatest benefit. Therefore, if a service or resource is offered for free, then a consumer will not pay for it.\nEconomic issues.\nFree riding is a problem of economic inefficiency when it leads to the underproduction or overconsumption of a good. For example, when people are asked how much they value a particular public good, with that value measured in terms of how much money they would be willing to pay, their tendency is to under-report their valuations. Goods that are subject to free riding are usually characterized by: the inability to exclude non-payers, its consumption by an individual does not impact the availability for others and that the resource in question must be produced and/or maintained. Indeed, if non-payers can be excluded by some mechanism, the good may be transformed into a club good (e.g. if an overused, congested public road is converted to a toll road, or if a free public museum turns into a private, admission fee-charging museum).\nFree riders become a problem when non-excludable goods are also rivalrous. These goods, categorized as common-pool resources, are characterized by overconsumption when common property regimes are not implemented. Not only can consumers of common-property goods benefit without payment, but consumption by one imposes an opportunity cost on others. The theory of 'Tragedy of the commons' highlights this, in which each consumer acts to maximize their own utility and thereby relies on others to cut back their own consumption. This will lead to overconsumption and even possibly exhaustion or destruction of the good. If too many people start to free ride, a system or service will eventually not have enough resources to operate. Free-riding is experienced when the production of goods does not consider the external costs, particularly the use of ecosystem services.\nAn example of this is global climate change initiatives. As climate change is a global issue and there is no global regime to manage the climate, the benefits of reduced emissions in one country will extend beyond their own countries' borders and impact countries worldwide. However, this has resulted in some countries acting in their own self-interest, limiting their own efforts and free-riding on the work of others. In some countries, citizens and governments do not wish to contribute to the associated effort and costs of mitigation, as they are able to free-ride on the efforts of others. This free rider problem also raises questions in regards to the fairness and ethics of these practices, as countries most likely to suffer the consequences of climate change, are also those who typically emit the least greenhouse gases and have fewer economic resources to contribute to the efforts, such as the small island country of Tuvalu.\nTheodore Groves and John Ledyard believe that Pareto-optimal allocation of resources in relation to public goods is not compatible with the fundamental incentives belonging to individuals. Therefore, the free-rider problem, according to most scholars, is expected to be an ongoing public issue. For example, Albert O. Hirschman believed that the free-rider problem is a cyclical one for capitalist economies. Hirschman considers the free-rider problem to be related to the shifting interests of people. When stress levels rise on individuals in the workplace and many fear losing their employment, they devote less of their human capital to the public sphere. When public needs then increase, disenchanted consumers become more interested in collective action projects. This leads individuals to organize themselves in various groups and the results are attempts to solve public problems. In effect this reverses the momentum of free riding. Activities often seen as costs in models focused on self-interest are instead seen as benefits for the individuals who were previously dissatisfied consumers seeking their private interests.\nThis cycle will reset itself because as individuals' work for public benefit becomes less praiseworthy, supporters' level of commitment to collective action projects will decrease. With the decrease in support, many will return to private interests, which with time resets the cycle. Supporters of Hirschman's model insist that the important factor in motivating people is that they are compelled by a leader's call to altruism. In John F. Kennedy's inaugural address he implored the American people to \"ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.\" Some economists (for example, Milton Friedman) find these calls to altruism to be nonsensical. Scholars like Friedman do not think the free-rider problem is part of an unchangeable virtuous or vicious circle, but instead seek possible solutions or attempts at improvement elsewhere.\nOpen communities.\nOpen Standards, Open Source and Open Data are now a huge part of our economy, and all share a version of this problem. Propagated by the internet, our digital economy has made it easy to copy and distribute information. Projects from operating systems to content management systems have been developed and maintained by a small group of contributors. Meanwhile a much larger number of individuals, companies, and governments benefit. This happens often without acknowledgement, let alone contributing back to the project. This dynamic has led to sustainability concerns, as core maintainers face burnout and underfunding despite the critical infrastructure role these digital public goods play. Scholars and advocates have highlighted the need for new models\u2014such as public funding, corporate contributions, or support from government institutions.\nEconomic and political solutions.\nAssurance contracts.\nAn assurance contract is a contract in which participants make a binding pledge to contribute to building a public good, contingent on a quorum of a predetermined size being reached, otherwise the good is not provided and any monetary contributions are refunded.\nA dominant assurance contract is a variation in which an entrepreneur creates the contract and refunds the initial pledge plus an additional sum of money if the quorum is not reached. The entrepreneur profits by collecting a fee if the quorum is reached and the good is provided. In terms of game theory, this makes pledging to build the public good a dominant strategy: the best move is to abide by the contract regardless of the actions of others.\nCoasian solution.\nA Coasian solution, named for the economist Ronald Coase, proposes that potential beneficiaries of a public good can negotiate to pool their resources and create it, based on each party's self-interested willingness to pay. His treatise, \"The Problem of Social Cost\" (1960), argued that if the transaction costs between potential beneficiaries of a public good are low\u2014that it is easy for potential beneficiaries to find each other and organize pooling their resources based upon the good's value to each of them\u2014that public goods could be produced without government action.\nMuch later, Coase himself wrote that while what had become known as the Coase Theorem had explored the implications of zero-transaction costs, he had actually intended to use this construct as a stepping stone to understand the real world of positive transaction costs, corporations, legal systems and government actions:I examined what would happen in a world in which transaction costs were assumed to be zero. My aim in doing so was not to describe what life would be like in such a world but to provide a simple setting in which to develop the analysis and, what was even more important, to make clear the fundamental role which transaction costs do, and should, play in the fashioning of the institutions which make up the economic system.Coase also wrote:The world of zero transaction costs has often been described as a Coasian world. Nothing could be further from the truth. It is the world of modern economic theory, one which I was hoping to persuade economists to leave. What I did in \"The Problem of Social Cost\" was simply to shed light on some of its properties. I argued in such a world the allocation of resources would be independent of the legal position, a result which Stigler dubbed the \"Coase theorem\".\nThus, while Coase himself appears to have considered the \"Coase theorem\" and Coasian solutions as simplified constructs to ultimately consider the real 20th-century world of governments, laws, and corporations, these concepts have become attached to a world where transaction costs were much lower and government intervention would unquestionably be less necessary.\nFundraising.\nA minor alternative, especially for information goods, is for the producer to refuse to release a good to the public until payment to cover costs is met. For instance, Stephen King authored chapters of a new novel downloadable for free on his website while stating that he would not release subsequent chapters unless a certain amount of money was raised. Sometimes dubbed \"holding for ransom\", this method of public goods production is a modern application of the street performer protocol for public goods production. Unlike assurance contracts, its success relies largely on social norms to ensure (to some extent) that the threshold is reached and partial contributions are not wasted.\nOne of the purest Coasian solutions today is the new phenomenon of Internet crowdfunding, in which case rules are enforced by computer algorithms and legal contracts, as well as social pressure. For example, on the Kickstarter site, each funder authorizes a credit card purchase to buy a new product or receive other promised benefits, but no money changes hands until the funding goal is met. Because automation and the Internet greatly reduce the transaction costs for pooling resources, project goals of only a few hundred dollars are frequently crowdfunded, far below the costs of soliciting traditional investors.\nIntroducing an exclusion mechanism (club goods).\nAnother solution, which has evolved for information goods, is to introduce exclusion mechanisms which turn public goods into club goods. One well-known example is copyright and patent laws. These laws, which in the 20th century came to be called intellectual property laws, attempt to remove the natural non-excludability by prohibiting reproduction of the good. Although they can address the free rider problem, the downside of these laws is that they imply private monopoly power and thus are not Pareto-optimal.\nFor example, in the United States, the patent rights given to pharmaceutical companies encourage them to charge high prices (above marginal cost) and to advertise to convince patients to persuade their doctors to prescribe the drugs. Likewise, copyright provides an incentive for publishers to take older works out of print so as not to cannibalize revenue from newer works. An example from the entertainment industry is Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment's \"vault\" sales practice, and an example from the technology industry is Microsoft's decision to pull Windows XP from the market in mid-2008 to drive revenue from the widely criticized Windows Vista operating system.\nIntellectual property laws also end up encouraging patent and copyright owners to sue even mild imitators in court and to lobby for the extension of the term of the exclusive rights in a form of rent seeking.\nThese problems with the club-good mechanism arise because the underlying marginal cost of giving the good to more people is low or zero, but because of the limits of price discrimination, those who are unwilling or unable to pay a profit-maximizing price do not gain access to the good. If the costs of the exclusion mechanism are not higher than the gain from the collaboration, club goods can emerge naturally. James M. Buchanan showed in his seminal paper that clubs can be an efficient alternative to government interventions.\nOn the other hand, the inefficiencies and inequities of club goods exclusions sometimes cause potentially excludable club goods to be treated as public goods, and their production financed by some other mechanism. This explains why many such goods, often known as \"social goods\", are often provided or subsidized by governments, co-operatives, or volunteer associations, rather than being left to be supplied by profit-minded entrepreneurs.\nJoseph Schumpeter claimed that the \"excess profits\" (or profits over normal profit) generated by the copyright or patent monopoly will attract competitors that would make technological innovations and thereby end the monopoly. This is a continual process referred to as \"Schumpeterian creative destruction\", and its applicability to different types of public goods is a source of some controversy. Supporters of the theory point to cases such as that of Microsoft, which has been increasing its prices (or lowering its products' quality), predicting that these practices will make increased market shares for Linux and Apple largely inevitable.\nA nation can be considered akin to a club whose members are its citizens. The government would then be the manager of this club. This is further studied in the theory of the state.\nNon-altruistic social sanctions (common property regimes).\nOften on the foundation of game theory, experimental literature suggests that free-riding situations can be improved without any state intervention by seeking to measure the effects of various forms of social sanctions. Peer-to-peer punishment, that is, when members sanction other members that do not contribute to the common pool resource by inflicting a cost on \"free-riders\", is considered sufficient to establish and maintain cooperation.\nSocial actions come at a cost to the punisher, which discourages individuals from taking action to punish the free-rider. Therefore, punishers often need to be rewarded for following through with their punishment for the resource to be effectively managed. Unlike a prisoner's dilemma where the prisoners are prohibited from communicating and strategizing, people can get together to form \"common property regimes\" in which the group weighs the costs and benefits of rewarding individuals for sanctioning free riders. So long as the benefits of preserving the resource outweigh the cost of communication and enforcement, members often compensate punishers for sanctioning free riders. While the outcome is not Pareto-optimal, as the group has the additional cost of paying for enforcement, it is often less costly than letting the resource deplete. In the limiting case, where the costs of bargaining and enforcement approach zero, the setup becomes Coasian as the solution approaches the Pareto-optimal solution.\nBoth punishment and regulation by the state work relatively badly under imperfect information, where people cannot observe the behavior of others.\n Often common property regimes which members establish through bargaining have more information about the specific common pool resource which they are managing than outsiders. For this reason, and because common property regimes can avoid the principal-agent problem, the specific local knowledge within common property regimes typically enables them to outperform regulations designed by outside technical experts. Nevertheless, the best performance is typically achieved when people in common property regimes consult with governments and technical experts while deciding on the rules and design of their firm, thereby combining local and technical knowledge.\nAltruistic solutions.\nSocial norms.\nPsychologically, people are only fundamentally considered free-riders by others when they take benefits and withhold contributions. Although free-riders are recognised in all cultures, the degree of tolerance they experience and methods of dealing with them vary due to cultural differences. The impact of social norms on free-riding differs between cultural contexts, which may lead to a variance between results in research on free-riding when applied cross-culturally. However, the impact of social norms on privately- and voluntarily-provided public goods is considered to have some level of effect on free-riding in many contexts. For example, social sanctioning is a norm in and of itself that has a high degree of universality. The goal of much research on the topic of social sanctioning and its effect on free-riding is to explain the altruistic motivation that is observed in various societies.\nFree-riding is often thought of only in terms of positive and negative externalities felt by the public. The impact of social norms on actions and motivations related to altruism are often underestimated in economic solutions and the models from which they are derived.\nAltruistic social sanctions.\nWhile non-altruistic social sanctions occur when people establish common property regimes, people sometimes punish free-riders even without being rewarded. The exact nature of motivation remains to be explored. Whether costly punishment can explain cooperation is disputed. Recent research finds that costly punishment is less effective in real-world environments.\nOther research finds that social sanctions cannot be generalized as strategic in the context of public goods. Preferences between secret sanctions and standard sanctions on free riders did not vary significantly. Rather, some individuals preferred to sanction others regardless of secrecy. Other research built on the findings of behavioral economics finds that, in a dilemmatic donation game, donors are motivated by the fear of loss. In the game, donors' deposits were only refunded if the donors always punish free-riding and non-commitment among other individuals. Pool-punishment, in which everyone loses their deposit if one donor does not punish the free rider, provided more stable results than punishment without consideration of the consensus of the group. Individual-to-individual peer punishment led to less-consistently-applied social sanctions. Although this research is experimental in nature, it may collectively prove useful when applied in public policy decisions seeking to improve free-rider problems within society.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52218", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52218", "title": "TGZ (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "52221", "revid": "45451381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52221", "title": "Corporate welfare", "text": "Government grants, tax breaks, or other special favorable treatment for corporations\nCorporate welfare refers to government financial assistance, subsidies, tax breaks, or other favorable policies provided to private businesses or specific industries, ostensibly to promote economic growth, job creation, or other public benefits. This support can take various forms, including tax credits, tax deductions, tax exemptions, government contracts, preferential regulatory treatment, debt write-offs, public-private partnerships, bailout programs, discount schemes, deferrals, low-interest loans or loan guarantees, direct subsidies or public grants.\nThe definition of corporate welfare is sometimes restricted to direct government subsidies of major corporations, excluding tax loopholes and all manner of regulatory and trade decisions.\nOrigin of term.\nThe term \"corporate welfare\" was reportedly coined in 1956 by Ralph Nader.\nAlternative adages.\n\"Socialism for the rich, capitalism for the poor\".\nBelieved to have been first popularised by Michael Harrington's 1962 book \"The Other America\" in which Harrington cited Charles Abrams, a noted authority on housing.\nVariations on this adage have been used in criticisms of the United States' economic policy by Joe Biden, Martin Luther King Jr., Gore Vidal, Joseph P. Kennedy II, Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., Dean Baker, Noam Chomsky, Robert Reich, John Pilger, Bernie Sanders, and Yanis Varoufakis.\n\"Privatizing profits and socializing losses\".\n\"Privatizing profits and socializing losses\" refers to the idea that corporations want to reserve financial gains for themselves and pass along losses to the rest of society, potentially through lobbying the government for assistance. This practice was criticized in the Wall Street bailout of 2008.\nBy country.\nUnited States.\nBackground.\nSubsidies considered excessive, unwarranted, wasteful, unfair, inefficient, or bought by lobbying are often called corporate welfare. The label of corporate welfare is often used to decry projects advertised as benefiting the general welfare that spend a disproportionate amount of funds on large corporations, and often in uncompetitive, or anti-competitive ways. For instance, in the United States, agricultural subsidies are usually portrayed as helping independent farmers stay afloat. In actuality, the majority of income gained from commodity support programs has gone to large agribusiness corporations such as Archer Daniels Midland, as they own a considerably larger percentage of production.\nAlan Peters and Peter Fisher, Associate Professors at the University of Iowa, have estimated that state and local governments provide $40\u201350 billion annually in economic development incentives, which critics characterize as corporate welfare.\nMultiple economists have considered the 2008 bank bailouts in the United States to be a form of corporate welfare. U.S. politicians have also contended that zero-interest loans from the Federal Reserve System to financial institutions during and after the 2008 financial crisis were a hidden, backdoor form of corporate welfare. The term gained increased prominence in 2018 when Senator Bernie Sanders introduced a bill, singling out Amazon and Walmart in particular, to require a company with 500 or more employees to pay the full cost of welfare benefits received by its workers.\nComprehensive analyses.\nIndependent.\nDaniel D. Huff, professor emeritus of social work at Boise State University, published a comprehensive analysis of corporate welfare in 1993. Huff reasoned that a very conservative estimate of corporate welfare expenditures in the United States would have been at least US$ in 1990. Huff compared this number with social welfare:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHuff argued that deliberate obfuscation was a complicating factor.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 2015, Kevin Farnsworth, a senior lecturer in Social Policy at the University of York published a paper in which he claimed that the government was providing corporate subsidies of \u00a393 billion. This amount includes the role of the government in increasing trade, tax relief for businesses that invest in new plants and machinery (estimated by Farnsworth at \u00a320 billion), not charging fuel duty on fuel used by railways or airlines, green energy subsidies, a lower corporation tax rate for small companies, regional development grants and government procurement for businesses (which Farnsworth suggests often favours British businesses even when these are not the best value option available). However, \"The Register\" wrote that Farnsworth's figure for tax relief for investment was incorrect and that he had made mistakes in his calculations, noting that he was not an accountant. It also stated that not charging businesses taxes under certain circumstances (when the reliefs applied) was not the same as giving them a subsidy. Fuel duty is not charged on airlines due to the Convention on International Civil Aviation (a UN agency) which specifies that aeroplanes should be exempt from fuel duties.\nPolitical discussion.\nIn 2015, Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn said he would \"strip out\" the \u00a393bn of \"corporate tax relief and subsidies\" Farnsworth referred to and use the proceeds for public investment. Corbyn did not say which specific policies he would change. \"The Guardian\" wrote the policy \"sounds wonderful, but careful scrutiny of 'corporate welfare' shows that it includes capital allowances designed to persuade companies to invest, regional aid to boost growth in rundown parts of the UK, and subsidies to keep bus and rail routes open \u2013 none of which Corbyn would presumably like to see stopped.\"\nCanada.\nThe New Democratic Party in Canada picked up the term as a major theme in its 1972 federal election campaign. Its leader, David Lewis, used the term in the title of his 1972 book, \"Louder Voices: The Corporate Welfare Bums\".\nThe Reform Party and its successor the Canadian Alliance were known for opposing most business subsidies, but after their merger with the Progressive Conservative party, they dropped their opposition.\nIndia.\nIt was observed by \"The Wire\" that the effective tax rate was low for the larger corporations which meant companies making smaller profits are competing in an unequal environment against bigger companies with substantial taxation benefits, with the gap in effective tax rates widening over the years. Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi criticised this practice, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \"Why is it that subsidies going to the well-off are portrayed in a positive manner? Let me give you an example. The total revenue loss from incentives to corporate tax payers was over Rs 62,000 crore... I must confess I am surprised by the way words are used by experts on this matter. When a benefit is given to farmers or to the poor, experts and government officers normally call it a subsidy. However, I find that if a benefit is given to industry or commerce, it is usually an 'incentive' or a 'subvention'.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52222", "revid": "50809118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52222", "title": "Kingdom of Asturias", "text": "Kingdom in the Northern Iberian Peninsula (718\u2013924)\nThe Kingdom of Asturias was a medieval monarchy in the Iberian Peninsula founded by the nobleman Pelagius. It was the first Christian political entity to be established in the Iberian Peninsula after the Umayyad conquest of Visigothic Hispania in 711\u2013720s. In the summer of 722, Pelagius defeated an Umayyad army at the Battle of Covadonga, in what is retroactively regarded as the beginning of the Christian \"Reconquista\".\nThe Asturian kings would occasionally make peace with the Muslims, particularly at times when they needed to pursue their other enemies, mainly rebel Basques and Galicians. Thus Fruela I (r.\u2009757\u00a0\u2013\u00a0768) fought Muslims but also defeated the Basques and Galicians, and Silo (r.\u2009774\u00a0\u2013\u00a0783) made peace with the Muslims but not with the Galicians. Under King Alfonso II (r.\u2009791\u00a0\u2013\u00a0842), the kingdom was firmly established with Alfonso's recognition as king of Asturias by Charlemagne and the Pope. He conquered Galicia and the Basques. During his reign, the holy bones of St James the Great were declared to be found in Galicia, in Compostela. Pilgrims from all over Europe opened a way of communication between the isolated Asturias and the Carolingian lands and beyond. Alfonso's policy consisted in depopulating the borders of Bardulia (which would turn into Castile) in order to gain population support north of the mountains. With this growth came a corresponding increase in military forces. The kingdom was now strong enough to sack the Muslim cities of Lisbon, Zamora and Coimbra. However, for centuries to come the focus of these actions was not conquest but pillage and tribute. In the summers of 792, 793 and 794 several Muslim attacks plundered Alava and the heart of the Asturian kingdom, reaching up to the capital, Oviedo. In one of the retreats, Alfonso inflicted a severe defeat on the Muslims in the swampy area of Lutos.\nWhen Alfonso II died, Ramiro I (842\u2013850) staged a coup against the Count of the Palace Nepotian, who had taken the throne. After a battle on a bridge over the river Narcea, Nepotian was captured in flight, blinded and then forced into monastic life. Early in his reign, in 844, Ramiro was faced with a Viking attack at a place called \"Farum Brecantium\", believed to be present-day Corunna. He gathered an army in Galicia and Asturias and defeated the Vikings, killing many of them and burning their ships. In 859, a second Viking fleet set out for Spain. The Vikings were slaughtered off the coast of Galicia by Count Pedro. The considerable territorial expansion of the Asturian kingdom under Alfonso III (866\u2013910) was largely made possible by the collapse of Umayyad control over many parts of Al-Andalus at this time. In 773 the western frontier of the kingdom in Galicia was expanded into the northern part of modern-day Portugal, pushing the border roughly to the Douro valley, and between 868 and 881 it expanded further south reaching all the way to the Mondego. The year 878 saw a Muslim assault on the towns of Astorga and Le\u00f3n. The expedition consisted of two detachments, one of which was decisively defeated at Polvoraria on the river \u00d3rbigo, with an alleged loss of 13,000 men. In 881, Alfonso took the offensive, leading an army deep into the Lower March, crossing the Tagus River to approach M\u00e9rida. Then miles from the city the Asturian army crossed the Guadiana River and defeated the Umayyad army on \"Monte Oxifer\", allegedly leaving 15,000 Muslim soldiers killed. Returning home, Alfonso devoted himself to building the churches of Oviedo and constructing one or two more palaces for himself.\nThe Kingdom of Asturias transitioned into the Kingdom of Le\u00f3n in 924, when Fruela II of Asturias became king with his royal court in Le\u00f3n.\nIndigenous background.\nThe kingdom originated in the western and central territory of the Cantabrian Mountains, particularly the Picos de Europa and the central area of Asturias. The main political and military events during the first decades of the kingdom's existence took place in the region. According to the descriptions of Strabo, Cassius Dio and other Graeco-Roman geographers, several peoples of Celtic origin inhabited the lands of Asturias at the beginning of the Christian era, most notably:\nClassical geographers give conflicting views of the ethnic description of the above-mentioned peoples. Ptolemy says that the Astures extended along the central area of current Asturias, between the Navia and Sella rivers, fixing the latter river as the boundary with the Cantabrian territory. However, other geographers placed the frontier between the Astures and the Cantabri further to the east: Julius Honorius stated in his \"Cosmographia\" that the springs of the river Ebro were located in the land of the Astures (\"sub asturibus\"). In any case, ethnic borders in the Cantabrian Mountains were not so important after that time, as the clan divisions that permeated the pre-Roman societies of all the peoples of Northern Iberia faded under similar political administrative culture imposed on them by the Romans.\nThe situation started to change during the Late Roman Empire and the early Middle Ages, when an Asturian identity gradually started to develop: the centuries-old fight between Visigothic and Suebian nobles may have helped to forge a distinct identity among the peoples of the Cantabrian districts. Several archaeological digs in the \"castro\" of La Carisa (municipality of Lena) have found remnants of a defensive line whose main purpose was to protect the valleys of central Asturias from invaders who came from the Meseta through the Pajares pass: the construction of these fortifications reveals a high degree of organization and cooperation among the several Asturian communities, in order to defend themselves from the southern invaders. Carbon-14 tests have found that the wall dates from the period 675\u2013725\u00a0AD, when two armed expeditions against the Asturians took place: one of them headed by Visigothic king Wamba (reigned 672\u2013680); the other by Muslim governor Musa bin Nusayr during the Umayyad conquest, who settled garrisons over its territory.\nThe gradual formation of Asturian identity led to the creation of the Kingdom of Asturias after Pelagius' coronation and the victory over the Muslim garrisons in Covadonga in the early 8th century. The \"Chronica Albeldense\", in narrating the happenings of Covadonga, stated that \"Divine providence brings forth the King of Asturias\".\nUmayyad occupation and Asturian revolt.\nThe kingdom was established by the nobleman Pelayo (), possibly an Asturian noble. No substantial movement of refugees from central Iberia could have taken place before the Battle of Covadonga, and in 714 Asturias was overrun by Musa bin Nusayr with no effective or known opposition. It has also been claimed that he may have retired to the Asturian mountains after the Battle of Guadalete, where in the Gothic tradition of Theias he was elected by the other nobles as leader of the Astures. Pelayo's kingdom was initially a rallying banner for existing guerilla forces.\nIn the progress of the Islamic conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, the main cities and administrative centers fell into the hands of Muslim troops. Control of the central and southern regions, such as the Guadalquivir and Ebro valleys, presented few problems for the newcomers, who used the existing Visigothic administrative structures, ultimately of Roman origin. However, in the northern mountains, urban centers (such as Gij\u00f3n) were practically nonexistent and the submission of the mountainous country had to be achieved valley by valley. Muslim troops often resorted to the taking of hostages to ensure the pacification of the newly conquered territory.\nAfter the first incursion of Tarik, who reached Toledo in 711, the Yemeni viceroy of Ifriqiya, Musa bin Nusayr, crossed the Strait of Gibraltar the following year and carried out a massive operation of conquest that would lead to the capture of M\u00e9rida, Toledo, Zaragoza and Lerida, among other cities. During the last phase of his military campaign, he reached the northwest of the Peninsula, where he gained control of the localities of Astorga and Gij\u00f3n. In the latter city, he placed a small Berber detachment under a governor, Munuza, whose mission was to consolidate Muslim control over Asturias. As a guarantee of the submission of the region, some nobles \u2013 some argue that Pelayo was among them \u2013 had to surrender hostages from Asturias to Cordoba. The legend says that his sister was asked for, and a marriage alliance sought with the local Berber leader. Later on, Munuza would try to do the same at another mountain post in the Pyrenees, where he rebelled against his Cordoban Arab superiors. The Berbers had been converted to Islam barely a generation earlier, and were considered second rank to Arabs and Syrians. \nThe most commonly accepted hypothesis for the battle (epic as described by later Christian Asturian sources, but a mere skirmish in Muslim texts) is that the Moorish column was attacked from the cliffs and then fell back through the valleys towards present day Gij\u00f3n, but it was attacked in retreat by the retinue and nearly destroyed. However, the only near-contemporary account of the events of the time, the Christian Chronicle of 754, makes no mention of the incident.\nHowever, as is told in the \"Rotensian Chronicle\" as well as in that of Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari, Pelayo escaped from Cordoba during the governorship of al-Hurr (717\u2013718) and his return to Asturias triggered a revolt against the Muslim authorities of Gij\u00f3n. The identity of Pelayo, however, is still an open subject, and that is only one of the theories. The leader of the Astures, whose origin is debated by historians, lived at that time in Bres, in the district of Pilo\u00f1a, and Munuza sent his troops there under al-Qama. After receiving word of the arrival of the Muslims, Pelayo and his companions hurriedly crossed the Pilo\u00f1a and headed toward the narrow, easily defended valley of Mt. Auseva, taking refuge in one of its caves, Covadonga. After an attempted siege was abandoned due to the weather and the exposed position of the deep valley gorge, the troops are said to have exited through the high ports to the south, in order to continue their search-and-destroy mission against other rebels. There, the locals were able to ambush the Muslim detachment, which was nearly annihilated. The few survivors continued south to the plains of Leon, leaving the maritime districts of Asturias exposed.\nThe victory, relatively small, as only a few Berber soldiers were involved, resulted in great prestige for Pelayo and provoked a massive insurrection by other nobles in Galicia and Asturias who immediately rallied around him, electing him King or military Dux.\nUnder Pelayo's leadership, the attacks on the Berbers increased. Munuza, feeling isolated in a region increasingly hostile, decided to abandon Gij\u00f3n and headed for the Plateau (\"Meseta\") through the Mesa Trail. However, he was intercepted and killed by Astures at Olal\u00edes (in the current district of Grado). Once he had expelled the Moors from the eastern valleys of Asturias, Pelayo attacked Le\u00f3n, the main city in the northwest of the Iberian Peninsula, and secured the mountain passes, insulating the region from Moorish attack. Pelayo continued attacking those Berbers who remained north of the Asturian Mountains until they withdrew, but the latter mostly deserted their garrisons in response to the wider rebellion against Arab control from Cordoba. He then married his daughter, Ermesinda, to Alfonso, the son of Peter of Cantabria, the leading noble at the still-independent Visigothic duchy of Cantabria. His son Favila was married to Froiliuba.\nRecent archaeological excavations have found fortifications in Mount Homon and La Carisa (near the Huerna and Pajares valleys) dated between the end of the seventh and beginning of the eighth centuries. The Berber fortifications included watchtowers and moats of almost two meters, in whose construction and defense many hundreds may have participated. That would have required a high degree of organization and firm leadership, probably by Pelayo himself. Therefore, experts consider it probable that the construction of the defensive line was intended to prevent the reentry of Moors into Asturias through the mountain passes of Mesa and Pajares.\nAfter Pelayo's victory over the Moorish detachment at the Battle of Covadonga, a small territorial independent entity was established in the Asturian mountains that was the origin of the kingdom of Asturias. Pelayo's leadership was not comparable to that of the Visigothic kings. The first kings of Asturias referred to themselves as \"princeps\" (prince) and later as \"rex\" (king), but the later title was not firmly established until the period of Alfonso II. The title of \"princeps\" had been used by the indigenous peoples of Northern Spain and its use appears in Galician and Cantabrian inscriptions, in which expressions like \"N\u00edcer, Pr\u00edncipe de los Albiones\" (on an inscription found in the district of Coa\u00f1a) and \"princeps cantabrorum\" (over a gravestone of the municipality of Cistierna, in Leon). In fact, the Kingdom of Asturias originated as a focus of leadership over other peoples of the Cantabrian Coast that had resisted the Romans as well as the Visigoths and that were not willing to subject themselves to the dictates of the Umayyad Caliphate. Immigrants from the south, fleeing from Al-Andalus, brought a Gothic influence to the Asturian kingdom. However, at the beginning of the 9th century, Alfonso II's will cursed the Visigoths, blaming them for the loss of Hispania. The later chronicles on which knowledge of the period is based, all written during the reign of Alfonso III, when there was great Gothic ideological influence, are the Sebastianensian Chronicle (\"Cr\u00f3nica Sebastianense\"), the Albeldensian Chronicle (\"Cr\u00f3nica Albeldense\") and the Rotensian Chronicle (\"Cr\u00f3nica Rotense\").\nDuring the first decades, the Asturian dominion over the different areas of the kingdom was still lax and so it had to be continually strengthened through matrimonial alliances with other powerful families from the north of the Iberian Peninsula. Thus, Ermesinda, Pelayo's daughter, was married to Alfonso, Dux Peter of Cantabria's son. Alfonso's son Fruela married Munia, a Basque princess from Alava, while his daughter Adosinda married Silo, a local chief from the area of Flavionavia, Pravia.\nAfter Pelayo's death in 737, his son Favila (or \"Fafila\") was elected king. Fafila, according to the chronicles, was unexpectedly killed by a bear while hunting in one of the trials of courage normally required of the nobility of that era. However, there is no other such incident known from the long history of monarchs and others at the sport, and the case is suspiciously similar to the Roman legend of their first king, Romulus, taken by a sudden storm. The immediate consequence was that the rule of the Asturians passed to his brother-in-law, ruler of the neighboring independent domain, through a marriage alliance to Fafila's sister. The female ties and rights of inheritance were still respected, and in later cases would allow the regency or crown for their husbands too.\nPelayo founded a dynasty in Asturias that survived for decades and gradually expanded the kingdom's boundaries, until all of northwest Iberia was included by c.\u2009775. The reign of Alfonso II from 791 to 842 saw further expansion of the kingdom to the south, almost as far as Lisbon.\nInitial expansion.\nFavila was succeeded by Alfonso I, who inherited the throne of Asturias thanks to his marriage to Pelayo's daughter, Ermesinda. The \"Albeldensian Chronicle\" narrated how Alfonso arrived in the kingdom some time after the battle of Covadonga to marry Ermesinda. Favila's death made his access to the throne possible as well as the rise of one of the most powerful families in the Kingdom of Asturias, the House of Cantabria. Initially, only Alfonso moved to the court in Cangas de On\u00eds, but, after the progressive depopulation of the plateau and the Middle Valley of the Ebro, where the main strongholds of the Duchy of Cantabria (e.g., Amaya, Tricio and the City of Cantabria) were located, the descendants of Duke Peter withdrew from Rioja towards the Cantabrian area and in time controlled the destiny of the Kingdom of Asturias.\nAlfonso began the territorial expansion of the small Christian kingdom from its first seat in the Picos de Europa, advancing toward the west to Galicia and toward the south with continuous incursions in the Douro valley, taking cities and towns and moving their inhabitants to the safer northern zones. It eventually led to the strategic depopulation of the plateau, creating the Desert of the Duero as a protection against future Moorish attacks.\nThe depopulation, defended by Claudio S\u00e1nchez-Albornoz, is doubted today, at least concerning its magnitude. Two main arguments are used to refute it: first, the minor toponymy was preserved in multiple districts; second, there are biological and cultural differences between the inhabitants of the Cantabrian zone and those of the central Plateau. What is true is that in the first half of the eighth century there was a process of rural growth that led to the abandonment of urban life and the organization of the population in small communities of shepherds. Several causes explain this process: the definitive collapse of the Roman Mediterranean economic system from the time of the late Roman Empire due to Arab conquests, the continuous propagation of epidemics in the area, and the abandonment of al-Andalus by the Berber regiments after the revolt of 740\u2013741. All this made possible the emergence of a sparsely populated and ill-organized area that insulated the Asturian kingdom from the Moorish assaults and allowed its progressive strengthening.\nThe campaigns of kings Alfonso I and Fruela in the Duero valley were probably not very different from the raids that the Astures made in the same area in the pre-Roman era. The initial Asturian expansion was carried out mainly through Cantabrian territory (from Galicia to Vizcaya) and it was not until the reigns of Ordo\u00f1o I and Alfonso III that the Kingdom of Asturias could take effective possession of the territories located south of the Cantabrian Mountains.\nFruela I, Alfonso I's son, consolidated and expanded his father's domains. He was assassinated by members of the nobility associated with the House of Cantabria.\nSocial and political transformations.\nWritten sources are concise concerning the reigns of Aurelio, Silo, Mauregatus and Bermudo I. Generally this period, with a duration of twenty-three years (768\u2013791), has been considered as a long stage of obscurity and retreat of the kingdom of Asturias. This version, defended by some historians, who even named this historical phase as that of the \"lazy kings\", derived from the fact that, during it, there were apparently no important military actions against al-Andalus. However, there were relevant and decisive internal transformations, which provided a foundation for the strengthening and the expansion of Asturias.\nFirst, the first internal rebellion, led by Mauregato (783\u2013788), occurred during those years. The rebellion removed Alfonso II from the throne (although he became king again later, from 791 to 842). This initiated a series of further rebellions whose principal leaders were members of ascending aristocratic palace groups and landowners who, based on the growing economic development of the area, tried to unseat the reigning family of Don Pelayo. The important rebellions of Nepociano, Aldroito and Piniolo, during the reign of Ramiro I (842\u201350), are part of this process of economic, social, political and cultural transformation of the Asturian kingdom that occurred during the eighth and ninth centuries.\nSecond, neighboring rebellions by Basques and Galicians failed, quashed by Asturian kings. These rebels took advantage of the unrest in the central and Eastern part of Asturias, and, on occasion, provided help to one or another contender for the throne: by providing refuge to Alfonso II in Alava after his flight; the support for Nepociano's rebellion in some Asturian areas; and the adherence of Galicians to the cause of Ramiro I.\nFinally, other evidence suggests important internal transformations occurred during this time. Rebellions of freedmen (\"serbi\", \"servilis orico\" and \"libertini\", according to the \"Chronicles\") occurred during the reign of Aurelio I. The property relationship between master and slave broke down progressively. This fact, together with the growing role of the individual and the restricted family, to the detriment of the extended family, is another indication that a new society was emerging in Asturias at the end of the eighth and beginning of the ninth centuries.\nFruela I (757\u201368) was succeeded by Aurelius (768\u201374), son of Fruela of Cantabria and Peter of Cantabria's grandson, who would establish the court in what is today the district of San Mart\u00edn del Rey Aurelio, which previously belonged to Langreo. Silo (774\u201383) succeeded Aurelio after his death, and transferred the court to Pravia. Silo was married to Adosinda, one of the daughters of Alfonso I (and therefore, Pelayo's granddaughter).\nAlfonso II was elected king after Silo's death, but Mauregato organized a strong opposition and forced the new king to withdraw to lands in Alava (his mother, Munia, was Basque), obtaining the Asturian throne. The king, despite the bad reputation attributed by history, had good relations with Beatus of Li\u00e9bana, perhaps the most important cultural figure of the kingdom, and supported him in his fight against adoptionism. Legend says that Mauregato was Alfonso I's bastard son with a Moorish woman, and attributes to him the tribute of a hundred maidens. He was succeeded by Bermudo I, Aurelio's brother. He was called \"the deacon\", although he probably received only minor vows. Bermudo abdicated after a military defeat, ending his life in a monastery.\nRecognition and later solidification.\nIt was not until King Alfonso II (791\u2013842) that the kingdom was firmly established, after Silo's subjugated Gallaecia and confirmed territorial gains in western Basque Country. Ties with the Carolingian Franks also got closer and more frequent, with Alfonso II's envoys presenting Charlemagne with spoils of war (campaign of Lisbon, 797). Alfonso II introduced himself as \"an Emperor Charlemagne's man\", suggesting some kind of suzerainty. During Alfonso II's reign, a probable reaction against indigenous traditions took place in order to strengthen his state and grip on power, by establishing in the Asturian Court the order and ceremonies of the former Visigoth Kingdom. Around this time, the holy bones of James, son of Zebedee were declared to have been found in Galicia at Iria Flavia. They were considered authentic by a contemporary pope of Rome. However, during the Asturian period, the final resting place of Eulalia of M\u00e9rida, located in Oviedo, became the primary religious site and focus of devotion.\nAlfonso II also repopulated parts of Galicia, Le\u00f3n and Castile and incorporated them into the Kingdom of Asturias while establishing influence over parts of the Basques. The first capital city was Cangas de On\u00eds, near the site of the battle of Cavadonga. Then in Silo's time, it was moved to Pravia. Alfonso II chose his birthplace of Oviedo as the capital of the kingdom (circa 789).\nRamiro I began his reign by capturing several other claimants to the throne, blinding them, and then confining them to monasteries. As a warrior he managed to defeat a Viking invasion after the Vikings had landed at Corunna, and also fought several battles against the Moors.\nWhen he succeeded his father Ramiro, Ordo\u00f1o I (850\u201366) repressed a major revolt amongst the Basques in the east of the kingdom. In 859, Ordo\u00f1o besieged the fortress of Albelda, built by Musa ibn Musa of the Banu Qasi, who had rebelled against Cordoba and became master of Zaragoza, Tudela, Huesca and Toledo. Musa attempted to lift the siege in alliance with his brother-in-law Garc\u00eda I\u00f1iguez, the king of Pamplona, whose small realm was threatened by the eastwards expansion of the Asturian monarchy. In the battle that followed, Musa was defeated and lost valuable treasures in the process, some of which were sent as a gift to Charles the Bald of Francia. Seven days after the victory, Albelda fell and, as the chronicler records, \"its warriors were killed by the sword and the place itself was destroyed down to its foundations.\" Musa was wounded in the battle and died in 862/3; soon thereafter, Musa's son Lubb, governor of Toledo, submitted himself to the Asturian king for the rest of Ordo\u00f1o's reign.\nWhen Alfonso III's sons forced his abdication in 910, the Kingdom of Asturias split into three separate kingdoms: Le\u00f3n, Galicia and Asturias. The three kingdoms were eventually reunited in 924 (Le\u00f3n and Galicia in 914, Asturias later) under the crown of Le\u00f3n. It continued under that name until incorporated into the Kingdom of Castile in 1230, after Ferdinand III became joint king of the two kingdoms.\nViking raids.\nThe Vikings invaded Galicia in 844, but were decisively defeated by Ramiro I at Corunna. Many of the Vikings' casualties were caused by the Galicians' ballistas \u2013 powerful torsion-powered projectile weapons that looked rather like giant crossbows. Seventy of the Vikings' longships were captured on the beach and burned. A few months later, another fleet took Seville. The Vikings found in Seville a population which was still largely Gothic and Romano-Spanish. The Gothic elements were important in the Andalusian emirate. Musa ibn Musa, who took a leading part in the defeat of the Vikings at , belonged to a powerful Muwallad family of Gothic descent.\nVikings returned to Galicia in 859, during the reign of Ordo\u00f1o I. Ordo\u00f1o was at the moment engaged against his constant enemies, the Moors, but a count of the province, Don Pedro, attacked the Vikings and defeated them, inflicting severe losses upon them. Ordo\u00f1o's successor, Alfonso III, strove to protect the coast against attacks from Vikings or Moors. In 968, Gunrod of Norway attacked Galicia with 100 ships and 8,000 warriors. They roamed freely for years and even occupied Santiago de Compostela. A Galician count of Visigothic descent, , ended the Viking adventure in 971, when he launched an attack with a powerful army that defeated the Vikings in a bloody battle, and captured Gunrod, who was subsequently executed along with his followers.\nReligion.\nRemnants of Megalithic and Celtic paganism.\nAlthough the earliest evidence of Christian worship in Asturias dates from the 5th century, evangelisation did not make any substantial progress until the middle of the sixth century, when hermits like Turibius of Li\u00e9bana and monks of the Saint Fructuoso order gradually settled in the Cantabrian mountains and began preaching the Christian doctrine.\nChristianisation progressed slowly in Asturias and did not necessarily supplant the ancient pagan divinities. As elsewhere in Europe, the new religion coexisted syncretically with features of the ancient beliefs. In the sixth century, bishop San Mart\u00edn de Braga complained in his work \"De correctione rusticorum\" about the Galician peasants being attached to the pre-Christian cults: \"Many demons, who were expelled from the heavens, settled in the sea, in the rivers, fountains and forests, and have come to be worshipped as gods by ignorant people. To them they do their sacrifices: in the sea they invoke Neptune, in the rivers the Lamias; in the fountains the Nymphs, and in the forests Diana.\"\nIn the middle of the Sella valley, where Cangas de On\u00eds is located, there was a dolmen area dating back to the megalithic era, and was likely built between 4000 and 2000 BC. Chieftains from the surrounding regions were ritually buried here, particularly in the Santa Cruz dolmen. Such practices survived the Roman and Visigothic conquests. Even in the eighth century, King Favila was buried there, along with the bodies of tribal leaders. Although the Asturian monarchy fostered the Christianisation of this site, by constructing a church, to this day there are still pagan traditions linked with the Santa Cruz dolmen. It is said that \"xanas\" (Asturian fairies) appear to visitors, and magical properties are ascribed to the soil of the place.\nAccording to an inscription found in the Santa Cruz church, it was consecrated in 738 and was presided by a \"vates\" called Asterio. The word \"vates\" is uncommon in Catholic documents and epitaphs, where the word \"presbyterus\" (for Christian priests) is preferred. However, \"vates\" was used in Latin to denote a poet who was clairvoyant, and according to the Ancient Greek writers Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and Posidonius, the \"vates\" (\u03bf\u03c5\u03b1\u03c4\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2) were also one of three classes of Celtic priesthood, the other two being the druids and the bards. Some historians think that Asterio held a religious office which combined elements of paganism and Christianity, while others think he may be linked to the Brythonic refugees that settled in Britonia (Galicia) in the 6th century. The \"Parrochiale Suevorum,\" an administrative document from the Kingdom of the Suebi, states that the lands of Asturias belonged to the Britonian See, and some features of Celtic Christianity spread to Northern Spain. This is evidenced by the Celtic tonsure, which the Visigothic bishops who participated in the Fourth Council of Toledo condemned.\nStill extant Galician legends relate to monks who travelled by sea to the Paradise Islands, like those of Saint Amaro, Trezenzonio or \"The Legend of Ero of Armenteira\". These stories have many parallels with those of Brendan the navigator, Malo of Wales, and the stories of the Irish immrama.\nAsturian kings promoted Christianity and but also based their power on indigenous religious traditions, like other medieval European kings such as Penda of Mercia or Widukind, but also relied on Christian sacred scriptures (in particular, the books of Revelation, Ezekiel and Daniel) and the Church Fathers. These furnished the new monarchy with its foundational myths. They did not need to draft new laws since the Visigothic Code was the referential code, at least since the arrival of new influences including exiles, prisoners from the central area of al-Andalus in the 770s along with their mixed Berber-Arabic and Gothic legacy. This combined with governmental and religious ideas imported from Charlemagne's Frankish Kingdom (Alcuin-Beatus of Li\u00e9bana).\nAdoptionism.\nThe foundations of Asturian culture and that of Christian Spain in the High Middle Ages were laid during the reigns of Silo and Mauregatus, when the Asturian kings submitted to the authority of the Umayyad emirs of the Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba. The most prominent Christian scholar in the Kingdom of Asturias of this period was Beatus of Li\u00e9bana, whose works left an indelible mark on the Christian culture of the Reconquista.\nBeatus was directly involved in the debate surrounding adoptionism, which argued that Jesus was born a man, and was adopted by God and acquired a divine dimension only after his passion and resurrection. Beatus refuted this theological position, championed by such figures as Elipando, bishop of Toledo.\nThe adoptionist theology had its roots in Gothic Arianism, which denied the divinity of Jesus, and in Hellenistic religion, with examples of heroes like Heracles who, after their death attained the apotheosis. Likewise, as Elipandus's bishopric of Toledo was at the time within the Muslim Caliphate of Cordoba, Islamic beliefs which acknowledged Jesus as a Prophet, but not as the Son of God, influenced the formation of adoptionism. However, the adoptionist theology was opposed strongly by Beatus from his abbey in Santo Toribio de Li\u00e9bana. At the same time, Beatus strengthened the links among Asturias, the Holy See, and the Carolingian Empire, and was supported in his theological struggle by the Pope and by his friend Alcuin of York, an Anglo-Saxon scholar who had settled among the Carolingian court in Aachen.\nMillennialism.\nThe most transcendental works of Beatus were his \"Commentaries to Apocalypse\", which were copied in later centuries in manuscripts called \"beati\", about which the Italian writer Umberto Eco said: \"Their splendid images gave birth to the most relevant iconographic happening in the History of Mankind\". Beatus develops in them a personal interpretation of the Book of Revelation, accompanied by quotes from the Old Testament, the Church Fathers and fascinating illustrations.\nIn these \"Commentaries\" a new interpretation of the apocalyptic accounts is given: Babylon no longer represents the city of Rome, but C\u00f3rdoba, seat of the Umayyad emirs of al-Andalus; the Beast, once a symbol of the Roman Empire, now stands for the Islamic invaders who during this time threatened to destroy Western Christianity, and who raided territories of the Asturian Kingdom.\nThe prologue to the second book of the \"Commentaries\" contains the Beatus map, one of the best examples of a \"mappa mundi\" of the high medieval culture. The purpose of this map was not to represent the world cartographically, but to illustrate the Apostles' diaspora in the first decades of Christianity. Beatus took data from the works of Isidore of Seville, Ptolemy and the Bible. The world was represented as a land disc surrounded by the Ocean and divided in three parts: Asia (upper semicircle), Europe (lower left quadrant) and Africa (lower right quadrant). The Mediterranean Sea (Europe-Africa), the Nile River (Africa-Asia), the Aegean Sea, and the Bosphorus (Europe-Asia) were set as the boundaries between the different continents.\nBeatus believed that the Apocalypse described in the book of Revelation was imminent, which would be followed by 1290 years of domination by the Antichrist. Beatus followed the views of Augustine of Hippo, whose work, \"The City of God\", influenced the \"Commentaries\" which followed the premise that the history of the world was structured in six ages. The first five ones extended from the creation of Adam to the Passion of Jesus, while the sixth, subsequent to Christ, ends with the unleashing of the events prophesied in the book of Revelation.\nMillennialist movements were very common in Europe at that time. Between 760 and 780, a series of cosmic phenomena stirred up panic among the population of Gaul; John, a visionary monk, predicted the coming of the Last Judgment during the reign of Charlemagne. In this time the Apocalypse of Daniel appeared, a Syriac text redacted during the rule of the empress Irene of Athens, wherein wars between the Arabs, the Byzantines and the Northern peoples were prophesied. These wars would end with the coming of the Antichrist.\nEvents taking place in Hispania (Islamic rule, the adoptionist heresy, the gradual assimilation of the Mozarabs) were, for Beatus, signals of the imminent apocalypse. aeon. As Elipandus describes in his \"Letter from the bishops of Spania to their brothers in Gaul\", the abbot of Santo Toribio went so far as to announce to his countrymen the coming of the End of Time on Easter of the year 800. On the dawn of that day, hundreds of peasants met around the abbey of Santo Toribio, waiting, terrified, for the fulfillment of the prophecy. They remained in there, without eating for a day and half, until one of them, named Ordonius, exclaimed: \"Let us eat and drink, so that if the End of the World comes we are full!\".\nThe prophetic and millennialist visions of Beatus produced an enduring mark in the development of the Kingdom of Asturias: the \"Chronica Prophetica\", which was written around 880 CE, predicted the final fall of the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba, and the conquest and redemption of the entire Iberian Peninsula by king Alfonso III. Millennialist imagery is also reflected throughout the kingdom in the Victory Cross icon, the major emblem of the Asturian kingdom, which has its origins in a passage of the Revelation book in which John of Patmos relates a vision of the Second Coming. He sees Jesus Christ seated in his majesty, surrounded by clouds and affirming: \"I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty\". It is true that usage of the labarum was not restricted to Asturias, and dates back to the time of Constantine the Great, who used this symbol during the Battle of the Milvian Bridge. However, it was in Asturias where the Cruz de la Victoria attained a general use: in nearly every pre-Romanesque church this icon is engraved, often accompanied with the expression \"Hoc signo tuetur pius, in hoc signo vincitur inimicus\", that became the royal motto of the Asturian monarchs.\nCamino de Santiago.\nAnother of the major spiritual legacies of the Asturian kingdom is the creation of one of the most important ways of cultural transmission in European history: the Camino de Santiago. The first text which mentions St. James' preaching in Spain is the \"Breviarius de Hyerosolima\", a 6th-century document which stated that the Apostle was buried in an enigmatic place called \"Aca Marmarica\". Isidore of Seville supported this theory in his work \"De ortu et obitu patrium\". One hundred and fifty years later, in the times of Mauregato, the hymn \"O Dei Verbum\" rendered St. James as \"the golden head of Spain, our protector and national patron\" and a mention is made of his preaching in the Iberian Peninsula during the first decades of Christianity. Some attribute this hymn to Beatus, although this is still discussed by historians.\nThe legend of St. James gained support during the reign of Alfonso II. The period was marked by Alfonso II's reaching out to Charlemagne for military assistance and importation of similar royal ceremonies and governmental structures. Galician Pelagius the Hermit claimed to observe a mysterious brightness during several nights over the Libredon forest, in Iria Flavia diocese. Angelic songs accompanied the lights. Impressed by this phenomenon, Pelayo appeared before the bishop of Iria Flavia, Theodemir, who \u2013 after having heard the hermit \u2013 visited the location with his retinue. Legend has it that in the depths of the forest was found a stone sepulchre with three corpses, which were identified as those of St. James, son of Zebedee, and his two disciples, Theodorus and Atanasius. According to the legend, King Alfonso was the first pilgrim who had come to see the Apostle. During his travels he was guided at night by the Milky Way, which from then on acquired the name of \"Camino de Santiago\".\nThe founding of the alleged St. James tomb was a formidable political success for the Kingdom of Asturias: Now Asturias could claim the honour of having the body of one of the apostles of Jesus, a privilege shared only with Asia (Ephesus) where John the Apostle was buried, and Rome, where the bodies of Saint Peter and Saint Paul rested. As of the early 12th century, Santiago de Compostela grew to become one of the three sacred cities of Christianity, together with Rome and Jerusalem. In later centuries, many Central European cultural influences travelled to Iberia through the Way of St. James, from the Gothic and Romanesque styles, to the Occitan lyric poetry.\nHowever, the story of the \"discovery\" of the remains of the Apostle shows some enigmatic features. The tomb was found in a place used as a necropolis since the Late Roman Empire, so it is possible that the body belonged to a prominent person of the area. British historian Henry Chadwick hypothesized the tomb of Compostela actually hold the remains of Priscillian. Historian Roger Collins holds that the identification of the relics (at any rate nothing close to a full body) with Saint James is related to the translation of the remains found under a 6th-century church altar in M\u00e9rida, where various saint names are listed, Saint James among them. Other scholars, like Constantino Cabal, highlighted the fact that several Galician places, such as Pico Sacro, Pedra da Barca (Mux\u00eda) or San Andr\u00e9s de Teixido, were already draws for pagan pilgrimage in pre-Roman times. Pagan beliefs held these places as the End of the World and as entrances to the Celtic Otherworld. After the discovery of Saint James' tomb, the gradual Christianization of those pilgrimage routes began.\nMythology.\nSince the Chronicles of the Asturian kingdom were written a century and a half after the battle of Covadonga, there are many aspects of the first Asturian kings that remain shrouded in myth and legend.\nAlthough the historicity of Pelayo is beyond doubt, the historical narrative describing him includes many folktales and legends. One of them asserts that, prior to the Muslim invasion, Pelayo went on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, the sacred city of Christianity. However, there is no extant evidence of this.\nLikewise, it is also said that the \"Cruz de la Victoria\" was at first carved in an oak's log by a lightning strike. The core of this story contains two elements of major importance in the Asturian folklore. On one hand, lightning was the ancient symbol of the Astur god Taranis, and in Asturian mythology was thought to be forged by the Nuberu, lord of clouds, rain and wind. On the other hand, the oak tree is the symbol of the Asturian royalty and in reliefs of the Abamia Church (where Pelayo was buried) leaves of that tree are shown.\nThe Covadonga area is also rich with astonishing stories, such as the one which is said to have happened in a shepherd village where today Lakes Enol and Ercina are situated. Mary, mother of Jesus, disguised as a pilgrim, is said to have visited that village and asked for food and shelter from every house. She was rudely rejected by every person, except for a shepherd who gave her refuge and warmly shared everything he had. On the following day, as punishment for their lack of hospitality, a flood of divine origin devastated the village, which completely covered everything except the cottage of the good shepherd. In front of him, the mysterious guest started to cry, and her tears became flowers when they reached the floor. Then the shepherd realized that the pilgrim was actually Mary.\nThere are also myths about the Asturian monarchy that are rooted in Jewish and Christian traditions rather than pagan ones: the \"Chronica ad Sebastianum\" tells of an extraordinary event that happened when Alfonso I died. While the noblemen were holding a wake for him, there could be heard celestial canticles sung by angels. They recited the following text of the Book of Isaiah (which happens to be the same that was read by the Mozarabic priests during the Vigil of the Holy Saturday):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.I said, I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed; undertake for me.\u2014\u200a\nThis canticle was recited by Hezekiah, king of Judah, after his recovery from a serious illness. In these verses, the king regretted with distress his departure to sheol, the Jewish underworld, a shady place where he would not see God nor men any more.\nAsturias also has examples of the king in the mountain myth. According to the tradition, it is still today possible to see king Fruela walking around the \"Jard\u00edn de los Reyes Caudillos\" (a part of the Oviedo Cathedral), and it is said that his grandson, the famous cavalier Bernardo del Carpio, sleeps in a cave in the Asturian mountains. The story tells that one day a peasant went into a certain cave to retrieve his lost cow and heard a strong voice who declared to be Bernardo del Carpio, victor over the Franks in Roncevaux. After saying he had lived alone for centuries in that cave, he told the peasant: \"Give me your hand, so that I can see how strong are men today\". The shepherd, scared, gave him the horn of the cow, which, when seized by the giant man, was immediately broken. The poor villager ran away terrified, but not without hearing Bernardo say: \"Current men are not like those who helped me to kill Frenchmen in Roncevaux\".\nLegacy.\nThis kingdom is the birthplace of an influential European medieval architectural style: Asturian pre-Romanesque. This style of architecture was founded during the reign of Ramiro I.\nThis small kingdom was a milestone in the fight against the adoptionist heresy, with Beatus of Li\u00e9bana as a major figure. In the time of Alfonso II, the shrine of Santiago de Compostela was founded. The pilgrimage to Santiago, Cami\u00f1o de Santiago, was a major nexus within Europe, and many pilgrims (and their money) passed through Asturias on their way to Santiago de Compostela.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n &lt;ns&gt;10&lt;/ns&gt;\n &lt;id&gt;22914325&lt;/id&gt;\n &lt;revision&gt;\n &lt;id&gt;1147815959&lt;/id&gt;\n &lt;parentid&gt;953494070&lt;/parentid&gt;\n &lt;timestamp&gt;2023-04-02T10:44:43Z&lt;/timestamp&gt;\n &lt;contributor&gt;\n &lt;username&gt;Randy Kryn&lt;/username&gt;\n &lt;id&gt;4796325&lt;/id&gt;\n &lt;/contributor&gt;\n &lt;comment&gt;Minor arts, removed Sudarium of Oviedo (not an artwork)&lt;/comment&gt;\n &lt;origin&gt;1147815959&lt;/origin&gt;\n &lt;model&gt;wikitext&lt;/model&gt;\n &lt;format&gt;text/x-wiki&lt;/format&gt;"}
{"id": "52223", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52223", "title": "Arabic numeral", "text": ""}
{"id": "52224", "revid": "37076980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52224", "title": "The Diamond Age", "text": "1995 novel by Neal Stephenson\nThe Diamond Age: Or, A Young Lady's Illustrated Primer is a science fiction novel by American writer Neal Stephenson. It is to some extent a Bildungsroman or coming-of-age story, focused on a young girl named Nell, set in a future world in which nanotechnology affects all aspects of life. The novel deals with themes of education, social class, ethnicity, and the nature of artificial intelligence. \"The Diamond Age\" was first published in 1995 by Bantam Books, as a Bantam Spectra hardcover edition. In 1996, it won both the Hugo and Locus Awards, and was shortlisted for the Nebula and other awards.\nSetting.\n\"The Diamond Age\" depicts a 22nd century world revolutionised by advances in nanotechnology, much as Eric Drexler envisioned it in his 1986 nonfiction book \"Engines of Creation\". Molecular nanotechnology is omnipresent in the novel's world, generally in the form of matter compilers and their products. The book explicitly recognizes the achievements of several real-world nanotechnology researchers: Feynman, Drexler, and Ralph Merkle are seen among characters of the fresco in Merkle-Hall, where new nanotechnological items are designed and constructed.\nThe book contains descriptions of various exotic technologies, such as the \"chevaline\" (a mechanical horse that can fold up and is light enough to be carried one-handed), and forecasts the use of technologies that are in development today, such as smart paper that can show personalized news headlines. Major cities have immune systems made up of aerostatic defensive micromachines, and public matter compilers provide basic food, blankets, and water for free to anyone who requests them.\nMatter compilers receive their raw materials from the Feed, a system analogous to the electrical grid of modern society. The Feed carries streams of both energy and basic molecules, which are rapidly assembled into usable goods by matter compilers. The Source, where the Feed's stream of matter originates, is controlled by the Victorian phyle (though smaller, independent Feeds are possible). The hierarchic nature of the Feed and an alternative, anarchic developing technology, known as the Seed, mirror the cultural conflict between East and West that is depicted in the book. This conflict has an economic element as well, with the Feed representing a centrally-controlled distribution mechanism, while the Seed represents a more flexible, open-ended, decentralized method of creation and organization.\nPhyles.\nSociety in \"The Diamond Age\" is dominated by a number of \"phyles\", also sometimes called \"tribes\", which are groups of people often distinguished by shared values, similar ethnic heritage, a common religion, or other cultural similarities. In the extremely globalized future depicted in the novel, these cultural divisions have largely supplanted the system of nation-states which divides the world today. Cities appear divided into sovereign enclaves affiliated or belonging to different phyles within a single metropolis. Most phyles depicted in the novel have a global scope of sovereignty, and maintain segregated enclaves in or near many cities throughout the world.\nThe phyles coexist much like historical nation-states under a system of justice and mutual protection, known as the Common Economic Protocol (CEP). The rules of the CEP are intended to provide for the co-existence of, and peaceful economic activity between, phyles with potentially very different values. The CEP is concerned particularly with upholding rights to personal property, being shown to provide particularly harsh punishment for harming the economic capability of another person.\n\"Thetes\" are individuals who are not members of any phyle and are often socially disadvantaged and economically poor, being similar to second-class citizens under the CEP. In the novel, the material needs of nearly all thetes are satisfied by freely available food and clothing, albeit of low quality; thetes without the political connections of a phyle are entitled to similarly low-quality \"free justice.\"\nThe book distinguishes between the four Great Phyles: the Han (consisting of Han Chinese), Nippon (consisting of Japanese), Hindustan (a \"riotously diverse collection of microtribes sintered together according to some formula we don't get\") and the Neo-Victorian New Atlantis (consisting largely of Anglo-Saxons but also accepting Indians, Africans, and other members of the Anglosphere who identify with the culture).\nInternally, the New Atlantis phyle is a corporate oligarchy whose \"equity lords\" rule the organization and its bylaws under allegiance to the vestigial British monarchy. Other phyles are less defined \u2013 some intentionally, as with the CryptNet group or the mysterious hive-mind Drummers. Over the course of the story, the Common Economic Protocol sponsors the investigation of clandestine Seed technologies in order to preserve the established order from subversion, using the justification that unrestricted access to Sources would lead to the proliferation of high tech weapons and result in anarchy.\nPlot summary.\nThe protagonist in the story is Nell, a \"thete\" (or person without a tribe; equivalent to the lowest working class) living in the Leased Territories, a lowland slum built on the artificial, diamondoid island of New Chusan, located offshore from the mouth of the Yangtze River, northwest of Shanghai. When she is four, Nell's older brother Harv gives her a stolen copy of a highly sophisticated interactive book, \"Young Lady's Illustrated Primer: a Prop\u00e6deutic Enchiridion\", in which is told the tale of Princess Nell and her various friends, kin, associates, etc., commissioned by the wealthy Neo-Victorian \"Equity Lord\" Alexander Chung-Sik Finkle-McGraw for his granddaughter, Elizabeth. The story follows Nell's development under the tutelage of the Primer, and to a lesser degree, the lives of Elizabeth Finkle-McGraw and Fiona Hackworth, Neo-Victorian girls who receive other copies. The Primer is intended to steer its reader intellectually toward a more \"interesting life,\" as defined by Lord Finkle-McGraw, and growing up to be an effective member of society. The most important quality to achieving an interesting life is deemed to be a subversive attitude towards the status quo. The Primer is designed to react to its owner's environment and teach them what they need to know to survive and develop.\n\"The Diamond Age\" features intersecting story lines: the social downfall of the nanotech engineer designer of the Primer, John Percival Hackworth, who makes an unauthorized copy of the Primer for his own young daughter, Fiona, and Nell's education through her independent work with the Primer after her brother Harv steals it from Hackworth. Hackworth's crime becomes known to Dr. X, the black market engineer whose compiler Hackworth used to create the copy of the Primer, and later Lord Finkle-McGraw. Hackworth is compelled by both to advance their opposing goals. Another storyline follows actress (\"ractor\") Miranda Redpath, who voices most of the Primer characters who interact with Nell and effectively becomes a surrogate mother to Nell. After Miranda disappears in her quest to find Nell, her storyline continues from the point of view of her boss, Carl Hollywood.\n\"The Diamond Age\" also includes fully narrated educational tales from the Primer that map Nell's individual experience (e.g. her four toy friends) onto archetypal folk tales stored in the primer's database. The story explores the role of technology and personal relationships in child development, and its deeper themes also probe the relative values of cultures.\nTitle.\n\"Diamond Age\" is an extension of labels for archeological time periods that take central technological materials to define an entire era of human history, such as the Stone Age, the Bronze Age or the Iron Age. Technological visionaries such as Eric Drexler and Ralph Merkle, both of whom receive an honorary mention in \"The Diamond Age\", have argued that if nanotechnology develops the ability to manipulate individual atoms at will, it will become possible to simply assemble diamond structures from carbon atoms, materials also known as diamondoids. Merkle states: \"In diamond, then, a dense network of strong bonds creates a strong, light, and stiff material. Indeed, just as we named the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, and the Steel Age after the materials that humans could make, we might call the new technological epoch we are entering the Diamond Age\". In the novel, a near future vision of our world, nanotechnology has developed precisely to this point, which enables the cheap production of diamond structures.\nReception.\nReviews.\nMichael Berry of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote: \"Stephenson's world-building skills are extraordinary, and while he sometimes lets his narrative ramble or grow complicated, he can be depended upon to serve up plenty of clever extrapolations.\"\nGerald Jonas of \"The New York Times\": \"While the final chapters of the novel veer toward the stylistic excesses that marred \"Snow Crash\", Mr. Stephenson mostly holds to his theme.\"\nMarc Laidlaw of \"Wired\" praised the characters, the setting, and called the \"rich and polished, the inventiveness unceasing\" but found it ultimately disappointing saying Stephenson \"gave himself an enormous task and nearly succeeded in all respects, instead of \"merely\" most of them.\" Publishers Weekly praised the novel, stating that it \u201cpresents its sometimes difficult technical concepts in accessible ways\u201d.\nAwards.\nIn 1996, it won both the Hugo and Locus Awards, and was shortlisted for the Nebula and other awards.\nProposed television adaptation.\nIn January 2007, the Sci-Fi Channel announced a planned six-hour miniseries based on \"The Diamond Age\". \nAccording to a June 2009 report in \"Variety\", Zo\u00eb Green had been hired to write the series, with George Clooney and Grant Heslov of Smokehouse Productions as executive producers on the project.\nAllusions to \"The Diamond Age\".\nDuring the development of the original Amazon Kindle that was launched in 2007, the device was codenamed \"Fiona\" by Gregg Zehr, the head of Amazon's Lab 126, as a reference to the Illustrated Primer and Fiona Hackworth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52225", "revid": "1304760646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52225", "title": "Trade dress", "text": "Characteristics of visual appearance of a product\nTrade dress is the characteristics of the visual appearance of a product or its packaging (or even the design of a building) that signify the source of the product to consumers. Trade dress is an aspect of trademark law, which is a form of intellectual property protection law.\nOverview.\nTrade dress is an extension of trademark protection to \"[t]he design and shape of the materials in which a product is packaged, [primarily].\u00a0'Product configuration,' the design and shape of the product itself, may also be considered a form of trade dress.\" \nProduct configuration applies particularly to situations where the product can be seen within the packaging (e.g. a toy car sold in packaging that operates as a shadow box for commercial display within\u2014the collective look it creates is trade dress), or where the packaging is part of the product (e.g. the bottle of a soft drink, along with its visible contents, are trade dress, though the bottle is actually part of the product that retains its value to the consumer for as long as its contents last).\nLike all intellectual property law other than patent law, trade dress and other trademark elements are subject to the bar on functional features (e.g. a handle cannot be protected, though it may contain trade dress features that can prevent exact replicas of a particular trade dress handle). It is a question of which elements of the packaging are intrinsic to the basic function of the packaging.\nIn the United States, the Lanham Act protects trade dress if it serves the same source-identifying function as a trademark. It is possible to register trade dress as a trademark, but for practical reasons most trade dress and product configurations are protected without registration under \u00a0https://.\nBy country.\nUnited Kingdom.\nTrade dress can be protected as getup under the law of passing off in the UK. Passing off is a common law remedy for protecting an unregistered trade mark. Getup, packaging, business strategy, marketing techniques, advertisement themes etc. can also be protected under passing off.\nUnited States.\nTrade dress protection is intended to protect consumers from packaging or appearance of products that are designed to imitate other products; to prevent a consumer from buying one product under the belief that it is another. For example, the shape, color, and arrangement of the materials of a children's line of clothing can be protectable trade dress (though, the design of the garments themselves is not protected), as can the design of a magazine cover, the appearance and d\u00e9cor of a chain of Mexican-style restaurants, and a method of displaying wine bottles in a wine shop.\nStatutory source.\nTrademark law is not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution of the United States (as opposed to patent and copyright protection law); as such, trademark law\u2014and thus, trade dress\u2014is enforced on the state level in addition to the federal level.\nIn the U.S., like trademarks, a product's trade dress is legally protected by the Lanham Act, the federal statute which regulates trademarks and trade dress. Under section 43(a) of the Lanham Act, a product's trade dress can be protected without formal registration with the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). In part, section 43(a) states the following:\nAny person who, on or in connection with any goods or services, or any container for goods, uses in commerce any word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof, or any false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact, or false or misleading representation of fact, which\nshall be liable in a civil action by any person who believes that he or she is likely to be damaged by such an act.\nThis statute allows the owner of a particular trade dress (\"container for goods\") to sue an infringer (a person or entity who illegally copies that trade dress) for violating section 43(a) without registering that trade dress with any formal agency or system (unlike the registration and application requirements for enforcing other forms of intellectual property, such as patents). It is commonly seen as providing \"federal common law\" protection for trade dress (and trademarks).\nFormal registration.\nTrade dress may be registered with the PTO in either the Principal Register or the Supplemental Register. Although registration is not required for legal protection, registration offers several advantages. In the Principal Register, a registrant gains nationwide constructive use and constructive notice, which prevent others from using or registering that registrant's trade dress (without contesting the registration). Further, a registrant in the Principal Register gains incontestable status after five years, which eliminates many of the ways for another party to challenge the registration. Registration under the Supplemental Register allows the registrant to protect its trade dress in foreign countries, although the protections are much more limited than protections under the Principal Register in the U.S.\nLegal requirements.\nIt can be difficult to obtain protection for trade dress, as applicants must prove that the design has secondary meaning to consumers and is then further limited by the functionality doctrine.\nFunctionality.\nTo gain registration in the Principal Register or common law protection under the Lanham Act, a trade dress must not be \"functional\". That is, the configuration of shapes, designs, colors, or materials that make up the trade dress in question must not serve a utility or function outside of creating recognition in the consumer's mind. For example, even though consumers associated a distinct spring design for wind resistant road signs with a particular company, the spring design was not protectable for trade dress purposes because the springs served the function of withstanding heavy wind conditions.\nWhat is considered \"functional\" depends upon the specific product or thing sought to be protected. For example, the color red in a line of clothing may not be functional (and thus part of protectable trade dress) whereas the same color on a stop sign would be functional because the color red serves the function of putting drivers on alert (and thus would not be part of a protectable trade dress).\nDistinctiveness.\nTo gain registration in the Principal Register or common law protection under the Lanham Act, a trade dress must be \"distinctive.\" This means that consumers perceive a particular trade dress as identifying a source of a product.\nClaimed trade dress in the product design\u2014as opposed to product packaging\u2014context can no longer be \"inherently distinctive\"; it must acquire distinctiveness through \"secondary meaning\". Distinctiveness through secondary meaning means that although a trade dress is not distinctive on its face, the use of the trade dress in the market (the \"goodwill\" of the trade dress) has created an association between that trade dress and a source in the mind of the consumer.\nAlthough the law is evolving, as it stands now, product packaging (including packaging in very general terms, such as a building's d\u00e9cor) may be inherently distinctive. However, product design, that is the design or shape of the product itself, may not be inherently distinctive, and must acquire secondary meaning.\nProtection for electronic interfaces and websites.\nAlthough the exact boundaries of protection are still uncertain, courts are beginning to allow trade dress protection for the overall \"look and feel\" of a website. In \"Blue Nile, Inc. v. Ice.com, Inc.\", the plaintiff sued the defendant in the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington for copying the overall \"look and feel\" of plaintiff's retail jewelry websites, including the design of plaintiff's search pages. Although the court ordered more factual development before it could rule definitively on the issue, the court did hold that it was possible for the look and feel of the websites to have trade dress protection if the plaintiff's copyright claims did not already cover those parts. In \"SG Services, Inc. v. God's Girls, Inc.\", the United States District Court for the District of Oregon denied trade dress protection for the plaintiff's website because the plaintiff did not demonstrate that the website was non-functional or distinctive. This case shows the court's willingness to consider trade dress protection for a website, even though the court did not find protection in this case. However, the \"SG Services\" court did not look at the overall \"look and feel\" of the website, but rather, at specific characteristics (such as color) of the website that the plaintiff claimed were infringed.\nAlthough the future of trade dress protection for websites is still very unclear, much thought has been given to this area and it will likely continue to be actively developing area for courts and litigants.\nSimilar concepts in other countries.\nChina.\nAlthough Chinese law does not recognize a concept of trade dress, the Anti-Unfair Competition Law (\u53cd\u4e0d\u6b63\u5f53\u7ade\u4e89\u6cd5) does protect the packaging, decoration, or appearance of a \"well-known commodity\"; this provision accomplishes something similar to trade dress protections.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52226", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52226", "title": "TeamForge", "text": "Formerly SourceForge Enterprise Edition\nTeamForge (formerly SourceForge Enterprise Edition or SFEE) is a proprietary collaborative application lifecycle management forge supporting version control and a software development management system.\nBackground.\nTeamForge provides a front-end to a range of software development lifecycle services and integrates with a number of free software / open source software applications (such as PostgreSQL and Subversion).\nIts predecessor, SourceForge, started as open source software, but a version of it (based on the v2.5 prototype code) was eventually relicensed under a proprietary software license as SourceForge Enterprise Edition, which was re-written in Java and marketed for offshore outsourcing software development.\nThe original codebase of SourceForge (code-named \"Alexandria\") was forked by the GNU Project as GNU Savannah; then, Savannah was also modified at CERN and released as Savane. SourceForge was also later forked as GForge by one of the SourceForge programmers, and then GForge was itself forked as FusionForge by three GForge developers.\nOriginally sold by VA Software, SourceForge Enterprise Edition was acquired by CollabNet on April 24, 2007. CollabNet subsequently integrated SourceForge Enterprise Edition with its own CollabNet Enterprise Edition and product, taking architectural and product elements from both systems, and re-launched the enhanced product as TeamForge in 2008. Since 2007, TeamForge has continued to undergo development, adding in a series of application lifecycle management tools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52227", "revid": "49739718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52227", "title": "SourceForge", "text": "Software discovery and hosting platform for B2B and open source software\nSourceForge is a web service founded by Tony Guntharp, Uriah Welcome, Tim Perdue, and Drew Streib in November 1999. SourceForge provides a centralized software discovery platform, including an online platform for managing and hosting open-source software projects, and a directory for comparing and reviewing B2B software that lists over 104,500 business software titles. It provides source code repository hosting, bug tracking, mirroring of downloads for load balancing, a wiki for documentation, developer and user mailing lists, user-support forums, user-written reviews and ratings, a news bulletin, micro-blog for publishing project updates, and other features.\nSourceForge was one of the first to offer this service free of charge to open-source projects. Since 2012, the website has run on Apache Allura software. SourceForge offers free hosting and free access to tools for developers of free and open-source software.\nAs of \u00a02020[ [update]], the SourceForge repository claimed to host more than 502,000 projects and had more than 3.7 million registered users.\nConcept.\nSourceForge is a web-based source code repository. It acts as a centralized location for free and open-source software projects. It was the first to offer this service for free to open-source projects. Project developers have access to centralized storage and tools for managing projects, though it is best known for providing revision control systems such as CVS, Subversion, Bazaar, Git and Mercurial. Major features (amongst others) include project wikis, metrics and analysis, access to a MySQL database, and unique sub-domain URLs (in the form codice_1).\nRevenue model.\nSourceForge's traditional revenue model is through advertising banner sales on their site. Reported revenue increased from quarterly takings of US$1 million in 2005, to 6.5 million in 2006 to US$23 million a quarter in 2009 before dropping back to reported total annual revenue of US$20 million in 2011 across SourceForge, slashdot and freecode (prior to SourceForge's acquisition).\nSince 2013, additional revenue generation schemes, such as bundleware models, have been trialled, with the goal of increasing SourceForge's revenue. Negative community reactions to the partnership program led to a review of the program, which was nonetheless opened up to all SourceForge projects on February 7, 2014.\nOn February 9, 2016, the new owners BIZX, LLC, announced they had eliminated the DevShare program.\nHistory.\nSourceForge, founded in 1999 by VA Software, was the first provider of a centralized location for free and open-source software developers to control and manage software development and offering this service free of charge. The software running the SourceForge site was released as free software in January 2000 and was later named SourceForge Alexandria. The last release under a free license was made in November 2001. After the dot-com bubble, SourceForge was later powered by the proprietary SourceForge Enterprise Edition, a separate product re-written in Java which was marketed for use in offshore outsourcing.\nSourceForge has been temporarily banned in China three times: in September 2002, in July 2008 (for about a month) and on August 6, 2012 (for several days).\nIn November 2008, SourceForge was sued by the French collection society Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 civile des Producteurs de Phonogrammes en France (SPPF) for hosting downloads of the file sharing application Shareaza.\nIn 2009, SourceForge announced a new site platform known as Allura, which would be an extensible, open source platform licensed under the Apache License, utilizing components such as Python and MongoDB, and offering REST APIs. In June 2012, the Allura project was donated to the Apache Software Foundation as Apache Allura.\nIn September 2012, SourceForge, Slashdot, and Freecode were acquired from Geeknet by the online job site Dice.com for $20 million, and incorporated into a subsidiary known as Slashdot Media. In July 2015, Dice announced that it planned to sell SourceForge and Slashdot, and, in January 2016, the two sites were sold to the San Diego\u2013based BIZX, LLC for an undisclosed amount. In December 2019, BIZX rebranded as Slashdot Media.\nOn September 26, 2012, it was reported that attackers had compromised a SourceForge mirror, and modified a download of phpMyAdmin to add security exploits.\nInstaller with adware.\nIn July 2013, SourceForge announced that it would provide project owners with an optional feature called \"DevShare\", which places closed-source ad-supported content into the binary installers and gives the project part of the ad revenue. Opinions of this new feature varied; some complained about users not being as aware of what they are getting or being able to trust the downloaded content, whereas others saw it as a reasonably harmless option that keeps individual projects and users in control.\nIn November 2013, GIMP, a free image manipulation program, removed its download from SourceForge, citing misleading download buttons that potentially confuse customers as well as SourceForge's own Windows installer, which bundles potentially unwanted programs with GIMP. In a statement, GIMP called SourceForge a \"once useful and trustworthy place to develop and host FLOSS applications\" that now faces \"a problem with the ads they allow on their sites\". \nIn some cases this program appeared to introduce malware bundled with SourceForge downloads.\nIn May 2015, SourceForge took control of pages for five projects that had migrated to other hosting sites and replaced the project downloads with adware-laden downloads, including GIMP. This came despite SourceForge's commitment in November 2013 to never bundle adware with project downloads without developers' consent.\nOn June 1, 2015, SourceForge claimed that they had stopped coupling \"third party offers\" with unmaintained SourceForge projects. After this announcement was made, more developers continued to report that their SourceForge projects had been taken over by SourceForge staff accounts (but have not had binaries edited), including nmap and VLC media player.\nOn June 18, 2015, SourceForge announced that SourceForge-maintained mirrored projects were removed and anticipated the formation of a Community Panel to review their mirroring practices.\nSourceForge discontinued DevShare and the bundling of installers after SourceForge was sold to BizX in early 2016. On May 17, 2016, SourceForge announced that they were now scanning all projects for malware and displaying warnings on projects detected to have malware.\nUsage.\nAs of \u00a02013[ [update]], the SourceForge repository hosted more than 300,000 projects and had more than 3 million registered users, although not all were active. The domain \"sourceforge.net\" attracted at least 33 million visitors by August 2009 according to a Compete.com survey.\nIn its terms of use, SourceForge states that its services are not available to users in countries on the sanction list of the U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control (including Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan and Syria). Since 2008 the secure server used for making contributions to the site has blocked access from those countries. In January 2010, the site had blocked all access from those countries, including downloads. Any IP address that appeared to belong to one of those countries could not use the site. By the following month, SourceForge relaxed the restrictions so that individual projects could indicate whether or not SourceForge should block their software from download to those countries. This, however, had been reversed by November 2020 for North Korea and other countries. Crimea has been blocked since February 1, 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52229", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52229", "title": "Zeeland", "text": "Province of the Netherlands\nZeeland (; ), historically known in English by the exonym Zealand, is the westernmost and least populous province of the Netherlands. Located in the south-western corner of the country, it borders North Brabant to the east, South Holland to the north, and an international border with Belgium to the south and west (Flemish provinces of East and West Flanders).\nZeeland consists of a number of islands and peninsulas (hence its name, meaning \"Sealand\"), with only the southern part (Zeelandic Flanders) not being an island or peninsula. Its capital is Middelburg with a population of 48,544 as of November 2019, although the largest municipality in Zeeland is Terneuzen (population 54,589). Zeeland has two seaports: Vlissingen and Terneuzen. Its area is , of which is water; it had a population of about 391,000 as of January 2023.\nLarge parts of Zeeland are below sea level. The last great flooding of the area was in 1953. Tourism is an important economic activity. In the summer, its beaches make it a popular destination for tourists, especially German tourists. In some areas, the population can be two to four times higher during the high summer season. The coat of arms of Zeeland shows a lion half-emerged from water, and the text (Latin for \"I struggle and emerge\"). The country of New Zealand was named after Zeeland after it was sighted by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman.\nHistory.\nZeeland was a contested area between the counts of Holland and Flanders until 1299, when the last count of Holland died. The Counts of Hainaut then gained control of the County of Zeeland, followed by the counts of Bavaria, Burgundy, and Habsburg. After 1585, Zeeland followed, as one of the 7 independent provinces, the fate of the Northern part of The Netherlands.\nIn 1432, it became part of the Low Countries possessions of Philip the Good of Burgundy, the later Seventeen Provinces. Through marriage, the Seventeen Provinces became the property of the Habsburgs in 1477. In the Eighty Years' War, Zeeland was on the side of the Union of Utrecht, and became one of the United Provinces. The area now called ' (or Zeelandic Flanders) was not part of Zeeland, but a part of the county of Flanders (still under Habsburg control) that was conquered by the United Provinces, hence called ' (see: Generality Lands).\nAfter the French occupation (see \"\" Bouches-de-l'Escaut) and the formation of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1815, the present province Zeeland was formed.\nDuring World War II, Zeeland was occupied by Nazi Germany between June 1940 and November 1944. In 1944, Zeeland was devastated by the Battle of the Scheldt and the , which brought about the Inundation of Walcheren, between British and Canadian forces, and the occupying Germans.\nThe catastrophic North Sea flood of 1953, which killed over 1800 people in Zeeland, led to the construction of the protective Delta Works.\nGeography.\nZeeland consists of several islands (\"eilanden\") and peninsulas (\"schiereilanden\"). The following are all the geographic parts that make up the province, from north to south:\nThe province of Zeeland is a large river delta situated at the mouth of several major rivers, namely Scheldt ('Schelde'), Rhine ('Rijn') and Meuse ('Maas') (i.e. the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta). Most of the province lies below sea level and was reclaimed from the sea by inhabitants over time. What used to be a muddy landscape, flooding at high tide and reappearing at low tide, became a series of small man-made hills that stayed dry at all times. The people of the province would later connect the hills by creating dikes, which led to a chain of dry land that later grew into bigger islands and gave the province its current shape. The shape of the islands has changed over time at the hands of both people and nature.\nThe deadly North Sea flood of 1953 inundated vast amounts of land that were only partially reclaimed. The subsequent construction of the Delta Works also changed the face of the province. The infrastructure, although very distinct by the number of bridges, tunnels and dams, has not shaped the geography of the province so much as the geography of the province has shaped its infrastructure. The dams, tunnels and bridges that are currently a vital part of the province's road system were constructed over the span of decades and came to replace old ferry lines. The final touch to this process came in 2003 when the Western Scheldt Tunnel was opened. It was the first solid connection between both banks of the Western Scheldt and ended the era of water separating the islands and peninsulas of Zeeland.\nMunicipalities.\nThe province of Zeeland has 13 municipalities:\nThe largest cities are: Middelburg with 42,000 inhabitants; Vlissingen with 34,000; Goes with 28,000; and Terneuzen with 25,000.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 1 January 2023, Zeeland had a population of 391,124 and a population density of . It is the least populous and the 3rd least densely populated province of the Netherlands.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nZeeland is more religious than the Netherlands as a whole, with over 53% being religious. The Dutch Bible Belt runs through Zeeland. Zeelandic Flanders is more religious (58.5%) than the rest of Zeeland (51.6%). Among the religious population, Reformed Christianity (Calvinism) is dominant, however there is also a large community of Roman Catholics, mostly concentrated in Zeelandic Flanders.\nAfter being long part of the vast Franco-Flemish Roman Catholic Diocese of Cambrai, Zeeland got its own bishopric, the Diocese of Middelburg, on 5 December 1559, which was suppressed in 1603, its territory being merged into the Apostolic Vicariate of Batavia, only to be 'restored' on 22 March 1803 as the Apostolic Vicariate of Breda, which was promoted to the present large (yet counting few faithful) Diocese of Breda, whose See is in the other part, western North Brabant, and enlarged further in 1955, gaining territory from the Roman Catholic Diocese of Haarlem\u2013Amsterdam.\nPolitics.\nProvincial council.\nThe States of Zeeland is the provincial council of Zeeland. As of the 2023 provincial election, the governing coalition consists of the BBB, SGP, CDA, and VVD, with 23 of 39 seats.\nProvincial executive.\nThe Provincial executive (\"Gedeputeerde Staten\") of Zeeland is the executive branch of the province, which consists of several ministers and the King's commissioner of Zeeland. Hugo de Jonge (CDA) was appointed commissioner on September 3rd, 2025 (having been acting commissioner from September 2024 onwards). The previous commissioner was Han Polman (D66), who filled the position from March 1st, 2013 until September 16th, 2024.\nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 13.6 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 1.8% of the Netherlands economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac30,900, or 102% of the EU27 average that year.\nTransportation.\nTrain.\nThere is one passenger railway line, running from Vlissingen to Roosendaal. It serves the following stations in Zeeland:\nBus.\nBus lines in Zeeland include:\nLegend.\nNehalennia is a mythological goddess of an ancient religion known around the province of Zeeland. Her worship dates back at least to the 2nd century BC, and flourished in the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD. She was possibly a regional god, either Celtic or pre-Germanic \u2013 but sources differ on the culture that first worshipped her. During the Roman era, her main function appeared to be the protection of travelers, especially seagoing travelers crossing the North Sea. Most of what is known about her mythology comes from the remains of carved stone offerings (votives) which have been dredged up from the Oosterschelde (Eastern Scheldt) since 1870. Two more Nehalennia offering stones have also been found in Cologne, Germany.\n\"Provinciale Zeeuwse Courant\" and \"BN/De Stem\" are the regional daily newspapers in the province.\nNamesakes.\nThe first westerners to sight New Zealand were captained by Dutch navigator Abel Tasman in 1642, although he did not land there. Tasman named it \"Staten Landt\", believing it to be part of the land of that name off the coast of Argentina that is now known as Isla de los Estados. When that was shown not to be so, Dutch authorities named it \"Nova Zeelandia\" in Latin, \"Nieuw Zeeland\" in Dutch. The two major seafaring provinces of the Netherlands in its Golden Age were Holland and Zeeland, and the Dutch explorers originally named the largest landmass of Oceania and the two islands to the southeast Nieuw Holland and Nieuw Zeeland, respectively. The former was eventually replaced by the name Australia, but the name New Zealand remained in place for the latter. Captain James Cook of Britain later anglicised the name to \"New Zealand\" and, after British settlers arrived in New Zealand, English became the main language.\nThe city of Zeeland in the US state of Michigan was settled in 1847 by Dutchman Jannes van de Luyster and was incorporated in 1907. Flushing, a neighborhood within the borough of Queens, New York, is named after the city Flushing (Vlissingen in Dutch) in Zeeland. This dates from the period of the colony of New Netherland, when New York was still known as New Amsterdam. The Dutch colonies of Nieuw Walcheren and Nieuw Vlissingen, both on the Antillian island of Tobago, were both named after parts of Zeeland. The Canadian town of Zealand, New Brunswick, was named for the Zeeland birthplace of Dutchman Philip Crouse who settled in the area in 1789. Zeeland, North Dakota is another town named for this province and whose earliest settlers were of Dutch heritage.\nParamaribo, the capital and largest city of Suriname, has a Fort Zeelandia, the former Fort Willoughby during British colonization.\nFort Zeelandia was a fortress built over ten years from 1624 to 1634 by the Dutch East India Company, in the town of Anping (Tainan) on the island of Formosa, present day Taiwan, during their 38-year rule over the western part of it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52230", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52230", "title": "Osaka", "text": "Designated city in Kansai, Japan\n is a designated city in the Kansai region of Honshu in Japan. It is the capital of and most populous city in Osaka Prefecture, and the third-most populous city in Japan, following the special wards of Tokyo and Yokohama. With an estimated population of 2,816,247 as of October 1, 2025 and a population density of about 12,505 people per square kilometer, it is the largest component of the Keihanshin Metropolitan Area, which is the second-largest metropolitan area in Japan and the 10th-largest urban area in the world with more than 19 million inhabitants.\nOsaka was traditionally considered Japan's economic hub. By the Kofun period (300\u2013538) it had developed into an important regional port, and in the 7th and 8th centuries, it served briefly as the imperial capital. Osaka continued to flourish during the Edo period (1603\u20131867) and became known as a center of Japanese culture. Following the Meiji Restoration, Osaka greatly expanded in size and underwent rapid industrialization. The construction boom accelerated population growth throughout the following decades, and by the 1900s, Osaka was the industrial hub in the Meiji and Taish\u014d eras. Osaka made noted contributions to redevelopment, urban planning and zoning standards in the postwar period, and the city developed rapidly as one of the major financial centers in the Keihanshin Metropolitan Area.\nOsaka is a major financial center of Japan, and it is recognized as one of the most multicultural and cosmopolitan cities in Japan. The city is home to the Osaka Exchange as well as the headquarters of multinational electronics corporations such as Panasonic and Sharp. Osaka is an international center of research and development and is represented by several major universities, notably Osaka University, Osaka Metropolitan University, and Kansai University. Famous landmarks in the city include Osaka Castle, Osaka Aquarium Kaiyukan, D\u014dtonbori, Ts\u016btenkaku in Shinsekai, Tenn\u014dji Park, Abeno Harukas, Sumiyoshi Taisha Grand Shrine, and Shitenn\u014d-ji, one of the oldest Buddhist temples in Japan.\nEtymology.\n\"\u014csaka\" means \"large hill\" or \"large slope\". It is unclear when this name gained prominence over Naniwa, but the oldest written evidence for the name dates back to 1496.\nBy the Edo period, (\"\u014csaka\") and (\"\u014csaka\") were mixed use, and the writer Hamamatsu Utakuni, in his book \"Setsuyo Ochiboshu\" published in 1808, states that the kanji was abhorred because it means \"returns to the earth,\" and thus was used. The kanji (earth) is also similar to the word (knight), and means against, so can be understood as \"samurai rebellion.\" became the official name in 1868 after the Meiji Restoration. The older kanji (\u5742) is still in very limited use, usually only in historical contexts. When used as an abbreviation, the modern kanji refers to Osaka City or Osaka Prefecture.\nHistory.\nOrigins: J\u014dmon and Yayoi period.\nDuring the J\u014dmon period (7,000 BCE), present-day Osaka was mostly submerged, and the formed a 12\u00a0km long and 2.5\u00a0km wide peninsula separating Kawachi Bay from the Seto Inland Sea. It is considered one of the first places where inhabitants of Japan settled, both for the favorable geological conditions, rich in fresh water and lush vegetation, and because its position was defensible against military attack.\nThe earliest evidence of settlements in the Osaka area are the which is located in the central Chuo-ku district. Buried human skeletons and a kaizuka (a mound containing remains) were found, as well as shell mounds, oysters, and other interesting archeological discoveries from the Jomon period. In addition to the remains of consumed food, there were arrow heads, stone tools, fishing hooks and crockery with remains from rice processing. It is estimated that the ruins contain 2,000-year-old debris between the Jomon and Yayoi period. The findings of the archeological sites are exhibited in an adjacent building.\nIn the years between the end of the J\u014dmon period and the beginning of the Yayoi period, the sediments that were deposited north of the Uemachi peninsula / plateau transformed Kawachi Bay into a lagoon. During the Yayoi period (300 BCE-250 CE), permanent habitation on the plains grew as rice farming became popular.\nAt the beginning of the third century CE the grand shrine of Sumiyoshi-taisha was inaugurated near the harbor, commissioned by consort Empress Jing\u016b. This Shinto shrine structure survived historical events, which inaugurated a new style in the construction of Shinto shrines, called Sumiyoshi-zukuri. The maritime panorama enjoyed from the shrine gardens inspired several artists, and nowadays the representations of that type of landscape are called \"Sumiyoshi drawings\".\nTowards the end of the Yayoi period the Uemachi plateau-peninsula expanded further, transforming the Kawachi Lagoon into a lake (\u6cb3\u5185\u6e56) connected to the mouth of the Yodo River, which had widened to the south.\nKofun period.\nBy the Kofun period, Osaka developed into a hub port connecting the region to the western part of Japan. The port of Naniwa-tsu was established and became the most important in Japan. Trade with other areas of the country and the Asian continent intensified. The large numbers of increasingly larger keyhole-shaped Kofun mounds found in the plains of Osaka are evidence of political-power concentration, leading to the formation of a state. The findings in the neighboring plains, including the mausoleum of Emperor Nintoku was discovered nearby in Sakai testify to the status of imperial city that Osaka had reached. Four of these mounds can be seen in Osaka, in which important members of the nobility are buried. They are located in the southern districts of the city and date back to the 5th century. A group of megalithic tombs called Mozu Tombs are located in Sakai, Osaka Prefecture.\nImportant works of the Kofun period is the excavation that diverted the course of the Yamato River, whose floods caused extensive damage, and the construction of important roads in the direction of Sakai and Nara. Maritime traffic connected to the port of Naniwa-tsu increased in such a way that huge warehouses were built to stow material arriving and departing.\nAsuka and Nara period.\nThe Kojiki records that during 390\u2013430 CE, there was an imperial palace located at Osumi, in what is present day Higashiyodogawa ward, but it may have been a secondary imperial residence rather than a capital.\nIn 645, Emperor K\u014dtoku built his Naniwa Nagara-Toyosaki Palace in what is now Osaka, making it the capital of Japan. The city now known as Osaka was at this time referred to as Naniwa (written as or ) and this name and derivations of it are still in use for districts in central Osaka such as Naniwa () and Namba (). Although the capital was moved to Asuka (in Nara Prefecture today) in 655, Naniwa remained a vital connection, by land and sea, between Yamato (modern day Nara Prefecture), Korea, and China.\nNaniwa was declared the capital again in 744 by order of Emperor Sh\u014dmu, and remained so until 745, when the Imperial Court moved back to Heij\u014d-ky\u014d (now Nara). By the end of the Nara period, Naniwa's seaport roles had been gradually taken over by neighboring areas, but it remained a lively center of river, channel, and land transportation between Heian-ky\u014d (Kyoto today) and other destinations. Sumiyoshi Taisha Grand Shrine was founded by Tamomi no Sukune in 211 CE. Shitenn\u014d-ji was first built in 593 CE and is the oldest Buddhist temple in Japan.\nHeian to Edo period.\nIn 1496, J\u014ddo Shinsh\u016b Buddhists established their headquarters in the heavily fortified Ishiyama Hongan-ji, located directly on the site of the old Naniwa Imperial Palace. Oda Nobunaga began a decade-long siege campaign on the temple in 1570 which ultimately resulted in the surrender of the monks and subsequent razing of the temple. Toyotomi Hideyoshi constructed Osaka Castle in its place in 1583. Osaka Castle played a pivotal role in the Siege of Osaka (1614\u20131615).\nOsaka was long considered Japan's primary economic center, with a large percentage of the population belonging to the merchant class (see Four divisions of society). Over the course of the Edo period (1603\u20131867), Osaka grew into one of Japan's major cities and returned to its ancient role as a lively and important port. \"Daimy\u014ds\" (feudal lords) received most of their income in the form of rice. Merchants in Osaka thus began to organize storehouses where they would store a \"daimy\u014d\"'s rice in exchange for a fee, trading it for either coin or a form of receipt; essentially a precursor to paper money. Many if not all of these rice brokers also made loans, and would actually become quite wealthy and powerful. Osaka merchants coalesced their shops around D\u014djima, where the Rice Exchange was established in 1697 and where the world's first futures market would come to exist to sell rice that was not yet harvested.\nThe popular culture of Osaka was closely related to \"ukiyo-e\" depictions of life in Edo. By 1780, Osaka had cultivated a vibrant arts culture, as typified by its famous Kabuki and Bunraku theaters. In 1837, \u014cshio Heihachir\u014d, a low-ranking samurai, led a peasant insurrection in response to the city's unwillingness to support the many poor and suffering families in the area. Approximately one-quarter of the city was razed before shogunal officials put down the rebellion, after which \u014cshio killed himself. Osaka was opened to foreign trade by the government of the Bakufu at the same time as Hyogo Town (modern Kobe) on January 1, 1868, just before the advent of the Boshin War and the Meiji Restoration. The Kawaguchi foreign settlement, now the Kawaguchi subdistrict, is a legacy of the foreign presence in Osaka.\nOsaka residents were stereotyped in Edo literature from at least the 18th century. Jippensha Ikku in 1802 depicted Osakans as stingy almost beyond belief. In 1809, the derogatory term \"Kamigata zeeroku\" was used by Edo residents to characterize inhabitants of the Osaka region in terms of calculation, shrewdness, lack of civic spirit, and the vulgarity of Osaka dialect. Edo writers aspired to samurai culture, and saw themselves as poor but generous, chaste, and public spirited. Edo writers by contrast saw \"zeeroku\" as obsequious apprentices, stingy, greedy, gluttonous, and lewd. To some degree, Osaka residents are still stigmatized by Tokyo observers in the same way today, especially in terms of gluttony, evidenced in the phrase, .\nMeiji to Heisei period.\nWith the enormous changes that characterized the country after the Meiji Restoration (1868), and the relocation of the capital from Kyoto to Tokyo, Osaka entered a period of decline. From being the capital of the economy and finance, it became a predominantly industrial center. The modern municipality was established in 1889 by government ordinance, with an initial area of , overlapping today's Chuo and Nishi wards. Later, the city went through three major expansions to reach its current size of . Osaka was the industrial center most clearly defined in the development of capitalism in Japan. It became known as the \"Manchester and Melbourne of the Orient\". In 1925, it was the largest and most populous city in Japan and the sixth largest in the world.\nThe rapid industrialization attracted many Asian immigrants (Indians, Chinese, and Koreans), who set up a life apart for themselves. The political system was pluralistic, with a strong emphasis on promoting industrialization and modernization. Literacy was high and the educational system expanded rapidly, producing a middle class with a taste for literature and a willingness to support the arts. In 1927, General Motors operated a factory called Osaka Assembly until 1941, manufacturing Chevrolet, Cadillac, Pontiac, Oldsmobile, and Buick vehicles, operated and staffed by Japanese workers and managers. In the nearby city of Ikeda in Osaka Prefecture is the headquarters of Daihatsu, one of Japan's oldest automobile manufacturers.\nLike its European and American counterparts, Osaka displayed slums, unemployment, and poverty. In Japan it was here that municipal government first introduced a comprehensive system of poverty relief, copied in part from British models. Osaka policymakers stressed the importance of family formation and mutual assistance as the best way to combat poverty. This minimized the cost of welfare programs.\nDuring World War II, Osaka came under air raids in 1945 by the United States Army Air Forces as part of the air raids on Japan. On March 13, 1945, a total of 329 Boeing B-29 Superfortress heavy bombers took part in the raid against Osaka. According to an American prisoner of war who was held in the city, the air raid took almost the entire night and destroyed of the city. The U.S. bombed the city again twice in June 1945 and again on August 14, a day before Japan's surrender.\nIn the decades following World War II, Osaka's reconstruction efforts and the industriousness of its residents brought the city even greater prosperity than before the war. Its population surpassed three million in the 1960s, initiating large-scale suburbanization within the prefecture, and eventually doubled to six million by the 1990s. With factories rebuilt and trade revived, Osaka rapidly developed into a major multicultural and financial center from the 1950s through the 1980s. Osaka Prefecture was chosen as the venue for the prestigious Expo '70, the first world's fair ever held in an Asian country. Since then, numerous international events have been held in Osaka, including the 1995 APEC Summit.\nThe modern municipality, which when it was established in 1889 occupied an area of just 15\u00a0km2 including the districts of Ch\u016b\u014d and Nishi, following three successive expansions has reached an area of 222\u00a0km2. It was one of the first cities in Japan to obtain designated city status in 1956.\n21st century to present.\nThe plan to reorganize Osaka and its province into a metropolis like Tokyo met with stiff opposition in some municipalities, particularly the highly populated Sakai. He then fell back on a project that included the suppression of the 24 wards of Osaka, thus dividing the city into 5 new special districts with a status similar to that of the 23 Special wards of Tokyo. It was introduced by former mayor T\u014dru Hashimoto, leader of the reform party Osaka Restoration Association which he founded. The May 2015 referendum for the approval of this project saw the narrow victory of no, and consequently Hashimoto announced his withdrawal from politics. A second referendum for a merger into 4 semi-autonomous wards was narrowly voted down by 692,996 (50.6%).\nAccording to the Forbes list of \"The World's Most Expensive Places To Live 2009\", Osaka was the second most expensive in the world after Tokyo. By 2020 it slipped to 5th rank of most expensive cities.\nIn March 2014, the 300-metre tall Abeno Harukas opened, which became the tallest building in Japan (surpassing the Yokohama Landmark Tower in Yokohama), until it was in turn surpassed by the 330-metre tall Azabudai Hills Main Tower in Tokyo following its completion in 2022.\nExpo 2025 is being held at Yumeshima Island, Konohana-ku. Osaka is the third city to host the World Expo twice, previously hosting Expo '70. It is also the fourth World\u2019s Fair held in Japan following Expo '90 and Expo 2005 in Aichi Prefecture. The event will return to its traditional 5-year scheduling cycle after the Expo 2020 in Dubai was delayed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The projected visitor count is approximately 28 million.\nMGM Resorts began construction on MGM Osaka in April 2025. MGM Osaka will be the first integrated resort in Japan. It will include 2,300 hotel rooms, a casino, shopping and dining options, convention space and a 3,500-seat theatre.\nGeography.\nOsaka's west side is open to Osaka Bay, and is otherwise completely surrounded by more than ten satellite cities, all of them in Osaka Prefecture, with one exception: the city of Amagasaki, belonging to Hy\u014dgo Prefecture, in the northwest. The city occupies a larger area (about 13%) than any other city or village within Osaka Prefecture.\nWhen Osaka was established in 1889, it occupied roughly the area known today as the Chuo and Nishi wards, that grew into today's via incremental expansions. The largest was a single expansion in 1925. Osaka's highest point, located in Tsurumi-ku, is above Tokyo Peil. The lowest point, in Nishiyodogawa-ku, is below Tokyo Peil. Osaka is situated at a latitude of 34.67\u00b0, near the 35th parallel north, a latitude farther south than Rome (41.90\u00b0), Madrid (40.41\u00b0), San Francisco (37.77\u00b0) and Seoul (37.53\u00b0).\nClimate.\nOsaka is located in the humid subtropical climate zone (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\"), with four distinct seasons. Its winters are generally mild. January is the coldest month, with an average high of . Osaka rarely sees snowfall during the winter. Spring in Osaka starts off mild, but ends up being hot and humid. Spring tends to be Osaka's wettest season, with the \u2014the rainy season\u2014occurring between early June and late July. The average starting and ending dates of the rainy season are June 7 and July 21 respectively. \nSummers are very hot and humid. In August, the hottest month, the average daily high temperature reaches . Average nighttime low temperatures typically hover around . Fall in Osaka sees a cooling trend, with the early part of the season resembling summer, while the latter part of fall resembles winter. \nPrecipitation is abundant. Winter is the driest season. Monthly rainfall peaks in June with the \"tsuyu\" rainy season, which typically ends in mid to late July. From late July to the end of August, summer's heat and humidity peak, and rainfall decreases somewhat. Osaka has a second rainy period in September and early October, when tropical weather systems, including typhoons, coming from the south or southwest are possible.\nCityscape.\nOsaka's sprawling cityscape has been described as \"only surpassed by Tokyo as a showcase of the Japanese urban phenomenon\".\nNeighborhoods.\nCentral Osaka is roughly divided into downtown and uptown areas known as and .\nKita is home to the Umeda district and its immediate surrounding neighborhoods, a major business and retail hub that plays host to Osaka Station City and a large subterranean network of shopping arcades. Kita and nearby Nakanoshima contain a prominent portion of the city's skyscrapers and are often featured in photographs of Osaka's skyline.\nMinami, though meaning \"south\", is essentially in and geographically central within the city. Well known districts here include Namba and Shinsaibashi shopping areas, the D\u014dtonbori canal entertainment area, Nipponbashi Den Den Town, as well as arts and fashion culture-oriented areas such as Amerikamura and Horie. The 300-meter tall Abeno Harukas was the tallest skyscraper in the country from 2014 until 2023.\nThe business districts between Kita and Minami such as Honmachi and Yodoyabashi, called , house the regional headquarters of many large-scale banks and corporations. The Mid\u014dsuji boulevard runs through Semba and connects Kita and Minami.\nFurther south of Minami are neighborhoods such as Shinsekai (with its Ts\u016btenkaku tower), Tennoji and Abeno (with Tennoji Zoo, Shitenn\u014d-ji and Abeno Harukas), and the Kamagasaki slums, the largest slum in Japan.\nThe city's west side is a prominent bay area which serves as its main port as well as a tourist destination with attractions such as Kyocera Dome, Universal Studios Japan and the Tempozan Harbor Village. Higashiosaka is zoned as a separate city, although the east side of Osaka city proper contains numerous residential neighborhoods including Tsuruhashi KoreaTown, as well as the Osaka Castle Park, Osaka Business Park and the hub Ky\u014dbashi Station.\nOsaka contains numerous urban canals and bridges, many of which serve as the namesake for their surrounding neighborhoods. The phrase \"808 bridges of Naniwa\" was an expression in old Japan used to indicate impressiveness and the \"uncountable\". Osaka numbered roughly 200 bridges by the Edo period and 1,629 bridges by 1925. As many of the city's canals were gradually filled in, the number dropped to 872, of which 760 are currently managed by Osaka City.\nList of wards.\nThere are currently 24 wards in Osaka:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation numbers have been recorded in Osaka since as early as 1873, in the early Meiji era. According to the census in 2005, there were 18,967,000 residents in Osaka, an increase of 30,037 or 1.2% from 2000. There were 1,280,325 households with approximately 2.1 persons per household. The population density was 11,836 persons per km2. The Great Kant\u014d earthquake caused a mass migration to Osaka between 1920 and 1930, and the city became Japan's largest city in 1930 with 2,453,573 people, outnumbering even Tokyo, which had a population of 2,070,913. The population peaked at 3,252,340 in 1940, and had a post-war peak of 3,156,222 in 1965, but has declined since, as the residents moved out to the suburbs.\nThere were 144,123 registered foreigners, the two largest groups being Korean (60,110) and Chinese (39,551). Ikuno, with its Tsuruhashi district, is the home to one of the largest population of Korean residents in Japan, with 20,397 registered Zainichi Koreans.\nDialect.\nThe commonly spoken dialect of this area is \"Osaka-ben\", a typical sub-dialect of \"Kansai-ben\". Of the many other particularities that characterize Osaka-ben, examples include using the copula \"ya\" instead of \"da\", and the suffix \"-hen\" instead of \"-nai\" in negative verb forms.\nGovernment.\nThe Osaka City Council is the city's local government formed under the Local Autonomy Law. The council has eighty-nine seats, allocated to the twenty-four wards proportional to their population and re-elected by the citizens every four years. The council elects its president and Vice President. Toshifumi Tagaya (LDP) is the current and 104th president since May 2008. \nThe mayor of Osaka is directly elected by the citizens every four years, in accordance with the Local Autonomy Law. T\u014dru Hashimoto, former governor of Osaka Prefecture is the 19th mayor of Osaka since 2011. The mayor is supported by two vice mayors, currently Akira Morishita and Takashi Kashiwagi.\nOsaka also houses several agencies of the Japanese government. Below is a list of governmental offices housed in Osaka.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDevelopments.\nIn July 2012, a joint multi-party bill was submitted to the Diet that would allow for implementation of the Osaka Metropolis plan as pursued by the mayor of Osaka city, the governor of Osaka and their party. If implemented, Osaka City, neighboring Sakai City and possibly other surrounding municipalities would dissolve and be reorganized as four special wards of Osaka prefecture \u2013 similar to former Tokyo City's successor wards within Tokyo prefecture. Special wards are municipal-level administrative units that leave some otherwise municipal administrative responsibilities and revenues to the prefectural administration.\nIn October 2018, the city of Osaka officially ended its sister city relationship with San Francisco in the United States after the latter permitted a monument memorializing \"comfort women\" to remain on a city-owned property, circulating in the process a 10-page, 3,800-word letter in English addressed to San Francisco mayor London Breed.\nIn November 2020, a second referendum to merge Osaka's 24 wards into 4 semi-autonomous wards was narrowly voted down. There were 692,996 (50.6%) votes against and 675,829 (49.4%) votes supported it. Osaka mayor and Osaka Ishin co-leader Ichiro Matsui said he would resign when his term ended in 2023.\nEnergy policies.\nNuclear power.\nIn February 2012, three Kansai cities, Kyoto, Osaka, and Kobe, jointly asked Kansai Electric Power Company to break its dependence on nuclear power. In a letter to KEPCO they also requested to disclose information on the demand and supply of electricity, and for lower and stable prices. The three cities were stockholders of the plant: Osaka owned 9% of the shares, Kobe had 3% and Kyoto 0.45%. In June 2012, Toru Hashimoto, the mayor of Osaka, announced a proposal to minimize the dependence on nuclear power for the shareholders meeting.\nIn March 2012, the city of Osaka decided that as the largest shareholder of Kansai Electric Power Co, that at the next shareholders-meeting in June 2012 it would demand a series of changes:\nIn this action, Osaka secured the support of two other cities and shareholders: Kyoto and Kobe. With their combined voting-rights of 12.5 percent, they were not certain of the ultimate outcome. Two-thirds of the shareholders would be needed to agree to revise the corporate charter.\nAt a meeting held on April 10, 2012, by the \"energy strategy council\", formed by the city of Osaka and the governments of the prefectures, it became clear that at the end of the fiscal year 2011 some 69 employees of Kansai Electric Power Company were former public servants. \"Amakudari\" is the Japanese name for this practice of rewarding, by hiring officials that formerly controlled and supervised the firm. Such people included the following:\nBesides this, it became known that Kansai Electric had made about 600 external financial donations, to a total sum of about 1.695\u00a0billion yen:\nDuring this meeting ,some 8 conditions were compiled, that needed to be fulfilled before a restart of the No.3 and No.4 reactors Oi Nuclear Power Plant:\nEconomy.\nThe gross city product of Osaka in fiscal year 2004 was \u00a521.3\u00a0trillion, an increase of 1.2% over the previous year. The figure accounts for about 55% of the total output in the Osaka Prefecture and 26.5% in the Kinki region. In 2004, commerce, services, and manufacturing have been the three major industries, accounting for 30%, 26%, and 11% of the total, respectively. The per capita income in the city was about \u00a53.3\u00a0million, 10% higher than that of the Osaka Prefecture. MasterCard Worldwide reported that Osaka ranks 19th among the world's leading cities and plays an important role in the global economy. Osaka's GDP per capita (Nominal) was $59,958.($1=\\120.13) However, by 2020, Osaka ranked as the 5th most expensive city due to flatlining consumer prices and government subsidies of public transportation.\nHistorically, Osaka was the center of commerce in Japan, especially in the middle and pre-modern ages. Nomura Securities, the first brokerage firm in Japan, was founded in the city in 1925, and Osaka still houses a leading futures exchange. Many major companies have since moved their main offices to Tokyo. However, several major companies, such as Panasonic, Sharp, and Sanyo, are still headquartered in Osaka. In the 2017 Global Financial Centres Index, Osaka was ranked as having the 15th most competitive financial center in the world and fifth most competitive in Asia (after Singapore, Hong Kong, Tokyo, and Shanghai).\nThe Osaka Securities Exchange, specializing in derivatives such as Nikkei 225 futures, is based in Osaka. The merger with JASDAQ will help the Osaka Securities Exchange become the largest exchange in Japan for start-up companies.\nAccording to global consulting firm Mercer, Osaka was the second most expensive city for expatriate employees in the world in 2009. It jumped up nine places from 11th place in 2008 and was the eighth most expensive city in 2007. However, it was not ranked in the top ten places of the list in 2013. The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) ranked Osaka as the second most expensive city in the world in its 2013 Cost of Living study.\nKeihanshin region.\nOsaka is part of the metropolitan region called Keihanshin (also known as Greater Osaka) in the Kansai region. The Keihanshin region includes the prefectures of Osaka, Kyoto, Hy\u014dgo (Kobe), Nara, Shiga, Wakayama, and Sakai. The Keihanshin region has a population (as of 2015[ [update]]) of 19,303,000 (15% of Japan's population) which covers . It is ranked the second most urban region in Japan after the Greater Tokyo area and 10th largest urban area in the world. Keihanshin has a GDP of approximately $953.9 billion in 2012 (16th largest in the world). Osaka-Kobe has a GDP of $681 billion (2015), which is a bit more than Paris or Greater London.\nTransportation.\npx; overflow: hidden;\"&gt;\npx; left: -px; width: px\"&gt;\n The black lines represent the commuter rail network serving the Osaka metropolitan area. The pink lines represent the Osaka Metro system. The blue lines represent three rail extension projects: the Osaka Monorail Main Line (right), the Naniwasuji Line (center), and the Osaka Port Transport System Hokk\u014d Line (left).\nGreater Osaka has an extensive network of railway lines, comparable to that of Greater Tokyo. Major stations within the city include , , , , , and .\nOsaka connects to its surrounding cities and suburbs via the JR West Urban Network as well as numerous private lines such as Keihan Electric Railway, Hankyu Railway, Hanshin Electric Railway, Kintetsu Railway, and Nankai Electric Railway.\nThe Osaka Metro system alone ranks 8th in the world by annual passenger ridership, serving over 912\u00a0million people annually (a quarter of Greater Osaka Rail System's 4\u00a0billion annual riders), despite being only 8 of more than 70 lines in the metro area.\nAll Shinkansen trains including \"Nozomi\" stop at Shin-Osaka Station and provide access to other major cities in Japan, such as Kobe, Kyoto, Nagoya, Yokohama, and Tokyo.\nRegular bus services are provided by Osaka City Bus, as well Hankyu, Hanshin and Kintetsu, providing a dense network covering most parts of the city.\nOsaka is served by two airports situated just outside of the city, Kansai International Airport (IATA: KIX) which handles primarily international passenger flights and international cargo flights and the nearby Osaka International Airport (IATA: ITM) which handles mostly domestic services.\nDue to its geographical position, Osaka's international ferry connections are far greater than that of Tokyo, with international service to Shanghai, Tianjin, and Busan along with domestic routes to Kitakyushu, Kagoshima, Miyazaki and Okinawa.\nCulture and lifestyle.\nShopping and food.\nOsaka has a large number of wholesalers and retail shops: 25,228 and 34,707 respectively in 2004. Many of them are concentrated in the wards of Chu\u014d (10,468 shops) and Kita (6,335 shops). Types of shops vary from malls to conventional sh\u014dtengai shopping arcades, built both above- and underground. Sh\u014dtengai are seen across Japan, and Osaka has the longest one in the country. The Tenjinbashi-suji arcade stretches from the road approaching the Tenmang\u016b shrine and continues for going north to south. The stores along the arcade include commodities, clothing, and catering outlets.\nOther shopping areas include Den Den Town, the electronic and manga/anime district, which is comparable to Akihabara in Tokyo, the Umeda district, which has the Hankyu Sanbangai shopping mall and Yodobashi Camera, a huge electrical appliance store that offers a vast range of fashion stores, restaurants, and a Shonen Jump store. Osaka is known for its food, in Japan and abroad. Author Michael Booth and food critic Fran\u00e7ois Simon of have suggested that Osaka is the food capital of the world. \nOsakans' love for the culinary is made apparent in the old saying \"Kyotoites are financially ruined by overspending on clothing, Osakans are ruined by spending on food.\" Regional cuisine includes , , , as well as the traditional , particularly .\nOsaka is known for its fine sake, which is made with fresh water from the prefecture's mountains. \nOsaka's culinary prevalence is the result of regional access to high-quality ingredients, a high population of merchants, and proximity to the ocean and waterway trade. In recent years, Osaka has started to garner more attention from foreigners with the increased popularity of cooking and dining in popular culture.\nOther shopping districts include:\nAnnual festivals.\nOne of the most famous festivals held in Osaka, the Tenjin Matsuri, is held on July 24 and 25 (Osaka Tenmang\u016b). Other festivals in Osaka include the Aizen Matsuri (June 30\u2013July 2, Sh\u014dman-in Temple), the Sumiyoshi Matsuri (July 30\u2013August 1, Sumiyoshi Taisha), Sh\u014dry\u014d-e (April 22, Shitenn\u014d-ji) and T\u014dka-Ebisu (January 9\u201310, Imamiya Ebisu Jinja). The annual Osaka Asian Film Festival takes place in Osaka every March while the Midosuji Parade takes place in October.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe National Museum of Art (NMAO) is a subterranean Japanese and international art museum, housing mainly collections from the post-war era and regularly welcoming temporary exhibitions. Osaka Science Museum is in a five storied building next to the National Museum of Art, with a planetarium and an OMNIMAX theater. The Museum of Oriental Ceramics holds more than 2,000 pieces of ceramics, from China, Korea, Japan and Vietnam, featuring displays of some of their Korean celadon under natural light. Osaka Municipal Museum of Art is inside Tenn\u014dji park, housing over 8,000 pieces of Japanese and Chinese paintings and sculptures. The Osaka Museum of History, opened in 2001, is located in a 13-story modern building providing a view of Osaka Castle. Its exhibits cover the history of Osaka from pre-history to the present day. Osaka Museum of Natural History houses a collection related to natural history and life.\nSports.\nOsaka hosts four professional sport teams: one of them is the Orix Buffaloes, a Nippon Professional Baseball team, playing its home games at Kyocera Dome Osaka. Another baseball team, the Hanshin Tigers, although based in Nishinomiya, Hy\u014dgo, plays a part of its home games in Kyocera Dome Osaka as well, when their homeground Koshien Stadium is occupied with the annual National High School Baseball Championship games during summer season.\nThere are two J.League clubs, Gamba Osaka, plays its home games at Suita City Football Stadium. Another club Cerezo Osaka, plays its home games at Yanmar Stadium Nagai. The city is home to Osaka Evessa, a basketball team that plays in the B.League. Evessa has won the first three championships of the league since its establishment. Kintetsu Liners, a rugby union team, play in the Top League. After winning promotion in 2008\u201309, they will again remain in the competition for the 2009\u201310 season. Their base is the Hanazono Rugby Stadium.\nThe , one of the six regular tournaments of professional sumo, is held annually in Osaka at Osaka Prefectural Gymnasium.\nAnother major annual sporting event that takes place in Osaka is Osaka International Ladies Marathon. Held usually at the end of January every year, the race starts from Nagai Stadium, runs through Nakanoshima, Mid\u014dsuji and Osaka castle park, and returns to the stadium. Another yearly event held at Nagai Stadium is the Osaka Gran Prix Athletics games operated by the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) in May. The Osaka GP is the only IAAF games annually held in Japan.\nOsaka made the bid for the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2008 Summer Paralympics but was eliminated in the first round of the vote on July 13, 2001, which awarded the game to Beijing.\nOsaka was one of the host cities of the official Women's Volleyball World Championship for its 1998, 2006 and 2010 editions.\nOsaka is the home of the 2011 created Japan Bandy Federation and the introduction of bandy, in the form of rink bandy, was made in the city. In July 2012 the first Japan Bandy Festival was organized.\nMedia.\nOsaka serves as one of the media hubs for Japan, housing headquarters of many media-related companies. Abundant television production takes place in the city and every nationwide TV network (with the exception of TXN network) registers its secondary-key station in Osaka. All five nationwide newspaper majors also house their regional headquarters, and most local newspapers nationwide have branches in Osaka. However major film productions are uncommon in the city. Most major films are produced in nearby Kyoto or in Tokyo. The Ad Council Japan was founded in 1971 is based in Osaka, now it is the Osaka branch.\nNewspapers.\nAll five major national newspapers of Japan, \"The Asahi Shimbun\", \"Mainichi Shimbun\", \"Nihon Keizai Shimbun\", \"Sankei Shimbun\" and \"Yomiuri Shimbun\", have their regional headquarters in Osaka and issue their regional editions. Furthermore, Osaka houses Osaka Nichi-nichi Shimbun, its newspaper press. Other newspaper-related companies located in Osaka include the regional headquarters of FujiSankei Business i.;Houchi Shimbunsha; Nikkan Sports; Sports Nippon, and offices of Kyodo News Jiji Press; Reuters; Bloomberg L.P.\nBroadcasting.\nThe five TV networks are represented by Asahi Broadcasting Corporation (ANN), Kansai Telecasting Corporation (FNN), Mainichi Broadcasting System, Inc. (JNN), Television Osaka, Inc. (TXN) and Yomiuri Telecasting Corporation (NNN), headquartered in Osaka. NHK has also its regional station based in the city. AM Radio services are provided by NHK as well as the ABC Radio (Asahi Broadcasting Corporation), MBS Radio (Mainichi Broadcasting System, Inc.) and Radio Osaka (Osaka Broadcasting Corporation) and headquartered in the city. FM services are available from NHK, FM OSAKA, FM802 and FM Cocolo, the last providing programs in multiple languages including English.\nPublishing companies.\nOsaka is home to many publishing companies, including Examina, Izumi Shoin, Kaihou Shuppansha, Keihanshin Elmagazine, Seibundo Shuppan, Sougensha, and Toho Shuppan.\nEducation.\nPublic elementary and junior high schools in Osaka are operated by the city of Osaka. Its supervisory organization on educational matters is Osaka City Board of Education. Likewise, public high schools are operated by the Osaka Prefectural Board of Education.\nOsaka once had a large number of universities and high schools, but because of growing campuses and the need for larger area, many chose to move to the suburbs, including Osaka University.\nHistorically foreign expatriates in the Kansai region preferred to live in Kobe rather than Osaka. As a result, until 1991 the Osaka area had no schools catering to expatriate children. Osaka International School of Kwansei Gakuin, founded in 1991, is located in nearby Minoh, and it was the first international school in the Osaka area. The Great Hanshin-Awaji earthquake of 1995 caused a decline in demand for international schools, as there were about 2,500 U.S. nationals resident in Osaka after the earthquake while the pre-earthquake number was about 5,000. American Chamber of Commerce in Japan (ACCJ) Kansai chapter president Norman Solberg stated that since 2002 the numbers of expatriates in Kansai were recovering \"but the fact is there is still a persistent exodus to Tokyo.\" In 2001 the city of Osaka and YMCA established the Osaka YMCA International School.\nColleges and universities include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFacilities.\n\"Important cultural property\" (\u91cd\u8981\u6587\u5316\u8ca1) after the name of a facility indicates an important cultural property designated by the country.\nLeisure facilities and high-rise buildings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical site.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParks and gardens.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTheaters and halls.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSport venues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReligious facilities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nSister cities.\nOsaka is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendship cooperation cities.\nOsaka also cooperates with:\nBusiness partner cities.\nOsaka's business partner cities, mostly in the Asia-Pacific region, are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister ports.\nOsaka's sister ports are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52231", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52231", "title": "WEU", "text": ""}
{"id": "52232", "revid": "50100954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52232", "title": "Mauritshuis", "text": "Art museum in The Hague, Netherlands\nThe Mauritshuis (, ; lit.\u2009'Maurice House') is an art museum in The Hague, Netherlands. The museum houses the Royal Cabinet of Paintings which consists of 854 objects, mostly Dutch Golden Age paintings. The collection contains works by Johannes Vermeer, Rembrandt van Rijn, Jan Steen, Paulus Potter, Frans Hals, Jacob van Ruisdael, Hans Holbein the Younger, and others. Originally, the 17th-century building was the residence of Count John Maurice of Nassau. The building is now the property of the government of the Netherlands and is listed in the top 100 Dutch heritage sites.\nHistory.\nIn 1631, John Maurice, Prince of Nassau-Siegen, a cousin of Stadtholder Frederick Henry, bought a plot bordering the Binnenhof and the adjacent Hofvijver pond in The Hague, at that time the political centre of the Dutch Republic. Between 1636 and 1641, the Mauritshuis was built on this piece of land, during John Maurice's governorship of Dutch Brazil. It was built in the Dutch Classicist style by the Dutch architects Jacob van Campen and Pieter Post. The two-storey building is strictly symmetrical; originally the interior contained four apartments and a great hall. Each apartment was designed with an antechamber, a chamber, a cabinet, and a cloakroom. The building had a cupola, which was destroyed in a fire in 1704.\nAfter the death of Prince John Maurice in 1679, the house was owned by the Maes family, who leased the house to the Dutch government. In 1704, most of the interior of the Mauritshuis was destroyed by fire. The building was restored between 1708 and 1718.\nIn 1774, an art gallery open to the public was formed in what is now the Prince William V Gallery. That collection was seized by the French in 1795 and only partially recovered in 1808. The small gallery space soon proved to be too small, however, and in 1820, the Mauritshuis was bought by the Dutch state for the purpose of housing the Royal Cabinet of Paintings. In 1822, the Mauritshuis was opened to the public and housed the Royal Cabinet of Paintings and the Royal Cabinet of Rarities. In 1875, the entire museum became available for paintings.\nIn 1995, the Mauritshuis was established as a non-profit foundation. The foundation set up at that time took charge of both the building and the collection, which it was given on long-term loan. This building, which is the property of the state, continues to be rented by the museum. In 2007, the museum announced its desire to expand. Within three years the definitive design was presented. The museum would occupy a part of the nearby Soci\u00ebteit de Witte building. The two buildings would be connected via a tunnel, running underneath the Korte Vijverberg. \nThe renovation started in 2012 and finished in 2014. The design was by Hans van Heeswijk. During the renovation, about 100 of the museum's paintings were displayed in The Hague's Kunstmuseum in the \"Highlights Mauritshuis\" exhibition. About 50 other paintings, including the \"Girl With the Pearl Earring\", went on loan to exhibitions in the United States and Japan. The expanded museum was reopened on 27 June 2014 by King Willem-Alexander.\nControversy over the colonial past of Prince Maurice.\nIn 1664 Prince John Maurice ordered a marble bust portrait of himself for the garden of the Mauritshuis, the Prince's residence in the Hague. The statue was sculpted by the Flemish sculptor Bartholomeus Eggers. Prince Maurice had the bust moved to the burial chamber (F\u00fcrstengruft) in Siegen which he had built for himself in 1670.\nIn 1986 a copy of the statue made in plastic was placed inside the Mauritshuis. The bust was removed from the Mauritshuis in 2017 amidst controversy over Holland's colonial history and Prince John Maurice's role in the slave trade. The Mauritshuis museum has denied that the removal had anything to do with the controversy and has stated that the decision was taken on the grounds that the object was solely a copy made of plastic and the museum was unable to offer the necessary historical context for it in the foyer of the Mauritshuis where it was exhibited. The museum has since created a webpage dedicated to explaining the role of the Prince in the creation of the museum's building and collection and the museum's current view of the Prince. The statements on the page highlight the key role the Prince played in the slave trade in Brazil and how his immense wealth was likely sourced (in certain cases even in breach of then existing rules) from his involvement in the slave trade.\nCollection.\nThe collection of paintings of stadholder William V, Prince of Orange was presented to the Dutch state by his son, King William I. This collection formed the basis of the Royal Cabinet of Paintings of around 200 paintings. The collection is currently called the Royal Picture Gallery. The current collection consists of almost 800 paintings and focusses on Dutch and Flemish artists, such as Pieter Brueghel, Paulus Potter, Peter Paul Rubens, Rembrandt van Rijn, Jacob van Ruisdael, Johannes Vermeer, and Rogier van der Weyden. There are also works of Hans Holbein in the collection in the Mauritshuis.\nAdministration.\nThe Mauritshuis was a state museum until 1995, when it became an independent foundation. It still continues to receive funding from the Dutch central government. For its estimated budget for 2024, the government provided just under a third (5m Euros) of its total budget of 16m Euros. The Prince William V Gallery is also managed by the organisation.\nThe museum has a staff of around 91 people. was museum director from 2008 until 2020. Martine Gosselink assumed the directorship in February 2020. Victor Moussault served as deputy director from 2007 until 2016, succeeded by Sander Uitdenbogaard in 2017.\nIn the period 2005 to 2011, the Mauritshuis saw between 205,000 and 262,000 visitors per year. In 2011, the museum was the 13th most visited museum in the Netherlands. In 2012, when the museum closed for renovation on 1 April, it received 45,981 visitors. The museum was closed all of 2013 and was reopened on 27 June 2014. It closed for three months in the spring of 2020 in response to the Covid epidemic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52234", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52234", "title": "Chief executive officer", "text": "Highest-ranking officer of an organization\nA chief executive officer (CEO), also known as a chief executive or managing director, is the top-ranking corporate officer charged with the management of an organization, usually a company or a nonprofit organization.\nCEOs find roles in various organizations, including public and private corporations, nonprofit organizations, and even some government organizations (notably state-owned enterprises). The governor and CEO of a corporation or company typically reports to the board of directors and is charged with maximizing the value of the business, which may include maximizing the profitability, market share, revenue, or another financial metric. In the nonprofit and government sector, CEOs typically aim at achieving outcomes related to the organization's mission, usually provided by legislation. CEOs are also frequently assigned the role of the main manager of the organization and the highest-ranking officer in the C-suite.\nOrigins.\nThe term \"chief executive officer\" is attested as early as 1782, when an ordinance of the Congress of the Confederation of the United States of America used the term to refer to governors and other leaders of the executive branches of each of the Thirteen Colonies. In draft additions to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" published online in 2011, the \"Dictionary\" says that the use of \"CEO\" as an acronym for a chief executive officer originated in Australia, with the first attestation being in 1914. The first American usage cited is from 1972.\nResponsibilities.\nThe responsibilities of an organization's CEO are set by the organization's board of directors or other authority, depending on the organization's structure. They can be far-reaching or quite limited, and are typically enshrined in a formal delegation of authority regarding business administration. Typically, responsibilities include being an active decision-maker on business strategy and other key policy issues, as well as leader, manager, and executor roles. The communicator role can involve speaking to the press and the public, as well as to the organization's management and employees. The decision-making role entails making high-level decisions regarding policy and strategy. The CEO is responsible for implementing the goals, targets, and strategic objectives as determined by the board of directors.\nAs an executive officer of the company, the CEO reports the status of the business to the board of directors, motivates employees, and drives change within the organization. As a manager, the CEO presides over the organization's day-to-day operations. The CEO is the person who is ultimately accountable for a company's business decisions, including those in operations, marketing, business development, finance, human resources, etc. The CEO of a political party is often entrusted with fundraising, particularly for election campaigns.\nThe use of the CEO title may be used by for-profit companies or non-profit or charitable organisations, such as the Wikimedia Foundation.\nInternational use.\nIn some countries, there is a dual board system with two separate boards, one executive board for the day-to-day business and one supervisory board for control purposes (selected by the shareholders). In these countries, the CEO presides over the executive board and the chairperson presides over the supervisory board, and these two roles will always be held by different people. This ensures a distinction between management by the executive board and governance by the supervisory board. This allows for clear lines of authority. The aim is to prevent a conflict of interest and too much power being concentrated in the hands of one person.\nIn the United States, the board of directors (elected by the shareholders) is often equivalent to the supervisory board, while the executive board may often be known as the executive committee (the division/subsidiary heads and C-level officers that report directly to the CEO).\nIn the United States, and in business, the executive officers are usually the top officers of a corporation, the chief executive officer (CEO) being the best-known type. The definition varies; for instance, the California Corporate Disclosure Act defines \"executive officers\" as the five most highly compensated officers not also sitting on the board of directors. In the case of a sole proprietorship, an executive officer is the sole proprietor. In the case of a partnership, an executive officer is a managing partner, senior partner, or administrative partner. In the case of a limited liability company, an executive officer is any member, manager, or officer.\nRelated positions.\nDepending on the organization, a CEO may have several subordinate executives to help run the day-to-day administration of the company, each of whom has specific functional responsibilities referred to as senior executives, executive officers or corporate officers. Subordinate executives are given different titles in different organizations, but one common category of subordinate executive, if the CEO is also the president, is the vice president (VP). An organization may have more than one vice president, each tasked with a different area of responsibility (e.g., VP of finance, VP of human resources). Examples of subordinate executive officers who typically report to the CEO include the chief operating officer (COO), chief financial officer (CFO), chief strategy officer (CSO), chief marketing officer (CMO) and chief business officer (CBO). The public relations-focused position of chief reputation officer is sometimes included as one such subordinate executive officer, but, as suggested by Anthony Johndrow, CEO of Reputation Economy Advisors, it can also be seen as \"simply another way to add emphasis to the role of a modern-day CEO \u2013 where they are both the external face of, and the driving force behind, an organization culture\".\nUnited States.\nIn the US, the term \"chief executive officer\" is used primarily in business, whereas the term \"executive director\" is used primarily in the not-for-profit sector. These terms are generally mutually exclusive and refer to distinct legal duties and responsibilities. The CEO is the highest-ranking executive in a company, making corporate decisions, managing operations, allocating resources, and serving as the main point of communication between the board of directors and the company.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, chief executive and chief executive officer are used in local government, where their position in law is described as the \"head of paid service\", and in business and in the charitable sector. As of 2013[ [update]], the use of the term director for senior charity staff is deprecated to avoid confusion with the legal duties and responsibilities associated with being a charity director or trustee, which are normally non-executive (unpaid) roles. The term managing director is often used in lieu of chief executive officer.\nCelebrity CEOs.\nBusiness publicists since the days of Edward Bernays (1891\u20131995) and his client John D. Rockefeller (1839\u20131937) and even more successfully the corporate publicists for Henry Ford, promoted the concept of the \"celebrity CEO\". Business journalists have often adopted this approach, which assumes that the corporate achievements, especially in the arena of manufacturing, are produced by uniquely talented individuals, especially the \"heroic CEO\". In effect, journalists celebrate a CEO who takes distinctive strategic actions. The model is the celebrity in entertainment, sports, and politics \u2013 compare the \"great man theory\". Guthey \"et al.\" argues that \"...these individuals are not self-made, but rather are created by a process of widespread media exposure to the point that their actions, personalities, and even private lives function symbolically to represent significant dynamics and tensions prevalent in the contemporary business atmosphere\". Journalism thereby exaggerates the importance of the CEO and tends to neglect harder-to-describe broader corporate factors. There is little attention to the intricately organized technical bureaucracy that actually does the work. Hubris sets in when the CEO internalizes the celebrity and becomes excessively self-confident in making complex decisions. There may be an emphasis on the sort of decisions that attract the celebrity journalists.\nResearch published in 2009 by Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate indicates that \"firms with award-winning CEOs subsequently underperform, in terms both of stock and of operating performance\".\nCreator CEOs.\nIn the 2020s, a new category of high-visibility executives emerged, often referred to as \"creator CEOs\". These leaders combine traditional corporate responsibilities with digital-media visibility, producing content such as podcasts, vlogs, and social-media posts to communicate company culture, transparency, and brand purpose. Commentators have noted that this approach allows CEOs to build direct relationships with customers and employees while humanizing their companies in competitive direct-to-consumer markets. \nExamples include founders who use digital storytelling and video platforms to discuss entrepreneurship, creativity, and business challenges as part of their leadership style.\nCriticism.\nCEO Selection and Performance Evaluation.\nCEOs and senior executives are governed by the board of directors. The proper selection and evaluation of the CEO and the executive team is critical to the company\u2019s performance. Yet there is no established standard framework to evaluate and govern the CEO performance. Aside from Sarbanes Oxley Act legal standard to govern the financial reporting of public companies and hold the CEO &amp; CFO accountable, there are no industry standards to test the CEO competency and actions or to help align the performance of the executive team with the shareholders' interest and performance expectations. One initiative proposes a standardized questionnaire used in annual CEO reviews and senior executive recruitment. These questionnaires help guide CEO strategy and assure the shareholders that the company and its executive team are on the right track. According to the Executive Institute, the top 10 questions every board must ask its CEO, include the following:\nEvery CEO and C-level executive must be able to provide specific answers to the preceding questions, readily and clearly. Additionally, these questions can also be used as a framework for evaluating potential candidates for the succession planning and selection process. \nExecutive compensation.\nExecutive compensation has been a source of criticism following a dramatic rise in pay relative to the average worker's wage. For example, the relative pay was 20-to-1 in 1965 in the US, but had risen to 376-to-1 by 2000. The relative pay differs around the world, and, in some smaller countries, is still around 20-to-1. Observers differ as to whether the rise is due to competition for talent or due to lack of control by compensation committees. In recent years, investors have demanded more say over executive pay.\nDiversity.\nLack of diversity amongst chief executives has also been a source of criticism. In 2018, 5% of \"Fortune\" 500 CEOs were women. In 2023 the number rose to 10.4% of for Women CEO's of Fortune 500 companies. The reasons for this are explained or justified in various ways, and may include biological sex differences, male and female differences in Big Five personality traits and temperament, sex differences in psychology and interests, maternity and career breaks, hypergamy, phallogocentrism, the existence of old boy networks, tradition, and the lack of female role models in that regard. Some countries have passed laws mandating boardroom gender quotas. In 2023 Rockefeller Foundation awarded a grant to Korn Ferry to research strategies and then action a plan to help more women to become CEO's.\nToxic executives.\nThere are contentious claims that a significant number of CEO's have psychopathic tendencies, often characterized by power-seeking behavior and dominance. These individuals can often conceal their ruthlessness and antisocial behavior behind a facade of charm and eloquence. Traits such as courage and risk-taking, generally considered desirable, are often found alongside these psychopathic tendencies.\nTara Swart, a neuroscientist at MIT Sloan School of Management, has suggested that individuals with psychopathic traits thrive in chaotic environments and are aware that others do not. As a result, they may intentionally create chaos in the workplace. This perspective is explored in the book \"Snakes in Suits\", co-authored by Robert D. Hare.\nHowever, Scott Lilienfeld has argued that the attention given to psychopathy in the workplace by both the media and scholars has far exceeded the available scientific evidence. Emilia Bunea, writing in \"Psychology Today\", has linked psychopathic traits in managers to workplace bullying, employee dissatisfaction, and turnover intentions. Despite this, Bunea cautions that excessive worry about supposed psychopathic managers could discourage individuals from pursuing careers in corporations and deter employees from addressing issues with difficult bosses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52239", "revid": "50307497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52239", "title": "Hoax", "text": "Widespread deliberate fabrication presented as truth\nA hoax (pl.: hoaxes) is a widely publicised falsehood created to deceive its audience with false and often astonishing information, with the either malicious or humorous intent of causing shock and interest in as many people as possible.\nSome hoaxers intend to eventually unmask their representations as having been a hoax so as to expose their victims as fools; seeking some form of profit, other hoaxers hope to maintain the hoax indefinitely, so that it is only when skeptical people willing to investigate their claims publish their findings, that the hoaxers are finally revealed as such.\nHistory.\nZhang Yingyu's \"The Book of Swindles\" (c. 1617), published during the late Ming dynasty, is said to be China's first collection of stories about fraud, swindles, hoaxes, and other forms of deception. Although practical jokes have likely existed for thousands of years, one of the earliest recorded hoaxes in Western history was the drummer of Tedworth in 1661. The communication of hoaxes can be accomplished in almost any manner that a fictional story can be communicated: in person, via word of mouth, via words printed on paper, and so on. As communications technology has advanced, the speed at which hoaxes spread has also advanced: a rumour about a ghostly drummer, spread by word of mouth, will affect a relatively small area at first, then grow gradually. However, hoaxes could also be spread via chain letters, which became easier as the cost of mailing a letter dropped. The invention of the printing press in the 15th century brought down the cost of a mass-produced books and pamphlets, and the rotary printing press of the 19th century reduced the price even further (see yellow journalism). During the 20th century, the hoax found a mass market in the form of supermarket tabloids, and by the 21st century there were fake news websites which spread hoaxes via social networking websites (in addition to the use of email for a modern type of chain letter).\nEtymology.\nThe English philologist Robert Nares (1753\u20131829) says that the word \"hoax\" was coined in the late 18th century as a contraction of the verb \"hocus\", which means \"to cheat\", \"to impose upon\" or (according to Merriam-Webster) \"to befuddle often with drugged liquor.\" \"Hocus\" is a shortening of the magic incantation \"hocus pocus\", whose origin is disputed.\nDefinition.\nRobert Nares defined the word \"hoax\" as meaning \"to cheat\", dating from Thomas Ady's 1656 book \"A candle in the dark, or a treatise on the nature of witches and witchcraft\".\nThe term \"hoax\" is occasionally used in reference to urban legends and rumours, but the folklorist Jan Harold Brunvand argues that most of them lack evidence of deliberate creations of falsehood and are passed along in good faith by believers or as jokes, so the term should be used for only those with a probable conscious attempt to deceive. As for the closely related terms \"practical joke\" and \"prank\", Brunvand states that although there are instances where they overlap, \"hoax\" tends to indicate \"relatively complex and large-scale fabrications\" and includes deceptions that go beyond the merely playful and \"cause material loss or harm to the victim.\"\nAccording to Professor Lynda Walsh of the University of Nevada, Reno, some hoaxes\u00a0\u2013 such as the Great Stock Exchange Fraud of 1814, labelled as a hoax by contemporary commentators\u00a0\u2013 are financial in nature, and successful hoaxers\u00a0\u2013 such as P. T. Barnum, whose Fiji mermaid contributed to his wealth\u00a0\u2013 often acquire monetary gain or fame through their fabrications, so the distinction between \"hoax\" and \"fraud\" is not necessarily clear. Alex Boese, the creator of the Museum of Hoaxes, states that the only distinction between them is the reaction of the public, because a fraud can be classified as a hoax when its method of acquiring financial gain creates a broad public impact or captures the imagination of the masses.\nOne of the earliest recorded media hoaxes is a fake almanac published by Jonathan Swift under the pseudonym of Isaac Bickerstaff in 1708. Swift predicted the death of John Partridge, one of the leading astrologers in England at that time, in the almanac and later issued an elegy on the day Partridge was supposed to have died. Partridge's reputation was damaged as a result and his astrological almanac was not published for the next six years.\nIt is possible to perpetrate a hoax by making only true statements using unfamiliar wording or context, such as in the Dihydrogen monoxide hoax. Political hoaxes are sometimes motivated by the desire to ridicule or besmirch opposing politicians or political institutions, often before elections.\nA hoax differs from a magic trick or from fiction (books, film, theatre, radio, television, etc.) in that the audience is unaware of being deceived, whereas in watching a magician perform an illusion the audience expects to be tricked.\nA hoax is often intended as a practical joke or to cause embarrassment, or to provoke social or political change by raising people's awareness of something. It can also emerge from a marketing or advertising purpose. For example, to market a romantic comedy film, a director staged a phony \"incident\" during a supposed wedding, which showed a bride and preacher getting knocked into a pool by a clumsy fall from a best man. A resulting video clip of \"Chloe and Keith's Wedding\" was uploaded to YouTube and was viewed by over 30 million people and the couple was interviewed by numerous talk shows. Viewers were deluded into thinking that it was an authentic clip of a real accident at a real wedding; but a story in \"USA Today\" in 2009 revealed it was a hoax.\nGovernments sometimes spread false information to facilitate their objectives, such as going to war. These often come under the heading of black propaganda. There is often a mixture of outright hoax and suppression and management of information to give the desired impression. In wartime and times of international tension rumours abound, some of which may be deliberate hoaxes.\nExamples of politics-related hoaxes:\nPsychologist Peter Hancock has identified six steps which characterise a truly successful hoax:\nTypes.\nHoaxes vary widely in their processes of creation, propagation, and entrenchment over time. Examples include:\nHoax news.\nHoax news (also referred to as fake news) is a news report containing facts that are either inaccurate or false but which are presented as genuine. A hoax news report conveys a half-truth used deliberately to mislead the public.\nHoax may serve the goal of propaganda or disinformation \u2013 using social media to drive web traffic and amplify their effect. Unlike news satire, fake news websites seek to mislead, rather than entertain, readers for financial or political gain.\nHoax news is usually released with the intention of misleading to injure an organisation, individual, or person, and/or benefit financially or politically, sometimes utilising sensationalist, deceptive, or simply invented headlines to maximise readership. Likewise, clickbait reports and articles from this operation gain advertisement revenue.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52240", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52240", "title": "Post-traumatic Stress Disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "52241", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52241", "title": "Autosport", "text": "British motorsport magazine\nAutosport is a global motorsport publishing brand headquartered based in Richmond, London, England. It was established in 1950 at the same time as the origins of the Formula One World Championship.\nAutosport began life as a weekly magazine in 1950 and expanded into digital publishing with the creation of Autosport.com in 1997. In 2016, Haymarket Media Group sold Autosport and the rest of its motorsport portfolio to Motorsport Network.\nAutosport.com.\nAutosport launched its website \u2013 Autosport.com \u2013 in 1997. As distinct from the magazine, the online content is more internationally focussed and as well as covering sports news and reporting on races, Autosport.com also produces video and galleries taken from the Motorsport Images archive and in-depth long-form content in the website's subscriber-only sections.\nAutosport Plus.\nAutosport Plus is a paywalled part of the autosport.com website with additional content.\nAutosport Magazine.\nAutosport first issue was published in 1950 and the weekly newsstand title has been in continuous publication ever since.\nIt covers all forms of motorsport from Formula 1 through to the British club racing scene. The magazine carries race and rally reports from high-profile and significant meetings from all over the world and the UK and blends this with news analysis and in-depth articles looking at contemporary cars, drivers and events as well as retrospective looks at significant characters and developments from the sport's past.\nTraditionally Autosport had only focused on four-wheel racing, but its editorial expanded to include MotoGP coverage in 2014. In the past, the magazine once carried reviews of new road cars, but it is now specifically dedicated to racing and rallying.\nAutosport stopped printing their magazine on 30 April 2020 due to COVID, and said that they would resume in time for the 2020 Formula 1 season. They then resumed publishing with the issue dated 3 July 2020.\nAutosport switched from a weekly to a monthly publication at the beginning of 2025, after it was merged with its sister title \"GP Racing\".\nCurrent editorial team.\nSince May 2016 the magazine has been edited by Kevin Turner, who was previously the editor of sister title Motorsport News. The other full-time members of staff are.\nIn addition, the magazine features a number of freelance correspondents. Among these are F1 columnist Nigel Roebuck, Sportscar specialist Gary Watkins and British Club racing expert Marcus Pye. It also has correspondents covering club-level racing from the British domestic racing scene and prominent international races and rallies.\nEditions.\nAutosport Asia Edition\nIn April 2011, Autosport re-launched Autosport Asia Edition. It is published by Bespoke Media Pte Ltd in Singapore. It is a monthly magazine instead of a weekly and the aim is that it will carry over most of the month's content from the British edition, as well as placing a very strong emphasis on the Asian motorsport scene.\nAutosport Russian Edition\nOn 11 February 2013, launched Autosport Russian Edition.\nAutosport Arabic Edition\nOn 1 November 2013, launched Autosport Arabic Edition.\nAutosport French Edition\nOn 3 April 2014, launched Autosport French Edition.\nAutosport Engineering &amp; Autosport Performance.\nAutosport Engineering and Autosport Performance are regular supplements that appear in Autosport each month on a rotating basis. Edited by James Newbold, Autosport Engineering is derived from the section of the Autosport International Show of the same name.\nThe supplement has a particular focus on companies based in the UK.\nAutosport International.\nAutosport International is a motorsport-themed exhibition, which has taken place every January at the NEC Birmingham, UK, since 1991.\nAutosport Awards.\nThe Autosport Awards, held annually at The Grosvenor House Hotel on Park Lane in London on the first weekend in December is motorsport's red carpet event, honouring the achievements of the race drivers from Formula One and other world championships, as well as recognising and promoting emerging talent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52242", "revid": "36909700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52242", "title": "Motor racing (disambiguation)", "text": "Motor racing describes various forms of motor-powered racing:\nMotor racing may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52243", "revid": "50853909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52243", "title": "Touring car racing", "text": "Motorsport road racing competition\nTouring car racing is a form of motorsport featuring production-based cars that are modified for competition. The discipline emphasizes close racing, balanced performance, and manufacturer diversity, with cars that still resemble their road-going counterparts. Originating in Europe in the mid-20th century, touring car racing has since expanded globally through rule sets such as Group A, Super Touring, and the FIA TCR formula. Major championships include the British Touring Car Championship (BTCC), German Touring Car Racing (DTM), and Supercars Championship. It has both similarities to and significant differences from stock car racing, which is popular in the United States.\nModern touring car championships increasingly rely on Balance of Performance (BoP) and cost-control regulations to ensure close competition among manufacturers and private teams. The adoption of hybrid technology and the introduction of electric touring car series, such as the ETCR (now FIA E-Touring Car World Cup), mark the category\u2019s adaptation to sustainability trends in motorsport. While the cars do not move as fast as those in formula or sports car races, their similarity both to one another and to fans' own vehicles makes for well-supported racing. The lesser use of aerodynamics means following cars have a much easier time passing than in open-wheel racing, and the more substantial bodies of the cars makes the subtle bumping and nudging for overtaking much more acceptable as part of racing.\nAs well as short \"sprint\" races, many touring car series include one or more endurance races, which last anything from 3 to 24 hours and are a test of reliability and pit crews as much as car, driver speed, and consistency.\nCharacteristics.\nTouring car racing started in the mid twentieth century as a long-format style of competition that took place on public roads between numerous towns. The cars were crewed by a driver and, because of their unreliability, a mechanic who carried tools and spares. The legacy of these beginnings can still be seen in modern touring and GT cars\u00a0\u2013 the driver sits offset from the centreline of the car and there is space for a second seat (although they are rarely fitted any more).\nWhile rules vary from country to country and series to series, most series require that the competitors start with a standard car body, but virtually every other component may be allowed to be heavily modified for racing, including engines, suspension, brakes, wheels and tires. Aerodynamic aids are sometimes added to the front and rear of the cars. Regulations are usually designed to limit costs by banning some of the more exotic technologies available (for instance, many series insist on a \"control tire\" that all competitors must use) and keep the racing close (sometimes by ballast weight where winning a race requires the winner's car to be heavier for subsequent races).\nTouring cars share some similarity with American stock car racing. Touring cars are, at least notionally, derived from production cars as most stock car racing outside of NASCAR, including street stock and late model racing, continue to be. NASCAR circuits have since moved to a custom platform independent of production cars, unlike touring car circuits. Touring car racing is also referred to as \"saloon car racing\".\nSeries of competition.\nFIA TCR World Tour.\n\"Worldwide\"\nModern World Touring Car Championship (WTCC) started in 2005, evolving from the reborn European Touring Car Championship. The series merged with the TCR International Series and became the World Touring Car Cup (WTCR) starting from 2018. In 2023, the WTCR was replaced by the TCR World Tour.\nRunning at major international racing facilities, this series is supported by BMW, SEAT and Chevrolet. The latter fields a works team, whereas the other two only sell racing kits to be installed on their cars, providing technical support to their customers. In 2011, Volvo also entered the championship, fielding a one-car team as an evaluation for a possible heavier commitment to the series. The World Touring Car Championship features 1.6-litre cars built to \"Super 2000\" regulations based on FIA Group N.\nFollowing the trend of recent FIA rules, cost control is a major theme in the technical regulation.\nIn 2011 the rules concerning the engine capacity have changed, switching from 2000 cc to 1600 cc turbo engines. Cars equipped with the old 2000 cc engines are still eligible in the championship. Many technologies that have featured in production cars are not allowed, for example: variable valve timing, variable intake geometry, ABS braking and traction control.\nBritish Touring Car Championship.\n\"United Kingdom\"\nThe British Touring Car Championship (BTCC) currently competes at nine circuits in the UK with cars built to Next Generation Touring Car specification, with ballast being used to equalise performance. From 2011, cars that ran to the BTCC's own Next Generation Touring Car specification were eligible to compete in a phased move away from Super 2000 regulations. Cars are 2.0-litre saloons, station wagons and hatchbacks with over and can be front or rear-wheel drive. During the 2016 season manufacturer team entries came from BMW, Subaru, MG, and Honda. Since BTCC budgets have been kept relatively low, there is a strong independent and privateer presence in the championship. Manufacturers represented by privateers include Vauxhall, Ford, Toyota, Volkswagen, Chevrolet, and Audi.\nPrior to 2001 the BTCC was contested by cars built to 2.0-litre supertouring regulations and had in its heyday up to nine different manufacturers. Joachim Winkelhock stated on several occasions that it was the best touring car championship in the world, and many champions of that era now race in the World Touring Car Championship (WTCC). Between 2002 and 2006 the BTCC ran its own Touring class with Super Production/Super 2000 cars making up the numbers; the Touring class was phased out (only privateers are eligible to run old Touring cars) with the intention of a pure Super 2000 series. The introduction of the Next Generation Touring Car specification, from 2011, started a phased transition from Super 2000 cars in an effort to cut costs and improve the sport.\nDTM.\n\"Germany/Europe\"\nThe DTM series, the initials standing for \"Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft\" until 1996, then following a hiatus, revived as \"Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters\" in 2000, features advanced purpose built 2.0-litre four-cylinder turbo-powered space frame machines, covered with largely carbon fibre bodyshapes resembling the manufacturers' road machine (although the roof and roof pillars do originate from the production car). In order to lower costs, the engine power is limited to , and transmissions, brakes and tyres (Hankook) are standard parts for all. Also, dimensions and aerodynamics are equalised. The approx. (without driver) DTM cars corner incredibly quickly and wear spectacular bodykits incorporating huge wheel arches and diffusers, plus a drag-reduction system (DRS) designed to encourage overtaking.\nMore than 20 works-backed entries of the Opel Astra, Audi TT and Mercedes-Benz CLK contested the revived 2000 DTM series but a serious issue developed for the series when Opel pulled out ahead of the 2006 season. BMW would eventually replace Opel as the series' third manufacturer for 2012, while Mercedes-AMG withdrew at the end of 2018. Mercedes-AMG was replaced by a privately funded Aston Martin Vantage program that did not last beyond the 2019 season.\nFor the 2019 season, major technical changes occurred. Turbochargers were reintroduced in accordance with new regulations impacting engines and power outputs, as all cars are now required to have 2.0-litre 4-cylinder single turbo engines, replacing the 4.0L V8s that had been used since the series' revival in 2000. Engine power was increased from ~500\u00a0hp to 610\u00a0hp, with an extra 30\u00a0hp available as part of a push-to-pass system available to drivers for the first time. Downforce levels were also reduced to encourage overtaking and increase top speeds to 300\u00a0km/h (186\u00a0mph) in order to improve the racing spectacle.\nIn 2019, DTM formed a partnership with the Japanese sports car series Super GT which runs a near identical set of rules and regulations in its GT500 class. Honda, Toyota \u2013 represented via Lexus, and Nissan each entered a wildcard entry for the final race of the 2019 season at the Hockenheimring. The cars entered were a Nissan GT-R (R35), a Lexus LC 500 and a Honda NSX. For the weekend of the 22nd-24 November, DTM sent three BMW M4s and four Audi RS5s to take part in a non-championship race at Fuji Speedway along with the full GT500 grid, labelled the 'SUPER GT x DTM Dream Race'. Aston Martin withdrew from the event as they intended to focus on developing the Vantage package for 2020, however this never eventuated as the program was ended.\nAudi announced in late April 2020 that they would be discontinuing their involvement in the series after the end of the 2020 season, following the same path Mercedes-Benz did after the end of the 2018 season; focusing on electric motorsport, most notably Formula E. This will leave BMW as the sole manufacturer left, putting the series' future in serious jeopardy.\nN\u00fcrburgring NLS Endurance Racing Series.\n\"Germany\"\nSince 1997, and nowadays still on the over long famous old N\u00fcrburgring and other circuits worldwide, in average over 150 touring cars compete in the NLS series of ten typically four-hour-long races. Cars range from old road legal compacts to Porsche 996 and even modified DTM cars (). Most entrants of the 24 Hours N\u00fcrburgring collect experience here.\nScandinavian Touring Car Championship.\n\"Sweden/Denmark\"\nBetween 1996 and 2010 the Swedish Touring Car Championship contained various races in Sweden and a few in Denmark. The most successful car makes were Volvo, BMW, Audi, and Nissan. In 2010 the championship merged with the Danish Touringcar Championship to form the Scandinavian Touring Car Championship. The 2010 champion was Robert Dahlgren, because he had achieved the best results from selected races in the Danish and Swedish championships. Rickard Rydell and Johan Kristoffersson won the championship in 2011 and 2012, in a Chevrolet and a VW, respectively. In 2013 the series merged with the TTA \u2013 Racing Elite League to form the 2013 STCC \u2013 Racing Elite League season, starring 17 drivers for Volvo, BMW, Saab, Citro\u00ebn, Dacia, and Honda.\nSupercars Championship.\n\"Australia\" and \"New Zealand\"\nFormerly the Australian Touring Car Championship, Supercars are recognised internationally as the 'fastest touring cars in the world' racing at speeds that can reach nearly 300\u00a0km/h. They are also the most expensive touring cars in the world with each car costing in excess of $1 million (AUD) which includes bespoke $250,000 (AUD) 5.0-litre V8 engines producing approximately 635\u00a0hp (473\u00a0kW). The current formula was devised in 1993 (based on Group A regulations) and branded as 'V8 Supercars' in 1997 and 'Supercars' in 2016. The series features grids of approximately 25 cars, although selected events feature wildcard entries which add to the grid. The cars are currently based on the Ford Mustang GT and Holden Commodore (ZB) The minimum weight for a Supercar including driver is . The Commodore will be replaced by a Chevrolet Camaro in 2022. The race cars themselves are derived from production body panels and space frame chassis. Both body styles feature an aerodynamic package incorporating large front and rear wings designed to ensure equal aerodynamic performance between the two vehicle types.\nThe series incorporates the world famous Bathurst 1000 race as a championship round. Because of the longer distance, regulations require two drivers per car for this race. This also applies to The Bend 500 &amp; the Gold Coast 600. These events make up the Pirtek Enduro Cup, which is a championship-within-a-championship where the driver combination with most points collected over these three endurance races wins a trophy.\nIn Australia, Supercars enjoys a strong support base that is still driven in large part by the tribal Ford versus Holden battle. Over 200,000 total spectators attend the four-day Adelaide 500 and Bathurst 1000 events, and the 2019 Bathurst 1000 drew a maximum of 2.36 million television viewers across the country. This compares favourably with other major sporting events such as the AFL Grand Final with 2.2 million TV viewers in 2019. Supercars is also popular in New Zealand, with a regular round formerly held in the country (previously held at Pukekohe) being the only international event on the series calendar. Attempts at further international expansion were made in China, Malaysia, the Middle East, and the United States during the 2000s and 2010s, none of which have survived.\nAs the series has grown, major international motorsport organisations have become involved such as Team Penske, Andretti Autosport, United Autosports and Triple Eight Race Engineering.\nBoth Ford and Holden financially and technically supported their favoured teams and took an active role in promotion of the series from its beginning, but began to wind back and ultimately withdraw their financial commitments approximately in line with the decline in sales and eventual discontinuation of the Falcon in 2016 and Commodore in 2020 (the two models that exclusively competed in the V8 formula from 1993 to 2012). Ford withdrew all financial support after 2015, and Holden cut most of its support back to only the Red Bull Holden Racing Team from 2017. Holden was shut down as a brand during 2020, ending its factory involvement in Supercars after the 2020 season, while Ford returned for the 2019 season with the Mustang project. The Commodore will be replaced with a Chevrolet Camaro, which will be sold in Australia by General Motors Specialty Vehicles.\nOther manufacturers have also appeared in the series, including Nissan with Kelly Racing, Volvo with Garry Rogers Motorsport, and Mercedes-Benz in a non-factory-supported program from Erebus Motorsport. With Kelly Racing's switch to Ford Mustangs for 2020 after a year of running its Nissan Altimas privately, Supercars reverted to a two-make Ford vs. Holden competition.\nRule sets.\nDifferent sets of regulations do apply:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52244", "revid": "50863340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52244", "title": "Sports car racing", "text": "Type of motorsport road racing\nSports car racing is a form of motorsport road racing that uses sports cars with two seats and enclosed wheels. The cars in question may be either purpose-built sports prototypes, which are the highest level in sports car racing; or grand tourers (GT cars) based on road-going models and therefore more common, but not as fast. Sports car races are often endurance races run over particularly long distances or large amounts of time (generally between 6 and 24 hours), resulting in an emphasis on reliability and efficiency of the car and its drivers over outright car performance or driver skills. The FIA World Endurance Championship and IMSA SportsCar Championship are some of the best-known sports car racing series, GT World Challenge is the pedominantly Global GT Racing. Sports car racing is one of the main types of circuit auto racing, alongside open-wheel racing (such as Formula One and Indycar), touring car racing (such as BTCC and V8 Supercars, which is based on 'saloon cars' as opposed to the 'exotics' seen in sports cars) and stock car racing (such as NASCAR).\nA hybrid of the purism of open-wheelers and the familiarity of touring car racing, sports car racing is commonly associated with the annual 24 Hours of Le Mans endurance race. First run in 1923, Le Mans is one of the longest-running motor races. Well-known defunct sports car races include the Italian classics, the Targa Florio (1906\u20131977) and Mille Miglia (1927\u20131957), and the Mexican Carrera Panamericana (1950\u20131954). Most top-class sports car races focus more on endurance and strategy than pure speed or skills, and longer races usually involve complex pit strategies and regular driver changes. As a result, sports car racing is seen more as a team endeavour than an individual sport, with team managers such as John Wyer, Tom Walkinshaw, driver-turned-constructor Henri Pescarolo, Peter Sauber and Reinhold Joest becoming almost as famous as some of their drivers.\nSuccess in sports car racing helped build the prestige of Alfa Romeo, Aston Martin, Audi, Bentley, BMW, Chevrolet, Ferrari, Jaguar, Lamborghini, Lancia, Lotus, Maserati, Mercedes-Benz, and Porsche. These makers' top road cars have often been similar in engineering and styling to those raced. This close association with the exotic nature of the cars distinguishes between sports car racing and touring cars.\nThe 24 Hours of Daytona, 12 Hours of Sebring, and 24 Hours of Le Mans are considered the Triple Crown of endurance racing. Other crown-jewel sports car endurance races include Petit Le Mans, N\u00fcrburgring 24 Hours, Spa 24 Hours, Bathurst 12 Hour and Suzuka 1000km.\nHistory.\nEvolution.\nAccording to historian Richard Hough, \"It is obviously impossible to distinguish between the designers of sports cars and Grand Prix machines during the pre-1914 period. The late Georges Faroux contended that sports-car racing was not born until the first 24 Hours of Le Mans race in 1923, and while as a joint-creator of that race he may have been prejudiced in his opinion, it is certainly true that sports-car racing as it was known after 1919 did not exist before the First World War.\"\nIn the 1920s, the cars used in endurance racing and Grand Prix were still basically identical, with fenders and two seats, to carry a mechanic if necessary or permitted. Cars such as the Bugatti Type 35 were almost equally at home in Grands Prix and endurance events, but specialisation gradually started to differentiate the sports-racer from the Grand Prix car. The legendary Alfa Romeo Tipo A Monoposto started the evolution of the true single-seater in the early 1930s; the Grand Prix racer and its miniature voiturette offspring rapidly evolved into high performance single seaters optimised for relatively short races, by dropping fenders and the second seat. During the later 1930s, French constructors, unable to keep up with the progress of the Mercedes-Benz and Auto-Union cars in GP racing, withdrew into primarily domestic competition with large-capacity sports cars\u00a0\u2013 marques such as Delahaye, Talbot and the later Bugattis were locally prominent.\nSimilarly, through the 1920s and 1930s the road-going sports/GT car started to emerge as distinct from fast tourers (Le Mans had originally been a race for touring cars) and sports cars, whether descended from primarily road-going vehicles or developed from pure-bred racing cars came to dominate races such as Le Mans and the Mille Miglia.\nIn open-road endurance races across Europe such as the Mille Miglia, Tour de France and Targa Florio, which were often run on dusty roads, the need for fenders and a mechanic or navigator was still there. As mainly Italian cars and races defined the genre, the category came to be known as Gran Turismo (particularly in the 1950s), as long distances had to be travelled, rather than running around on short circuits only. Reliability and some basic comfort were necessary in order to endure the task.\nPost-war revival.\nAfter the Second World War, sports car racing emerged as a distinct form of racing with its own classic races, and, from 1953, its own FIA sanctioned World Sportscar Championship. In the 1950s, sports car racing was regarded as almost as important as Grand Prix competition, with major marques like Ferrari, Maserati, Jaguar and Aston Martin investing much effort in their works programmes and supplying cars to customers; sports racers lost their close relationship to road-going sports cars in the 1950s and the major races were contested by dedicated competition cars such as the Jaguar C and D types, the Mercedes 300SLR, Maserati 300S, Aston Martin DBR1 and assorted Ferraris including the first Testa Rossas. Top Grand Prix drivers also competed regularly in sports car racing. After major accidents at the 1955 24 Hours of Le Mans and the 1957 Mille Miglia the power of sports cars was curbed with a 3-litre engine capacity limit applied to them in the World Championship from 1958. From 1962 sports cars temporarily took a back seat to GT cars with the FIA replacing the World Championship for Sports Cars with the International Championship for GT Manufacturers.\nGrowth at a national level.\nIn national rather than international racing, sports car competition in the 1950s and early 1960s tended to reflect what was locally popular, with the cars that were successful locally often influencing each nation's approach to competing on the international stage.\nIn the US, imported Italian, German and British cars battled local hybrids, with initially very distinct East and West Coast scenes; these gradually converged and a number of classic races and important teams emerged including Camoradi, Briggs Cunningham and so on. The US scene tended to feature small MG and Porsche cars in the smaller classes, and imported Jaguar, Maserati, Mercedes-Benz, Allard and Ferrari cars in the larger classes.\nA breed of powerful hybrids appeared in the 50s and 60s and raced on both sides of the Atlantic, featuring European chassis and large American engines\u00a0\u2013 from the early Allard cars via hybrids such as Lotus 19s fitted with large engines through to the AC Cobra. The combination of mostly British chassis and American V8 engines gave rise to the popular and spectacular Can-Am series in the 1960s and 1970s.\nIn Britain 2-litre sports cars were initially popular (the Bristol engine being readily available and cheap), subsequently 1100 cc sports racers became a very popular category for young drivers (effectively supplanting 500 cc F3), with Lola, Lotus, Cooper and others being very competitive, although at the other end of the scale in the early to mid-1960s the national sports racing scene also attracted sophisticated GTs and later a crop of large-engined \"big bangers\" the technology of which largely gave rise to Can-Am but soon died out. Clubmans provided much entertainment at club-racing level from the 1960s into the 1990s and John Webb revived interest in big sports prototypes with Thundersports in the 1980s. There was even enough interest in Group C to sustain a C2 championship for a few years; at 'club' level Modified Sports Car (\"ModSports\") and Production Sports Car (\"ProdSports\") races remained a feature of most British race meetings into the 1980s, evolving into a \"Special GT\" series that was essentially Formula Libre for sports or saloon cars. After a relative period of decline in the 1980s a British GT Championship emerged in the mid-90s.\nItaly found itself with both grassroots racing with a plethora of Fiat based specials (often termed \"etceterinis\") and small Alfa Romeos, and exotica such as Maserati and Ferrari\u00a0\u2013 who also sold cars to domestic customers as well as racing on the world stage. Road races such as the Mille Miglia included everything from stock touring cars to World Championship contenders. The Mille Miglia was the largest sporting event in Italy until a fatal accident caused its demise in 1957. The Targa Florio, another tough road race, remained part of the world championship until the 1970s and remained as a local race for many years afterwards.\nAs the French car industry switched from making large powerful cars to small utilitarian ones, French sports cars of the 1950s and early 1960s tended to be small-capacity and highly aerodynamic (often based on Panhard or Renault components), aimed at winning the \"Index of Performance\" at Le Mans and Reims and triumphing in handicap races. Between the late 1960s and late 1970s, Matra and Renault made significant and successful efforts to win at Le Mans.\nIn Germany, domestic production based racing was largely dominated by BMW, Porsche and Mercedes-Benz, although sports car/GT racing gradually became eclipsed by touring cars and the initially sports car based Deutsche Rennsport Meisterschaft gradually evolved into the Deutsche Tourenwagen Meisterschaft. Porsche started to evolve a line of sports prototypes from the late 1950s; noted for their toughness and reliability they started to win in races of attrition such as the Targa Florio and as they grew bigger (via the Porsche 910 to the Porsche 908 and finally the Porsche 917) the Stuttgart marque became first a competitor for overall wins and then came to dominate sports car racing\u00a0\u2013 both they and Mercedes have made intermittent returns to the top level of the sport through the 1970s, 80s, 90s and 2010s.\nSports car racing has intermittently been popular in Japan\u00a0\u2013 in the 1960s small-capacity sports racers and even a local version of the Group 7 cars as raced in the Canadian-American Challenge Cup were popular; a healthy local sports prototype championship ran until the early 1990s and now the Super GT series provides high-budget exposure to manufacturers, with many international drivers appearing. The Japanese manufacturers have also been frequent visitors to the US sports car scene (Nissan and Toyota in particular during the heyday of IMSA) and to the European scene, in particular Le Mans, where despite many years of trying by all the main Japanese marques the only victory to have been scored by a Japanese marque was by Mazda in 1991, until 2018 when Toyota scored a first and second-place finish. Toyota followed this with another 1-2 finish in 2019.\n1960s and 1970s \u2013 Evolution, rise, and decline.\nPowerful prototypes (effectively pure-bred two-seater racing cars with no real link to production vehicles) started to appear as the 1960s progressed, with worldwide battles between Ferrari, Ford, Porsche, Lotus, Alfa Romeo and Matra as well as other more specialist marques running on into the early 1970s. The competition at Le Mans even made it to the movie screens, with Steve McQueen's film Le Mans. This era was seen by many as the highpoint of sports car racing, with the technology and performance of the cars comfortably in excess of what was seen in Formula 1. Homologation saw many out-and-out racing cars produced in sufficient quantities to see them classed as production vehicles; the FIA responded by placing more restrictions on even the allegedly production-based cars and placed draconian limits on the power available to prototypes\u00a0\u2013 these prototypes of the late 1960s/early 1970s were comfortably quicker than contemporary Grand Prix machinery and for 1972 they were constrained to run much smaller engines to F1 rules, often de-tuned for endurance. Group 4 Grand Touring Cars and Group 5 Special Production Cars became the premier form of \"sports car\" racing from 1976, with prototypes going into a general decline apart from Porsche 936 domination at Le Mans and a lower-key series of races for smaller two-litre Group 6 prototypes.\nA peculiarly American form of sports car racing was the Can-Am series, in which virtually unlimited sports prototypes competed in relatively short races. This series ran from 1966 to 1974 and was an expansion of the USRRC that conformed to FIA Group 7 rules. The original Can-Am fell victim to rising costs and the energy crisis.\nThe ACO, organisers of the Le Mans 24 Hours, attempted to come up with a formula that would encourage more prototypes back to the race but would also be relatively economical\u00a0\u2013 their Grand Touring Prototype rules in the late 1970s, based on fuel consumption rules, gave rise to two different varieties of sports car racing that were widely held to be a high point in the history of the sport.\n1980s \u2013 Group C and IMSA GTP.\nIn Europe, the FIA adopted the ACO GTP rules virtually unchanged and sanctioned the Group C World Endurance Championship (or World Sportscar Championship), featuring high-tech closed-cockpit prototypes from Porsche, Aston Martin, Mercedes-Benz, Nissan, Jaguar and others. In the US, the IMSA Camel GTP series boasted close competition between huge fields of manufacturer-backed teams and privateer squads\u00a0\u2013 the cars were technically similar to Group Cs but used a sliding scale of weights and engine capacities to try to limit performance. Both Group C and GTP had secondary categories, respectively Group C2 and Camel Lights, for less powerful cars, targeting entries by small specialist constructors or serious amateur teams.\nThe FIA attempted to make Group C into a virtual \"two seater Grand Prix\" format in the early 1990s, with engine rules in common with F1, short race distances, and a schedule dovetailing with that of the F1 rounds. This drove up costs and drove away entrants and crowds, and by 1993 prototype racing was dead in Europe, with the Peugeot, Jaguar, Toyota and Mercedes-Benz teams all having withdrawn.\n1990s \u2013 Rebirth and revival.\nIn an attempt to provide a top-class endurance racing series to replace the WSPC, a number of GT series sprung up at national and European level, with the BPR series eventually evolving into the FIA GT Championship. IMSA GTP continued for a few more years but was replaced by a series for World Sports Cars\u00a0\u2013 relatively simple open-top prototypes\u00a0\u2013 which gave rise to cars such as the Ferrari 333SP and the Riley &amp; Scott Mk 3, supported by GTs. As the 1990s progressed, these prototypes and others like them started to be raced in Europe and an FIA Sports Car series evolved for them.\nSince the demise of Group C (where Japan and Germany both had successful series of their own) Japan has largely gone its own way in sports car racing; the Super GT series is for very highly modified production-based cars; although prototypes are slowly returning to Japanese racing in the Japan Le Mans Challenge many of these 'prototypes' are little more than rebodied Formula 3 cars (although there has been a long Japanese tradition of such hybrids; a Grand Champion series ran for many years with rebodied Formula 2 and Formula 3000 cars, rather similar to the second incarnation of Can-Am).\nIn the US, however, road racing actually saw a decline. The IMSA GT Championship had been prototype-based since 1983, with less emphasis on production cars. NASCAR was becoming increasingly dominant, and the IndyCar Series' split from CART in 1996 put more emphasis on ovals regarding domestic open-wheel racing. Also contributing to the decline was the retirement of Mario Andretti from Formula One. It would be over a decade before another American driver would join Formula One, viz. Scott Speed, although Speed was ultimately unsuccessful and eventually joined NASCAR himself.\n2000s \u2013 Resurgence in the US.\nThe debut of the SpeedVision television network brought a resurgence of interest in sports car racing in the US, with the network originally showing a large amount of sports car racing and sports car\u2013related programming before being replaced by Fox Sports.\nThe IMSA GT Series evolved into the American Le Mans Series; the European races eventually became the closely related Le Mans Series, both of which mix prototypes and GTs; the FIA remains more interested in its own GT and GT3 championships, with the ACO's rules the basis for the LMS and ALMS. The Le Mans Prototype is somewhat reminiscent of the old Can Am prototype.\nFurther splits in the American scene saw the Grand American Road Racing Association form a separate series, the Rolex Sports Car Series, with its own GT and prototype rules aimed at providing cheaper, lower-cost racing for independent teams. Grand Am's Continental Tire Sports Car Challenge, a support series for the Rolex Series, provides a similar series to the old Trans Am Series, mixing conventional sports cars and touring cars. Due to Grand Am's affiliation with NASCAR, many NASCAR drivers occasionally participate in the Rolex Sports Car Series. Max Papis is a notable example in that he was a road racer prior to his tenure in the Sprint Cup Series. Many of these drivers only participate in the 24 Hours of Daytona.\nThe original Trans-Am Series dissolved in 2006, but returned to action in 2009 with tube frame TA1 and TA2 divisions racing with production-based TA3-American and TA3-International divisions. In addition, the SCCA continues to provide a major support series for Trans-Am. This series, known as the SCCA World Challenge, consists of a one-hour race for each round, combining three classes: GT (Chevrolet Corvette, Aston Martin DB9, etc.), \"GTS\" (Acura TSX, BMW 3 Series, etc.; replaced the former touring car class), and Touring Car (a \"showroom stock\" class similar to Grand Am's Continental Challenge). The Trans Am series returned in 2009, but has yet to establish a television contract.\n2010s \u2013 Reformatting.\nThe 2010s have seen a major overhaul of sports car racing in the United States. The Pirelli World Challenge reformatted in 2010 to have a showroom stock touring car group comparable to that of the Continental Challenge's Grand Sport class, promoting its other touring car class to \"GTS\". This came after several years of the old TC class being an Acura-BMW-Mazda affair. For 2012, the series adopted a \"B-spec\" touring car class comparable to that of the Continental Challenge's Street Tuner class.\n2010 also saw the introduction of the Intercontinental Le Mans Cup (ILMC) by the ACO, featuring events in America, Asia and Europe. This in turn led the ACO &amp; FIA to come together to create the FIA World Endurance Championship (WEC) starting in 2012. This new series replaced the ILMC and was a spiritual successor to the former FIA World Sportscar Championship. \nIn 2012, the Rolex Sports Car Series overhauled its Daytona Prototype class, allowing for production-based designs. \nThe ALMS's new LMP/LMC format, however, did not hold up. The prototype classes split again in 2011, with LMP1 having three cars and LMP2 having one. A new \"GT Pro Am\" class was added. Initially, this format was only to be used in endurance races, but was eventually applied to all races. For 2012, only a handful of LMPs were entered, with almost all of them being powered by Japanese manufacturers (Nissan, Honda, etc.). The British manufacturer Morgan entered a Nissan-powered LMP2 for Conquest Endurance.\nThe reformatted Trans-Am Series remained stagnant, being heavily overshadowed by the SCCA's World Challenge, and failing to garner a television contract. A major factor in this is the fact that Trans Am's teams still use vehicles dating back to 1999. In most other series, teams tended to update their vehicles every few years or so (examples include the 2005 vs. 2010 Mustangs in the Continental Challenge and the two different generations of Mazda RX-8 in the Rolex Series).\nOther television changes include Speed Channel losing the rights to almost every series. The World Challenge was transferred to Versus, while the ALMS was transferred to an ESPN/ABC partnership. ALMS races were shown live online with a telecast the following day (although Speed still has the rights to the 24 Hours of Le Mans, which is still televised live). Speed, having a partnership with NASCAR, still has exclusive rights to the NASCAR-owned Grand Am series.\nThe ALMS introduced \"GTE-PRO\" and \"GTE-AM\" for endurance races.\nIn 2014, American Le Mans Series and Rolex Sports Car Series were merged into United SportsCar Championship, with IMSA as its sanctioning body. Fox Sports 1 (successor of Speed Channel) was returned as main broadcaster of the unified series.\nDaytona Prototype was replaced in 2017 by Daytona Prototype International (DPi), which based on the four ACO homologated LMP2 chassis made by Dallara, Onroak (Ligier), Oreca, and Riley-Multimatic, with brand bodywork and homologated engines. Manufacturers are asked to partner with a privateer team, and each car will sport manufacturer bodywork, corresponding to their brand-identity. These rules are made to both control costs and attract manufacturers to the series.\nIn 2018, SRO Motorsports Group has taken over the management of Pirelli World Challenge, with USAC as its sanctioning body since 2017.\nBeginning in 2019, NBC Sports will be replacing Fox Sports as main broadcaster of WeatherTech SportsCar Championship with six-year broadcasting rights.\nTypes of cars.\nThere are many kinds of sports cars that compete, but they can be broadly broken down into two main categories: Sports prototypes and Grand Touring (GT) cars. These two categories (or \"classes\") are often mixed together in a single race, such as in the 24 Hours of Le Mans. In mixed-class races, an overall winner is awarded, though individual class winners are often recognised as well.\nSports prototype.\nSports prototype is the name given to a type of car used in sports car racing and is effectively the next automotive design and technological step-up from road-going sports cars and are, along with open-wheel cars, the pinnacle of racing car design.\nThe highest level in sports car racing, these cars are purpose-built racing cars with enclosed wheels, and either open or closed cockpits. Ever since the World Sportscar Championship was conceived, there have been various regulations regarding bodywork, engine style and size, tyres and aerodynamics to which these cars must be built. Sports prototypes may be (and often are) one-of-a-kind machines, and need bear no relation to any road-going vehicle, although during the 1990s, some manufacturers exploited a loophole in the FIA and ACO rules. As a result, some cars racing in the GT category did pass as true sports prototypes, in turn leading to some road-going versions for homologation purposes. The Dauer-Porsche 962LM, Porsche 911 GT1-98, Mercedes CLK-GTR and Toyota GT-One were prime examples of prototypes masquerading as GTs.\nIn simplistic terms, sports prototypes are two-seat racing cars with bodywork covering their wheels, and are as technically advanced and, depending on the regulations they are built to, as quick as or quicker than their single-seat counterparts. Although not widely known, sports-prototypes (along with Formula 1 cars) are responsible for introducing the most numbers of new technologies and ideas to motorsport, including rear-wings, ground effect 'venturi' tunnels, fan-assisted aerodynamics and dual-shift gearboxes. Some of these technologies eventually filter down to road cars.\nIn the ACO regulations, two categories of sports prototypes are now recognised: P1 and P2. Cars competing in the P1 category must weigh no less than 900\u00a0kg and are limited to 6000 cc naturally aspirated and 4000 cc turbocharged engines. 5500 cc turbo-Diesel engines are also permitted in P1\u00a0\u2013 Audi scored Le Mans victories with such a car in 2006, 2007 and 2008 and Peugeot returned to racing in 2007 with a car with a similar powerplant (Peugeot 908). P2 cars can weigh much less\u00a0\u2014 first 675\u00a0kg, then 750\u00a0kg and now 825\u00a0kg\u00a0\u2014 but are restricted to 3400 cc V6 or V8 normally aspirated or 2000 cc turbocharged powerplants. In the European series in which endurance is a priority and P2s have been run largely by privateers, P2s have not challenged P1s for outright victories; in the American Le Mans Series with generally shorter races P2 has become the most active prototype category with serious involvement from Porsche and Acura and whereas P2 in Europe tends to involve races of attrition, in the US series the P2s, particularly the Porsche RS Spyder are often quicker round a lap than P1s, with the Porsche having scored many overall victories against the Audis in P1.\nPrototype rules for 2010 and beyond will encourage production-based engines (GT1 engines in LMP1, GT2 engines in LMP2) and rules to equalise the performance of petrol and diesel LMP1s are also being addressed.\nDaytona Prototypes are a product of the Grand-Am Rolex Sports Car Series, and offer a different interpretation of the prototype theme. DPs, as they are often called, are closed-cockpit, purpose-built racing machines which are less expensive and (deliberately) somewhat slower than Le Mans Prototypes, which were becoming dangerously quick on the Daytona oval and prohibitively expensive for smaller teams to run. Compared to the LMPs, DPs are severely limited in terms of approved technology; for instance, they are required to be constructed of steel tube frames with carbon-fibre skins, rather than being carbon-fibre monocoques, and must use production-based engines. In addition, contrary to their European counterparts who continuously alter and develop a vehicle to increase performance as a season progresses, DPs are restricted to their original conception of the car from the start of the season. For these reasons, the category being labeled as a \"prototype\" has occasionally been criticised as misleading and being more in line with traditional \"spec\" race series prevalent in the United States. The intention of the DP formula was to provide a class in which tight technical regulations encouraged close competition and where budget would be relatively unimportant. DP chassis are subject to a franchise-like approval system in which only approved constructors are eligible, with rules stability enforced for several years at a time, although this led in 2007 to established constructors like Lola and Dallara entering the 2008 series by taking over the rights of existing constructors (Multimatic and Doran respectively).\nGrand Touring car.\nGrand Touring (from the Italian \"Gran Turismo\") racing is the most common form of sports car racing, and is found all over the world, in both international and national series. Historically, Grand Touring cars had to be in series production, but in 1976 the class was split into production-based Group 4 Grand Touring Cars and Group 5 Special Production Cars, the latter of which were essentially pure-bred racing cars with production-lookalike bodies. GT racing gradually fell into abeyance in Europe in the 1980s and 1990s, with silhouette cars continuing to race in IMSA races in the USA. When GT racing revived after the collapse of the World Sports Car Championship at the end of 1992, the lead in defining rules was taken by the ACO. Under the ACO rules, Grand Touring cars are divided into two categories, Grand Touring 1 (GT1, formerly GT) and Grand Touring 2 (GT2, formerly N-GT). As the name of the class implies, the exterior of the car closely resembles that of the production version, while the internal fittings may differ greatly. GT2 cars are very similar to the FIA GT2 classification, and are considered 'pure' GT cars; that is production exotic cars with relatively few internal modifications for racing. The Porsche 911 is currently the most popular car in the GT2 class. 2009 will be the last run of the GT1 class as a result of budgeting issues. GT1 teams are currently enlisting to run their cars in the GT2 class next year. The American Le Mans Series also runs a \"GT-Challenge\" class, which currently only uses Porsche 911 GT3 Cups but will open to other cars next year. This category is designed for privateer and rookie teams as an easier way to enter the series.\nFor 2011, the ACO split GT2 into two categories, GTE-Pro (for all-professional teams with current-spec cars) and GTE-Am (for teams with one amateur and one professional per car using previous-spec cars), as a way to entice rookies to enter one of the three Le Mans Series.\nFIA divides GT cars into four categories called GT1 (formerly GT), GT2 (formerly N-GT), GT3 (recently introduced) and GT4. The GT1 and GT2 divisions are very close to the ACO rules outlined above, and again some crossover racing does occur, particularly in the GT2 class. The GT3 class is relatively new and was introduced for 2006. These cars are closer to standard form than in GT2, and in most cases modifications are restricted to those found in one-make cups. GT4 is another new category for amateur and semi-pro drivers in production-based cars with very few racing modifications\u00a0\u2013 for example, no aerodynamic aids or body modifications are permitted. All of the categories (with the exception of GT2) have their own championships/cups run by the FIA. Currently, GT2 is defunct in the FIA, and only runs in Le Mans Series/ALMS; however, the FIA has also announced that GT2 cars will be able to compete in the FIA GT1 World Championship in 2012 in a World Class along with GT3 cars.\nGrand-Am has only one class for Grand Touring cars which allows production-based GT racers at a spec somewhere between FIA GT2 and GT3 in terms of modification (e.g. the Porsche 911 GT3 Cup) to compete with purpose-built tube-frame \"silhouette\" machines reminiscent of the former IMSA GTO/GTU classes. Grand-Am also runs various under-classes more reminiscent of GT4, though closer to factory cars. For 2012, GT3 cars will be allowed, with spec wings and splitters, as long as they pass a test at the NASCAR Research and Development Center in Concord, North Carolina, thus allowing GT3 cars to run with few modifications relative to other series (NASCAR, the parent company of Grand-Am, does not permit anti-lock brakes or traction control to be used on Grand-Am GT cars).\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the four GT categories are in mixed health. GT1 has been all but phased out with the removal of the class from the FIA GT1 World Championship in favor of GT3 cars, in turn leading to the outright discontinuation of the series. GT2 is currently limited to certain series, including the IMSA SportsCar Championship, European Le Mans Series, FIA World Endurance Championship, Asian Le Mans Series, and the International GT Open. GT3, which has since emerged as the most popular of the GT classes, has seen widespread use in many international and regional series such as the FIA GT3 European Championship and the Blancpain Endurance Series, as well as most national series such as Germany's ADAC GT Masters and the British GT Championship. GT4 has likely been phased out like GT1, with the removal of the category from the Blancpain Endurance Series and the cancellation of the GT4 European Cup for 2012 due to issues regarding the organiser.\nTechnology escalation and control.\nWhile GT cars are at least in theory based on road-going models, some GT1 cars in the mid to late 1990s were effectively purpose-built sports-prototypes which spawned exotic production cars with homologation production limits of 25 cars (for small-scale manufacturers, such as Saleen) or 100 cars (for major manufacturers like Daimler AG).\nThe original form of GT1 racing was intended for the purebred supercars and purpose-built race cars. Examples include the McLaren F1 GTR, Ferrari F40, Porsche 911 GT1, Mercedes-Benz CLK GTR, Toyota GT-One and Nissan R390\u00a0\u2013 while the first two were a derivatives of road-going sports cars, the German and Japanese contenders were pure-bred racing cars\u00a0\u2013 virtually sports prototypes. Rising costs coupled with declining entries led to the death of this class in 1998, and it was replaced by what was then called GT2 (by the FIA, which later evolved into the GT1) and Le Mans Prototype (LMP, by the ACO).\nThis process was repeated in 2009 in response to cost increases in GT1 and GT2 racing, resulting in the abolition of both GT classes as they stood. Various proposals exist to control technology and costs, mainly by discontinuing the existing GT1 class and creating new class boundaries between current GT2, GT3 and GT4 cars.\nOther divisions.\nSports car racing in general extends far beyond ACO and FIA rules, encompassing the Grand-Am professional series as well as amateur road racing classes in the Sports Car Club of America in North America.\nAmateur sports car racing throughout the United States is sanctioned by clubs such as the Sports Car Club of America. The SCCA's sports-racing classes include C and D Sports Racing, Sports 2000 and Spec Racer Ford, in descending order of speed and sophistication, as well as a number of production-based and one-make classes.\nIn Japan, the Super GT series divides cars into two classes, called GT500 and GT300. These cars are less restricted than their European and American counterparts, with cars often sporting tube frame clips and forced induction kits. Teams are also free to change engines with other models made by the manufacturer. The numbers in the classifications refer to the maximum power (in horsepower) available to each class; this is achieved through the use of engine restrictors. Proponents of the series claim that the Super GT cars are the fastest sports cars in the world, while critics deride the cars as being outside the limits of 'acceptable' modifications. In recent years however, rule changes in both GT500 and GT1 (aimed at eventually allowing both classes to compete with each other in the future) have brought the cars closer to each other, although GT500 cars still have a notable advantage in terms of aerodynamics and cornering performance (enough to compensate for GT1 cars greater power).\nIn Europe, although most national championships (British, French, German and the Spain-based International GT Open) run under FIA/ACO GT regulations with some modifications to ensure a more balanced competition and lower costs, some championships are open to non-homologated GT cars. The Belcar series in Belgium allows silhouettes and touring cars to race alongside GTs, while the VdeV Modern Endurance allows small prototypes from national championships such as the Norma, Centenari and Radical to race alongside GT3-class cars. Britcar permits a wide range of touring and GT cars to compete in endurance races, and Britsports permits various kinds of sports racing cars.\nNotable racing series.\nRegional championships.\nNorth America.\nDefunct\nEurope.\nDefunct\nAsia-Pacific.\nDefunct\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52245", "revid": "40637013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52245", "title": "Rallying", "text": "Form of motorsport\nRallying is a wide-ranging form of motorsport with various competitive motoring elements such as speed tests (sometimes called \"rally racing\" in United States), navigation tests, or the ability to reach waypoints or a destination at a prescribed time or average speed. Rallies may be short in the form of trials at a single venue, or several thousand miles long in an extreme endurance rally.\nDepending on the format, rallies may be organised on private or public roads, open or closed to traffic, or off-road in the form of cross country or rally-raid. Competitors can use production vehicles which must be road-legal if being used on open roads or specially built competition vehicles suited to crossing specific terrain.\nIn most cases rallying distinguishes itself from other forms of motorsport by not running directly against other competitors over laps of a circuit, but instead in a point-to-point format in which participants leave at regular intervals from one or more start points.\nRally types.\nRallies generally fall under two categories, road rallies and cross-country (off-road). Different types of rally are described however a rally may be a mix of types.\nRoad rallies.\nRoad rallies are the original form held on public highways open to traffic. In its annually published International Sporting Code, the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) includes the following definition of rally:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rally: Road Competition with an imposed average speed run entirely or partly on roads open to normal traffic. A Rally consists either of a single itinerary..., or of several itineraries converging on a rallying-point fixed beforehand... The route may include one or several special stages, i.e. events organised on roads closed to normal traffic, and which together determine the general classification of the Rally. The itineraries which are not used for special stages are called road sections. Speed must never constitute a factor determining the classification on these road sections.\u2014\u200a\nRegularity rally.\nIn an exclusively regularity rally, the aim is to adhere to the itinerary by following the route and arriving and departing at checkpoints at the prescribed time, with penalties applied to entrants who arrive early, late or who deviate from the route. The entrants with the fewest penalties at the end of the rally are the winners. In trying to maintain the set average speed/s, the reliability of the vehicle, and the ability of the crew to drive, navigate and follow the itinerary is tested. Most non-regularity rally itineraries follow this base structure even where driving tests or special stages are used, however these would not then be described as a regularity rally.\nTime-Speed-Distance (TSD rally).\nSimilar to a regularity rally, the itinerary may advise a time and/or distance, or may only advise a target average speed with no indication where the checkpoints may be.\nNavigational rally.\nThe ability of the crew to follow road signs or directions of varying depth of information is tested.\nGimmick rallies.\nGimmick rallies have less of a concern on timekeeping or driving ability and include other fun and games. Examples include:\nThese rallies are primarily amateur events.Stage rallying simply divides the route from the start to the finish of any rally into stages, not necessarily exclusively for speed tests on \"special stages\". Each stage may have different targets or rules attached. In the FIA ecoRally Cup for example, energy performance is measured on regularity stages ran in conformity with the clock. A gimmick rally may have stages with varying difficulty of the puzzle element.\nSpeed competitions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Also called \"rally racing\" or \"(special) stage rallying\".\nRoad rallies must use special stages where speed is used to determine the classification of the rally's competitors; the quickest time to complete the special stages wins the rally. These are sections of road closed to traffic and authorised to be used for speed tests. Special stages are linked by open roads where navigation, timekeeping, and road traffic law rules must be followed. These open road sections are sometimes called transport stages, somewhat complementing special stages in the make-up of a stage rally. These are the most common format of professional and commercial rallies and rally championships. The FIA organises the World Rally Championship, Regional Rally Championships; and many countries' motorsport governing bodies organise domestic rallying championships using speed competitions. The stages may vary from flat asphalt and mountain passes to rough forest tracks, from ice and snow to desert sand, each chosen to provide a challenge for the crew and a test of the car's performance and reliability. A single-venue rally takes place without the need for public road sections though the format and rules remain.\nIn the wake of the ever more advanced rally cars of the late 20th and 21st century is a trend towards historic rallying (also known as classic rallying), in which older cars can continue to rally. Historic rallies are usually regularity rallies with no speed tests arranged. This discipline attracts some former professional drivers back into the sport. Other drivers started their competition careers in historic rallying.\nCross-country rallies.\nAlso commonly known by its types rally-raid or baja; cross-country rallies take place mostly off-road using similar competitive elements to road and special stage rallying competitions. When off-road, waypoints and markers are set using GPS systems, although competitors cannot use GPS for navigation. Crews must choose how best to cross the terrain to the next waypoint whilst respecting the navigational instructions provided in the roadbook. The challenge is mostly navigational and endurance. The World Rally-Raid Championship was inaugurated in 2022, including the annual Dakar Rally in its calendar, with joint sanctioning by the FIA and FIM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cross-Country Rally: Competition with a total distance between 1200 and 3000 km.\nBaja Cross-Country Rally: Cross-Country Rally which must be run over one day (max: 600 km) or two days (max: 1000 km). A Super Special Stage may be run on an extra day.\nMarathon Cross-Country Rally: Cross-Country Rally with a total distance of at least 5000 km.\u2014\u200a\nHill Rally.\nHill rallies are a type of cross-country event found in the United Kingdom and defined and governed by Motorsport UK.\nTouring assembly.\nAssemblies of car enthusiasts and their vehicles may still colloquially be called rallies, even if they involve merely the task of getting to the location (often on a trailer). However, static assemblies that simply 'meet' (akin to a caravan or steam rally) are not considered a form of motorsport. A touring assembly may have an organised route and simple passage controls but not any form of competition held or prizes given. One example, the Gumball 3000, which calls itself \"'a rally not a race\"', explicitly states in its terms that no form of competition between participants must take place. The FIA defined this activity under 'rally of the touring kind' at least until 2007, though have now separated the term 'Touring Assembly' without using the word rally in its definition.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe word 'rally' comes from the French verb \"'rallier\"', meaning to reunite or regroup urgently during a battle. It was in use since at least the seventeenth century and continues to mean to synergise with haste for a purpose. By the time of the invention of the motor car, it was in use as a noun to define the organised mass gathering of people, not to protest or demonstrate, but to promote or celebrate a social, political or religious cause. Motor car rallies were probably being arranged as motor clubs and automobile associations were beginning to form shortly after the first motor cars were being produced.\n\"Auto Rallies\" were common events in the USA in the early twentieth century for the purpose of political caucusing, however many of these rallies were coincidentally aimed at motorists who could attend in convenient fashion rather than being a motoring rally. One early example of a true motor rally, the 1909 Auto Rally Day in Denison, Iowa, United States, gathered approximately 100 vehicles owned by local residents for no other real reason than to give rides to members of the public, using fuel paid for by local businessmen who hoped the event would help sell cars.\nIn the case of the 1910 Good Roads Rally held in Charleston, South Carolina, a rally was organised to promote the need for better roads. The rally itself had no competition and most vehicles were expected to be parked for its duration. The programme included a visit to some ongoing roadworks, a vehicle parade, with food, drink, dancing and music also arranged. However, the Automobile Club of Columbia, who had members attending the event, independently organised their own road competition to contest on the journey between the two cities. A prize of $10 was awarded to the motorist \"approximating the most ideal schedule\" between two secret points along the route and who had \"the most nearly correct idea of a pleasant and sensible pleasure tour\" between the two cities. Though this format of competition itself would later become known as a regularity 'rally', it wasn't at the time, however the trophy and prize were awarded at the rally.\nThe first known use of the word rally to include a road competition was the 1911 Monaco Rally (later Monte Carlo Rally). It was organised by a group of wealthy locals who formed the \"Sport Automobile V\u00e9locip\u00e9dique Mon\u00e9gasque\" and bankrolled by the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Bains de Mer\" (the \"sea bathing company\"), the operators of the famous casino who were keen to attract wealthy and adventurous motorists to their 'rallying point'. Competitors could start at various locations but with a speed limit of 25kph imposed, the competitive elements were partly based on cleanliness, condition and elegance of the cars and required a jury to choose a winner. However, getting to Monaco in winter was a challenge in itself. A second event was held in 1912.\nRallying as road competitions.\nOrigins of motorsport.\nRallying as a form of road competition can be traced back to the origins of motorsport, including the world's first known motor race; the 1894 Paris\u2013Rouen Horseless Carriage Competition (\"Concours des Voitures sans Chevaux\"). Sponsored by a Paris newspaper, \"Le Petit Journal\", it attracted considerable public interest and entries from leading manufacturers. The official winner was Albert Lema\u00eetre driving a 3\u00a0hp Peugeot, although the \"Comte\" de Dion had finished first but his steam-powered vehicle was ineligible for the official competition.\nThe event led to a period of city-to-city road races being organised in Europe and the USA, which introduced many of the features found in later rallies: individual start times with cars running against the clock rather than head to head; time controls at the entry and exit points of towns along the way; road books and route notes; and driving over long distances on ordinary, mainly gravel, roads, facing hazards such as dust, traffic, pedestrians and farm animals.\nFrom 24 September-3 October 1895, the \"Automobile Club de France\" sponsored the longest race to date, a event from Bordeaux to Agen and back. Because it was held in ten stages, it can be considered the first stage rally. The first three places were taken by a Panhard, a Panhard, and a three-wheeler De Dion-Bouton.\nIn the Paris\u2013Madrid race of May 1903, the Mors of Fernand Gabriel took just under five and a quarter hours for the to Bordeaux, an average of 105\u00a0km/h (65.3\u00a0mph). Speeds had now exceeded the safe limits of dusty highways thronged with spectators and open to other traffic, people and animals and there were numerous crashes, many injuries and eight deaths. The French government stopped the race and banned this style of event. From then on, racing in Europe (apart from Italy) would be on closed circuits, initially on long loops of public highway and then, in 1907, on the first purpose-built track, England's Brooklands.\nItaly had been running road competitions since 1895, when a reliability trial was run from Turin to Asti and back. The country's first true motor race was held in 1897 along the shore of Lake Maggiore, from Arona to Stresa and back. This led to a long tradition of road racing, including events like Sicily's Targa Florio (from 1906) and \"Giro di Sicilia\" (Tour of Sicily, 1914), which went right round the island, both of which continued on and off until after World War II. The first Alpine event was held in 1898, the Austrian Touring Club's three-day Automobile Run through South Tyrol, which included the infamous Stelvio Pass.\nIn Britain, the legal maximum speed of precluded road racing, but in April and May 1900, the Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (the forerunner of the Royal Automobile Club) organised the Thousand Mile Trial, a 15-day event linking Britain's major cities in order to promote this novel form of transport. Seventy vehicles took part, the majority of them trade entries. They had to complete thirteen stages of route varying in length from at average speeds of up to the legal limit of , and tackle six hillclimb or speed tests. On rest days and at lunch halts, the cars were shown to the public in exhibition halls. This event was followed in 1901 by a five-day trial based in Glasgow The Scottish Automobile Club organised an annual Glasgow\u2013London non-stop trial from 1902 to 1904, then the Scottish Reliability Trial from 1905. The Motor Cycling Club allowed cars to enter its trials and runs from 1904 (London\u2013Edinburgh, London\u2013Land's End, London\u2013Exeter). In 1908 the Royal Automobile Club held its International Touring Car Trial, and in 1914 the Light Car Trial for manufacturers of cars up to 1400 cc, to test comparative performances. In 1924, the exercise was repeated as the Small Car Trials.\nIn Germany, the Herkomer Trophy was first held in 1905, and again in 1906. This challenging five-day event attracted over 100 entrants to tackle its road section, a hillclimb and a speed trial, but it was marred by poor organisation and confusing regulations. One participant had been Prince Henry of Austria, who with the Imperial Automobile Club of Germany, later created the first \"Prinz Heinrich Fahrt\" (Prince Henry Trial) in 1908. Another trial was held in 1910. These were very successful, attracting top drivers and works cars from major teams \u2013 several manufacturers added \"Prince Henry\" models to their ranges. The first Alpine Trial was held in 1909, in Austria, and by 1914 this was the toughest event of its kind, producing a star performance from Britain's James Radley in his Rolls-Royce Alpine Eagle.\nIn Estonia and Latvia, https:// was held in the days prior to the outbreak of World War 1 in 1914. This period was later called the July Crisis. A 706 mile car race of six stages through what is now Estonia and Latvia. The race was the third Baltic Automobile and Aero Club competition for the Grand Duchess Victoria Feodrovna Prize. The participants were mainly of Tsarist Russian and German Nobility.\nTwo ultra-long distance challenges took place at this time. The Peking-Paris of 1907 was not officially a competition, but a \"raid\", the French term for an expedition or collective endeavour whose promoters, the newspaper \"Le Matin\", rather optimistically expected participants to help each other; it was 'won' by Prince Scipione Borghese, Luigi Barzini, and Ettore Guizzardi in an Itala. The New York\u2013Paris of the following year, which went via Japan and Siberia, was won by George Schuster and others in a Thomas Flyer. Each event attracted only a handful of adventurous souls, but in both cases the successful drivers exhibited characteristics modern rally drivers would recognise: meticulous preparation, mechanical skill, resourcefulness, perseverance and a certain single-minded ruthlessness. Rather gentler (and more akin to modern rallying) was the Glidden Tour, run by the American Automobile Association between 1902 and 1913, which had timed legs between control points and a marking system to determine the winners.\nInterwar years.\nThe First World War brought a lull to motorsport. The Monte Carlo Rally was not revived until 1924, but since then, apart from World War II and its aftermath, it has been an annual event and remains a regular round of the World Rally Championship. In the 1930s, helped by the tough winters, it became the premier European rally, attracting 300 or more participants.\nIn the 1920s, numerous variations on the Alpine theme sprang up in Austria, Italy, France, Switzerland and Germany. The most important of these were Austria's \"Alpenfahrt\", which continued into its 44th edition in 1973, Italy's \"Coppa delle Alpi\", and the \"Coupe Internationale des Alpes\" (International Alpine Trial), organised jointly by the automobile clubs of Italy, Germany, Austria, Switzerland and, latterly, France. This last event, run from 1928 to 1936, attracted strong international fields vying for an individual Glacier Cup or a team Alpine Cup, including successful Talbot, Riley, MG and Triumph teams from Britain and increasingly strong and well funded works representation from Adolf Hitler's Germany, keen to prove its engineering and sporting prowess with successful marques like Adler, Wanderer and Trumpf.\nThe French started their own \"Rallye des Alpes Fran\u00e7aises\" in 1932, which continued after World War II as the \"Rallye International des Alpes\", the name often shortened to \"Coupe des Alpes\". Other rallies started between the wars included Britain's RAC Rally (1932) and Belgium's \"Li\u00e8ge-Rome-Li\u00e8ge\" or just Li\u00e8ge, officially called \"Le Marathon de la Route\" (1931), two events of radically different character; the former a gentle tour between cities from various start points, \"rallying\" at a seaside resort with a series of manoeuvrability and car control tests; the latter a thinly disguised road race over some of Europe's toughest mountain roads.\nIn Ireland, the first \"Ulster Motor Rally\" (1931) was run from multiple starting points. After several years in this format, it transitioned into the Circuit of Ireland Rally. In Italy, Benito Mussolini's government encouraged motorsport of all kinds and facilitated road racing, so the sport quickly restarted after World War I. In 1927 the \"Mille Miglia\" (Thousand Mile) was founded, run over a loop of highways from Brescia to Rome and back. It continued in this form until 1938.\nThe Li\u00e8ge of August 1939 was the last major event before World War II. Belgium's Jean Trasenster (Bugatti) and France's Jean Tr\u00e9voux (Hotchkiss) tied for first place, denying the German works teams shortly before their countries were overrun. This was one of five Li\u00e8ge wins for Trasenster; Trevoux won four Montes between 1934 and 1951.\nPost-World War II years.\nEurope.\nRallying was again slow to get under way after a major war, but by the 1950s there were many long-distance road rallies. In Europe, the Monte Carlo Rally, the French and Austrian Alpines, and the Li\u00e8ge were joined by a host of new events that quickly established themselves as classics: the Lisbon Rally (Portugal, 1947), the Tulip Rally (the Netherlands, 1949), the Rally to the Midnight Sun (Sweden, 1951, now the Swedish Rally), the Rally of the 1000 Lakes (Finland, 1951 \u2013 now the Rally Finland), and the Acropolis Rally (Greece, 1956). The RAC Rally gained International status on its return in 1951, but for 10 years its emphasis on map-reading navigation and short manoeuvrability tests made it unpopular with foreign crews. The \"FIA\" created in 1953 a European Rally Championship (at first called the \"Touring Championship\") of eleven events; it was first won by Helmut Polensky of Germany. This was the premier international rallying championship until 1973, when the FIA created the World Rally Championship for Manufacturers.\nInitially, most of the major post-war rallies were fairly gentlemanly, but the organisers of the French Alpine and the Li\u00e8ge (which moved its turning point from Rome into Yugoslavia in 1956) straight away set difficult time schedules: the \"Automobile Club de Marseille et Provence\" laid on a long tough route over a succession of rugged passes, stated that cars would have to be driven flat out from start to finish, and gave a coveted \"Coupe des Alpes\" (\"Alpine Cup\") to anyone achieving an unpenalised run; while Belgium's Royal Motor Union made clear no car was expected to finish the Li\u00e8ge unpenalised \u2013 when one did (1951 winner Johnny Claes in a Jaguar XK120) they tightened the timing to make sure it never happened again. These two events became the ones for \"the men\" to do. The Monte, because of its glamour, got the media coverage and the biggest entries (and in snowy years was also a genuine challenge); while the Acropolis took advantage of Greece's appalling roads to become a truly tough event. In 1956 came Corsica's \"Tour de Corse\", 24 hours of virtually non-stop flat out driving on some of the narrowest and twistiest mountain roads on the planet \u2013 the first major rally to be won by a woman, Belgium's Gilberte Thirion, in a Renault Dauphine.\nThese events were road races in all but name, but in Italy such races were still allowed, and the \"Mille Miglia\" continued until a serious accident in 1957 caused it to be banned. Meanwhile, in 1981, the \"Tour de France\" was revived by the Automobile-Club de Nice as a different kind of rally, based primarily on a series of races at circuits and hillclimbs around the country. It was successful for a while and continued until 1986. It spawned similar events in a few other countries, but none survive.\nSouth America.\nIn countries where there was no shortage of demanding roads across remote terrain, other events sprang up. In South America, the biggest of these took the form of long distance city to city races, each around , divided into daily legs. The first was the \"Gran Premio del Norte\" of 1940, run from Buenos Aires to Lima and back; it was won by Juan Manuel Fangio in a much modified Chevrolet coup\u00e9. This event was repeated in 1947, and in 1948 an even more ambitious one was held, the \"Gran Premio de la Am\u00e9rica del Sur\" from Buenos Aires to Caracas, Venezuela\u2014Fangio had an accident in which his co-driver was killed. Then in 1950 came the fast and dangerous Carrera Panamericana, a road race in stages across Mexico to celebrate the opening of the asphalt highway between the Guatemala and United States borders, which ran until 1954. All these events fell victim to the cost \u2013 financial, social and environmental \u2013 of putting them on in an increasingly complex and developed world, although smaller road races continued long after, and a few still do in countries like Bolivia.\nAfrica.\nIn Africa, 1950 saw the first French-run Algiers-Cape Town Rally, a rally from the Mediterranean to South Africa; it was run on and off until 1961, when the new political situation hastened its demise. In 1953 East Africa saw the demanding Coronation Safari, which went on to become the Safari Rally and a World Championship round, to be followed in due course by the Rallye du Maroc and the Rallye C\u00f4te d'Ivoire. Australia's Redex Round Australia Trial also dates from 1953, although this remained isolated from the rest of the rallying world.\nNorth America.\nCanada hosted one of the world's longest and most gruelling rallies in the 1960s, the Shell 4000 Rally. It was the only one sanctioned by the FIA in North America.\nIntercontinental rallying.\nThe quest for longer and tougher events saw the re-establishment of the intercontinental rallies beginning with the London\u2013Sydney Marathon held in 1968. The rally trekked across Europe, the Middle-East and the sub-continent before boarding a ship in Bombay to arrive in Fremantle eight days later before the final push across Australia to Sydney. It attracted over 100 crews including a number of works teams and top drivers; it was won by the Hillman Hunter of Andrew Cowan/Brian Coyle/Colin Malkin. The huge success of this event saw the creation of the World Cup Rallies, linked to Association Football's FIFA World Cup. The first was the 1970 London to Mexico World Cup Rally which saw competitors travel from London eastwards across to Bulgaria before turning westwards on a more southerly route before boarding a ship in Lisbon. Disembarking in Rio de Janeiro the route travelled southward into Argentina before turning northwards along the western coast of South America before arriving in Mexico City. The Ford Escort of Hannu Mikkola and Gunnar Palm won. These were followed in 1974 by the London-Sahara-Munich World Cup Rally, and in 1977 by the Singapore Airlines London-Sydney Rally.\nIntroduction of special stages.\nRallying became very popular in Sweden and Finland in the 1950s, thanks in part to the invention there of the \"specialstr\u00e4cka\" (Swedish) or \"erikoiskoe\" (Finnish), or special stage. These were shorter sections of route, usually on minor or private roads\u2014predominantly gravel in these countries\u2014away from habitation and traffic, which were separately timed. These provided the solution to the conflict inherent in the notion of driving as fast as possible on ordinary roads. The idea spread to other countries, albeit more slowly to the most demanding events.\nThe RAC Rally had formally become an International event in 1951, but Britain's laws precluded the closure of public highways for special stages. This meant it had to rely on short manoeuvrability tests, regularity sections and night map-reading navigation to find a winner, which made it unattractive to foreign crews. In 1961, Jack Kemsley was able to persuade the Forestry Commission to open their many hundreds of miles of well surfaced and sinuous gravel roads, and the event was transformed into one of the most demanding and popular in the calendar, by 1983 having over of stage. It was later renamed Rally GB.\nOff road (cross country) rallying.\nIn 1967, a group of American off-roaders created the Mexican 1000 rally, a tough 1,000-mile race for cars and motorcycles which ran the length of the Baja California peninsula, much of it initially over roadless desert. Which quickly gained fame as the Baja 1000, today run by the SCORE International. \"Baja\" events, relatively short cross-country rallies, now take place in a number of other countries worldwide.\nIn 1979, a young Frenchman, Thierry Sabine, founded an institution when he organized the first \"rallye-raid\" from Paris to Dakar, in Senegal, the event now called the Dakar Rally. From amateur beginnings it quickly became a massive commercial circus catering for cars, motorcycles and trucks, and spawned other similar events. From 2008 to 2019, it was held in South America before moving to Saudi Arabia exclusively in 2020.\nCharacteristics of a rally.\nItinerary.\nAll rallies follow at least one itinerary, essentially a schedule of the points along the route that define the rally. A common (single) itinerary may begin and end with a ceremonial start and finish that confirm the bounds of the competition. Many rallies\u2019 itineraries are divided into legs, usually corresponding with days on multi-day rallies dividing overnight rest periods; sections, usually between \"services\" or \"regroups\"; and stages, individual point-to-point lengths of road. A loop is often used to describe a section that begins and ends in the same place, for example from a central service park.\nA time control is usually found at each point on the itinerary, a timecard is carried by the crews and handed to an official at each control point to be filled in as proof of following the itinerary correctly. As crews start each leg, section and stage at intervals (for example of two minutes), each crew will have a different due or target time to arrive at each control, with penalties applied for being too early or late. A crew can be excluded from a rally if they are found to be over time limit or outside total lateness (OTL). This is a maximum permitted lateness set, often 30 minutes, to prevent rally officials having to wait too long for the last car.\nLong rallies may include one or more service, a window of time where mechanics are permitted to repair or prepare the car. Outside these services only the driver and co-driver can work on the car, although they must still respect the timing requirements of the rally. A flexi-service allows teams to use the same group of mechanics with flexibility in the timing, for example if two cars are due to arrive at two minute intervals, the second cars' 45 minute service can be delayed whilst the first car is serviced. During overnight halts between legs cars are held in a quarantine environment called parc ferm\u00e9 where it is not permitted to work on the cars.\nOther examples of features of an itinerary include passage controls, which ensure competitors are following the correct route but have no due time window, the timecard may be stamped or the cars may be observed by officials. Refuel, light fitting and tyre zones allow competitors to refuel, fit lights for \"night stages\" run in darkness, or exchange used tyres for new. Regroups act to gather competitors in one location and reset the time intervals which may have grown or shrunk.\nA road book may be published and distributed to competitors detailing the itinerary, the route they must follow and any supplementary regulations they must follow. The route can be marked out in tulip diagrams, a form of illustrating the navigational requirements or other standard icons.\nSpecial stage.\nSpecial stages (SS) must be used when using timing for classifying competitors in speed competitions. These stages are preceded by a time control marking the boundary of a road section and the special stage. The competitors proceed to the start line from where they begin the special stage at a prescribed time, and are timed until they cross the flying finish in motion before safely coming to a stop at the stop control which acts as a time control for the following road section and the place for the crews to find out their time of completing the stage. To avoid interruptions and hindering other competitors the road between the time control and the end of the start line zone, and between the flying finish and stop control are both considered as under parc ferm\u00e9 conditions, crews are not allowed to get out of their car.\nA Super Special Stage runs contrary to the ordinary running of a special stage, the reasons for which should be explained in the supplementary regulations. This may be where head-to-head stages are run in a crossover loop style, or if a short asphalt city stage with donuts around hay bails is run on a gravel rally for example.\nA Power Stage is used in the WRC and European Rally Championship, it is simply a nominated special stage that alone awards championship points to the fastest crews.\nA Shakedown is often included in an itinerary but does not form part of the competition. Crews can do multiple passes of a special stage to practice or trial different set ups. In some championships, a Qualifying Stage may also run alongside a shakedown to determine road order, the order in which competitors will compete.\nRecce and pacenotes.\nPacenotes are a unique and major tool in modern special stage rallying. They provide a detailed description of the course and conditions ahead and allow the driver to form a mental image beyond the visible to be able to drive as fast as possible.\nIn many rallies, including those of the World Rally Championship (WRC), drivers are allowed to run on the special stages of the course before the competition begins and create their own pacenotes. This process is called reconnaissance or recce and a low maximum speed is imposed. During reconnaissance, the co-driver writes down shorthand notes on how to best drive the stage. Usually, the drivers call out the turns and road conditions for the co-drivers to write down. These pacenotes are then read aloud through an internal intercom system during the actual rally, allowing the driver to anticipate the upcoming terrain and thus take the course as fast as possible.\nOther rallies provide organizer-created \"route notes\" also referred to as \"stage notes\" and disallow reconnaissance and use of custom pacenotes. These notes are usually created using a predetermined format, from which a co-driver can optionally add comments or transpose into other pacenote notations. Many North American rallies do not conduct reconnaissance but provide stage notes due to time and budget constraints.\nService park or bivouac.\nThough not necessary for all rallies, many road rallies have a central service park that acts as a base for servicing, scrutineering, parc ferm\u00e9 and playing host to Rally Headquarters, where the rally officials assemble. Service parks can also be a spectator attraction in their own right, with opportunities to meet and greet the crews and commercial outlets providing goods and services. If the rally is of the touring A to B kind there may be multiple service parks that may be very small and only used once each meaning teams carry as little as possible for simple logistics purposes. A remote service is a small service used once when there are stages far away from a central service park.\nIn off-road cross countries the service area and support teams may travel with the competitors along the route in a Bivouac. The word means 'camp' and many participants indeed sleep in tents overnight.\nParticipants.\nDriver.\nThe driver is the person who drives the car during the rally. Regardless of the type of rally, a driver needs a driver's license issued by a competent authority. No prior experience of rallying is necessary and a debutant can hypothetically compete with a world champion on unfamiliar roads even in speed competitions.\nUnless the car is in a scheduled service, only the driver and co-driver can repair or work on the car during the rally with no external assistance allowed. Spectators assisting a crashed car is technically a breach of the rules but is usually overlooked. Driver's and co-drivers often have to make running-repairs and have to change punctured wheels themselves.\nOften, a distinction is made between so called 'works' drivers and privateer drivers. The first is one who competes for a team, usually that of a manufacturer, who provides the car, parts, repairs, logistics and the support personnel. Most of the works drivers of the 1950s were amateurs, paid little or nothing, reimbursed their expenses and given bonuses for winning. Then in 1960 came arguably the first rallying superstar (and one of the first to be paid to rally full-time), Sweden's Erik Carlsson, driving for Saab. Contrarily a privateer has to meet all the organization requirements and expenses involved in competing and usually competes for the enjoyment rather than using the sport as a means of promotion or contesting a full championship.\nA \"specialist driver\" is used to describe a driver who may have the skills and aptitude to win a rally of a certain surface but not on another. In the World Rally Championship which consists of different surfaces, a tarmac specialist driver may be employed by a team for example, on only the tarmac rounds. A privateer snow specialist may only enter the snow rounds. Some examples of specialist drivers are Gilles Panizzi, who obtained several victories on asphalt in the WRC while on gravel never passed fifth place; Shekhar Mehta won five editions of the Safari Rally however he never aspired to win the world championship and the Swede Mats Jonsson achieved his only two victories in the world, in the Rally Sweden. Historically, manufacturers always used local drivers due to their experience which ensured a certain result.\nUnlike in many other sports, rally has no gender barriers and everybody can compete on equal terms in this regard, although historically there were cups and trophies only for women. One of the first prominent names was that of the Brit Pat Moss, sister of F1 driver Stirling Moss, who won several rallies in her time. Later, Italy's Antonella Mandello, Germany's Isolde Holderies, Britain's Louise Aitken Walker and Sweden's Pernilla Walfridson stood out. The most notable was France's Mich\u00e8le Mouton who with co-driver, Fabrizia Pons, became the first women to achieve victories in the world championship, in addition to the championship runner-up slots in 1982. As co-pilots in addition to the aforementioned Pons, the French Mich\u00e8le Espinos \"Biche\" stood out, the Swedish Tina Th\u00f6rner, the Venezuelan Ana Go\u00f1i or the Austrian Ilka Minor.\nCo-driver.\nThe co-driver accompanies the driver inside the car during a \"rally\" stage and is sometimes called a navigator. The co-driver and driver may swap roles although this is uncommon. On all rallies their responsibilities are mostly organizational, assisting to ensure the route is adhered to, the correct timing of the itinerary is met, ensuring completion of the timecard and avoiding penalties for being early or late when arriving at time controls. Usually the co-driver maintains communication with the team as the rally progresses.\nOn special stages, the co-driver's role is to notate pace notes during reconnaissance and recite them at the correct point the driver demands when competing. This is a skill in itself as it requires reading the notes of the unseen road ahead from a page whilst keeping track of the current location. Theoretically, the more pacenotes a co-driver can deliver gives the driver more detail of the road ahead. Incorrect pace notes called at very high speeds on blind corners or crests can easily lead to accidents.\nThe co-driver often exercises an important role in strategy, monitoring the state of rivals and in many cases acting as a psychologist, since they also encourage and advise the driver. The rapport between driver and co-driver must therefore be essential and it is common for a driver to change partners throughout their career if they do not feel comfortable. Perhaps for this reason it is very common to find relatives competing. Examples of this are the Panizzi brothers, who raced in France and the world championship, the Vallejo brothers in Spain or the world champion Marcus Gr\u00f6nholm who took his brother-in-law as co-driver during his career.\nTeam.\nA rally team is not required and can exist in various forms but is usually only found in professional or commercial speed competition rallying such as is found in the WRC where manufacturer teams are required to enter multiple cars. Commercial teams exist to provide a service to privateers. A driver, co-driver and friends volunteering to help can also be called a team.\nVehicles.\nAuto manufacturers had entered cars in rallies, and in their forerunner and cousin events, from the very beginning. The 1894 Paris-Rouen race was mainly a competition between them, while the Thousand Mile Trial of 1900 had more trade than private entries. From the time that speed limits were introduced to the various nation's roads, rallies became mostly about reliability than speed. As a result rallies and trials became a great proving ground for any standard production vehicle, with no real need to purposely build a rally competition car until the special stage was introduced in the 1950s.\nAlthough there had been exceptions like the outlandish Ford V8 specials created for the 1936 Monte Carlo Rally, rallies before World War II had tended to be for standard or near-standard production cars. After the war, most competing cars were production saloons or sports cars, with only minor modifications to improve performance, handling, braking and suspension. This naturally kept costs down and allowed many more people to afford the sport using ordinary cars, compared to the rally specials used today.\nGroups 1\u20134.\nIn 1954 the FIA introduced Appendix J of the International Sporting Code, classifying touring and sports production cars for use in its competitions, including the new European Rally Championship, and cars had to be homologated in order to compete. The Groups 1\u20139 within Appendix J changed frequently though Group 1, Group 2, Group 3 and Group 4 generally held the forms of unmodified or modified, series production touring and grand touring cars used in rallying.\nAs rallying grew in popularity, car companies started to introduce special models or variants for rallying, such as the British Motor Corporation's Mini Cooper, introduced in Group 2 in 1962, and its successor the Mini Cooper S (1963), developed by the Cooper Car Company. Shortly after, Ford of Britain first hired Lotus to create a high-performance version of their Cortina family car, then in 1968 launched the Escort Twin Cam, one of the most successful rally cars of its era. Similarly, Abarth developed high performance versions of Fiats 124 roadster and 131 saloon.\nOther manufacturers were not content with modifying their 'bread-and-butter' cars. Renault bankrolled the small volume sports-car maker Alpine to transform their little A110 Berlinette coup\u00e9 into a world-beating rally car, and hired a skilled team of drivers to pilot it. In 1974 the Lancia Stratos became the first car designed from scratch to win rallies. These makers overcame the rules of FISA (as the FIA was called at the time) by building the requisite number of these models for the road, somewhat inventing the 'homologation special'.\nFour-wheel-drive.\nIn 1980, a German car maker, Audi, at that time not noted for their interest in rallying, introduced a rather large and heavy coup\u00e9 version of their family saloon, installed a turbocharged 2.1 litre five-cylinder engine, and fitted it with four-wheel drive, giving birth to the Audi Quattro. International regulations had prohibited four-wheel drive in rallying, but FISA accepted that this was a genuine production car and changed the rules. The Quattro quickly became the car to beat on snow, ice or gravel; and in 1983 took Hannu Mikkola to the World Rally Championship title.\nGroups N/A/B.\nIn 1982 the FIA replaced the structure of groups in Appendix J. Rallying, with the young World Rally Championship, now allowed Group N for unmodified touring cars, Group A for modified touring cars and Group B for Grand Touring cars. The low production requirement and loose restrictions of Group B led many manufacturers to develop cars much further removed from production models, and so was created a generation of rallying supercars, of which the most radical and successful were the Peugeot 205 T16, Renault 5 Turbo and the Lancia Delta S4, with lightweight fibreglass bodies roughly the shape of the standard car tacked onto spaceframe chassis, four-wheel drive, and power outputs higher than . This particular era was not to last. On the 1986 Rallye de Portugal, four spectators were killed then two months later on the \"Tour de Corse\", Henri Toivonen and Sergio Cresto went over the edge of a mountain road and were incinerated in the fireball that followed. FISA immediately changed the rules again: rallying after 1987 would be in Groups A and N cars, closer to the production model. One notably successful car during this period was the Group A Lancia Delta Integrale, dominating world rallying during 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991 and 1992 \u2013 winning six consecutive manufacturer's world rally championship titles, a feat unbeaten as of 2022. In the 1990s Japanese manufacturers Toyota, Subaru and Mitsubishi also dominated the world rally championships.\nCross-country.\nGroups T1 and T2 codify cars used in FIA cross-country rallies. Group T5 (T4 prior to 2020) was introduced to allow support trucks to enter the rally raids in their own class. Groups T3 and T4 are reserved for side-by-side vehicles and lightweight vehicles, these differ from cars by not having notable parts such as windscreens or doors. Group T6 and Trophy truck.\nAlternative energy.\nThe car manufacturer Opel, WRC driver Hayden Paddon and a collaboration of rally team Baumschlager, Kreisel and \u0160koda have each built electric cars for special stage rallies in the 2020s.\nHistoric.\nThe minimum age and inclusion of a vehicle in a historic rally is at the decision of the organiser. The FIA organises two international competitions for historic rallying: the European Historic Rally Championship, composed of special stage rallies; and the Trophy for Historic Regularity Rallies. In both cases, cars must comply with their Appendix K of the International Sporting Code, which classifies historic vehicles. Many nation's ASNs and independent organisations also arrange historic rallies and championships.\nAny vehicle.\nAs regularity rallies and touring assemblies take place on open roads without a performance requirement, a rally organiser can hypothetically allow any street legal vehicle to enter. The Wacky Rally will permit campervans, fire appliances, busses or the Batmobile for example. Banger rallies generally permit any car purchased below a given value. The Gumball 3000 is known for permitting luxury and performance cars alongside ordinary cars, vans and some unconventional vehicles.\nIn popular culture.\nThe saying \"Trata de arrancarlo, Carlos\" (\"try to start it, Carlos\") has become a well known phrase in Spain following the failure of Carlos Sainz and Luis Moya's Toyota Corrola at the 1998 RAC Rally. The crew were close to the finish of the rally, and potential championship titles, when their engine caught fire. Moya's repeated shouts were caught by TV cameras and have entered common speech and fiction even away from a motorsport context.\nSee also.\nRally driving techniques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRally events.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52246", "revid": "30973818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52246", "title": "Alfred Jodl", "text": "German general and war criminal (1890\u20131946)\nAlfred Josef Ferdinand Jodl (; born Alfred Josef Baumg\u00e4rtler; 10 May 1890 \u2013 16 October 1946) was a German Army \"Generaloberst\" (the rank was equal to a four-star full general) and convicted war criminal, who served as the Chief of the Operations Staff of the \"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\" \u2013 the German Armed Forces High Command \u2013 throughout World War II.\nAfter the war, Jodl was indicted on charges of conspiracy to commit crimes against peace, planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression, war crimes, and crimes against humanity at the Allied-organized Nuremberg trials. The principal charges against him related to his signing of the criminal Commando and Commissar Orders. Found guilty on all charges, he was sentenced to death and executed in Nuremberg in 1946.\nEarly life and career.\nAlfred Jodl was educated at a military cadet school in Munich, from which he graduated in 1910. Ferdinand Jodl, who also became an army general, was his younger brother. He was the nephew of philosopher and psychologist Friedrich Jodl at the University of Vienna. Jodl was raised Roman Catholic but rejected the faith later in life.\nFrom 1914 to 1916, he served with a field artillery regiment on the Western Front, being awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class for gallantry in November 1914, and for being wounded in action. In 1917, he served briefly on the Eastern Front before returning to the West as a staff officer. In 1918, he was awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class for gallantry in action. After the defeat of the German Empire in 1918, he continued his career as a professional soldier with the much-reduced German Army (\"Reichswehr\"). Jodl married twice: in 1913 and (after becoming a widower) in 1944.\nWorld War II.\nJodl's appointment as a major in the operations branch of the \"Truppenamt\" ('Troop Office') in the Army High Command in the last years of the Weimar Republic put him under the command of General Ludwig Beck. In September 1939, Jodl first met Adolf Hitler. During the build-up to the Second World War, Jodl was nominally assigned as commander of the 44th Division from October 1938 to August 1939 after the \"Anschluss\".\nHe was chosen by Hitler to be Chief of the Operations Staff of the newly formed \"Oberkommando der Wehrmacht\" (OKW) on 23 August 1939, just prior to the German invasion of Poland. Jodl acted as chief of staff during the invasion of Denmark and Norway. Following the Fall of France, Jodl was optimistic of Germany's success over Britain, writing on 30 June 1940 that \"The final German victory over England is now only a question of time.\"\nJodl signed the Commissar Order of 6 June 1941 (in which Soviet political commissars were to be shot) and the Commando Order of 28 October 1942 (in which Allied commandos, including properly uniformed soldiers as well as combatants wearing civilian clothes, such as Maquis and partisans, were to be executed immediately without trial if captured behind German lines).\nJodl spent most of the war at the Wolf's Lair, Hitler's forward command post in East Prussia. On 1 February 1944, he was promoted to the rank of \"Generaloberst\" ('colonel general', a four-star rank). He was among those slightly injured during the 20 July plot of 1944 against Hitler, during which he suffered a concussion.\nOn 6 May 1945, Jodl was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross by Grand admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz, who had succeeded Hitler on 30 April 1945 as head of Germany and its armed forces.\nFollowing regional surrenders of German forces in Europe, Jodl was sent by D\u00f6nitz to respond to the demand for \"immediate, simultaneous and unconditional surrender on all fronts.\" Jodl signed the German Instrument of Surrender on 7 May 1945 in Reims on behalf of the OKW. The surrender to all the Allies was concluded on 8 May in Berlin. On 13 May, on the arrest of \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Wilhelm Keitel, Jodl succeeded him as Chief of OKW.\nTrial and conviction.\nJodl was arrested, along with the rest of the Flensburg Government of D\u00f6nitz, by British troops on 23 May 1945 and transferred to Camp Ashcan and later put before the International Military Tribunal at the Nuremberg trials. He was accused of conspiracy to commit crimes against peace; planning, initiating and waging wars of aggression, war crimes and crimes against humanity. The principal charges against him related to his signature of the Commando Order and the Commissar Order, both of which ordered that certain classes of prisoners of war were to be summarily executed upon capture. When confronted with the 1941 mass shootings of Soviet POWs, Jodl claimed the only prisoners shot were \"not those that could not, but those that did not want to walk\".\nAdditional charges at his trial included unlawful deportation and abetting execution. Presented as evidence was his signature on an order that transferred Danish citizens, including Jews, to Nazi concentration camps. Although he denied his role in this activity of the regime, the court sustained his complicity based on the evidence it had examined, with the French judge, Henri Donnedieu de Vabres, dissenting.\nHis wife Luise attached herself to her husband's defence team. Subsequently, interviewed by Gitta Sereny, researching her biography of Albert Speer, Luise alleged that in many instances the Allied prosecution made charges against Jodl based on documents that they refused to share with the defence. Jodl nevertheless proved that some of the charges made against him were untrue, such as the charge that he had helped Hitler gain control of Germany in 1933.\nJodl pleaded not guilty \"before God, before history and my people\". Found guilty on all four charges, he was hanged at Nuremberg Prison on 16 October 1946. Jodl's last words were reportedly \"I salute you, my eternal Germany\" ().\nHis remains, like those of the other nine executed men and Hermann G\u00f6ring (who had killed himself prior to his scheduled execution), were cremated at Ostfriedhof and the ashes were scattered in the Wenzbach, a small tributary of the River Isar to prevent the establishment of a permanent burial site which might be enshrined by Neo-Nazis. A cross commemorating him was later added to the family grave on the Frauenchiemsee in Bavaria. In 2018, the local council ordered the cross to be removed; however, in March 2019, a Munich Court upheld Jodl's relatives' right to maintain the family grave, while noting the family's willingness to remove his name.\nPosthumous legal action.\nOn 28 February 1953, after his widow Luise sued to reclaim her pension and his estate, a West German denazification court posthumously declared Jodl not guilty of breaking international law, based on Henri Donnedieu de Vabres's 1949 disapproval of Jodl's conviction. This not guilty declaration was revoked by the Minister of Political Liberation for Bavaria on 3 September 1953, following objections from the United States; the consequences of the acquittal on Jodl's estate were, however, maintained.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
