{"id": "54001", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54001", "title": "Comanche", "text": "Plains Native North American tribe\nThe Comanche (), or N\u0289m\u0289n\u0289\u0289 (, 'the people'), are a Native American tribe from the Southern Plains of the present-day United States. Comanche people today belong to the federally recognized Comanche Nation, headquartered in Lawton, Oklahoma.\nThe Comanche language is a Numic language of the Uto-Aztecan family. Originally, it was a Shoshoni dialect, but diverged and became a separate language. The Comanche were once part of the Shoshone people of the Great Basin.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, Comanche lived in most of present-day northwestern Texas and adjacent areas in eastern New Mexico, southeastern Colorado, southwestern Kansas, and western Oklahoma. Spanish colonists and later Mexicans called their historical territory \"Comancher\u00eda\".\nDuring the 18th and 19th centuries, Comanche practiced a nomadic horse culture and hunted, particularly bison. They traded with neighboring Native American peoples, and Spanish, French, and American colonists and settlers.\nAs European Americans encroached on their territory, the Comanche waged war on the settlers and raided their settlements, as well as those of neighboring Native American tribes. They took with them captives from other tribes during warfare, using them as slaves, selling them to the Spanish and (later) to Mexican settlers, or adopting them into their tribe. Thousands of captives from raids on Spanish, Mexican, and American settlers were assimilated into Comanche society. At their peak, the Comanche language was the lingua franca of the Great Plains region.\nDiseases, destruction of the buffalo herds, and territory loss forced most Comanches onto reservations in Indian Territory by the late 1870s.\nIn the 21st century, the Comanche Nation has 17,000 enrolled citizens, around 7,000 of whom reside in tribal jurisdictional areas around Lawton, Fort Sill, and the surrounding areas of southwestern Oklahoma. The Comanche Homecoming Annual Dance takes place in mid-July in Walters, Oklahoma.\nName.\nThe Comanche's autonym is , meaning 'the human beings' or 'the people'. The earliest known use of the term \"Comanche\" dates to 1706, when the Comanche were reported by Spanish officials to be preparing to attack far-outlying Pueblo settlements in southern Colorado. The Spanish adopted the Ute name for the people: ('enemy'), spelling it \"Comanche\" (or \"Comanchi\", \"Cumanche\", \"Cumanchi\") in accord with the Spanish pronunciation. Before 1740, French explorers from the east sometimes used the name for the Comanche since it was already used for the Plains Apache and the French were not aware of the change of tribe in the region in the early 18th century.\nGovernment.\nThe Comanche Nation is headquartered in Lawton, Oklahoma. Their tribal jurisdictional area is located in Caddo, Comanche, Cotton, Greer, Jackson, Kiowa, Tillman, and Harmon Counties. Their current tribal chairman is Forrest Tahdooahnippah. The tribe requires enrolled citizens to have at least one-eighth blood quantum level (equivalent to one great-grandparent).\nIn 2025, their administration was:\nEconomic development.\nThe tribe operates its own housing authority and issues tribal vehicle tags. They have their own Department of Higher Education, primarily awarding scholarships and financial aid for citizens' college educations. They own 10 tribal smoke shops and six casinos:\nCultural institutions.\nThe Comanche National Museum and Cultural Center in Lawton has permanent and changing exhibitions on Comanche history and culture. It opened to the public in 2007.\nIn 2002, the tribe founded the Comanche Nation College, a two-year tribal college in Lawton. It closed in 2017 because of problems with accreditation and funding.\nEach July, Comanche gather from across the United States to celebrate their heritage and culture in Walters at the annual Comanche Homecoming powwow. The Comanche Nation Fair takes place every September. The Comanche Little Ponies host two annual dances\u2014one over New Year's Eve and one in May.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nThe Proto-Comanche movement to the Plains was part of the larger phenomenon known as the \"Shoshonean Expansion\" in which that language family spread across the Great Basin and across the mountains into Wyoming. The Kotsoteka (\"Bison Eaters\") were probably among the first. Other groups followed. Contact with the Shoshones of Wyoming was maintained until the 1830s when it was broken by the advancing Cheyennes and Arapahoes.\nAfter the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, various Plains peoples acquired horses, but it was probably some time before they were very numerous. As late as 1725, Comanches were described as using large dogs rather than horses to carry their bison-hide \"campaign tents\".\nHorses became a key element in the emergence of a distinctive Comanche culture. They were of such strategic importance that some scholars suggested that the Comanche broke away from the Shoshone and moved south to search for additional sources of horses among the settlers of New Spain to the south (rather than search for new herds of buffalo). The Comanche have the longest documented existence as horse-mounted Plains peoples; they had horses when the Cheyenne still lived in earth lodges.\nThe Comanche supplied horses and mules to all comers. As early as 1795, Comanche were selling horses to Anglo-American traders. and by the mid-19th century, Comanche-supplied horses were flowing into St. Louis via other Indian middlemen (Seminole, Osage, Shawnee).\nTheir original migration took them to the southern Great Plains, into a sweep of territory extending from the Arkansas River to central Texas. The earliest references to them in the Spanish records date from 1706, when reports reached Santa Fe that Utes and Comanches were about to attack. In the Comanche advance, the Apaches were driven off the Plains. By the end of the 18th century, the struggle between Comanche and Apache had assumed legendary proportions; in 1784, in recounting the history of the southern Plains, Texas Governor Domingo Cabello y Robles recorded that some 60 years earlier (i.e., \"circa\" 1724), the Apache had been routed from the Southern Plains in a nine-day battle at La Gran Sierra del Fierro, the \"Great Mountain of Iron\", somewhere northwest of Texas. but no other record, documentary or legendary, of such a fight has been found.\nThey were formidable warriors, who developed strategies for using traditional weapons for fighting on horseback. Warfare was a major part of Comanche life. Their raids into Mexico traditionally took place during the full moon, when they could see to ride at night. This led to the term \"Comanche Moon\", during which the Comanche raided for horses, captives, and weapons. Comanche raids, especially in the 1840s, reached hundreds of miles deep into Mexico, devastating northern parts of the country.\nDivisions.\nKavanagh has defined four levels of social-political integration in traditional Comanche society before reservations:\nIn contrast to the neighboring Cheyenne and Arapaho to the north, a single Comanche political unit or \"Nation\" was not historically recognized by all Comanche in previous centuries. Rather, the divisions, the most \"tribe-like\" units, acted independently, pursuing their own economic and political goals.\nBefore the 1750s, the Spanish identified three \"Comanche Naciones\" (divisions): H\u0289pen\u0289\u0289 (Jupe, Hoipi), Yapar\u0289hka (Yamparika), and K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka).\nAfter the Mescalero Apache, Jicarilla Apache, and Lipan Apache had been largely displaced from the Southern Plains by the Comanche and allied tribes in the 1780s, the Spanish began to divide the now-dominant Comanche into two geographical groups, which only partially corresponded to the former three \"naciones\". The K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka) (Buffalo Eaters), which had moved southeast in the 1750s and 1760s to the Southern Plains in Texas, were called \"Cuchanec Orientales\" (Eastern Cuchanec/Kotsoteka\") or Eastern Comanche, while those K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka) who remained in the northwest and west, together with H\u0289pen\u0289\u0289 (Jupe, Hoipi \u2013 Timber/Forest People) (and sometimes Yapar\u0289hka (Yamparika)), which had moved southward to the North Canadian River, were called \"Cuchanec Occidentales\" (Western Cuchanec/Kotsoteka) or Western Comanche. The Western Comanche lived in the region of the upper Arkansas, Canadian, and Red Rivers, and the Llano Estacado. The Eastern Comanche lived on the Edwards Plateau and the Texas plains of the upper Brazos and Colorado Rivers, and east to the Cross Timbers.\nThey were probably the ancestors of the Penat\u0289ka N\u0289\u0289 (Penateka \u2013 Honey Eaters).\nOver time, these divisions were altered in various ways, primarily due to changes in political resources. As noted above, the K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka) were probably the first proto-Comanche group to separate from the Eastern Shoshone.\nThe name H\u0289pen\u0289\u0289 (Jupe, Hoipi) vanished from history in the early 19th century, probably merging into the other divisions; they are likely the forerunners of the Nokoni N\u0289\u0289 (Nokoni), Kwaar\u0289 N\u0289\u0289 (Kwahadi, Quohada), and H\u0289pen\u0289\u0289 (Hois) local group of the Penat\u0289ka N\u0289\u0289 (Penateka). Due to pressure by southward-moving Kiowa and Plains Apache (Naishan) raiders, many Yapar\u0289hka (Yamparika) moved southeast, joining the Eastern Comanche and becoming known as the Tahnahwah (Tenawa, Tenahwit). Many Kiowa and Plains Apache moved to northern Comancheria and became later closely associated with the Yapar\u0289hka (Yamparika).\nIn the mid-19th century, other powerful divisions arose, such as the Nokoni N\u0289\u0289 (Nokoni) (Wanderers, literally \"go someplace and return\"), and the Kwaar\u0289 N\u0289\u0289 (Kwahadi, Quohada) (Antelope Eaters). The latter originally were some local groups of the K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka) from the Cimarron River Valley and descendants of some H\u0289pen\u0289\u0289 (Jupe, Hoipi), who had pulled both southwards.\nThe northernmost Comanche division was the Yapar\u0289hka (Yapai N\u0289\u0289 or Yamparika \u2014 (Yap)Root Eaters). As the last band to move onto the Plains, they retained much of their Eastern Shoshone tradition.\nThe power and success of the Comanche attracted bands of neighboring peoples, who joined them and became part of Comanche society; an Arapaho group became known as Saria T\u0289hka (Chariticas, Sata Teichas \u2013 Dog Eaters) band, an Eastern Shoshone group as Pohoi (Pohoee \u2013 Wild Sage) band, and a Plains Apache group as the Tasipenan\u0289\u0289 band.\nThe Texans and Americans divided the Comanche into five, large, dominant bands \u2013 the Yapar\u0289hka (Yamparika), K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka), Nokoni N\u0289\u0289 (Nokoni), Penat\u0289ka N\u0289\u0289 (Penateka), and Kwaar\u0289 N\u0289\u0289 (Kwahadi, Quohada)', which in turn were divided by geographical terms into first three (later four) regional groupings: Northern Comanche, Middle Comanche, Southern Comanche, Eastern Comanche, and later Western Comanche. These terms, though, generally do not correspond to the native language terms.\nThe Northern Comanche label encompassed the Yapar\u0289hka (Yamparika) between the Arkansas River and Canadian River and the prominent and powerful K\u0289hts\u0289t\u0289hka (Kotsoteka), who roamed the High Plains of Oklahoma and Texas Panhandles between the Red and Canadian Rivers; the famous Palo Duro Canyon offered their horse herds and them protection from strong winter storms and enemies, because the two bands dominated and ranged in the northern Comancheria.\nThe Middle Comanche label encompassed the aggressive Nokoni N\u0289\u0289 (Nokoni) (Wanderers, \"those who turn back\") between the headwaters of the Red River and the Colorado River in the south and the Western Cross Timbers in the east; their preferred ranges were on the Brazos River headwaters and its tributaries, and the Pease River offered protection from storms and enemies. Two smaller bands shared the same tribal areas: the Tahnahwah (Tenawa, Tenahwit) (Those Living Downstream) and Tanim\u0289\u0289 (Tanima, Daha\u0289i, Tevawish) (Liver Eaters). All three bands together were known as Middle Comanche because they lived \"in the middle\" of the Comancheria.\nThe Southern Comanche label encompassed the Penat\u0289ka N\u0289\u0289 (Penateka) (Honey Eaters), the southernmost, largest, and best-known band among Whites as they lived near the first Spanish and Texan settlements; their tribal areas extended from the upper reaches of the rivers in central Texas and Colorado River southward, including much of the Edwards Plateau, and eastward to the Western Cross Timbers; because they dominated the southern Comancheria, they were called Southern Comanche.\nThe Western Comanche label encompassed the Kwaar\u0289 N\u0289\u0289 (Kwahadi, Quohada) (Antelope Eaters), who is the last to develop as an independent band in the 19th century. They lived on the hot, low-shadow desert plateaus of Llano Estacado in eastern New Mexico, and found shelter in Tule Canyon and Palo Duro Canyon in northwestern Texas. They were the only band that never signed a contract with the Texans or Americans, and they were the last to give up the resistance. Because of their relative isolation from the other bands on the westernmost edge of the Comancheria, they were called the Western Comanche.\nMuch confusion has occurred and continues in the presentation of Comanche group names. Groups on all levels of organization, families, n\u0289m\u0289nahkahni, bands, and divisions, were given names, but many band lists do not distinguish these levels. In addition, alternate names and nicknames could exist. The spelling differences between Spanish and English add to the confusion.\nSome of the Comanche group names.\nSome names given by others include: \nUnassignable names include: \nOld Shoshone names \nOther names, which may or may not refer to Comanche groups include:\nModern local groups\nComanche Wars.\nThe Comanche fought a number of conflicts against Spanish and later Mexican and American armies. These were both expeditionary, as with the raids into Mexico, and defensive. They also fought against many other tribes, especially the Apache. As they came south, they destroyed, drove out or assimilated the tribes that currently held these lands. By the 1760's, many Apache bands simply vanished from history The Comanche were noted as fierce warriors who fought vigorously for their homeland of Comancheria. However, the massive population of the settlers from the east and the diseases they brought led to pressure and decline of Comanche power and the cessation of their major presence in the southern Great Plains.\nRelationship with settlers.\nThe Comanche maintained an ambiguous relationship with Europeans and later settlers attempting to colonize their territory. The Comanche were valued as trading partners since 1786 via the Comancheros of New Mexico, but were feared for their raids against settlers in Texas. Similarly, they were, at one time or another, at war with virtually every other Native American group living on the South Plains, leaving opportunities for political maneuvering by European colonial powers and the United States. At one point, Sam Houston, president of the newly created Republic of Texas, almost succeeded in reaching a peace treaty with the Comanche in the 1844 Treaty of Tehuacana Creek. His efforts were thwarted in 1845 when the Texas Legislature refused to create an official boundary between Texas and the Comancheria.\nWhile the Comanche managed to maintain their independence and increase their territory, by the mid-19th century, they faced annihilation because of a wave of epidemics due to Eurasian diseases to which they had no immunity, such as smallpox and measles. Outbreaks of smallpox (1817, 1848) and cholera (1849) took a major toll on the Comanche, whose population dropped from an estimated 20,000 in the late 18th century to just a few thousand by the 1870s.\nThe US began efforts in the late 1860s to move the Comanche into reservations, with the Treaty of Medicine Lodge (1867), which offered churches, schools, and annuities in return for a vast tract of land totaling over . The government promised to stop the buffalo hunters, who were steadily exterminating the great bison herds of the Plains, provided that the Comanche, along with the Apaches, Kiowas, Cheyenne, and Arapahos, move to a reservation totaling less than of land, but the government did not prevent the slaughtering of the herds. The Comanche under Quenatosavit White Eagle (later called Isa-tai \"Coyote's Vagina\") retaliated by attacking a group of hunters in the Texas Panhandle in the Second Battle of Adobe Walls (1874). The attack was a disaster for the Comanche, and the US army was called in during the Red River War to drive the remaining Comanche in the area into the reservation, culminating in the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon. Within just 10 years, the bison were on the verge of extinction, effectively ending the Comanche way of life as hunters. In May 1875, the last free band of Comanches, led by Quahada warrior Quanah Parker, surrendered and moved to the Fort Sill reservation in Oklahoma. The last independent Kiowa and Kiowa Apache had also surrendered.\nThe 1890 Census showed 1,598 Comanche at the Fort Sill reservation, which they shared with 1,140 Kiowa and 326 Kiowa Apache.\nMeusebach\u2013Comanche treaty.\nThe Peneteka band agreed to a peace treaty with the German Immigration Company under John O. Meusebach. This treaty was not affiliated with any level of government. Meusebach brokered the treaty to settle the lands on the Fisher-Miller Land Grant, from which were formed the 10 counties of Concho, Kimble, Llano, Mason, McCulloch, Menard, Schleicher, San Saba, Sutton, and Tom Green. In contrast to many treaties of its day, this treaty was very brief and simple, with all parties agreeing to a mutual cooperation and a sharing of the land. The treaty was agreed to at a meeting in San Saba County, and signed by all parties on May 9, 1847, in Fredericksburg, Texas. The treaty was very specifically between the Peneteka band and the German Immigration Company. No other band or tribe was involved. The German Immigration Company was dissolved by Meusebach himself shortly after it had served its purpose. By 1875, the Comanches had been relocated to reservations. Five years later, artist Friedrich Richard Petri and his family moved to the settlement of Pedernales, near Fredericksburg. Petri's sketches and watercolors gave witness to the friendly relationships between the Germans and various local Native American tribes.\nFort Martin Scott treaty.\nIn 1850, another treaty was signed in San Saba, between the United States government and a number of local tribes, among which were the Comanche. This treaty was named for the nearest military fort, which was Fort Martin Scott. The treaty was never officially ratified by any level of government and was binding only on the part of the Native Americans.\nCherokee Commission.\nThe signed with the Cherokee Commission October 6\u201321, 1892, further reduced their reservation to at a cost of $1.25 per acre ($308.88/km2), with an allotment of per person per tribe to be held in trust. New allotments were made in 1906 to all children born after the agreement, and the remaining land was opened to white settlement. With this new arrangement, the era of the Comanche reservation came to an abrupt end.\nCaptive Herman Lehmann.\nOne of the most famous captives in Texas was a German boy named Herman Lehmann. He had been kidnapped by the Apache, only to escape and be rescued by the Comanche. Lehmann became the adoptive son of Quanah Parker. On August 26, 1901, Quanah Parker provided a legal affidavit verifying Lehmann's life as his adopted son 1877\u20131878. On May 29, 1908, the United States Congress authorized the United States Secretary of the Interior to allot Lehmann, as an adopted member of the Comanche nation, 160 acres of Oklahoma land, near Grandfield.\nRecent history.\nEntering the Western economy was a challenge for the Comanche in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Many tribal citizens were defrauded of whatever remained of their land and possessions. Appointed paramount chief by the United States government, Chief Quanah Parker campaigned vigorously for better deals for his people, meeting with Washington politicians frequently; and helped manage land for the tribe.\nParker became wealthy as a cattleman. He also campaigned for the Comanches' permission to practice the Native American Church religious rites, such as the usage of peyote, which was condemned by European Americans.\nBefore the first Oklahoma legislature, Quanah testified:\nI do not think this legislature should interfere with a man's religion, also these people should be allowed to retain this health restorer. These healthy gentleman before you use peyote and those that do not use it are not so healthy.\nDuring World War II, many Comanche left the traditional tribal lands in Oklahoma to seek jobs and more opportunities in the cities of California and the Southwest. About half of the Comanche population still lives in Oklahoma, centered on the town of Lawton.\nRecently, an 80-minute 1920 silent film was \"rediscovered\", titled \"The Daughter of Dawn.\" It features a cast of more than 300 Comanche and Kiowa.\nCulture.\nChildbirth.\nIf a woman went into labor while the band was in camp, she was moved to a tipi, or a brush lodge if it was summer. One or more of the older women assisted as midwives. Men were not allowed inside the tipi during or immediately after the delivery.\nFirst, the midwives softened the earthen floor of the tipi and dug two holes. One of the holes was for heating water and the other for the afterbirth. One or two stakes were driven into the ground near the expectant mother's bedding for her to grip during the pain of labor. After the birth, the midwives hung the umbilical cord on a hackberry tree. The people believed that if the umbilical cord was not disturbed before it rotted, the baby would live a long and prosperous life.\nThe newborn was swaddled and remained with its mother in the tipi for a few days. The baby was placed in a cradleboard, and the mother went back to work. She could easily carry the cradleboard on her back, or prop it against a tree where the baby could watch her while she collected seeds or roots. Cradleboards consisted of a flat board to which a basket was attached. The latter was made from rawhide straps, or a leather sheath that laced up the front. With soft, dry moss as a diaper, the young one was safely tucked into the leather pocket. During cold weather, the baby was wrapped in blankets, and then placed in the cradleboard. The baby remained in the cradleboard for about ten months; then it was allowed to crawl around.\nBoth girls and boys were welcomed into the band, but boys were favored. If the baby was a boy, one of the midwives informed the father or grandfather, \"It's your close friend\". Families might paint a flap on the tipi to tell the rest of the tribe that they had been strengthened with another warrior. Sometimes a man named his child, but mostly the father asked a medicine man (or another man of distinction) to do so. He did this in the hope of his child living a long and productive life. During the public naming ceremony, the medicine man lit his pipe and offered smoke to the heavens, earth, and each of the four directions. He prayed that the child would remain happy and healthy. He then lifted the child to symbolize its growing up and announced the child's name four times. He held the child a little higher each time he said the name. It was believed that the child's name foretold its future; even a weak or sick child could grow up to be a great warrior, hunter, and raider if given a name suggesting courage and strength. Boys were often named after their grandfather, uncle, or other relative. Girls were usually named after one of their father's relatives, but the name was selected by the mother. As children grew up they also acquired nicknames at different points in their lives, to express some aspect of their lives.\nChildren.\nThe Comanche looked on their children as their most precious gift. Children were rarely punished. Sometimes, though, an older sister or other relative was called upon to discipline a child, or the parents arranged for a boogey man to scare the child. Occasionally, old people donned sheets and frightened disobedient boys and girls. Children were also told about Big Maneater Owl (\"Pia Mupitsi\"), who lived in a cave on the south side of the Witchita Mountains and ate bad children at night.\nChildren learned from example, by observing and listening to their parents and others in the band. As soon as she was old enough to walk, a girl followed her mother about the camp and played at the daily tasks of cooking and making clothing. She was also very close to her mother's sisters, who were called not aunt but \"pia\", meaning mother. She was given a little deerskin doll, which she took with her everywhere. She learned to make all the clothing for the doll.\nA boy identified not only with his father but with his father's family, as well as with the bravest warriors in the band. He learned to ride a horse before he could walk. By the time he was four or five, he was expected to be able to skillfully handle a horse. When he was five or six, he was given a small bow and arrows. Often, a boy was taught to ride and shoot by his grandfather, since his father and other warriors were on raids and hunts. His grandfather also taught him about his own boyhood and the history and legends of the Comanche.\nAs the boy grew older, he joined the other boys to hunt birds. He eventually ranged farther from camp looking for better game to kill. Encouraged to be skillful hunters, boys learned the signs of the prairie as they learned to patiently and quietly stalk game. They became more self-reliant, yet, by playing together as a group, also formed the bonds and cooperative spirit that they would need when they hunted and raided.\nBoys were highly respected because they would become warriors and might die young in battle. As he approached manhood, a boy went on his first buffalo hunt. If he made a kill, his father honored him with a feast. Only after he had proven himself on a buffalo hunt was a young man allowed to go to war.\nWhen he was ready to become a warrior, at about age 15 or 16, a young man first \"made his medicine\" by going on a vision quest (a rite of passage). Following this quest, his father gave him a good horse to ride into battle and another mount for the trail. If he had proved himself as a warrior, a Give Away Dance might be held in his honor. As drummers faced east, the honored boy and other young men danced. His parents, along with his other relatives and the people in the band, threw presents at his feet \u2013 especially blankets and horses symbolized by sticks. Anyone might snatch one of the gifts for themselves, although those with many possessions refrained; they did not want to appear greedy. People often gave away all their belongings during these dances, providing for others in the band, but leaving themselves with nothing.\nGirls learned to gather berries, nuts, and roots. They carried water and collected wood, and at about 12 years old learned to cook meals, make tipis, sew clothing, prepare hides, and perform other tasks essential to becoming a wife and mother. They were then considered ready to be married.\nDeath.\nDuring the 19th century, the traditional Comanche burial custom was to wrap the deceased's body in a blanket and place it on a horse, behind a rider, who would then ride in search of an appropriate burial place, such as a secure cave. After entombment, the rider covered the body with stones and returned to camp, where the mourners burned all the deceased's possessions. The primary mourner slashed his arms to express his grief. The Quahada band followed this custom longer than other bands and buried their relatives in the Witchita Mountains. Christian missionaries persuaded Comanche people to bury their dead in coffins in graveyards, which is the practice today.\nTransportation and habitation.\nWhen they lived with the Shoshone, the Comanche mainly used dog-drawn travois for transportation. Later, they acquired horses from other tribes, such as the Pueblo, and from the Spaniards. Because horses are faster, easier to control and stronger, this helped with hunting, warfare and moving camp. Larger dwellings were made due to the ability to pull and carry more belongings. Being herbivores, horses were also easier to feed than dogs, since meat was a valuable resource. The horse was of the utmost value to the Comanche. A Comanche man's wealth was measured by the size of his horse herd. Horses were prime targets to steal during raids; often raids were conducted specifically to capture horses. Often horse herds numbering in the hundreds were stolen by Comanche during raids against other Indian nations, Spanish, Mexicans, and later from the ranches of Texans. Horses were used for warfare with the Comanche being considered to be among the finest light cavalry and mounted warriors in history.\nThe Comanche covered their tipis with buffalo hides sewn together. To prepare the hides, women spread them on the ground, scraped off the fat and flesh with blades of bone or antler, and dried them in the sun. Then the women scraped off the thick hair and soaked the hides in water. After several days, they vigorously rubbed them in a mixture of fat, brains and liver to soften them. They softened them further by rinsing and working back and forth over a rawhide thong. Finally, they were smoked over a fire, which gave them a tan color. To finish the tipi covering, women laid the tanned hides side by side and stitched them together. As many as 22 hides could be used, but 14 was the average. The sewn cover was tied to a pole and raised, wrapped around the cone-shaped frame, and pinned with pencil-sized wooden skewers. Two wing-shaped flaps at the top of the tipi were turned back to make an opening, which could be adjusted to keep out moisture and held pockets of insulating air. With a fire pit in the center of the earthen floor, the tipis stayed warm in winter. In summer, the bottom edges of the tipis could be rolled up to let in a breeze. Cooking was done outside during hot weather. Tipis were very practical homes for nomads. Working together, women could quickly set them up or take them down. An entire Comanche band could be packed and chasing a buffalo herd within about 20 minutes. The women did most food processing and preparation.\nFood.\nThe Comanche were initially hunter-gatherers. When they lived in the Rocky Mountains, during their migration to the Great Plains, both men and women shared responsibility for gathering and providing food. When the Comanche reached the plains, hunting predominated. Hunting was considered a male activity and was a principal source of prestige. For meat, the Comanche hunted bison, elk, black bear, pronghorn, and deer. When game was scarce, the men hunted wild mustangs, and sometimes ate their own ponies. In later years the Comanche raided Texas ranches and stole longhorn cattle. They did not eat fish or fowl, unless starving.\nWomen prepared and cooked bison meat and other game. Women also gathered wild fruits, seeds, nuts, berries, roots and tubers, including plums, grapes, juniper berries, persimmons, mulberries, acorns, pecans, wild onions, radishes, and tuna, the fruit of the prickly pear cactus. The Comanche also acquired maize, dried pumpkin, and tobacco through trade and raids. They roasted meat over a fire or boiled it. To boil fresh or dried meat and vegetables, women dug a pit in the ground, which they lined with animal skins or bison stomach and filled with water to make a kind of cooking pot. They placed heated stones in the water until it boiled and had cooked their stew. After Spanish contact, Comanche traded for copper pots and iron kettles, which made cooking easier.\nWomen used berries and nuts, as well as honey and tallow, to flavor bison meat. They stored the tallow in intestine casings or rawhide pouches called \"oy\u00f3ot\u00fb\u00bf\". They especially liked to make a sweet mush of bison marrow mixed with crushed mesquite beans.\nThe Comanches sometimes ate raw meat, especially raw liver flavored with gall. They also drank the milk from the slashed udders of bison, deer, and elk. Among their delicacies was the curdled milk from the stomachs of suckling bison calves. They also enjoyed bison tripe, or stomachs.\nComanche generally ate a light meal breakfast and a large dinner. They ate during the day when they were hungry or when it was convenient. Like other Plains tribes, the Comanche were very hospitable. They prepared meals whenever a visitor arrived in camp, which led to outsiders' belief that the Comanches ate at all hours of the day or night. Many families offered thanks as they sat down to eat their meals.\nComanche children ate pemmican, but this was primarily a tasty, high-energy food reserved for war parties. Carried in a parfleche pouch, pemmican was eaten only when the men did not have time to hunt. Similarly, in camp, people ate pemmican only when other food was scarce. Traders ate pemmican sliced and dipped in honey, which they called Indian bread.\nClothing.\nComanche clothing was simple and easy to wear. Men wore a leather belt with a breechcloth \u2014 a long piece of buckskin brought up between the legs and looped over and under the belt at the front and back, and loose-fitting deerskin leggings. Moccasins had soles made from thick, tough buffalo hide with soft deerskin uppers. Men wore nothing on the upper body, except in winter when they wore heavy robes of buffalo hide (or occasionally, bear, wolf, or coyote skins) with knee-length buffalo-hide boots. Young boys usually went naked except in cold weather. By age 8 or 9, they wore adult clothing. In the 19th century, men had replaced the buckskin breechcloths by woven cloth, and wore loose-fitting buckskin shirts. Women wore long deerskin dresses with a flared skirt and wide, long sleeves, with buckskin fringes on the sleeves and hem. Beads and pieces of metal were attached in geometric patterns. Women wore buckskin moccasins with buffalo soles. Women decorated their shirts, leggings and moccasins with fringes of deer-skin, animal fur, and human hair. They also decorated their shirts and leggings with patterns and shapes of beads and scraps of material. In winter they, too, wore warm buffalo robes and tall, fur-lined buffalo-hide boots. Unlike boys, girls old enough to walk were dressed in breechcloths. By age 12 or 13, they wore women's clothing.\nHair and headgear.\nComanche people took pride in their hair, which was worn long. They arranged it with porcupine quill brushes, greased it and parted it in the center from the forehead to the back of the neck. They painted the scalp along the parting with yellow, red, or white clay (or other colors). They wore their hair in two long braids tied with leather thongs or colored cloth, and sometimes wrapped with beaver fur. They also braided a strand of hair from the top of their head. This slender braid, called a scalp lock, was decorated with colored scraps of cloth and beads, and a single feather. Comanche men rarely wore anything on their heads. Only after they moved onto a reservation late in the 19th century did men begin to wear the typical Plains headdress. In severe cold, they might wear a brimless, woolly buffalo hide hat. At war, some warriors wore a headdress of buffalo scalp. Warriors cut away most of the hide and flesh from a buffalo head, leaving only a portion of the woolly head and the horns. This type of hat was worn only by the Comanche. Women did not let their hair grow as long as the men did. Young women might wear their hair long and braided, but women parted their hair in the middle and kept it short. Like the men, they painted their scalp along the parting with bright paint.\nBody decoration.\nComanche men usually had pierced ears with hanging earrings made of pieces of shell or loops of brass or silver wire. A female relative would pierce the outer edge of the ear with six or eight holes. The men also tattooed his face, arms, and chest with geometric designs, and painted his face and body. Traditionally they used paints made of berry juice and the colored clays of the Comancheria. Later, traders supplied them with vermilion (red pigment) and bright grease paints. Men wore bands of leather and strips of metal on their arms. Except for black, which was the color for war, there was no standard color or pattern for face and body painting: it was a matter of individual preference. For example, one man might paint one side of his face white and the other side red; another might paint one side of his body green and the other side with green and black stripes. One Comanche might always paint himself in a particular way, while another might change the colors and designs when so inclined. Some designs had special meaning to the individual, and special colors and designs might have been revealed in a dream. Women might also tattoo their face or arms. They were fond of painting their bodies and were free to do so as they pleased. It was popular for women to paint the insides of their ears a bright red and paint great orange and red circles on their cheeks. They usually painted red and yellow around their lips. \nArt and material culture.\nBecause of their frequent nomadic traveling, Comanche had to make sure that their household goods and other possessions were unbreakable. They did not use pottery that could easily be broken on long journeys. Weaving, wood carving, and metal working were unknown. Instead, they depended on buffalo for most of their tools, household goods, and weapons. They made nearly 200 different utilitarian items from the horns, hide, and bones.\nRemoving the lining of the inner stomach, women made the paunch into a water bag. The lining was stretched over four sticks and filled with water to make a pot for cooking soups and stews. With wood scarce on the plains, women relied on buffalo chips (dried dung) as fuel for cooking and heat.\nStiff rawhide was fashioned into saddles, stirrups and cinches, knife cases, buckets, and moccasin soles. Rawhide was also made into rattles and drums. Strips of rawhide were twisted into sturdy ropes. Scraped to resemble white parchment, rawhide skins were folded to make parfleches in which food, clothing, and other personal belongings were kept. Women also tanned hides to make soft and supple buckskin, which was used for tipi covers, warm robes, blankets, cloths, and moccasins. They used buckskin for bedding, cradles, dolls, bags, pouches, quivers, and gun cases.\nSinew was used for bowstrings and sewing thread. Hooves were turned into glue and rattles. Horns were shaped into cups, spoons, and ladles, while the tail made a whip, fly-swatter, or a tipi decoration. Men made tools, scrapers, needles, pipes and children's toys from the bones. But men concentrated on making bows and arrows, lances, and shields. The thick neck skin of an old bull was ideal for war shields that deflected arrows as well as bullets. Since they spent most of each day on horseback, they also fashioned leather into saddles, stirrups, and other equipment for their mounts. Buffalo hair was used to fill saddle pads and was used in rope and halters.\nLanguage.\nThe language spoken by the Comanche people, \"Comanche\" (\"Numu tekwapu\"), is a Numic language of the Uto-Aztecan language group. It is closely related to the language of the Shoshone, from which the Comanche diverged around 1700. The two languages remain closely related, but a few low-level sound changes inhibit mutual intelligibility. The earliest records of Comanche from 1786 clearly show a dialect of Shoshone, but by the beginning of the 20th century, these sound changes had modified the way Comanche sounded in subtle, but profound, ways. Although efforts are now being made to ensure survival of the language, most of its speakers are elderly, and less than 1% of the Comanches can speak it.\nIn the late 19th century, many Comanche children were placed in boarding schools with children from different tribes. The children were taught English and discouraged from speaking their native language. Anecdotally, enforcement of speaking English was severe.\nQuanah Parker learned and spoke English and was adamant that his own children do the same. The second generation then grew up speaking English, because it was believed that it was better for them not to know Comanche.\nComanches were among the Native Americans who were first utilized as code talkers by the U.S. Army during World War I.\nDuring World War II, a group of 17 young men, referred to as \"the Comanche code talkers\", were trained and used by the U.S. Army to send messages conveying sensitive information that could not be deciphered by the Germans.\nNotable Comanches.\nHistoric Comanche people.\nThese are notable Comanche people from the 18th and 19th centuries, prior to allotment. \nComanche Nation citizens.\nThese are 20th- and 21st-century citizens of the Comanche Nation.\nPopulation history.\nIn 1832 Comanche chiefs told George Catlin that the tribe numbered up to 40,000 people, being able to muster up to 8,000 warriors. This high population appears to be confirmed by Bourgmont who was told by a Comanche chief that the tribe consisted of 12 villages and when Bourgmont visited one of those villages, he found there 800 warriors (if every other village was equally populous, the total number of warriors would be 9,600). In 1774 a French trader, J. Gaignard, wrote that one division of the Comanche (the Naytane, also known as Yamparika) had 4,000 warriors divided into four bands which were never together. In 1786 Spaniards estimated that the Comanches may have numbered up to 30,000. Jedidiah Morse around year 1820 estimated the Comanche at between 38,000 and 41,000. In 1819 three bands of the Comanche were reported as 2,500 warriors. Indian Affairs 1837 reported 19,200 people. Charles Bent in 1847 reported that they had 2,500 lodges. Indian Affairs 1849 reported them as 4,000 warriors and 20,000 total population. Around the mid-19th century A. W. Whipple, E. Domenech and H. Howe all reported that the Comanche numbered up to 30,000. The Comanche population apparently rapidly declined in the 2nd half of the 19th century. The census of 1890 found only 1,598 in Oklahoma. According to Indian Affairs there were 1,507 (in 1895), 1,499 (in 1900), 1401 (in 1905) and 1,476 (in 1910). The census of 1910 reported only 1,171.\nComanche population has rebounded in the 20th and 21st centuries. There are 17,000 Comanche Nation citizens. In the 2020 US census, 39,808 Americans stated they were Comanche.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54002", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54002", "title": "Sauk", "text": "Sauk may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54003", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54003", "title": "Sac", "text": ""}
{"id": "54004", "revid": "50811152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54004", "title": "Le Havre", "text": "City in Normandy, France\n \nLe Havre is a major port city in the Seine-Maritime department in the Normandy region of northern France. It situated on the right bank of the estuary of the river Seine on the English Channel southwest of the Pays de Caux, very close to the Prime Meridian. Le Havre is the busiest port on the northern French Coast and largest container port in France. it is the second largest city in the Normandy region of France with total population of the greater Le Havre conurbation being smaller than that of Rouen.It is also the second largest subprefecture in France, after only Reims. The name \"Le Havre\" means \"the harbour\" or \"the port\". Its inhabitants are known as \"Havrais\" or \"Havraises\".\nThe city and port were founded by King Francis I in 1517. Economic development in the early modern period was hampered by religious wars, conflicts with the English, epidemics, and storms. It was from the end of the 18th century that Le Havre started growing and the port took off first with the slave trade then other international trade. After the 1944 bombings the firm of Auguste Perret began to rebuild the city in concrete. The oil, chemical, and automotive industries were dynamic during the Trente Glorieuses (postwar boom) but the 1970s marked the end of the golden age of ocean liners and the beginning of the economic crisis: the population declined, unemployment increased and remains at a high level today.\nChanges in years 1990\u20132000 were numerous. The right won the municipal elections and committed the city to the path of reconversion, seeking to develop the service sector and new industries (aeronautics, wind turbines). The Port 2000 project increased the container capacity to compete with ports of northern Europe, transformed the southern districts of the city, and ocean liners returned. Modern Le Havre remains deeply influenced by its employment and maritime traditions. Its port is the second largest in France, after that of Marseille, for total traffic, and the largest French container port.\nIn 2005, UNESCO inscribed the central city of Le Havre as a World Heritage Site because of its unique post-WWII reconstruction and architecture. The Andr\u00e9 Malraux Modern Art Museum is the second of France for the number of impressionist paintings. The city has been awarded two flowers by the National Council of Towns and Villages in Bloom in the Competition of Cities and Villages in Bloom.\nToponym.\nThe name of the town was attested in 1489, even before it was founded by Fran\u00e7ois I in the form \"le Hable de Grace\" then \"Ville de Grace\" in 1516, two years before its official founding. The learned and transient name of \"Franciscopolis\" in tribute to the same king, is encountered in some documents then that of \"Havre Marat\", referring to Jean-Paul Marat during the French Revolution but was not imposed. However it explains why the complementary determinant \"-de-Grace\" was not restored. This qualifier undoubtedly referred to the Chapel of Notre Dame located at the site of the cathedral of the same name. The chapel faced the Chapel Notre Dame de Grace of Honfleur across the estuary. The common noun \"havre\" meaning \"port\" was out of use at the end of the 18th or beginning of the 19th centuries but is still preserved in the phrase \"havre de paix\" meaning \"safe haven\". It is generally considered a loan from Middle Dutch from the 12th century. A Germanic origin can explain the \"aspiration\" of the initial \"h\". Havre de Grace, Maryland, in the United States retains the \"de Grace\" from colonial times.\nNew research however focuses on the fact that the term was attested very early (12th century) and in Norman texts in the forms \"Hable\", \"hafne\", \"havene\", \"havne\", and \"haule\" makes a Dutch origin unlikely. By contrast, a Scandinavian etymology is relevant given the old Scandinavian \"h\u00f6fn\" (genitive \"hafnar\") or \"hafn\" meaning \"natural harbour\" or \"haven\" and the phonetic evolution of the term \"\u00e9trave\" which is assuredly of Scandinavian origin is also attested in similar forms such as \"estable\" and probably dates back to the ancient Scandinavian \"stafn\".\nHistory.\nWhen founded in 1517, the city was named \"Franciscopolis\" after Francis I of France. It was subsequently named \"Le Havre-de-Gr\u00e2ce\" (\"Harbor of Grace\"; hence Havre de Grace, Maryland). Its construction was ordered to replace the ancient harbours of Honfleur and Harfleur whose utility had decreased due to silting.\nThe history of the city is inextricably linked to its harbour. In the 18th century, as trade from the West Indies was added to that of France and Europe, Le Havre began to grow. On 19 November 1793, the city changed its name to H\u00e2vre de Marat and later H\u00e2vre-Marat in honor of the recently deceased Jean-Paul Marat, who was seen as a martyr of the French Revolution. By early 1795, however, Marat's memory had become somewhat tarnished, and on 13 January 1795, H\u00e2vre-Marat changed its name once more to simply Le Havre, its modern name.\nDuring the 19th century, Le Havre became an industrial center. In the early 19th century it was the most important port for cotton, supplying France, Switzerland, and Germany with cotton imports. Jules Siegfried was member of a Le Havre cotton printers family. Jules Lecesne was a renown Le Havre cotton importer. At the end of World War I Le Havre had a major role as the transit port used to wind up affairs after the war.\nThe city was devastated during the Battle of Normandy when 5,000 people were killed and 12,000 homes were totally destroyed before its capture in Operation Astonia. Between 1945 and the 1960s, the center was extensively rebuilt to designs of a modernist style by Auguste Perret.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nLe Havre is located west of Rouen on the shore of the English Channel and at the mouth of the Seine. Numerous roads link to Le Havre with the main access roads being the A29 autoroute from Amiens and the A13 autoroute from Paris linking to the A131 autoroute.\nAdministratively, Le Havre is a commune in the Normandy region in the west of the department of Seine-Maritime. The urban area of Le Havre corresponds roughly to the territory of the Agglomeration community of Le Havre (CODAH) which includes 17 communes and 250,000 people. It occupies the south-western tip of the natural region of Pays de Caux where it is the largest city. Le Havre is sandwiched between the coast of the Channel from south-west to north-west and the estuary of the Seine to the south.\nGeology and terrain.\nLe Havre belongs to the Paris Basin which was formed in the Mesozoic period. The Paris Basin consists of sedimentary rocks. The commune of Le Havre consists of two areas separated by a natural cliff edge: one part in the lower part of the town to the south including the harbour, the city centre and the suburbs. It was built on former marshland and mudflats that were drained in the 16th century. The soil consists of several metres of alluvium or silt deposited by the Seine. The city centre was rebuilt after the Second World War using a metre of flattened rubble as a foundation.\nThe upper town to the north, is part of the cauchois plateau: the neighbourhood of Dollemard is its highest point (between above sea level). The plateau is covered with a layer of flinty clay and a fertile silt. The bedrock consists of a large thickness of chalk measuring up to deep. Because of the slope the coast is affected by the risk of landslides.\nClimate.\nDue to its location on the coast of the Channel, the climate of Le Havre is temperate oceanic. Days without wind are rare. There are maritime influences throughout the year. According to the records of the meteorological station of the Cap de la Heve (from 1961 to 1990), the temperature drops below on 24.9 days per year and it rises above on 11.3 days per year. The average annual sunshine duration is 1,785.8 hours per year.\nPrecipitation is distributed throughout the year, with a maximum in autumn and winter. The months of June and July are marked by some thunderstorms on average 2 days per month. One of the characteristics of the region is the high variability of the temperature, even during the day. The prevailing winds are from the southwest sector for strong winds and north-north-east for breezes, snowstorms occur in winter, especially in January and February.\nThe absolute speed record for wind at Le Havre \u2013 Cap de la Heve was recorded on 16 October 1987 at .\nThe main natural hazards are floods, storms, and storm surges. The lower town is subject to a rising water table. The lack of watercourses within the commune prevents flooding from overflows. Le Havre's beach may rarely experience flooding known as \"flooding from storms\". These are caused by the combination of strong winds, high waves, and a large tidal range.\nEnvironment.\nA study by \"Aphekom\" comparing ten large French cities showed that Le Havre is the least polluted urban commune of France. Le Havre is also the third best city in France with more than 100,000 inhabitants for air quality. A Carbon accounting showed in 2009 that the municipality ejected some 32,500 tonnes of CO2 per year. In 2011 the average annual emissions of sulfur dioxide by industry was between three micrograms per cubic metre in the centre of Le Havre to twelve micrograms per cubic metre in the district of Caucriauville.\nThe municipality has set a target to reduce emissions of CO2 by 3% per year. To achieve this solar panels have been installed on several municipal buildings (city hall, hanging gardens). Since 2008, Le Havre has been part of the network of Energy Cities and, in this context, it applies the steps of Agenda 21 and an Environmental Approach to Urban Planning. The city has received many awards of eco-labels several times (Energy of the Future label in 2009\u20132011, sustainable Earth label in 2009). Since 1998, Le Havre's beach has received the Blue Flag yearly thanks to its range of facilities, which extend over 30,000m2.\nLe Havre has kept extensive green areas (750 hectares or 41m2 per inhabitant), the two largest areas are the Montgeon Forest and Rouelles Park which are both located in the upper town. The gardens of the Priory of Graville and the hanging gardens offer views of the lower city. In the city centre, Saint-Roch Square and the City Hall Gardens provide the people with urban recreation areas. Various ecosystems are represented in the Beach Gardens and the Hauser Park (caves). Finally, the Plateau of Dollemard was classified as a \"Sensitive Natural Area\" of the department in 2001 to protect its landscape and ecosystems on the cliff. The streets are lined with 13,000 trees of 150 different varieties.\nLayout.\nLower city.\nCity rebuilt after 1945.\nLargely destroyed by the Allies during the Second World War, the city was rebuilt according to the plans of the architect Auguste Perret between 1945 and 1964. Only the City Hall and the Church of Saint Joseph (107m-high) were personally designed by Auguste Perret. In commending the reconstruction work UNESCO listed the city of Le Havre on 15 July 2005 as a World Heritage Site. This area of 133 hectares is one of the few inscribed contemporary sites in Europe. The architecture of the area is characterized by the use of precast concrete using a system of a modular frame of 6.24 metres and straight lines.\nAnother notable architectural work of the central city is that of the \"House of Culture\" built in 1982 by the Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer and nicknamed \"the Volcano\" because of the shape of the building. From 2012, this place was refurbished both inside and outside with fairly significant changes approved by the architect including greater openness to the outside of the plaza.\nThe Notre Dame and Perrey neighbourhoods are mainly residential. Les Halles is one of the commercial hubs of the city. The Saint Francis neighborhood was also rebuilt beginning in 1950 but in a radically different architectural style: the buildings are brick and have pitched slate roofs. This is the restaurant district and the fish market.\nNeighbourhoods.\nTo the east and north of the rebuilt central city are a stretch of old neighbourhoods (Danton, Saint-Vincent, Graville, Massillon, etc.) which were spared the bombings of World War II. The buildings, usually in brick, dated to the 19th and the first half of the 20th centuries. The shops are concentrated along several major roads in the Rond-Point neighbourhood. During the 1990s and 2000s, these neighborhoods have seen major redevelopments, particularly in the context of an OPAH: improvement of habitat by rehabilitation or reconstruction, creation of public facilities, and revitalization of business.\nAt the end of the 20th century and beginning of the 21st century, the area around the railway station has undergone a major transformation. As the station is the gateway to the city with the main avenues intersecting here. New buildings have sprung up (University of Le Havre, the conservatory, headquarters of the SPB (Provident Society Bank), and of CMA CGM, Novotel, Matmut, new CCI) some of which were designed by renowned architects. The bus station, certified \"NF\" since 2005, has been refurbished. North of the station, another construction project in place of the dilapidated island of Turgot-Magellan will be opened in 2013, including of office space and an eight-storey hotel, complete with shops on the ground-floor.\nSouthern districts.\nThe southern districts of Le Havre are mainly used for industrial and port activities. There are buildings in brick from the 19th century, large developments (Chicago, Les Neiges), worker estates, SMEs, warehouses, dock and port facilities, and transport infrastructure. \nThe southern districts have for some years experienced profound change due to European funding. It is revitalizing areas neglected by industrial and port activities by developing tertiary activities. Thus, the docks have been completely transformed into sports and entertainment complexes (Dock Oc\u00e9ane), a mall (Docks Vauban), and an exhibition hall (Docks Caf\u00e9). Les Bains Des Docks was designed by the architect Jean Nouvel. At the end of 2012 students from Sciences-Po Europe Asia and from INSA integrated new buildings next to the ISEL (Higher Institute of logistics studies) and the future ENSM (Ecole Nationale Sup\u00e9rieure Maritime). The new medical axis around the new \"Clinic des Ormeaux\" was built in the neighbourhoods where many homes are planned with the aim of promoting social mix. The \"City of the Sea and of Sustainable Development\" (Odyssey 21) will be organized around a metal tower one hundred metres high designed by Jean Nouvel: the project was suspended in 2007 but the work should finally begin in 2013. The municipality has to attract some 300,000 visitors per year.\nUpper town.\nThe upper town is composed of three parts: the \"coast\", the suburban districts of the plateau, and large peripheral housing estates.\nThe neighbourhoods on the \"coast\" (the Dead Cliff) are residential \u2013 more prosperous in the western part (Les Ormeaux, Rue Felix Faure) and more modest to the east (St. Cecilia, Aplemont). The Jenner tunnel passes under the \"coast\" and connects the upper town to the lower town. It is also on the coast that there are two fortifications of the city, Forts Sainte-Adresse and Tourneville, and the main cemetery (Sainte-Marie cemetery). With the demise of the military functions of the city, the forts are gradually being converted: Fort Sainte-Adresse houses the \"Hanging Gardens\" and Fort Tourneville hosted the Tetris project in 2013 \u2013 an axis of contemporary music with concert halls and rehearsal studios.\nTo the north of the \"coast\" suburban districts such as Rouelles, Sainte-Cecile, la Mare au Clerc, Sanvic, Bleville, and Dollemard were developed during the first half of the 19th century. In their extension North-west between Bleville and Octeville airport a new area is being developed: \"Les Hauts de Bleville\". This eco-district made up of housing units to HQE standards, a Joint Development Area (ZAC), and a school should have a total of 1,000 housing units.\nThe peripheral suburbs of the commune grew in the postwar period. These are large housing estates in Caucriauville, Bois de Bleville, Mont-Gaillard, and Mare-rouge where a disadvantaged population is concentrated. In October 2004 the National Agency for Urban Renewal (ANRU) signed with the municipality of Havre the first agreement to finance the rehabilitation of these areas. This finance agreement provides more than 340\u00a0million euros for the housing estates in the northern districts, where about 41,000 people reside. This development extends the budget for the \"Grand Projet de Ville\" (GPV). It allows the demolition and rebuilding of more than 1,700 homes.\nTransport.\nFor a long time Le Havre has exploited the strengths of its coastal location but also suffered from its relative isolation. This is why the accessibility of the city has been improved with the harbour highway A131 (E05) which links Le Havre to the A13 autoroute over Tancarville Bridge. The city is one hour from Rouen and one and a half-hour from \u00cele-de-France. More recently the A29 autoroute (E44) has connected Le Havre to the north of France and passes over the Normandy Bridge which makes Amiens (in the north-east) two hours away and Caen (in the south-west) one hour.\nThe TER network was modernized with the creation of the LER line in 2001 and direct services to F\u00e9camp in 2005. Thirteen Corail trains of the Paris\u2013Le Havre line link Le Havre station with Br\u00e9aut\u00e9-Beuzeville, Yvetot, Rouen and Paris Saint-Lazare station. In addition there is a TGV daily service to Le Havre: it has connected the city to Marseille since December 2004 serving Rouen, Mantes-la-Jolie, Versailles, Massy, Lyon, Avignon, Aix-en-Provence, and Saint Charles station in Marseille. There are also local services from Le Havre station to Rolleville and F\u00e9camp. Le Havre-Graville station in the eastern part of the city is served by trains to Rolleville.\nNo direct rail link connects Le Havre and Caen yet many projects \u2013 known as the \"Southwest Line\" \u2013 to link Le Havre to the left bank of the Seine downstream from Rouen, near the estuary of the river, were studied in the second half of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century but none have been realized. By public transport it is necessary to go to Rouen by train or bus (using No. 20 Green Bus). There is a Gray Coach to \u00c9tretat and F\u00e9camp and there is VTNI for destinations in the Seine valley and Rouen who provide inter-urban services on behalf of the Department of Seine-Maritime. Finally, the company AirPlus provides a shuttle service to the railway stations and airports of Paris.\nLe Havre Octeville Airport which is located north of Le Havre at the town of Octeville-sur-Mer and managed by CODAH. The airport does not have any scheduled services to or from Le Havre at this time. Currently, air travel is served by the nearest Caen\u2013Carpiquet Airport which is located approximately 54 km away from Le Havre.\nThe main destination is the Transport hub of Lyon. Many holiday destinations are offered each year (Tunisia, Balearic Islands, Portugal, Greece, Bulgaria, etc.) through local travel agencies that charter aircraft. There is also the Flying club Jean Maridor at the airport.\nThe Channel maritime links with Portsmouth in southern England with P&amp;O Ferries ended on 30 September 2005 to be taken over by LD Lines who had changed the configuration. Two services to Portsmouth are provided daily from the Terminal de la Citadelle until ceasing operations in 2014, the route has since been taken over by Brittany Ferries. The link to Ireland was moved to the port of Cherbourg.\nCrossing times to Portsmouth vary from five hours and thirty minutes to eight hours. Popular alternative routes going to areas close to Le Havre include Newhaven to Dieppe, and Poole to Cherbourg.\nUrban transport.\nThe city and the metropolitan area has a dense transport network. This solves the problem of a break between the lower town and the upper town and the two parts of the city are connected by long boulevards, winding roads, many stairs, a funicular, and finally the Jenner tunnel.\nThe CODAH transport network is called \"Lia\" and is operated by the \"Ocean Port Transport company\" (CTPO), a subsidiary of Veolia Transport. The overhaul of the bus network in 2008 helped to ensure a better service for all the towns in the metropolitan area. The CTPO operates a bus network consisting of 19 regular urban routes and six evening routes called the \"Midnight Bus\". The Le Havre urban area is served by 165 vehicles and 41 regular bus routes with an average of 100,000 passengers per day. From January 2011 there has been a regular shuttle service specific to the Industrial Zone and Port of Le Havre, thus adding to the cross-estuary service of VTNI. Since 1890 the funicular has provided a link between the upper town and the lower town in four minutes with a cable car.\nLe Havre had a tramway system from 1894 until it closed in 1957. More recently a new tramway system, with 23 stations and of route, was built, and opened on 12 December 2012. The first part of the line connects the beach to the station climbing to the upper town through a new tunnel near the Jenner tunnel then it splits into two: one link going to Mont-Gaillard, the other to Caucriauville.\nFinally, since 2001 Le Havre agglomeration has operated the LER, a TER line connecting the Le Havre station to Rolleville passing through five other SNCF railway stations of the urban area.\nFrom 2005, development work for Segregated cycle facilities have increased including a connection to the Greenway which promises to be an important network of quality. Between 2007 and 2011, the total length of cycle paths has doubled to in total length. It is possible to rent bicycles through agencies of the Oc\u00e9ane bus or from the town hall (Vel-H) which has them on hand. Finally, 140 taxis work in Le Havre and serve 25 stations.\nPolitics and administration.\nLe Havre is one of two sub-prefectures of Seine-Maritime and the second largest subprefecture in France after Reims. It is the capital of the Arrondissement of Le Havre which includes 168 communes. It is also the largest member of the Le Havre Seine M\u00e9tropole.\nSince 2015, the city of Le Havre is divided over six Cantons, some of which also cover neighbouring communes. For the parliamentary elections, Le Havre spans two constituencies: the seventh (former cantons I, V, VI, and VII) and the eighth (former cantons II, III, IV, VIII, IX).\nPolitical trends and results.\nSeveral politicians have spent part of their lives in the city: Jules Lecesne (1818\u20131878), Jules Siegfried (1837\u20131922), and F\u00e9lix Faure (1841\u20131899) were elected as municipal councillors and MPs. A pool, a shopping centre and a street have been named after Ren\u00e9 Coty from Le Havre, who served as President of the French Republic from 1954 to 1959. Christine Lagarde (born 1956) attended high schools in Le Havre before becoming Minister of the Economy and Director-General of the International Monetary Fund in 2011.\nSince 23 October 2010 the mayor has been \u00c9douard Philippe (UMP). He also holds the presidency of the CODAH and has held a seat in the National Assembly for the 7th district of Seine-Maritime since 2012. He succeeded Antoine Rufenacht (UMP), who was mayor of Le Havre for fifteen years before resigning, as the head of the municipality. The city of Le Havre has long been the strongest bastion of the Communist Party of France, who directed it from 1956 to 1995. Overall, the inhabitants of Le Havre in the 7th electoral district (city centre and western neighbourhoods) tend to vote for the right while those of the 8th electoral district (eastern neighbourhoods) tend to choose the candidate of the left. For example, in the presidential election of 2007, the 7th electoral district voted for Nicolas Sarkozy (UMP) by 55.05% against 44.95% for S\u00e9gol\u00e8ne Royal (PS) while in the 8th electoral district 55.02% voted for the Socialist candidate. However, the results of the 2012 presidential elections gave the PS wins in both districts with a smaller margin in the 7th (Hollande: 51.71% / Sarkozy: 48.29%) than in the 8th (Hollande 64.21% / Sarkozy: 35.79%).\nMunicipal administration.\nThe number of inhabitants in Le Havre is between 150,000 and 199,999 so the number of councillors is 59 members. The mayor, 41 aldermen and 17 deputies form the council of Le Havre elected in 2008. It meets on average once a month at the town hall. The debates are generally public except for certain proceedings.\nLe Havre has experienced many territorial extensions by annexing neighbouring communes:\nPublic institutions and services.\nThe Le Havre Palace of Justice is located on the Boulevard de Strasbourg. With its annex, it includes a high court, a juvenile court, and a commercial court. The city also has a Labour Court and District Court. Among the legal services offered there are legal aid services and the application of penalties. Le Havre depends on the Court of Appeal of Rouen. The prison, which dates from the Second Empire, was completely destroyed in 2012. The new prison for Le Havre was completed in 2010 at Saint-Aubin-Routot east of the Le Havre agglomeration. It has an area of 32,000 m2 on a site of 15 hectares and can accommodate 690 people.\nThe \"Hospital Group of Havre\" is a public health facility managed by a supervisory board chaired by the Mayor of Le Havre. Its main structures are Flaubert Hospital (the oldest, located downtown), the Monod Hospital (in Montivilliers), the Pierre Janet Hospital (psychiatry), the house for adolescents, day hospitals, and seniors' residences. It is the largest employer in the CODAH. Built in 1987, the Jacques Monod Hospital offers a full range of care in medicine, surgery, gynecology, obstetrics, pediatrics, geriatrics, mental health follow-up care, rehabilitation, reintegration, and public health.\nFinally, there are several private clinics that offer complete care: the private clinic of the Estuary groups together the old clinics of \"Petit Colmoulins\" and Fran\u00e7ois I. The private clinic of Ormeaux is located in the neighbourhood of Eure.\nDuring the first half of the 20th century, the 129th regiment of infantry of the line was stationed at Le Havre and left an important mark on the city so a street was named after them. The 74th Infantry Regiment of commandos was present from 1963 to 1976. Finally, Le Havre is the godmother city for BPC Mistral. The ceremony was held at the City Hall on 15 November 2009, during a stopover at the Building.\nNational politics.\nFor elections to the National Assembly, Le Havre is divided between Seine-Maritime's 7th and 8th constituency. They are currently represented by Agn\u00e8s Firmin-Le Bodo and Jean-Paul Lecoq.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nLe Havre is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\nLe Havre experienced a population boom in the second half of the 19th century. Subsequently, the population drain of the First World War was offset by the annexation of the town of Graville (the city gained 27,215 people between 1911 and 1921). During the Second World War the population decreased significantly (a loss of 57,149 people between 1936 and 1946) because of the exodus and bombings. After the war the commune saw its population increase until 1975. Since then population has decreased again, especially between 1975 and 1982: during these years of industrial crisis the population fell by 18,494 people. The trend continued in the 1980s although at a slower pace. The current policy of the municipality is to build new housing to attract new residents with the goal of exceeding 200,000 inhabitants, a level that was reached in the 1960s. The population of the commune of Le Havre was 191,000 inhabitants in 1999 which placed the city at 12th place among the most populated cities in France and in the first place in Normandy. In 2018 INSEE counted 169,733 people living in the commune of Le Havre, while the urban area of Le Havre had 234,945 inhabitants and the metropolitan area of Le Havre had 337,086 inhabitants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBetween 2012 and 2017, the birth rate was 14.3 per thousand and the mortality rate was 10.4 per thousand: even though the Rate of natural increase is positive it does not compensate for the clearly negative net migration rate (-0.7%). In 2017 19% of Le Havre's population was under 15 years old and 39% were under 30 years old, which was above the average for metropolitan France. 24% of men and 26% of women were over 60 years old. The most populous quarters are the city centre, Sanvic, Caucriauville, Anatole France/Danton and C\u00f4te Ouest/Ormeaux. In 2009 the foreign population was estimated at 8,525 persons or 4.8% of the population. 12,148 immigrants lived in Havre, or 6.8% of the urban population. Most had North African (5060) or African (3114) origins.\nWith the economic changes that have affected the city, the \"Professions and Socio-professional categories\" (PCS) have changed dramatically since the 1980s: between 1982 and 1999, the number of workers has declined by about a third (\u221210,593), their share of the active labour force was 16% in 1982 and 12.5% in 1999. The population of workers is concentrated in the southern suburbs close to the port and the industrial zone. At the same time the numbers of executives and intellectual professions increased by 24.5%, which is explained in part by the creation and development of the University of Le Havre. In 2017 the city had a lower proportion of managers and intellectual occupations than the national average (14.4% against 18.1%). The proportion of workers (22.5%) was higher than the national average (19.9%). Going from 16.7% to 21.7% of the labour force, the rate of unemployment has increased between 2007 and 2017, and it remains higher than in the rest of the country (13.9%). The proportion Le Havre people in short-term employment (CDD and interim work) is higher than the national average. Finally, the proportion of Le Havre people with a degree from higher education dramatically increased from 17.3% in 2007 to 23.2% in 2017 against 29.9% for entire France.\nEconomy.\nGeneral.\nAlthough well developed and diversified, the local economy relies heavily on industrial sites, international groups, and subcontracted SMEs. The Le Havre economy is far from decision centres which are located mainly in Paris and major European economic cities. There is therefore a low representation of head offices in the city with the exception of some local economic successes such as the Sidel Group (now a subsidiary of Tetra Pak) \u2013 a distributor of interior furniture, and the ship-owner Delmas which was recently acquired by the CMA-CGM group.\nPort.\nWith 68.6\u00a0million tons of cargo in 2011, the port of Le Havre is the second largest French seaport in trade volume behind that of Marseille and 50th largest port in the world. It represents 60% of total French container traffic with nearly 2.2\u00a0million Twenty-foot equivalent unit|EVP]s in 2011. At the European level, it is eighth largest for container traffic and sixth largest for total traffic. The Port receives a large number of oil tankers that transported 27.5\u00a0million tonnes of crude oil and 11.7\u00a0million tonnes of refined product in 2011. Finally, 340,500 vehicles passed through the Roll-on/roll-off terminal in 2010. 75 regular shipping lines serve 500 ports around the world. The largest trading partner of the port of Le Havre is the Asian continent which alone accounts for 58% of imports by container and 39.6% of exports. The rest of the traffic is distributed mainly to Europe and America.\nLe Havre occupies the north bank of the estuary of the Seine on the Channel. Its location is favourable for several reasons: it is on the most frequented waterway in the world; it is the first and last port in the \"North Range\" of European ports \u2013 the largest in Europe which handles a quarter of all global maritime trade. As a deepwater port, it is accessible to all types of ships whatever their size around the clock. At the national level, Le Havre is west of the most populous and richest region in France: \u00cele-de-France. Since its founding in 1517 on the orders of Fran\u00e7ois I, Le Havre has continued to grow: today it measures from east to west, about from north to south with an area of . The last big project called Port 2000 increased the handling capacity for containers.\nThe port provides 16,000 direct jobs to the Le Havre region, to which must be added indirect jobs in industry and transport. With approximately 3,000 employees in 2006, the activities of distribution and warehousing provide more jobs, followed by road transport (2,420 jobs) and handling (2,319 jobs).\nIn 2011, 715,279 passengers passed through the port of Le Havre and there were 95 visits by cruise ships carrying 185,000 passengers. The port expects 110 cruise ship calls in 2012. Created in 1934, the leisure boat harbour of Le Havre is located to the west and is the largest French boat harbour in the Channel with a capacity of 1,160 moorings. Finally, there is a small fishing port in the Saint-Fran\u00e7ois district and a Hawker centre.\nIndustry.\nMost industries are located in the industrial-port area north of the estuary and east of the city of Le Havre. The largest industrial employer (2,400 employees) of the Le Havre region is the Renault public company in the commune of Sandouville. The second important sector for the industrial zone is petrochemicals. The Le Havre region has more than a third of French refining capacity. It provides about 50% of the production of basic plastics and 80% of additives and oils with more than 3,500 researchers working in private and public laboratories. Large firms in the chemical industry are mainly in the communes of Le Havre (Millenium Chemicals Le Havre), Montivilliers (TotalEnergies, Yara, Chevron Oronite SA, Lanxess, etc.) and Sandouville (Goodyear Chemicals Europe). A total of 28 industrial establishments manufacture plastics in the Le Havre area many of which are classed as SECESO. \nThere are several firms in the aerospace industry: SAFRAN Nacelles, a supplier to Airbus, Boeing and other commercial air-framers, making jet engine nacelles and thrust reversers, is located in Harfleur and employs 1,200 people from the Le Havre area. Finally, Dresser-Rand SA manufactures equipment for the oil and gas industry and employs about 700 people. In the energy field, the \"EDF thermal power plant\" of Le Havre has an installed capacity of 1,450MW and operates using coal with 357 employees. The AREVA group announced the opening of a factory for building wind turbines: installed in the port of Le Havre, it should create some 1,800 jobs. The machines are designed for Offshore wind power in Brittany, the UK, and Normandy.\nOther industries are dispersed throughout the Le Havre agglomeration: the \"Br\u00fblerie du Havre\", which belongs to Legal-Lego\u00fbt, located in the district of Dollemard that roasts coffee, Sidel located both in the industrial area of Port of Le Havre and Octeville-sur-Mer designs and manufactures blow moulding machines and complete filling line machines for plastic bottles.\nServices sector.\nThe two largest employers in the service sector are the \"Groupe Hospitalier du Havre\" with 4,384 staff and the \"City of Le Havre\" with 3,467 permanent employees. The city has long been home to many service companies whose activity is related to port operations: primarily the ship-owning companies and also the marine insurance companies. The headquarters of Delmas (transport and communications, 1,200 employees) and SPB (Provident Society Banking, insurance, 500 employees) have settled recently at the entrance to the city. The head office of Groupama Transport (300 employees) is also present.\nThe transport sector is the largest economic sector in Le Havre with 15.5% of employment. Logistics occupies a large part of the population and the ISEL trains engineers in this field. Since September 2007 the ICC has welcomed local students in their first year in the relocated Europe-Asia campus of the Institute of Political Studies of Paris. Higher Education is represented by the University of Le Havre which employs 399 permanent professors and 850 lecturers as well as by engineering companies like Auxitec and SERO.\nThere are many growth factors in the tourist industry: blue flag rating, World Heritage status from UNESCO, the label \"French Towns and Lands of Art and History\", cruise ship development, a policy of value-creation from heritage, and the \"City of the Sea\" project. In January 2020 the city had 26 hotels with a total of 1,428 rooms.\nLe Havre is the seat of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Le Havre. It manages the Le Havre Octeville Airport.\nCulture.\nEvents and festivals.\nLe Havre's festival calendar is punctuated by a wide range of events.\nIn spring a \"Children's Book Festival\" was recently created. In May there is the \"Fest Yves\", a Breton festival in the Saint-Fran\u00e7ois district. On the beach of Le Havre and Sainte-Adresse there is a jazz festival called \"Dixie Days\" in June. In July, detective novels are featured in the Polar room at the Beach hosted by \"The Black Anchors\". Between the latter also in the context of \"Z'Estivales\" is an event offering many shows of street art throughout the summer supplemented by the festival of world music \"MoZa\u00efques\" at the fort of Sainte-Adresse in August since 2010. In mid-August there is a Flower parade which passes through the streets of the central city.\nIn the first weekend of September the marine element is highlighted in the \"Festival of the Sea\". This is a race between Le Havre and Bahia in Brazil. Also every November there is a fair held in the Docks Caf\u00e9. The Autumn Festival in Normandy, organized by the departments of Seine-Maritime and Eure, and the Region of Normandy, runs from September to November and offers numerous concerts throughout the region as well as theatre performances and dance. In late October, since 2009, there is rock music festival which has been at the fort of Tourneville since the moving of the \"Papa's Production\" association site there. The West Park Festival, after its inauguration in 2004, has been held in the park of the town hall of Harfleur.\nSince 1 June 2006 a \"Biennale of contemporary Art\" has been organized by the group \"Partouche\".\nCultural heritage and architecture.\nMany buildings in the city are classified as \"historical monuments\", but the 2000s marked the real recognition of Le Havre's architectural heritage. The city received the label \"City of Art and History\" in 2001, then in 2005 UNESCO inscribed the city of Le Havre as a World Heritage Site.\nThe oldest building still standing in Le Havre is the Graville Abbey. The other medieval building in the city is the Chapel of Saint-Michel of Ingouville. Because of the bombing in 1944, heritage from the modern era is rare: \"Le Havre Cathedral\", the \"Church of Saint Francis\", the \"Museum of the Hotel Dubocage of Bleville\", the \"House of the ship-owner\" and the old palace of justice (now the \"Natural History Museum\") are concentrated in the Notre-Dame and Saint-Fran\u00e7ois areas. The buildings of the 19th century testify to the maritime and military vocations of the city: the \"Hanging Gardens\", the \"Fort of Tourneville\", \"Vauban docks\", and the \"Maritime Villa\". The heritage of the 1950s and 1960s which were the work of the Auguste Perret workshop forms the most coherent architecture: the \"Church of Saint Francis\" and the Town Hall are the centrepieces. The all curved architecture of the \"Volcano\", designed by Oscar Niemeyer, contrasts with that of the rebuilt centre. Finally, the reconstruction of many districts is a showcase for the architecture of the 21st century. Among the achievements by renowned architects are the Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Ren\u00e9 and Phine Weeke Dottelond), Les Bains Des Docks (Jean Nouvel).\nMuseums.\nFive Museums in Le Havre have the distinction of being classified as \"Mus\u00e9es de France\" (Museums of France) an official label granted only to museums of a high status. The five museums are:\nMuseum of modern art Andr\u00e9 Malraux \u2013 MuMa.\nThe most important of the five, Museum Malraux was built in 1955 by the Atelier LWD and was opened in 1961 by Andr\u00e9 Malraux. This museum houses a collection of art from the late Middle Ages until the 20th century. The impressionist paintings collections are the second most extensive in France after those of the Orsay Museum in Paris. The museum houses some paintings of Claude Monet, Auguste Renoir, Raoul Dufy, Edgar Degas.\nMus\u00e9e du Vieux Havre (Museum of old Le Havre).\nA Museum dedicated to the history of Le Havre with many objects from the Ancien R\u00e9gime and the 19th century: furniture, old maps, statues, and paintings.\nMus\u00e9e d'histoire naturelle (Museum of Natural History).\nFounded in 1881 but heavily damaged during World War II, the Museum of Natural History is housed in Le Havre's former law courts, built in the mid-18th century; the fa\u00e7ade and monumental staircase are listed as historical monuments. The museum houses mineralogy, zoology, ornithology, palaeontology and prehistory departments as well as 8,000 early 19th-century paintings from the collection of local naturalist and traveller Charles-Alexandre Lesueur (1778\u20131846). The museum was destroyed during Allied bombings on 5 September 1944. The library was lost, along with its collections of photographs, scientific instruments and archives. The mineral and geological collections were all destroyed, including a rare collection of local mineral specimens of Normandy. The destruction of the museum was so intense, that all the catalogues, lists of donations, lists of purchases and other archives prevented even a precise inventory of all that was lost.\"\nThe Shipowner's house.\nFrom the 18th century; like the Museum of Old Havre it is dedicated to the History of Le Havre and contains many relics from the Ancien R\u00e9gime as well as furniture, old maps, statues, and paintings.\nMuseum of the Priory of Graville.\nThe Museum at the Priory of Graville displays many items of religious art including statues, madonnas, and other religious objects many of which are classified by the Ministry of Culture. It also houses the Gosselin collection of 206 model houses created by Jules Gosselin in the 19th century.\nOthers.\nOther less important museums reflect the history of Le Havre and its maritime vocation. The \"apartment-control\" (Apartement-Temoine) was a standard apartment designed by in 1947\u20131950 and shows a place of daily life in the 1950s. The maritime museum displays objects related to the sea and the port. Finally, there are numerous exhibitions in the city such as the \"SPOT\", a centre for contemporary art, art galleries, and \"Le Portique\" \u2013 a contemporary art space opened in 2008; the municipal library of Le Havre regularly organizes exhibitions.\nOther attractions include:\nTheatres, auditoriums and concerts.\nThere are two main cultural axes in Le Havre: the central city and the Eure district. The \"Espace Oscar Niemeyer\" consists of a part of the \"Great Volcano\", a national theatre seating 1,093 (which houses the \"National Choreographic Centre\" of Le Havre Haute-Normandie directed by Herv\u00e9 Robbe) and secondly the \"Little Volcano\" with a 250-seat multi-purpose hall for live performances. The whole \"Espace Oscar Niemeyer\" has been worked on since 2011: the \"little volcano\" will be transformed into a multimedia library. As for the performances at the \"Great Volcano\", they are now taking place in the old ferry terminal until the end of construction. Other cultural institutions of the city centre are being transformed: the cinema of art and a trial of \"Le Sirius\" facing the university will reopen in 2013. \"Le Tetris\" at the fort of Tourneville will, in 2013, be a place devoted to contemporary music. Other cultural venues are scattered in the city centre: the cinema \"Le Studio\", the theatre of the City Hall (700 seats), the \"Little Theatre\" (450 seats), the \"Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Bains Douches\" (94 seats), \"Akt\u00e9 theatre\" (60 seats), and the \"Poulailler\" (Henhouse)) (associative theatre with 50 seats) host numerous shows each year. The National Choreographic Centre of Le Havre Haute-Normandie specialises in the creation and production of dance shows. Other shows and performances are given in other places and at the Conservatory Arthur Honegger.\nThe second cultural centre of the city is in the Eure district near the Basin Vauban. Docks Oc\u00e9ane is a multi-purpose hall (concerts, shows, and sporting events) which can accommodate up to 4,700 spectators in . The largest cinema in Le Havre is located on the Docks Vauban (2,430 seats). The Docks Caf\u00e9 is an exhibition centre of used for shows, fairs, and exhibitions. The \"Magic Mirrors\" offers many concerts managed by the city and leased to private organizers.\nFollowing the closure of \"Cabaret Electric\" which was located in the \"Espace Oscar Niemeyer\" in 2011 a new auditorium, \"Le Tetris\", is under construction at the Fort of Tourneville. It was scheduled to open in September 2013 with a large festival free-of-charge. It will consist of two halls with 800 and 200 seats, exhibition space, housing for artists in residence, a restaurant etc. \"Le Tetris\" will be a venue for contemporary music as well as theatre, dance, and visual arts. An \"expectation\" outside the walls was held on the site of the fort during 2012 and early 2013. \nLibraries and archives.\nThe main library is located in the city centre, named after the writer Armand Salacrou. It has branches in all districts. A new multimedia library at the \"Volcano\" is being refurbished for 2014. Thousands of references are available in specialized libraries in the Higher School of Art, the Museum of Andr\u00e9 Malraux, and the Natural History Museum. Medieval manuscripts and Incunables are conserved at the public library. The archives of the city, at the Fort of Tourneville, possesses documents from the 16th to the 20th centuries.\nRepresentations in visual arts.\nThe Port of Le Havre and the light on the estuary of the Seine inspired many painters: Louis-Philippe Crepin (1772\u20131851), Jean-Baptiste Corot (1796\u20131875), Eug\u00e8ne Isabey (1803\u20131886), Theodore Gudin (1802\u20131880), Adolphe-Felix Cals (1810\u20131880), Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet (1814\u20131875) in 1845, Gustave Courbet (1819\u20131877) etc.. It is to Eug\u00e8ne Boudin (1824\u20131898) who created many representations of Le Havre in the 19th century. The artist lived for a time in the city. Thanks to its proximity to Honfleur, Le Havre was also represented by foreign artists such as William Turner, Johan Barthold Jongkind, Alfred Stevens, and Richard Parkes Bonington.\nClaude Monet (1840\u20131926), a resident of Le Havre from the age of five, in 1872 painted \"Impression soleil levant\" (Impression, Sunrise), a painting that gave its name to the impressionist movement. In 1867\u20131868, he painted many seascapes in the Le Havre region (\"Terrasse \u00e0 Sainte-Adresse\" (Garden at Sainte-Adresse), 1867 \"Bateaux quittant le port\" (Boats Leaving the Port), 1874). The Mus\u00e9e Malraux houses some of his paintings : Waterlilies, London Parliament et Winter Sun at Lavacourt. Two other Impressionists, Camille Pissarro (1830\u20131903) and Maxime Maufra (1861\u20131918) also represented the port of Le Havre which also inspired Paul Signac (1863\u20131935), Albert Marquet (1875\u20131947), and Maurice de Vlaminck (1876\u20131958).\nThen came the school of Fauvism in which many artists did their training at Le Havre: Othon Friesz (1879\u20131949), Henri de Saint-Delis (1876\u20131958), Raoul Dufy (1877\u20131953), Georges Braque (1882\u20131963), Raymond Lecourt (1882\u20131946), Albert Copieux (1885\u20131956), who followed the course of the \"School of Fine Arts of Le Havre\" in the time of Charles Lhuillier. They left a number of paintings on the theme of the city and the port. In 1899, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1864\u20131901) painted \"La serveuse anglaise du Star\" (The English waitress of Star) (Museum Toulouse-Lautrec, Albi) of a girl he met in a bar in the city.\nOther painters who painted Le Havre and/or its surroundings such as Sainte-Adresse can be cited in particular: Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bazille, John Gendall, Thomas Couture, Ambroise Louis Garneray, Pablo Picasso (\"Souvenir du Havre\"). Jean Dubuffet studied at the School of Art in Le Havre.\nCinema.\nWith nearly 70 films, Le Havre is one of the provincial cities most represented in the cinema. Several directors have chosen the port facilities as part of their movie:\nThe city has also hosted the filming of several comedies such as:\nThe film by Sophie Marceau, \"La Disparue de Deauville\", made in 2007, contains many scenes around the port of Le Havre, in the Coty shopping centre of Coty and in the streets of the central city.\nThe film \"Le Havre\" by Aki Kaurism\u00e4ki received two prizes at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival and also the Louis Delluc Prize. It was nominated three times for the 37th C\u00e9sar Awards.\nLiterature.\nLe Havre appears in several literary works as a point of departure to America: in the 18th century, Father Prevost embarked \"Manon Lescaut\" and \"Des Grieux\" for French Louisiana. Fanny Loviot departed from Le Havre in 1852, as an emigrant to San Francisco and points further west, and recounted her adventures in \"Les pirates chinois\" (\"A Lady's Captivity among Chinese Pirates in the Chinese Seas\", 1858).\nIn the 19th century, Le Havre was the setting for several French novels: Honor\u00e9 de Balzac described the failure of a Le Havre merchant family in \"Modeste Mignon\". Later, the Norman writer Guy de Maupassant located several of his works at Le Havre such as \"Au mus\u00e9um d'histoire naturelle\" (At the Museum of Natural History) a text published in \"Le Gaulois\" on 23 March 1881 and again in \"Pierre et Jean\". Alphonse Allais located his intrigues at Le Havre too. (The Human Beast) by \u00c9mile Zola evokes the world of the railway and runs along the Paris\u2013Le Havre railway. Streets, buildings, and public places in Le Havre pay tribute to other famous Le Havre people from this period: the writer Casimir Delavigne (1793\u20131843) has a street named after him and a statue in front of the palace of justice alongside another man of letters, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre (1737\u20131814).\nIn the 20th century, Henry Miller located part of the action in Le Havre in his masterpiece \"Tropic of Cancer\", published in 1934. Bouville was the commune where the writer lived who wrote his diary in \"La Naus\u00e9e\" (The Nausea) (1938) by Jean-Paul Sartre who was inspired by Le Havre city where he wrote his first novel. There are also the testimonies of Raymond Queneau (1903\u20131976), born in Le Havre, the city served as a framework for his novel \"Un rude hiver\" (A harsh winter) (1939). The plot of \"Une maison souffl\u00e9e aux vents\" (A house blown to the winds) by \u00c9mile Dano\u00ebn, winner of the Popular Novel Prize in 1951, and its sequel \"Idylle dans un quartier mur\u00e9\" (Idyll in a walled neighbourhood) were located in Le Havre during the Second World War. Under the name \"Port de Brume\" Le Havre is the setting for three other novels by this author: \"Cerfs-volants\" (Kites), \"L'Aventure de No\u00ebl\" (The Adventure at Christmas), and \"La Queue \u00e0 la p\u00e8gre\" (Queue to the underworld). Michel Leiris wrote \"De la litt\u00e9rature consid\u00e9r\u00e9e comme une tauromachie\" (Of literature considered like a bullfight) in December 1945.\nDiana Gabaldon set the second novel in her \"Outlander\" series, \"Dragonfly in Amber\" (1992), partly in Le Havre.\nTwo mystery novels take place in Le Havre: \"Le Bilan Maletras\" (The Maletras Balance) by Georges Simenon and \"Le Crime de Rouletabille\" (Crime at the Roulette table) by Gaston Leroux. In \"Rouge Br\u00e9sil\" (Red Brazil), winner of the Goncourt Prize in 2001, Jean-Christophe Rufin describes Le Havre in the 16th century as the port of departure of French expeditions to the New World: the hero Villegagnon leaves of the port to conquer new lands for the French crown which become Brazil. Martine\u2013Marie Muller tells the saga of a clan of Stevedores from Le Havre in the 1950s to the 1970s in \"Quai des Am\u00e9riques\" (Quay of the Americas).\nBeno\u00eet Duteurtre published in 2001, \"Le Voyage en France\" (Travel in France), for which he received the Prix M\u00e9dicis: the main character, a young American impassioned by France, lands at Le Havre which he describes in the first part of the novel. In 2008, Beno\u00eet Duteurtre publishes \"Les pieds dans l'eau\" (Feet in the water), a highly autobiographical book in which he describes his youth spent between Le Havre and \u00c9tretat. The city hosted writers such as Emile Dano\u00ebn (1920\u20131999) who grew up in the district of Saint-Fran\u00e7ois, Yoland Simon (born 1941), and Philippe Huet (born 1955). Canadian poet Octave Cr\u00e9mazie (1827\u20131879) died at Le Havre and was buried in Saint Marie Cemetery. The playwright Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Ancelot (1794\u20131854) was also a native of Le Havre. Two famous historians, Gabriel Monod (1844\u20131912) and Andr\u00e9 Siegfried (1875\u20131959) were from the city.\nLe Havre also appears in comic books: for example, in \"L'Oreille cass\u00e9e\" (The Broken Ear) (1937), Tintin embarks on the vessel \"City of Lyon\" sailing to South America. The meeting between Tintin and General Alcazar in \"Les Sept Boules de cristal\" (The Seven Crystal Balls) (1948) is in Le Havre, according to notes by Herg\u00e9 in the margins of Le Soir, the first publisher of this adventure. The first adventure of Ric Hochet (1963), the designer Tibet and Andr\u00e9-Paul Duch\u00e2teau, \"Traquenard au Havre\" (Trap at Le Havre) shows the seaside and the port. Similarly, in 1967, for the album \"Rapt sur le France\" (Rapt on France), the hero passes by the ocean port. Frank Le Gall, in \"Novembre toute l'ann\u00e9e\" (November all year) (2000) embarks Theodore Poussin at Le Havre on the \"Cap Padaran\".\nMusic.\nLe Havre is the birthplace of many musicians and composers such as Henri Woollett (1864\u20131936), Andr\u00e9 Caplet (1878\u20131925) and Arthur Honegger (1892\u20131955). There was also Victor Mustel (1815\u20131890) who was famous for having perfected the harmonium.\nLe Havre has long been regarded as one of the cradles of French rock and blues. In the 1980s many groups have emerged after a first dynamic development in the 1960s and 1970s. The most famous personality of Le Havre rock is \"Little Bob\" who began his career in the 1970s. The port tradition in many of the groups was repeated in the unused sheds of the port, such as Bovis hall which could hold 20,000 spectators. A blues festival, driven by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Skrobek, Blues a Gogo existed for eight years from 1995 to 2002. Several artists have been produced such as: Youssou N'Dour, Popa Chubby, Amadou &amp; Mariam, Patrick Verbeke etc. It was organized by the Coup de Bleu association whose former president was head of music Caf\u00e9 \"L'Agora\" in the Niemeyer Centre which produced the new Le Havre scene. During these same years, the \"Festival of the Future\", the local version of the \"F\u00eate de l'Humanit\u00e9\" (Festival of Humanity), attracted a large audience.\nCurrently, the musical tradition continues in the Symphony Orchestra of the city of Le Havre, the orchestra of Concerts Andr\u00e9 Caplet, the conservatory, and music schools such as the Centre for Vocal and Musical Expression (rock) or the JUPO (mainly jazz), associations or labels like Papa's Production (la Folie Ordinaire, Mob's et Travaux, Dominique Comont, Souinq, Your Happy End etc.). The organization by the association of West Park Festival since the 2000s in Harfleur and since 2004 at the Fort of Tourneville is a demonstration. Moreover, since 2008, the association \"I Love LH\" was started and promotes Le Havre culture and especially its music scene by organizing original cultural events as well as the free distribution of compilation music by local artists.\nBoard game.\nMain articles: Le Havre (board game)\n\"Le Havre\" is a board game about the development of the town of Le Havre. It was inspired by the games \"Caylus\" and \"Agricola\" and was developed in December 2007.\nNorman language.\nMain articles: Norman language and Cauchois dialect.\nThe legacy of the Norman language is present in the language used by the people of Le Havre, part of which is identified as speaking cauchois. Among the Norman words most used in Le Havre there are: \"boujou\" (hello, goodbye), \"clenche\" (door handle), \"morveux (veuse)\" (child), and \"bezot (te)\" (last born).\nEducation.\nSchools.\nLe Havre is located in the Academy of Rouen. The city operates 55 kindergartens (254 classes) and 49 communal primary schools (402 classes). The department manages 16 colleges and the region of Normandy manages 9 schools. The Jules Valles college in Caucriauville is classified as a \"sensitive institution\" and eleven colleges are in a priority education zone (ZEP). A \"boarding school of excellence\", the Claude Bernard college, opened in 2011. The first college in Le Havre dates to the 16th century, the high school Fran\u00e7ois I was founded during the Second Empire and is the oldest in Le Havre. The philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre (1905\u20131980) and Raymond Aron (1905\u20131983) taught there. The writer Armand Salacrou (1899\u20131989) studied in this institution.\nPublic junior high schools (\"coll\u00e8ges\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecial schools and higher education.\nIn 2011 there were approximately 12,000 students in all disciplines in Le Havre. Opened in 1986, the University of Le Havre is recent, medium-sized and well located: the largest campus is virtually in the centre of the city near railway and tram stations. The campus includes a University Library (2006), a gym, several dining halls with student housing, a structure incorporating a theatre, an orientation service, and student associations. In 2010\u20132011, 6,914 students were enrolled including 5,071 undergraduates, 1,651 Masters students, and 192 postgraduate students. The university also trains 317 engineering students including the Logistical Studies Higher Education Institute (ISEL). It offers 120 Diplomas of State prepared by the Faculty of Science and Technology, Faculty of International Affairs, and the Faculty of Arts and Humanities. Many courses are offered are related to the port operations, logistics, industry, and sustainable development. Twelve languages are taught and 17% of students are foreigners. The University of Le Havre is also a research centre with nine laboratories. It works in partnership with other higher education institutions (INSA Rouen, IEP, IUFM, and Normandy University). The University Institutes of Technology of Le Havre occupies two main sites: one in the upper town in the Caucriauville-Rouelles district which was opened in 1967 and another in the Eure district since 2011. The IUT has a total of 1,881 students divided into ten departments preparing for the DUT. There is also a branch of the teacher training institute of Rouen (IUFM) for two courses (CAPET of technology and CRPE school teacher).\nIn addition there is a large number of specialized higher education institutions covering a wide range of different areas. Founded in 1871, the \"\u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure de Commerce du Havre\", one of the oldest in France, has merged with \"Sup Europe\" and \"l'IPER\" to create the \"Normandy Business School\" in 2006. This school had over 2,800 students on its five campuses (Le Havre, Caen, Deauville, Oxford and Paris) in 2015. Since the 2007 school year, the Institute of Political Studies of Paris opened a Euro-Asia cycle in Le Havre. The \"National School of The Merchant Marine\" trains Officers of the First Class for the Merchant Marine: currently located at Sainte-Adresse, it will move to the \"Bassin Vauban\" in 2015 in a building that will house 1,000 students. The National Higher School of Petrol and Motors (ENSPM) is a school for specialist petroleum engineers, petrochemists, and engine makers. The ITIP (National Institute for International Transportation and Ports) prepares students for careers in the multimodal transport and port business. The (Institut national des sciences appliqu\u00e9es|National Institute of Applied Sciences of Rouen) (INSA) opened a branch in Le Havre in 2008 with a civil engineering and sustainable construction department. The SPI (Axis of Science for the Engineer) is expected to reopen in 2012 in a new building in the Eure district.\nIn the arts, the Conservatory of Departmental Radiance Arthur Honegger is attended by 1,680 students (music, dance and drama). The \"Graduate School of Art of Le Havre\" (ESAH) offers several degrees and preparation for competition. Finally 800 people study in paramedical and social schools mostly in the IFSI (Institute of Training in Nursing) which has approximately 600 students.\nSports.\nThe city of Le Havre has some of the oldest sports clubs in France: the \"Le Havre Rowing Society\" (1838), the \"Regatta Society of Le Havre\" (1838), and \"Le Havre Athletic Club\" (1872), doyen of French football and rugby clubs.\nThe city also hosted the sailing events for the 1900 and 1924 Summer Olympics, respectively.\nLe Havre is dominated by three professional sports teams: the first is the Le Havre AC football team who were relegated from Ligue 1 after the 2008\u20132009 season but gained promotion back to Ligue 1 in 2023. Its training centre is well-reputed for having trained a number of international French players, including Vikash Dhorasoo, Julien Faubert, Jean-Alain Boumsong, Lassana Diarra, and Steve Mandanda. The second major sports team is Saint Thomas Basketball who represent the city in LNB Pro A. Thirdly the HAC women's team who play in the first division with many international players in its ranks. The team won their first major national title, the Coupe de France for women's handball in 2006. \"Le Havre Rugby athletic club\" plays in F\u00e9d\u00e9rale 3 (equivalent to fifth division). The Hockey Club of Le Havre played at the fourth level nationally (Division 3) for the 2008\u20132009 season. The team is nicknamed the \"Dock's du Havre\".\nThe maritime side of the city is found in many sports: for example, the tradition of sailing is old. On 29 July 1840 the first French pleasure boat regatta was held. Today, Le Havre is known as a water sports and Seaside resort. The marina can host deepwater vessels around the clock in any weather. Built in the Interwar period, it is now the largest in Seine-Maritime with about 1,300 moorings additional moorings were installed in the Vauban basin in 2011\u20132012. The \"Havraise Rowing Society\" has trained many rowers to a high level as Thierry Renault. The \"Club Nautique Le Havrais\" (CNH) is the centre of mixed swimming, synchronized swimming, and men's water polo. The \"Centre Nautique Paul Vatine\" is the fifth largest club in the country for the number of sports licenses it holds; it ranks second in the Division 1 of the Championship France for Catamaran Clubs.\nSeveral major local sportsmen began their career at Le Havre: the swimmer Hugues Duboscq was an Olympic medallist several times. In judo the French team has two members from Le Havre: Dimitri Dragin and Baptiste Leroy. Jerome Le Banner is a professional kick-boxer at world level who participates in the K-1 championship. Finally the navigator Paul Vatine, who was lost at sea in 1999, won the Transat Jacques Vabre several times.\nFacilities.\nThe city has 99 sports facilities including 46 gymnasiums, 23 sports fields, and 5 swimming pools. The Stade Oc\u00e9ane (Ocean Stadium), inaugurated in July 2012, replaced the Stade Jules Deschaseaux. With 25,000 seats, it can host football matches as well as other sporting and cultural events. Basketball and Handball matches are playued in the Dock Oc\u00e9ane hall (3600 seats) while ice hockey is played at the ice hockey rink (900 seats). Of the five swimming pools in the city, two are operated by the municipality: the CNH (which has an Olympic pool for competitions) and Les Bains Des Docks (which was designed by the architect Jean Nouvel). Le Havre has the largest free outdoor skatepark in France with approximately 7,000 m2 allocated to the urban Boardsport. The port infrastructure allows for many water activities such as sailing, fishing, canoeing, and rowing. Finally, the beach is a place for kitesurfing, windsurfing and surfing.\nEvents.\nLe Havre has been and is still the venue of major sports events: the Tour de France has passed a dozen times by the Ocean Gate, the last stage took place here in 2015. Sailing events are often held and the Transat Jacques Vabre transatlantic race has been held every two years since 1993 linking Le Havre to Latin America. The course of the Solitaire du Figaro was partly in Le Havre in 2010. Since 2006, weekends of freestyle board sports have been popular (skateboarding, rollerblading, funboard, kiteboarding, skydiving etc.). Every summer roller blade events are organized in the city on Friday evening every fortnight and have great success. The first International Triathlon was held in 2012. Finally, there are several opportunities for runners with ten kilometres () in Le Havre or the strides of Montgeon.\nMedia.\nFive newspapers cover the Le Havre agglomeration: the dailies \"Le Havre libre\", \"Le Havre Presse\", \"Paris Normandie\" in its Le Havre edition in collaboration with \"Le Havre Presse\" and \"Libert\u00e9-Dimanche\" (communal Sunday edition of the previous three) are part of the Hersant group which is currently in serious financial trouble and looking for a buyer. A free weekly of information, \"Le Havre Infos\" (PubliHebdo group) has been published since 2010 every Wednesday and is available in many places in the city.\nSeveral magazines provide local information: \"LH Oc\u00e9anes\" (Municipal magazine) and \"Terres d'Agglo\" (Agglomeration Area magazine) to which must be added several free magazines: \"Aux Arts\" (cultural information more focused on the Basse-Normandie region) \"Bazart\" (cultural events in Le Havre but now with circulation across all of Normandy), and \"HAC Magazine\" (news about HAC). Several newspapers are also available on the Internet: Infoc\u00e9ane, Le Havre on the Internet.\nA local televised edition on France 3, \"France 3 Baie de Seine\", is broadcast every evening then again on \"France 3 Haute Normandie\". \"Radio Albatros\" is a local station installed in the Sanvic du Havre district transmitting on FM frequency 88.2. \"Radio Vall\u00e9e de la L\u00e9zarde\", based in \u00c9pouville, \"RESONANCE\" on 98.9, and \"RCF Le Havre\" are other radio stations. It was in Le Havre radio stations that the journalist and television host Laurent Ruquier, who was born in Le Havre in 1963, began his career. Several national and regional radio stations are relays for Le Havre: local information on \"France Bleu Haute Normandie\", local relay from 12 noon to 4pm on \"Virgin radio Normandie 101.8 FM\", local relay for Information from 6am to 9am and from 4pm to 8pm on \"NRJ Le Havre 92.5 FM\". Associations like \"LHnouslanuit\" and \"Only-Hit\" have tried to develop alternative and cultural local radio by featuring local community associations (Papa's Production, Ben Salad Prod, Asso6Sons, Agend'Havre, Pied Nu, I Love LH).\nReligion.\nAt the request of Monsigneur Andr\u00e9 Mulch, Archbishop of Rouen, Pope Paul VI decided on 6 July 1974 through the papal bull \"Quae Sacrosanctum\" on the creation of the diocese of Le Havre (\"Portus Gratiae\" in Latin meaning \"Port of Grace\"). The diocese was created from part of the parishes of the Archdiocese of Rouen to the west of a line joining Norville to Sassetot-le-Mauconduit. Monseigneur Michel Saudreau, its first bishop, was ordained on 22 September 1974. The church of Notre Dame was promoted to Cathedral Notre Dame du Havre. Today, the commune of Le Havre is divided into eight parishes and 24 places of worship (churches and chapels). The oldest chapel is Saint-Michel d'Ingouville which dates back to the 11th century. The Church of Saint Joseph du Havre, built by Auguste Perret, dominates the city with its spire 107m high. There are several monastic establishments (Carmel of the Transfiguration, Franciscan Monastery, Little Sisters of the Poor, etc.).\nThe Protestant Church of Le Havre was built in the city centre in 1862. Bombed in 1941, it lost its pediment, its bell tower, and roof. Rebuilt in 1953 by the architects Jacques Lamy and G\u00e9rard Dupasquier, who worked in the Auguste Perret office, is the only building in Le Havre uniting the original architecture of the 19th century with the architecture of the Perret school. Le Havre also has seven evangelical Protestant churches: \"Salvation Army\", \"Seventh Day Adventist\", \"Apostolic Church\", \"Assembly of God\", \"Baptist Church\", \"Good News Church\", et \"Church of Le Havre\" as well as several Protestant churches of African origin.\nThe city also has seven Muslim places of worship: the socio-cultural association of Muslims in Upper Normandy, En-Nour Mosque on Rue Paul Claudel, El Fath Mosque on rue Victor Hugo, Bellevue mosque on rue Gustavus Brindeau, and three prayer rooms located on rue Audran, Boulevard Jules Durant, and rue Lodi. The synagogue, located in the rebuilt central city, was visited by President Jacques Chirac in April 2002. It is the seat of the \"association consistoriale isra\u00e9lite du Havre\" whose president is Victor Elgressy.\nNotable people.\nLe Havre was the birthplace of:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nFrench"}
{"id": "54005", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54005", "title": "Le Havre-de-Grace", "text": ""}
{"id": "54006", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54006", "title": "Seine", "text": "Major river in northern France\nThe Seine ( , ) is a river in northern France. Its drainage basin is in the Paris Basin (a geological relative lowland) covering most of northern France. It rises at Source-Seine, northwest of Dijon in northeastern France in the Langres plateau, flowing through Paris and into the English Channel at Le Havre (and Honfleur on the left bank). It is navigable by ocean-going vessels as far as Rouen, from the sea. Over 60 percent of its length, as far as Burgundy, is negotiable by large barges and most tour boats, and nearly its whole length is available for recreational boating; excursion boats offer sightseeing tours of the river banks in the capital city, Paris.\nThere are 37 bridges in Paris across the Seine (the most famous of which are the Pont Alexandre III and the Pont Neuf) and dozens more outside the city.\nRiver sources.\nThe Seine rises in the commune of Source-Seine, about northwest of Dijon. The source has been owned by the city of Paris since 1864. A number of closely associated small ditches or depressions provide the source waters, with an artificial grotto laid out to highlight and contain a deemed main source. The grotto includes a statue of a nymph, a dog, and a dragon. On the same site are the buried remains of a Gallo-Roman temple. Small statues of the \"dea Sequana\" \"Seine goddess\" and other ex-votos found at the same place are now exhibited in the Dijon archaeological museum.\nCourse.\nThe Seine can artificially be divided into five parts:\nBelow Rouen, the river passes through the \"Parc Naturel R\u00e9gional des Boucles de la Seine Normande\", a French regional nature park.\nNavigation.\nThe Seine is dredged and ocean-going vessels can dock at Rouen, from the sea. Commercial craft (barges and push-tows) can use the river beginning at Marcilly-sur-Seine, to its mouth.\nAt Paris, there are 37 bridges. The river is only above sea level from its mouth, making it slow flowing and thus easily navigable.\nThe Seine Maritime, from the English Channel at Le Havre to Rouen, is the only portion of the Seine used by ocean-going craft. The tidal section of the Seine Maritime is followed by a canalized section (\"Basse Seine\") with four large multiple locks until the mouth of the Oise at Conflans-Sainte-Honorine (). Smaller locks at Bougival and at Suresnes lift the vessels to the level of the river in Paris, where the junction with the Canal Saint-Martin is located. The distance from the mouth of the Oise is .\nThe \"Haute Seine\", from Paris to Montereau-Fault-Yonne, is long and has 8 locks. At Charenton-le-Pont is the mouth of the Marne. Upstream from Paris seven locks ensure navigation to Saint Mamm\u00e8s, where the Loing mouth is situated. Through an eighth lock the river Yonne is reached at Montereau-Fault-Yonne. From the mouth of the Yonne, larger ships can continue upstream to Nogent-sur-Seine (, 7 locks). From there on, the river is navigable only by small craft to Marcilly-sur-Seine (, 4 locks). At Marcilly-sur-Seine the 19th century Canal de la Haute-Seine used to allow vessels to continue all the way to Troyes. This canal has been abandoned since 1957.\nThe Seine's average depth in Paris today is approximately 9.5 meters (31 feet). Until locks were installed to raise the level in the 1800s, the river was much shallower within the city, and consisted of a small channel of continuous flow bordered by sandy banks (depicted in many illustrations of the period). Today the depth is tightly controlled and the entire width of the river between the built-up banks on either side is normally filled with water. The average flow of the river is very low, only a few cubic metres per second, but much higher flows are possible during periods of heavy runoff.\nDredging.\nDredging in the 1960s mostly eliminated tidal bores on the lower river, known in French as \"le mascaret.\"\nDams and flood control.\nFour large storage reservoirs have been built since 1950 on the Seine as well as its tributaries Yonne, Marne, and Aube. These help in maintaining a constant level for the river through the city, but cannot prevent significant increases in river level during periods of extreme runoff. The dams are Lac d\u2019Orient, Lac des Settons, Lake Der-Chantecoq, and Auzon-Temple and Amance, respectively.\nFlooding.\nA very severe period of high water in January 1910 resulted in extensive flooding throughout the city of Paris. The Seine again rose to threatening levels in 1924, 1955, 1982, 1999\u20132000, June 2016, and January 2018. After a first-level flood alert in 2003, about 100,000 works of art were moved out of Paris, the largest relocation of art since World War II. Much of the art in Paris is kept in underground storage rooms that would have been flooded.\nA 2002 report by the French government stated the worst-case Seine flood scenario would cost 10 billion euros and cut telephone service for a million Parisians, leaving 200,000 without electricity and 100,000 without gas.\n2018 Paris flood.\nIn January 2018 the Seine again flooded, reaching a flood level of on 29 January. An official warning was issued on 24 January that heavy rainfall was likely to cause the river to flood. By 27 January, the river was rising. The Deputy Mayor of Paris Colombe Brossel warned that the heavy rain was caused by climate change. She added that \"We have to understand that climatic change is not a word, it's a reality.\"\nWatershed.\nThe basin area, including a part of Belgium, is , 2\u00a0percent of which is forest and 78\u00a0percent cultivated land. In addition to Paris, three other cities with a population over 100,000 are in the Seine watershed: Le Havre at the estuary, Rouen in the Seine valley and Reims at the northern limit\u2014with an annual urban growth rate of 0.2\u00a0percent. The population density is 201 per square kilometer.\nTributaries.\nTributaries of the Seine are, from source to mouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWater quality.\nDue to concentrated levels of industry, agriculture and urban populations of Paris and its surroundings, the Seine-Normandy watershed experiences the highest human impacts of any hydrographic basin in France. Compared to most other large European rivers, the ability of the Seine to dilute urban sewage and farmland runoff is very low. Low oxygen levels, high concentrations of ammonia, nitrites and faecal bacteria, extending from Paris to the estuary, have been issues for over a century. The advent of nitrogenous fertilizers in the 1960s marked an upturn in agricultural pollution due to land use changes that had previously scaled with population growth. Heavy industries near Paris and along the Oise River discharged virtually untreated wastewaters from the turn of the 19th century, causing concentrations of toxins in the river that were ignored until the late 1980s. Major French laws to address water quality were passed in 1898, 1964, 1996, and 2006.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, most domestic sewage was used as fertilizer for nearby croplands. As populations grew, the agricultural capacity to absorb those wastewaters was exceeded. Large-scale construction of waste water treatment plants (WWTPs) began in 1940 to meet demand; however, by 1970, about 60% of urban sewage was allowed to flow into the river untreated. The resulting oxygen depletion reduced the number of fish species to three. Measures taken in the early 2000s due to the Water Framework Directive led to significant reductions of organic carbon, phosphorus and ammonium, which in turn decreased the occurrence and severity of phytoplankton blooms. Continued WWTP construction and new treatment methods improved environmental conditions. In 2009, it was announced that Atlantic salmon had returned to the Seine. By the early 2020s, the number of fish species near Paris had rebounded to 32.\nPeriodically the sewage systems of Paris experience a failure known as sanitary sewer overflow, often in periods of high rainfall. Under these conditions, untreated residential and industrial sewage is discharged into the Seine to prevent backflow. This is due in large part to Paris's \"single system\" drainage scheme dating from the 19th century, which combines street runoff and sewage. The resulting oxygen deficit is principally caused by allochthonous bacteria larger than one micrometre in size. The specific activity of these sewage bacteria is typically three to four times greater than that of the autochthonous (background) bacterial population. Heavy metal concentrations in the Seine are relatively high. The pH level of the Seine at Pont Neuf has been measured to be 8.46. Despite this, the water quality has improved significantly over what several historians at various times in the past called an \"open sewer\".\nIn 1988, then-mayor of Paris and future president Jacques Chirac first called for the lifting of a swimming ban that had been in place since 1923 due to polluted waters. In 2018, a \u20ac1.4 billion ($1.55 billion) cleanup programme called the \"Swimming Plan\" was launched with the aim of making the river safe to use for the 2024 Summer Olympics. The project included constructing a basin to store rainwater, which would then be slowly released into the sewer system, preventing overflow. Plans also call for several public swimming areas to be made available by 2025, bringing an end to a century-old ban. These efforts have produced mixed results, as \"E. coli\" levels have often been found to be far higher than what is safe to swim in, though this could depend on the season. At the same time, the fish population in the river has surged, from just two species to over 30. To demonstrate the river's improved cleanliness, Mayor Anne Hidalgo and President Emmanuel Macron both pledged to take a swim in the waters, and Hidalgo did so on July 17, 2024.\nDuring the Summer Olympics, the date of the triathlon was postponed due to water quality issues, as the earlier rainstorm during the opening ceremony had driven some untreated rainwater back into the Seine. However, the triathlon proceeded the following day, after testing found the water quality to be sufficient for swimming.\nIn July 2025, the Seine was reopened for swimming after a ban lasting almost 100 years.\nHistory.\nThe name comes from Gaullish , from the Celtic Gallo-Roman goddess of the river, as offerings for her were found at the source. Sometimes it is incorrectly associated with Latin 'follow', but the Celtic word rather seems to derive from the same root as English \"sea\", namely Proto-Indo-European \"*seikw-\", signifying 'to flow' or 'to pour forth'.\nOn 28 or 29 March 845, an army of Vikings led by a chieftain named Reginherus, which is possibly another name for Ragnar Lothbrok, sailed up the River Seine with siege towers and sacked Paris.\nOn 25 November 885, another Viking expedition led by Rollo was sent up the River Seine to attack Paris again.\nIn March 1314, King Philip IV of France had Jacques de Molay, last Grand Master of the Knights Templar, burned on a scaffold on an island in the River Seine in front of Notre Dame de Paris.\nFollowing the burning of Joan of Arc in 1431, her ashes were thrown into the Seine from the medieval stone Mathilde Bridge at Rouen, though unsupported counter-claims persist.\nOn 9 August 1803, Robert Fulton, American painter and marine engineer, made his first successful test of his steamboat in the Seine beside the Tuileries Garden. Having a length of sixty-six feet and an eight-foot beam Fulton's steamboat attained speeds of three to four miles per hour against the Seine's current.\nReaching the Seine was one of the original objectives of Operation Overlord, during the Second World War, in 1944. The Allies' intention was to reach the Seine by 90 days after D-Day. That objective was met. An anticipated assault crossing of the river never materialized as German resistance in France crumbled by early September 1944. However, the First Canadian Army did encounter resistance immediately west of the Seine and fighting occurred in the For\u00eat de la Londe as Allied troops attempted to cut off the escape across the river of parts of the German 7th Army in the closing phases of the Battle of Normandy.\nSome of the Algerian victims of the 1961 Paris massacre drowned in the Seine after being thrown by French policemen from the Pont Saint-Michel and other locations in Paris.\nAt the Olympics.\n1900 and 1924 Summer Olympics.\nAt the 1900 Summer Olympics, the river hosted the rowing, swimming, and water polo events. Twenty-four years later, it hosted the rowing events again at Bassin d'Argenteuil, along the Seine north of Paris.\n2024 Summer Olympics.\nMore than a century later, during the 2024 Summer Olympics, the Seine hosted a boat parade with boats for each national delegation during the opening ceremony. \nThe river was also the site of the men's and women's event for marathon swimming, as well as the swimming portion of the triathlon. Although swimming in the Seine had been banned since 1923, a \u20ac1.4 billion cleanup effort by the French government sought to reduce bacterial levels in the river to those safe for swimming. During the Olympics, daily tests of the water quality were taken to determine if it was safe for swimming; this caused the triathlon to be delayed by a day, before being allowed to proceed on July 31. A few of the triathletes who swam in the river became sick afterwards, though it was not clear if the Seine water was the cause.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nIn 1991 (and 2024), UNESCO added the banks of the Seine in Paris\u2014the \"Rive Gauche\" and \"Rive Droite\"\u2014to its list of World Heritage Sites in Europe.\nIn art.\nDuring the 19th and the 20th centuries in particular the Seine inspired many artists, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA song \"La Seine\" by Flavien Monod and Guy Lafarge was written in 1948.\nJosephine Baker also recorded a song called \"La Seine\"\nAnother song titled \"La Seine\", by Vanessa Paradis featuring Matthieu Chedid, formed part of the original soundtrack for the 2011 film \"A Monster in Paris\".\nThe Seine features prominently in ABBA's 1980 song \"Our Last Summer\", written by Benny Andersson and Bj\u00f6rn Ulvaeus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54007", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54007", "title": "Seine River", "text": ""}
{"id": "54008", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54008", "title": "River Seine", "text": ""}
{"id": "54009", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54009", "title": "Shill", "text": "Person who publicly helps or gives credibility to assist in a fraud\nA shill, also called a plant or a stooge, is a person who publicly helps or gives credibility to a person or organization without disclosing that they have a close relationship with said person or organization, or have been paid to do so. Shills can carry out their operations in the areas of media, journalism, marketing, politics, sports, confidence games, cryptocurrency, or other business areas. A shill may also act to discredit opponents or critics of the person or organization in which they have a vested interest.\nIn most uses, \"shill\" refers to someone who purposely gives onlookers, participants or \"marks\" the impression of an enthusiastic customer independent of the seller, marketer or con artist, for whom they are secretly working. The person or group in league with the shill relies on crowd psychology to encourage other onlookers or audience members to do business with the seller or accept the ideas they are promoting. Shills may be employed by salespeople and professional marketing campaigns. \"Plant\" and \"stooge\" more commonly refer to a person who is secretly in league with another person or outside organization while pretending to be neutral or part of the organization in which they are planted, such as a magician's audience, a political party, or an intelligence organization (see double agent).\nShilling is illegal in many circumstances and under many jurisdictions because of the potential for fraud and damage. However, if a shill does not place uninformed parties at a risk of loss, the shill's actions may be legal. For example, a person planted in an audience to laugh and applaud when desired (see claque), or to participate in on-stage activities as a \"random member of the audience\", is a legal type of shill.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the term \"shill\" is uncertain; it may be an abbreviation of \"shillaber\". The word originally denoted a carnival worker who pretended to be a member of the audience in an attempt to elicit interest in an attraction. Some sources trace the usage back to 1914, or as far back as 1911. American humorist Benjamin Penhallow Shillaber (1814\u20131890), who often wrote under the guise of his fictional character Mrs. Ruth Partington, the American version of Mrs. Malaprop, is a possible source.\nInternet.\nIn online discussion media, shills make posts expressing opinions that further interests of an organization in which they have a vested interest, such as a commercial vendor or special interest group, while posing as unrelated innocent parties. For example, an employee of a company that produces a specific product might praise the product anonymously in a discussion forum or group in order to generate interest in that product, service, or group. Web sites can also be set up for the same purpose. In addition, some shills use sock puppetry, where one person poses as multiple users.\nIn some jurisdictions and circumstances, this type of activity is illegal. The plastic surgery company Lifestyle Lift ordered their employees to post fake positive reviews on websites. As a result, they were sued, and ordered to pay $300,000 in damages by the New York Attorney General's office.\nReputable organizations may prohibit their employees and other interested parties (contractors, agents, etc.) from participating in public forums or discussion groups in which a conflict of interest might arise, or will at least insist that their employees and agents refrain from participating in any way that might create a conflict of interest.\nGambling.\nBoth the illegal and legal gambling industries often use shills to make winning at games appear more likely than it actually is. For example, illegal three-card monte and shell-game peddlers are notorious employers of shills. These shills also often aid in cheating, disrupting the game if the \"mark\" is likely to win. In a legal casino, however, a shill is sometimes a gambler who plays using the casino's money in order to keep games (especially poker) going when there are not enough players. The title of one of Erle Stanley Gardner's mystery novels, \"Shills Can't Cash Chips\", is derived from this type of shill. This is different from \"proposition players\" who are paid a salary by the casino for the same purpose, but bet with their own money.\nMarketing.\nIn marketing, shills are often employed to assume the air of satisfied customers and give testimonials to the merits of a given product. This type of shilling is illegal in some jurisdictions, but almost impossible to detect. It may be considered a form of unjust enrichment or unfair competition, as in California's Business &amp; Professions Code \u00a7 17200, which prohibits any \"unfair or fraudulent business act or practice and unfair, deceptive, untrue or misleading advertising\".\nAuctions.\nPeople who drive prices in favor of the seller or auctioneer with fake bids in an auction are called \"shills\" or \"potted plants\" and seek to provoke a bidding war among other participants. Often they are told by the seller precisely how high to bid, as the seller does not lose money if the item does not sell, paying only the auction fees. Shilling has a substantially higher rate of occurrence in online auctions, where any user with multiple accounts can bid on their own items. One detailed example of this has been documented in online auto auctions. The online auction site eBay forbids shilling; its rules do not allow friends or employees of a person selling an item to bid on the item, even though eBay has no means to detect if a bidder is related to a seller or is in fact the seller.\nIn his book \"Fake: Forgery, Lies, &amp; eBay\", Kenneth Walton describes how he and his accomplices placed shill bids on hundreds of eBay auctions over the course of a year. Walton and his associates were charged and convicted of fraud by federal authorities for their eBay shill bidding.\nWith the proliferation of live online auctions in recent years, shill bidding has become commonplace. Some websites allow shill bidding by participating auctioneers. These auctioneers are able to see bids placed in real time and can then place counter bids to increase the amount. One Proxibid auctioneers' website states, \"At the request of the auction company, this auction permits bids to be placed by the seller or on the seller's behalf, even if such bids are placed solely for the purpose of increasing the bid.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54010", "revid": "36378140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54010", "title": "Sophus Lie", "text": "Norwegian mathematician (1842\u20131899)\nMarius Sophus Lie ( ; ; 17 December 1842 \u2013 18 February 1899) was a Norwegian mathematician. He largely created the theory of continuous symmetry and applied it to the study of geometry and differential equations. He also made substantial contributions to the development of algebra.\nLife and career.\nMarius Sophus Lie was born on 17 December 1842 in the small town of Nordfjordeid. He was the youngest of six children born to Lutheran pastor Johann Herman Lie and his wife, who came from a well-known Trondheim family.\nHe had his primary education in the south-eastern coast of Moss, before attending high school in Oslo (known then as Christiania). After graduating from high school, his ambition towards a military career was dashed when the army rejected him due to poor eyesight. He then enrolled at the Royal Frederick University.\nSophus Lie's first mathematical work, \"Repr\u00e4sentation der Imagin\u00e4ren der Plangeometrie\", was published in 1869 by the Academy of Sciences in Christiania and also by \"Crelle's Journal\". That same year he received a scholarship and travelled to Berlin, where he stayed from September to February 1870. There, he met Felix Klein and they became close friends. When he left Berlin, Lie travelled to Paris, where he was joined by Klein two months later. There, they met Camille Jordan and Gaston Darboux. But on 19 July 1870 the Franco-Prussian War began and Klein (who was Prussian) had to leave France very quickly. Lie left for Fontainebleau where he was arrested, suspected of being a German spy, garnering him fame in Norway. He was released from prison after a month, thanks to the intervention of Darboux.\nLie obtained his PhD at the Royal Frederick University (in present-day Oslo) in 1871 with a thesis entitled \"Over en Classe geometriske Transformationer\" (On a Class of Geometric Transformations). It would be described by Darboux as \"one of the most handsome discoveries of modern Geometry\". The next year, the Norwegian Parliament established an extraordinary professorship for him. That same year, Lie visited Klein, who was then at Erlangen and working on the Erlangen program.\nIn 1872, Lie spent eight months together with Peter Ludwig Mejdell Sylow, editing and publishing the mathematical works of their countryman, Niels Henrik Abel.\nAt the end of 1872, Sophus Lie proposed to Anna Birch, then eighteen years old, and they were married in 1874. The couple had three children: Marie (b. 1877), Dagny (b. 1880) and Herman (b. 1884).\nFrom 1876, he co-edited the journal \"Archiv for Mathematik og Naturvidenskab\", together with the physician Jacob Worm-M\u00fcller, and the biologist Georg Ossian Sars.\nIn 1884, Friedrich Engel arrived at Christiania to help him, with the support of Klein and Adolph Mayer (who were both professors at Leipzig by then). Engel would help Lie to write his most important treatise, \"Theorie der Transformationsgruppen\", published in Leipzig in three volumes from 1888 to 1893. Decades later, Engel would also be one of the two editors of Lie's collected works.\nIn 1886, Lie became a professor at Leipzig, replacing Klein, who had moved to G\u00f6ttingen. In November 1889, Lie suffered a mental breakdown and had to be hospitalized until June 1890. Subsequently he returned to his post, but over the years his anemia progressed to the point where he returned to his homeland. In 1898 he tendered his resignation in May, and left for home in September the same year. He died the following year in 1899 at the age of 56, due to pernicious anemia, a disease caused by impaired absorption of vitamin B12.\nHe was made Honorary Member of the London Mathematical Society in 1878, Corresponding Member of the French Academy of Sciences in 1892, honorary member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society 1894, Foreign Member of the Royal Society of London in 1895 and foreign associate of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America in 1895.\nLegacy.\nLie's principal tool, and one of his greatest achievements, was the discovery that continuous transformation groups (now called, after him, Lie groups) could be better understood by \"linearizing\" them, and studying the corresponding generating vector fields (the so-called infinitesimal generators). The generators are subject to a linearized version of the group law, now called the commutator bracket, and have the structure of what is today called a Lie algebra.\nHermann Weyl used Lie's work on group theory in his papers from 1922 and 1923, and Lie groups today play a role in quantum mechanics. However, the subject of Lie groups as it is studied today is vastly different from what the research by Sophus Lie was about and \"among the 19th century masters, Lie's work is \"in detail\" certainly the least known today\".\nSophus Lie was an eager proponent in the establishment of the Abel Prize. Inspired by the Nansen fund named after Fridtjof Nansen, and the lack of a prize for mathematics in the Nobel Prize. He gathered support for the establishment of an award for outstanding work in pure mathematics.\nLie advised many doctoral students who went on to become successful mathematicians. \u00c9lie Cartan became widely regarded as one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century. Kazimierz \u017borawski's work was proved to be of importance to a variety of fields. Hans Frederick Blichfeldt made contributions to various fields of mathematics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54012", "revid": "287161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54012", "title": "1924 Winter Olympics", "text": "Multi-sport event in Chamonix, France\nThe 1924 Winter Olympics, officially known as the I Olympic Winter Games () and commonly known as Chamonix 1924 (), were a winter multi-sport event which was held in 1924 in Chamonix, France. Organized by the French Olympic Committee and held as part of an \"International Winter Sports Week\", the competitions took place in Chamonix and Haute-Savoie, France, from 25 January to 5 February 1924. Although not initially termed \"Winter Olympics\", the event was later retroactively recognized by the IOC in 1925 as the first Olympic Winter Games, establishing the precedent for separate Winter Games https://.\nThe tradition of holding the Winter Olympics in the same year as the Summer Olympics would continue until 1992, after which the current practice of holding a Winter Olympics in the second year after each Summer Olympics began.\nAlthough figure skating had been an Olympic event in both London and Antwerp and ice hockey had been an event in Antwerp, winter sports had always been limited by the season. At the 1921 IOC convention in Lausanne, there was a call for equality for winter sports. After much discussion, it was decided that France, host nation for the 1924 Summer Olympics, would hold an \"international week of winter sport\" in Chamonix.\nWhile not one of the official 16 events (nor one of the 6 sports) during the \"International Winter Sports Week\", the closing ceremony included Pierre de Coubertin presenting gold medals in \"Alpinism\" (mountaineering) to the members of the 1922 British Mount Everest expedition, represented in Chamonix by Lt Col Edward Strutt, deputy expedition leader.\nHighlights.\nDay 2.\nCharles Jewtraw of the United States won the first gold medal of the games in the 500-meter speed skate, making him the first Winter Olympic champion.\nDay 4.\nSonja Henie of Norway, at just eleven years old, took part in the ladies' figure skating competition. Although she finished last, she became popular with fans and went on to take gold at the following three Winter Olympics.\nDay 6.\nFigure skater Gillis Grafstr\u00f6m of Sweden became the first athlete to successfully defend his Summer Olympic title at the Winter Olympics (having won a gold medal in 1920).\nDay 8.\nThe Canadian ice hockey team (Toronto Granites) finished their qualifying round with three wins against Czechoslovakia (30\u20130), Sweden (22\u20130), and Switzerland (33\u20130), scoring a total of 85 goals and conceding none.\nDay 10.\nFinding themselves in the same situation as Gillis Grafstr\u00f6m, the Canadian ice hockey team is the last to defend their Summer Olympics title at the Winter Olympics successfully. Canada would dominate ice hockey in early Olympic competitions, winning six of the first seven gold medals awarded.\nEpilogue.\nTaffy Abel (1900\u20131964) was an Indigenous Ojibwe ice hockey player. He was the first Native American in the Winter Olympic Games (1924 Hockey Silver Medal), the 1924 Flag Bearer for the United States at the 1924 Winter Olympics, the first Native American in the National Hockey League (1926), and a Stanley Cup champion (1929 and 1934).\nAt the closing ceremony, a prize for alpinism, a sport not officially included in the Olympic Winter Games, was awarded by Pierre de Coubertin to Lt Col Edward Strutt, the deputy leader of British expedition, on behalf of their attempt to climb Mount Everest in 1922.\nFor the first time in the history of the modern Olympics, the host country (in this case, France) failed to win any gold medals, finishing with three bronze medals. The same outcome occurred at the next Winter Olympics in St. Moritz where Switzerland won only a single bronze medal, the lowest ever output by a host nation at an Olympics. Later host nations to finish without gold medals included Canada at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, Yugoslavia at the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, and Canada for a second time at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary.\nIn 1925, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) decided to organize the Olympic Winter Games every four years, independent of the Olympic Games proper, and recognized the International Winter Sports Week as the first Olympic Winter Games in retrospect.\nThe final individual medal of Chamonix 1924 was presented in 1974. The ski jumping event was unusual because the bronze medalist was not determined for fifty years. Norway's Thorleif Haug was awarded third place at the event's conclusion, but a clerical error in calculating Haug's score was discovered in 1974 by skiing historian Jakob Vaage, who further determined that Anders Haugen of the United States, who had finished fourth, had actually scored 0.095 points more than Haug. This was verified by the IOC, and in Oslo in September 1974, Haug's daughter presented the medal to the 86-year-old Haug.\nIn 2006, the IOC confirmed that the medals awarded to the 1924 curling and military patrol teams were official. The IOC verified that curling was officially part of the program, after the \"Glasgow Herald\" newspaper filed a claim on behalf of the families of the team.\nEvents.\nMedals were awarded in 16 events contested in 5 sports (9 disciplines). Many sources do not list curling and the military patrol as Olympic events, or list them as demonstration events. However, no such designation was made in 1924. In February 2006, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) ruled that curling and military patrol were part of the Olympic program, and have included the medals awarded in the official count.\nParticipating nations.\nAthletes from 16 nations competed in the first Winter Olympic Games. Germany was banned from competing in the games, and instead hosted a series of games called Deutsche Kampfspiele.\nMedal count.\nPierre de Coubertin\u2014founder of the IOC &amp; father of the modern Olympics movement\u2014personally awarded, in addition to the medals awarded in the sports competitions, 21 gold medals to members of the 1922 British Mount Everest Expedition including 12 Britons, 7 Indians, 1 Australian and 1 Nepalese. Only the gold medal from 1924 is assigned to the Winter Olympics by the IOC in its database to the Mixed team, while the medals from 1932 and 1936 are assigned to the Summer Olympics for the respective NOCs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54013", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54013", "title": "1924 Winter Olympic Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "54015", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54015", "title": "1924 Olympic Winter Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "54016", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54016", "title": "Gabriel Princip", "text": ""}
{"id": "54017", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54017", "title": "Ngo Dinh Diem", "text": "President of South Vietnam from 1955 to 1963\nNg\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m ( , or ; ; 3 January 1901\u00a0\u2013 2 November 1963) was a South Vietnamese politician who was the final prime minister of the State of Vietnam (1954\u20131955) and later the first president of South Vietnam (Republic of Vietnam) from 1955 until his capture and assassination during the CIA-backed 1963 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nDi\u1ec7m was born into a prominent Catholic family with his father, Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Kh\u1ea3, being a high-ranking mandarin for Emperor Th\u00e0nh Th\u00e1i during the French colonial era. Di\u1ec7m was educated at French-speaking schools and considered following his brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c into the priesthood, but eventually chose to pursue a career in the civil service. He progressed rapidly in the court of Emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, becoming governor of B\u00ecnh Thu\u1eadn Province in 1929 and interior minister in 1933. However, he resigned from the latter position after three months and publicly denounced the emperor as a tool of France. Di\u1ec7m came to support Vietnamese nationalism, promoting both anti-communism, in opposition to Ho Chi Minh, and decolonization, in opposition to B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. He established the C\u1ea7n Lao Party to support his political doctrine of Person Dignity Theory, which was a blend of the philosophies of Personalism, especially as understood by French philosopher Emmanuel Mounier, and of Confucianism, which Di\u1ec7m and his father had greatly admired. Di\u1ec7m supported the Confucian concept of \"Mandate of Heaven\", and wished to make it the basis of political theory that would emerge in Vietnam.\nAfter several years in exile in Japan, the United States, and Europe, Di\u1ec7m returned home in July 1954 and was appointed prime minister by B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, against the French suggestion of Nguyen Ngoc Bich (a French-educated engineer, Francophile anticolonialist, a resistance hero in the First Indochina War, and medical doctor) as an alternative. The 1954 Geneva Conference took place soon after he took office, formally partitioning Vietnam along the 17th parallel. Di\u1ec7m, with the aid of his younger brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu, soon consolidated power in South Vietnam. After the 1955 State of Vietnam referendum, he proclaimed the creation of the Republic of Vietnam, with himself as president. His government was supported by other anti-communist countries, most notably the United States. Di\u1ec7m pursued a series of nation-building projects, promoting industrial and rural development. From 1957 onward, as part of the Vietnam War, he faced a communist insurgency backed by North Vietnam, eventually formally organized under the banner of the Viet Cong. He was subject to several assassination and coup attempts, and in 1962 established the Strategic Hamlet Program as the cornerstone of his counterinsurgency effort.\nIn 1963, Di\u1ec7m's favoritism towards Catholics and persecution of practitioners of Buddhism in Vietnam led to the Buddhist crisis. The event damaged relations with the United States and other previously sympathetic countries, and his organization lost favor with the leadership of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam. On 1 November 1963, the country's leading generals launched a coup d'\u00e9tat with assistance from the Central Intelligence Agency. Di\u1ec7m and his brother, Nhu, initially escaped, but were recaptured the following day and assassinated on the orders of D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh, who succeeded him as president.\nDi\u1ec7m has been a controversial historical figure. Some have considered him a tool of the United States, while others portrayed him as an avatar of Vietnamese tradition. At the time of his assassination, Western media widely considered him a dictator, though South Vietnamese offered a variety of views, generally acknowledging that he strongly opposed American interference.\nFamily and early life.\nNg\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m was born in 1901 in Qu\u1ea3ng B\u00ecnh province, in Central Vietnam. His family originated in Ph\u00fa Cam, a Catholic village adjacent to Hu\u1ebf. His ancestors had been among Vietnam's earliest Catholic converts in the 17th century. Di\u1ec7m was given a saint's name at birth, \"Gioan Baotixita\" (a Vietnamized form of John the Baptist), following the custom of the Catholic Church. The Ng\u00f4-\u0110\u00ecnh family suffered under the anti-Catholic persecutions of Emperors Minh M\u1ea1ng and T\u1ef1 \u0110\u1ee9c. In 1880, while Di\u1ec7m's father, Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Kh\u1ea3 (1850\u20131925), was studying in British Malaya, an anti-Catholic riot led by Buddhist monks almost wiped out the Ng\u00f4-\u0110\u00ecnh clan. Over 100 of the Ng\u00f4 clan were \"burned alive in a church including Kh\u1ea3's father, brothers, and sisters.\"\nNg\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Kh\u1ea3 was educated in a Catholic school in British Malaya, where he learned English and studied the European-style curriculum. He was a devout Catholic and scrapped plans to become a Roman Catholic priest in the late 1870s. He worked for the commander of the French armed forces as an interpreter and took part in campaigns against anti-colonial rebels in the mountains of Tonkin during 1880. He rose to become a high-ranking mandarin, the first headmaster of the National Academy in Hu\u1ebf (founded in 1896), and a counsellor to Emperor Th\u00e0nh Th\u00e1i of French Indochina. He was appointed minister of the rites and chamberlain and keeper of the eunuchs. Despite his collaboration with the French colonizers, Kh\u1ea3 was \"motivated less by Francophilia than by certain reformist ambitions\". Like Phan Ch\u00e2u Trinh, Kh\u1ea3 believed that independence from France could be achieved only after changes in Vietnamese politics, society, and culture had occurred. In 1907, after the ouster of emperor Th\u00e0nh Th\u00e1i, Kh\u1ea3 resigned his appointments, withdrew from the imperial court, and became a farmer in the countryside.\nKh\u1ea3 decided to abandon his studies for the priesthood and instead married. After his first wife died childless, Kh\u1ea3 remarried and, in a period of twenty-three years, had twelve children with his second wife, Ph\u1ea1m Th\u1ecb Th\u00e2n, nine of whom survived infancy \u2013 six sons and three daughters. As a devout Roman Catholic, Kh\u1ea3 took his entire family to daily morning Mass and encouraged his sons to study for the priesthood. Having learned both Latin and classical Chinese, Kh\u1ea3 strove to make sure his children were well educated in both Christian scriptures and Confucian classics. During his childhood, Di\u1ec7m laboured in the family's rice fields while studying at a French Catholic primary school (Pellerin School) in Hu\u1ebf, and later entered a private school started by his father, where he studied French, Latin, and classical Chinese. At the age of fifteen he briefly followed his elder brother, Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c, who would become Vietnam's highest-ranking Catholic bishop, into seminary. Di\u1ec7m swore himself to celibacy to prove his devotion to his faith, but found monastic life too rigorous and decided not to pursue a clerical career. According to Mark Moyar, Di\u1ec7m's personality was too independent to adhere to the disciplines of the Church, while Jarvis recalls Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c's ironic observation that the Church was \"too worldly\" for Di\u1ec7m. Di\u1ec7m also inherited his father's antagonism toward the French colonialists who occupied his country.\nAt the end of his secondary schooling at Lyc\u00e9e Qu\u1ed1c h\u1ecdc, the French lyc\u00e9e in Hu\u1ebf, Diem's outstanding examination results elicited the offer of a scholarship to study in Paris. He declined and, in 1918, enrolled at the prestigious School of Public Administration and Law in Hanoi, a French school that prepared young Vietnamese to serve in the colonial administration. It was there that he had the only romantic relationship of his life when he fell in love with one of his teacher's daughters. After his love interest chose to persist with her religious vocation and entered a convent, he remained celibate for the rest of his life. Di\u1ec7m's family, educational, and religious values greatly influenced his life and career. Historian Edward Miller stated that Di\u1ec7m \"displayed Christian piety in everything from his devotional practices to his habit of inserting references to the Bible into his speeches\"; he also enjoyed showing off his knowledge of classical Chinese texts.\nEarly career.\nAfter graduating at the top of his class in 1921, Di\u1ec7m followed in the footsteps of his eldest brother, Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Kh\u00f4i, joining the civil service in Th\u1eeba Thi\u00ean as a junior official. Starting from the lowest rank of mandarin, Di\u1ec7m steadily rose over the next decade. He first served at the royal library in Hu\u1ebf, and within one year was the district chief in both Th\u1eeba Thi\u00ean and nearby Qu\u1ea3ng Tr\u1ecb province, presiding over seventy villages. Di\u1ec7m was promoted to be a provincial chief (Tu\u1ea7n ph\u1ee7) in Ninh Thu\u1eadn at the age of 28, overseeing 300 villages.\nDuring his career as a mandarin, Di\u1ec7m was known for his industriousness and incorruptibility, and as a Catholic leader and nationalist. Catholic nationalism in Vietnam during the 1920s and 1930s facilitated Di\u1ec7m's ascent in his bureaucratic career.\nDi\u1ec7m's rise was also facilitated through his brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Kh\u00f4i's marriage to the daughter of Nguy\u1ec5n H\u1eefu B\u00e0i, who was the Catholic head of the Council of Ministers at the Hu\u1ebf court. B\u00e0i also supported the indigenization of the Vietnamese Church and giving more administrative powers to the monarchy. B\u00e0i was highly regarded among the French administration. Di\u1ec7m's religious and family ties impressed B\u00e0i and he became Di\u1ec7m's patron. The French were impressed by his work ethic but were irritated by Di\u1ec7m's frequent calls to grant more autonomy to Vietnam. Di\u1ec7m contemplated resigning but encouragement from the populace convinced him to persist. In 1925, he first encountered communists distributing propaganda while riding horseback through the region near Qu\u1ea3ng Tr\u1ecb. Revolted by calls for violent socialist revolution contained in the propaganda leaflets, Di\u1ec7m involved himself in anti-communist activities for the first time, spreading his own anti-communist pamphlets.\nIn 1929, he was promoted to the governorship of B\u00ecnh Thu\u1eadn Province and was known for his work ethic. In 1930 and 1931, he helped the French suppress the first peasant revolts organized by the communists. According to historian Bernard B. Fall Di\u1ec7m put the revolts down as he believed they would not lead to the removal of the French but might threaten the leadership of the mandarins. In 1933, with the ascension of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i to the throne, Di\u1ec7m accepted B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i's invitation to be his interior minister following lobbying by Nguy\u1ec5n H\u1eefu B\u00e0i. Soon after his appointment, Di\u1ec7m headed a commission to advise on potential administration reforms. After calling for the French administration to introduce a Vietnamese legislature and many other political reforms, he resigned after three months in office when his proposals were rejected. Di\u1ec7m denounced Emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i as \"nothing but an instrument in the hands of the French administration\", and renounced his decorations and titles from B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. The French administration then threatened him with arrest and exile.\nFor the next decade, Di\u1ec7m lived as a private citizen with his family in Hu\u1ebf, although he was kept under surveillance. He spent his time reading, meditating, attending church, gardening, hunting, and in amateur photography. Di\u1ec7m also conducted extensive nationalist activities during those 21 years, engaging in meetings and correspondence with various leading Vietnamese revolutionaries, such as his friend, Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u, a Vietnamese anti-colonial activist, whom Di\u1ec7m respected for his knowledge of Confucianism and argued that Confucianism's teachings could be applied to a modern Vietnam. With the start of the World War II in the Pacific, seeing an opportunity for Vietnam to challenge French colonization, he attempted to persuade the Japanese forces to declare independence for Vietnam in 1942 but was ignored. Di\u1ec7m also tried to establish relationships with Japanese diplomats, army officers, and intelligence operatives who supported Vietnam's independence. In 1943, Di\u1ec7m's Japanese friends helped him to contact Prince C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3, an anti-colonial activist, who was in exile in Japan.\nAfter contacting C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3, Di\u1ec7m formed a secret political party, the Association for the Restoration of Great Vietnam (Vi\u1ec7t Nam \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t Ph\u1ee5c H\u01b0ng H\u1ed9i), which was dominated by his Catholic allies in Hue. When its existence was discovered in the summer of 1944, the French declared Di\u1ec7m to be subversive and ordered his arrest. He flew to Saigon under Japanese military protection, staying there until the end of WWII.\nIn 1945, after the coup against French colonial rule, the Japanese offered Di\u1ec7m the post of prime minister in the Empire of Vietnam under B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, which they organized on leaving the country. He declined initially, but reconsidered his decision and attempted to reverse the refusal. However, B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i had already given the post to Tr\u1ea7n Tr\u1ecdng Kim. In September 1945, after the Japanese withdrawal, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and in the Northern half of Vietnam, his Viet Minh began fighting the French administration. Di\u1ec7m attempted to travel to Hu\u1ebf to dissuade B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i from joining H\u1ed3 but was arrested by the Vi\u1ec7t Minh along the way and exiled to a highland village near the border. He might have died of malaria, dysentery, and influenza had the local tribesmen not nursed him back to health. Six months later, he was taken to meet H\u1ed3, who recognized Di\u1ec7m's virtues and, wanting to extend the support for his new government, asked Di\u1ec7m to be a minister of the interior. Di\u1ec7m refused to join the Vi\u1ec7t Minh, assailing H\u1ed3 for the murder of his brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Kh\u00f4i by Vi\u1ec7t Minh cadres.During the Indochina War, Di\u1ec7m and other non-communist nationalists had to face a dilemma: they did not want to restore colonial rule and did not want to support the Vi\u1ec7t Minh. Di\u1ec7m proclaimed his neutrality and attempted to establish a Third Force movement that was both anti-colonialist and anti-communist In 1947, he became the founder and chief of the National Union Bloc (Kh\u1ed1i Qu\u1ed1c Gia Li\u00ean Hi\u1ec7p) and then folded it into the Vietnam National Rally (Vi\u1ec7t Nam Qu\u1ed1c Gia Li\u00ean Hi\u1ec7p), which united non-communist Vietnamese nationalists. He also established relationships with some leading Vietnamese anti-communists like Nguy\u1ec5n T\u00f4n Ho\u00e0n (1917\u20132001), a fellow Catholic and political activist. His other allies and advisors were dominated by Catholics, especially his family members and their friends.\nDi\u1ec7m also secretly maintained contact with high-ranking leaders of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, attempting to convince them to leave Ho Chi Minh's government and join him. Meanwhile, Di\u1ec7m lobbied French colonial officials for \"true independence\" for Vietnam, but was disappointed when B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i agreed to French demands for an \"associate state\" within the French Union, which allowed France to maintain its diplomatic, economic, and military policies in Vietnam. In the meantime, the French had created the State of Vietnam and Di\u1ec7m refused B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i's offer to become the prime minister. On 16 June 1949, he published a new manifesto in newspapers proclaiming a third force different from the Vi\u1ec7t Minh and B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, but it raised little interest and provided further evidence to both the French and Vi\u1ec7t Minh that Di\u1ec7m was a dangerous rival.\nIn 1950, the Vi\u1ec7t Minh lost patience and sentenced him to death in absentia, and the French refused to protect him. Ho Chi Minh's cadres tried to assassinate him while he was traveling to visit his elder brother Th\u1ee5c, bishop of the V\u0129nh Long diocese in the Mekong Delta. Recognizing his political status, Di\u1ec7m decided to leave Vietnam in 1950.\nAccording to Miller, during his early career, there were at least three ideologies that influenced Di\u1ec7m's social and political views in the 1920s and 1930s. The first of these were Catholic nationalism, which Di\u1ec7m inherited from his family's tradition, especially from his brother Bishop Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c and Nguy\u1ec5n H\u1eefu B\u00e0i, who advised him to \"return the seal\" in 1933 to oppose French policies. The second was Di\u1ec7m's understanding of Confucianism, especially through his friendship with Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u who argued that Confucianism's teachings could be applied to modern Vietnam. Lastly, instructed by Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu, Di\u1ec7m began to examine Personalism, which originated from French Catholicism's philosophy and then applied this doctrine as the main ideology of his regime.\nExile.\nDi\u1ec7m applied for permission to travel to Rome for the Holy Year celebrations at the Vatican. After gaining French permission, he left in August 1950 with his older brother, Bishop Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c. Before going to Europe, Di\u1ec7m went to Japan where he met with Prince C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3, his former ally, and discussed C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3's efforts to return to Vietnam and his capacity to play some roles in his homeland. Di\u1ec7m's friend also managed to organize a meeting between him and Wesley Fishel, an American political science professor at the University of California, who was working for the CIA in Japan. Fishel was a proponent of the anti-colonial, anti-communist third force doctrine in Asia and was impressed with Di\u1ec7m and helped him organize connections in the United States. In 1951, Di\u1ec7m flew to the United States to seek the support of government officials but he was not successful in winning US support for Vietnamese anti-communists.\nIn Rome, Di\u1ec7m obtained an audience with Pope Pius XII at the Vatican before undertaking further lobbying across Europe. He also met with French and Vietnamese officials in Paris and sent a message indicating that he was willing to be the Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam to B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i but B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i refused to meet with him. Di\u1ec7m returned to the United States to continue building support among Americans. Nonetheless, to Americans, the fact that Di\u1ec7m was an anti-communist was not enough to distinguish him from B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i and other State of Vietnam leaders. Some American officials worried that his devout Catholicism could hinder his ability to mobilize support in a predominantly non-Catholic country. Di\u1ec7m recognized that concern and broadened his lobbying efforts to include a development focus in addition to anti-communism and religious factors. Di\u1ec7m was motivated by the knowledge that the US was enthusiastic in applying their technology and knowledge to modernize postcolonial countries. With the help of Fishel, then at Michigan State University (MSU), Di\u1ec7m was appointed as a consultant to MSU's Government Research Bureau. MSU was administering government-sponsored assistance programs for Cold War allies, and Di\u1ec7m helped Fishel to lay the foundation for a program later implemented in South Vietnam, the Michigan State University Vietnam Advisory Group.\nThe Americans' assessments of Di\u1ec7m were varied but Di\u1ec7m did gain favor with some high-ranking officials, such as Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, Roman Catholic cardinal Francis Spellman, Representative Mike Mansfield of Montana, and Representative John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts along with numerous journalists, academics, and the former director of the Office of Strategic Services William J. Donovan. Although he did not succeed in winning official support from the US, his personal interactions with American political leaders promised the prospect of gaining more support in the future. Mansfield remembered after the luncheon with Di\u1ec7m held on 8 May 1953, he felt that \"if anyone could hold South Vietnam, it was somebody like Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m\". According to John Cooney, cardinal Francis Spellman played a prominent role in creating the political career of the Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m. In Di\u1ec7m, Spellman had seen the qualities he desired in any leader: ardent Catholicism and rabid anti-Communism\nDuring Di\u1ec7m's exile, his brothers Nhu, C\u1ea9n, and Luy\u1ec7n played important roles in helping him build international and internal networks and support in different ways for his return to Vietnam. In the early 1950s, Nhu established the C\u1ea7n Lao Party, which played a key role in helping Di\u1ec7m attain and consolidate his power.\nBecoming prime minister and consolidation of power.\nUntil 1953, the State of Vietnam was nominally independent from Paris. Since dissatisfaction with France and B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i was rising among non-communist nationalists, and support from non-communist nationalists and Di\u1ec7m's allies was rising for his \"true independence\" point of view, Di\u1ec7m sensed that it was time for him to come to power in Vietnam.In early 1954, B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i offered Di\u1ec7m the position of prime minister in the new government in Vietnam. In May 1954, the French surrendered at \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7 and the Geneva Conference began in April 1954. On 16 June 1954, Di\u1ec7m met with B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i in France and agreed to be the Prime Minister if B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i would give him military and civilian control. On 24 June 1954, Di\u1ec7m returned from exile, arriving at T\u00e2n S\u01a1n Nh\u1ee9t airport in Saigon. Di\u1ec7m was officially appointed Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam on June 26. On 7 July 1954, Di\u1ec7m established his new government with a cabinet of 18 people.\nIn the first period of his premiership, Di\u1ec7m did not have much power in the government; he lacked control of the military and police forces, and the civil system's key positions were still held by French officials. He also could not control the Bank of Indochina. Besides, Di\u1ec7m had to face massive obstacles: refugee issues; the French colonists wanting to remove Di\u1ec7m to protect France's interest in South Vietnam; General Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Hinh, a Francophile, the leader of National Army was ready to oust Di\u1ec7m; the leaders of the H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o and Cao \u0110\u00e0i sectarian armies wanted positions in Di\u1ec7m's cabinet and complete administrative control over the areas in which they had large numbers of followers; and the major threat of B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean, an organized crime syndicate that controlled the National Police led by L\u00ea V\u0103n Vi\u1ec5n, whose power was focused in Saigon. In summer 1954, the three organizations controlled approximately one-third of the territory and population of South Vietnam. Besides his own political skills, Di\u1ec7m had to trust in his relatives and the backing of his American supporters to overcome the obstacles and neutralize his opponents.\nPartition.\nOn 21 July 1954, the Geneva Accords temporarily partitioned Vietnam at the 17th parallel, pending elections in July 1956 to reunify the country. The Democratic Republic of Vietnam controlled the north (including his hometown Qu\u1ea3ng B\u00ecnh province), while the French-backed State of Vietnam controlled the south with Di\u1ec7m as the prime minister. Di\u1ec7m criticized the French for abandoning North Vietnam to the Communists at Geneva, claimed that the terms did not represent the will of the Vietnamese people, and refused French suggestions to include more pro-French officials in the government.\nThe Geneva Accords allowed for freedom of movement between the two zones until October 1954; this put a large strain on the south. Di\u1ec7m had only expected 10,000 refugees, but by August, there were more than 200,000 waiting for evacuation from Hanoi and H\u1ea3i Ph\u00f2ng. Nevertheless, the migration helped to strengthen Di\u1ec7m's political base of support as the refugees, mostly Catholic, were strongly anti-communist. To address the refugee situation, Diem's government arranged for their relocation to fertile and underpopulated provinces in the western Mekong Delta. The Di\u1ec7m regime also provided them with food and shelter, farm tools, and housing materials, as well as digging irrigation canals, building dykes, and dredging swamp-lands to help stabilise their lives.\nEstablishing control.\nIn August 1954, Di\u1ec7m also had to face the \"Hinh crisis\" when Hinh launched a series of public attacks on Diem, proclaiming that South Vietnam needed a \"strong and popular\" leader, as well as threatening to coup. However, at the end of 1954, Di\u1ec7m successfully forced Hinh to resign from his post. Hinh had to flee to Paris and hand over his command of the national army to General Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Vy. But the National Army officers favoured Di\u1ec7m's leadership over General Vy, which forced him to flee to Paris. Despite the failure of Hinh's alleged coup, the French continued to encourage Di\u1ec7m's enemies in an attempt to destabilize him.\nOn 31 December 1954, Di\u1ec7m established the National Bank of Vietnam and replaced the Indochinese banknotes with new Vietnamese banknotes. In early 1955, although American advisors encouraged Di\u1ec7m to negotiate with the leaders of the political-religious forces who threatened to overthrow his position and to forge an anti-communist bloc, he was determined to attack his enemies to consolidate his power. In April 1955, Di\u1ec7m's army forces took most of B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean's posts in Saigon after a victory in the Battle of Saigon. Within a few months, Di\u1ec7m's troops wiped out the B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean's remnants, leaving only a few small bands, who then joined forces with the communists.\nThe defeat of B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean increased the authority and prestige of Di\u1ec7m's government and marked the end of French efforts to remove Di\u1ec7m. Most of the Cao \u0110\u00e0i leaders chose to rally to Di\u1ec7m's government. Di\u1ec7m then dismantled the private armies of the Cao \u0110\u00e0i and H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o religious sects. By the end of 1955, Di\u1ec7m had almost taken control of South Vietnam, and his government was stronger than ever before. In April 1956, along with the capture of Ba C\u1ee5t, the leader of the last H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o rebels, Di\u1ec7m almost subdued all of his non-communist enemies, and could focus on his Vietnamese communist opponents. According to Miller, Di\u1ec7m's capacity in subduing his enemies and consolidating his power strengthened U.S. support of his government, although the U.S. government had planned to withdraw its backing from Di\u1ec7m during his early difficult years of leadership.\nPresidency (1955\u20131963).\nEstablishment of the Republic of Vietnam.\nIn South Vietnam, a referendum was scheduled for 23 October 1955 to determine the future direction of the south, in which the people would choose Di\u1ec7m or B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i as the leader of South Vietnam. Di\u1ec7m, with the support of his brother Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu and the C\u1ea7n Lao Party, used an avid propaganda campaign to destroy B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i's reputation and garner support for Diem. Supporters of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i were not allowed to campaign, and were physically attacked by Nhu's workers. Official results showed 98.2 per cent of voters favoured Di\u1ec7m, an implausibly high result that was condemned as fraudulent. The total number of votes far exceeded the number of registered voters by over 380,000, further evidence that the referendum was heavily rigged. For example, only 450,000 voters were registered in Saigon, but 605,025 were said to have voted for Di\u1ec7m.\nOn 26 October 1955, Di\u1ec7m proclaimed the formation of the Republic of Vietnam, with himself as its first President until 26 October 1956. The first Constitution provided articles to establish the republic and organize the election of its president. The 1954 Geneva Accords prescribed elections to reunify the country in 1956. Di\u1ec7m refused to hold these elections, claiming that a free election was not possible in the North and that since the previous State of Vietnam had not signed the accords, they were not bound by it. Di\u1ec7m claimed his government had the legal right to refuse the general elections, because the State of Vietnam had been recognized by France as a fully sovereign state within the French Union on 4 June 1954 and the country became independent from the treaties signed by France. According to historian Keith Taylor, Di\u1ec7m's rejection of the Geneva Accords was a way of objecting to the French colonization of Vietnam, while at the same time expressing his opinion of B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, and the establishment of the First Republic of Vietnam served to assert Vietnamese independence from France. At the same time, the first Constitution of the Republic of Vietnam was promulgated. According to the Constitution, the President was granted an inordinate amount of power, and his governing style became increasingly authoritarian over time.\nDi\u1ec7m's rule was authoritarian and nepotistic. His most trusted official was his brother Nhu, leader of the primary pro-Di\u1ec7m party, the C\u1ea7n Lao Party. Nhu was an opium addict and admirer of Adolf Hitler. He modeled the C\u1ea7n Lao secret police's marching style and torture styles on Nazi methodology. C\u1ea9n, another brother, was put in charge of the former Imperial City of Hu\u1ebf. Although neither C\u1ea9n nor Nhu held any official role in the government, they ruled their regions of South Vietnam absolutely, commanding private armies and secret police forces. Di\u1ec7m's youngest brother Luy\u1ec7n was appointed Ambassador to the United Kingdom. His elder brother, Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c, was Archbishop of Hu\u1ebf. Despite this, Thuc lived in the Presidential Palace, along with Nhu, Nhu's wife, and Di\u1ec7m. Di\u1ec7m was nationalistic, devoutly Catholic, anti-Communist, and preferred the philosophies of personalism and Confucianism.\nDi\u1ec7m's rule was also pervaded by family corruption. C\u1ea9n was widely believed to be involved in several illegal operations, namely the illegal smuggling of rice to North Vietnam on the black market, the opium trade via Laos, in monopolizing the cinnamon trade, and amassing a fortune in foreign banks. With Nhu, C\u1ea9n competed for U.S. contracts and rice trade. Thuc, the most powerful religious leader in the country, was allowed to solicit \"voluntary contributions to the Church\" from Saigon businessmen, which was likened to \"tax notices\". Thuc also used his position to acquire farms, businesses, urban real estate, rental property, and rubber plantations in the name of the Catholic Church. He also used Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) personnel to work on his timber and construction projects. The Nhus amassed a fortune by running numbers and lottery rackets, manipulating currency and extorting money from Saigon businesses, while Luyen became a multimillionaire by speculating in Piastres and Pounds on the currency exchange using inside government information.\nHowever, Miller wrote that Di\u1ec7m also clamped down on corruption. South Vietnam was divided into colonial-era provinces, of which governors enjoyed sweeping powers and firmly controlled local administrations, creating a problem of corruption and cronyism. The governors were seen as petty tyrants, and Di\u1ec7m launched corruption probes while also replacing many of the governors. However, starting in 1954, the political turmoil prevented him from taking further measures. The MSUG, an American advisory body created to aid the Di\u1ec7m's regime, recommended that Di\u1ec7m centralize power by abolishing local administrations and reforming the existing ones into much larger \"areas\", with much less power and no financial autonomy. Di\u1ec7m objected to abolishing the position of province chiefs, arguing that only local governments could address \"the needs of local people\" as he believed that requiring fiscal self-sufficiency from the local governments was key to creating the \"ethos of mutual responsibility\" \u2013 a key concept in Di\u1ec7m's communitarian interpretation of democracy.\nThe C\u1ea7n Lao Party played a key role in Di\u1ec7m's regime, often acting as much more than a tool of political organization. Initially, the party acted secretly based on a network of cells, and each member only knew the identities of a few other members. When necessary, the Party could assume the role of the government. After 1954, the existence of the party was recognized, but its activities were hidden from public view. In the early 1950s, Di\u1ec7m and Nhu used the party to mobilize support for Di\u1ec7m's political movements. According to the Republic of Vietnam decree 116/BNV/CT, the C\u1ea7n Lao Party was established on 2 September 1954. Personalism, as part of Person Dignity Theory, officially became the basic doctrine of Di\u1ec7m's regime, reflected in the Constitution's preface, which declared that \"Building Politics, Economy, Society, Culture for the people based on respecting Personalism\".\nElections.\nAccording to Miller, democracy, to Di\u1ec7m, was rooted in his dual identity as Confucian and Catholic, and was associated with communitarianism and the doctrine of Personalism. He defined democracy as \"a social ethos based on certain sense of moral duty\", not in the U.S. sense of \"political right\" or political pluralism and in the context of an Asian country like Vietnam, Confucian and Catholic values were relevant to deal with contemporary problems in politics, governance, and social change. In this sense, Di\u1ec7m was not a reactionary mandarin lacking an interest in democracy as he has been portrayed by some scholars. His way of thinking about democracy became a key factor of his approach to political and administrative reform. Di\u1ec7m argued that post-colonial Vietnam must be a democratic country, but noted that Vietnamese democracy should develop out of its precolonial models, rather than European and American concepts, arguing that Vietnamese \"institutions, customs and the principles underlying them are democratic facts.\" Researching the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty, Di\u1ec7m asserted that the moral norm of Nguy\u1ec5n-era Vietnam was that it was founded \"on the people\", following the Confucian concept of Mandate of Heaven; people could and often did withdraw their support from unpopular monarchs, causing their downfall. Di\u1ec7m considered it an \"indigenous Vietnamese democratic tradition\" and wished to make it the basis of democracy that would emerge in Vietnam.\nDi\u1ec7m's ideology of personalism was largely influenced by the Confucian notion that self-improvement meant cooperation with one's local community and society at large; he thought that there is a tension between individual's personal ambitions and community's ethos of mutual responsibility. Inspired by the writings of Catholic philosopher Emmanuel Mounier, Di\u1ec7m considered his ideology of personalism a \"third way\" of communitarianism, presenting an alternative to both individualism and collectivism, insisting that democracy couldn't be realised \"by drafting and promulgating documents and regulations\", but that civil liberties granted by democratic regime to its citizens should serve \"collective social improvement\", serving each person's community rather than the individual itself.\nIn 1955, Di\u1ec7m wrote that \"democracy is primarily a state of mind, a way of living that respects the human person, both with regard to ourselves and with regard to others\" and that \"more than any other form of government, democracy demands that we all display wisdom and virtue in our dealings with each other.\" In 1956, Diem added that democracy had to foster a feeling of community and mutual responsibility, arguing that respect for democracy lays in \"decency in social relations\", thus defining Vietnamese democracy as inherently communitarian and not individualist.\nIn summer and fall of 1955, Di\u1ec7m's administration had to decide the fate of the former emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i. B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i was initially supposed to remain the head of state until the National Assembly elections, but Di\u1ec7m's cabinet decided to decide the monarch's fate through a referendum. Miller highlights that despite the popular belief that the referendum was put forward by Edward Lansdale, it was Di\u1ec7m who decided to organise the referendum as a way to burnish his democratic credentials and attempt to realise his democratic ideas. While the monarch was highly unpopular given his collaboration with the French colonial regime, the new government committed to further diminishing \u0110\u1ea1i's reputation with aggressive smear campaign and large pro-rallies. Additionally, the referendum itself was considered non-secret, given that the voters were given ballots with the photos of Di\u1ec7m and B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i on it and were supposed to tear it in half and deposit the slice with their preferred candidate into the box \u2013 this made one's choice visible to everyone. Miller notes that the referendum reveals the eccentric nature of Di\u1ec7m's understanding of democracy \u2013 in the sense of political pluralism, the vote appeared inherently authoritarian; but to Di\u1ec7m his margin appeared legitimate, as he described democracy as \"state of mind\" in which the people elect the morally superior leader. Thus Di\u1ec7m was \"adamant that the outcome was entirely consistent with his view of democracy as the citizenry's embrace of a common moral ethos\".\nOn 4 March 1956, the elections for the first National Assembly were held. These elections were considerably more free and fair than the referendum, and some governmental candidates would highly contest with independents and oppositionist candidates for their seats, according to Miller. On this occasion, non-government candidates were allowed to campaign and the election had an atmosphere of legitimate pluralism, but the government retained the right to ban candidates deemed to be linked to the communists or other 'rebel' groups, and campaign material was screened. However, Miller notes that in some districts the opposition candidates withdrew due to police intimidation and military presence. Surprisingly, instead of letting the draft constitution be created by a handpicked commission, Di\u1ec7m dissolved it and had the constitution be made by the National Assembly deputies instead. The government hailed the process as democratic and transparent, given how the Assembly meetings were open and media presence was allowed; the National Revolutionary Movement dominated the council, but a handful of opposition figures had won seats as well.\nHowever, Di\u1ec7m's regime of \"democratic one man rule\" faced increasing difficulties. After coming under pressure from within Vietnam and from the United States, Di\u1ec7m agreed to hold legislative elections in August 1959 for South Vietnam. However, in reality, newspapers were not allowed to publish names of independent candidates or their policies, and political meetings exceeding five people were prohibited. Candidates who ran against government-supported opponents faced harassment and intimidation. In rural areas, candidates who ran were threatened using charges of conspiracy with the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng, which carried the death penalty. Phan Quang \u0110\u00e1n, the government's most prominent critic, was allowed to run. Despite the deployment of 8,000 ARVN plainclothes troops into his district to vote, \u0110\u00e1n still won by a ratio of six to one. The busing of soldiers to vote for regime approved candidates occurred across the country. When the new assembly convened, \u0110\u00e1n was arrested.\nIn May 1961, U.S. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson visited Saigon and enthusiastically declared Di\u1ec7m the \"Winston Churchill of Asia\". When asked why he had made the comment, Johnson replied, \"Di\u1ec7m's the only boy we got out there.\" Johnson assured Di\u1ec7m of more aid in molding a fighting force that could resist the communists.\nSocio-economic policies.\nDuring his presidency, Di\u1ec7m imposed programs to reform Saigon society in accordance with Catholic and Confucian values. Brothels and opium dens were closed, divorce and abortion were made illegal, and adultery laws were strengthened. Additionally, Di\u1ec7m's government established many schools and universities, such as the National Technical Center at Ph\u00fa Th\u1ecd in 1957, the University of Saigon (1956), the University of Hue (1957), and the University of Dalat (1957).\nRural development.\nDi\u1ec7m hoped to develop a national, revolutionary spirit within the citizens of South Vietnam as well as a vibrant communal democracy and an independent, non-communist Vietnam. He saw the peasantry as the key to this nation-building as he believed the peasantry was more likely to put the country before their own self interest in a spirit of volunteerism. A Special Commissariat for Civic Action was established to extend the reach of the Saigon government into rural areas and to help create 'model villages' to show rural peasants that the South Vietnamese government was viable as well as allowing citizen volunteers, and experts, to help these communities develop and tie them to the nation. The Special Commissariat for Civic Action was considered a practical tool of Di\u1ec7m's government to serve \"the power vacuum\", and be a force of influence for Di\u1ec7m's government, in the rural countryside following the departure of Vi\u1ec7t Minh cadres after the Geneva Accords (1954).\nGeoffrey C. Stewart's study provides a clearer picture of Di\u1ec7m's domestic policies and a further understanding of his government's efforts in reaching and connecting with local communities in South Vietnam that shows \"an indigenous initiative\" of the government in building an independent and viable nation.\nLand Reform In South Vietnam, especially in Mekong Delta, landholdings in rural areas were concentrated in small number of rich landlord families. Thus, it was urgent to implement land reform in South Vietnam. Di\u1ec7m had two attempts to control the excesses of the land tenancy system by promulgating the Ordinance 2 on 28 January 1955 to reduce land rent between 15% and 25% of the average harvest and the Ordinance 7 on 5 February 1955 to protect the rights of tenants on new and abandoned land and enhancing cultivation. In October 1956, with the urge from Wolf Ladejinsky, Di\u1ec7m's personal adviser on agrarian reform, Di\u1ec7m promulgated a more serious ordinance on the land reform, in which he proclaimed a \"land to the tiller\" (not to be confused with other Land reform in South Vietnam like Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u's later 'Land to the Tiller\" program) program to put a relatively high 100 hectares limit on rice land and 15 hectares for ancestral worship.\nHowever, this measure had no real effect because many landlords evaded the redistribution by transferring the property to the name of family members. Besides, during the 1946\u201354 war against the French Union forces, the Vi\u1ec7t Minh had gained control of parts of southern Vietnam, initiated land reform, confiscated landlords' land and distributed it to the peasants. Additionally, the ceiling limit was more than 30 times that allowed in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, and the 370,000 acres (1,500\u00a0km2) of the Catholic Church's landownings in Vietnam were exempted. The political, social, and economic influences of the land reform was minimal. From 1957 to 1963, only 50 percent of expropriated land was redistributed, and only 100,000 out of approximately one million tenant farmers in South Vietnam benefited from the reform. Farmers were required to pay for land they acquired under the program, and the program was riddled with corruption and inefficiency.\nSupport for the Vietcong was driven by resentment of Di\u1ec7m's reversal of Viet Minh land reforms in the countryside. The Viet Minh had confiscated large private landholdings, reduced rents and debts, and leased communal lands, mostly to poorer peasants. Di\u1ec7m brought the landlords back, people who had been farming land for years had to return it to landlords and pay years of back rent. Marilyn B. Young wrote that \"The divisions within villages reproduced those that had existed against the French: 75% support for the Vietcong, 20% trying to remain neutral and only 5% firmly pro-Saigon government\".\nResettlement According to Miller, Di\u1ec7m, who described tenant farmers as a \"real proletariat\" and pursued the goal of \"middle peasantization\", was not a beholden to large landowners, instead of vigorously implementing Land Reform, Di\u1ec7m had his own vision in Vietnamese rural development based on resettlement, which focused on redistribution of people (rather than land), could reduce overpopulation and lead to many benefits in socio-economic transformation as well as military affairs and security, especially anti-communist infiltration. Moreover, Di\u1ec7m was ambitious to envision resettlement as a tactic to practice the government's ideological goals. The differences between the US and Di\u1ec7m over nation building in countryside shaped the clashes in their alliance.\nThe C\u00e1i S\u1eafn resettlement project: In late 1955, with the help of US material support and expertise, Di\u1ec7m's government implemented the project C\u00e1i S\u1eafn in An Giang province, which aimed to resettle one hundred thousand northern refugees.\nLand Development program (\"Khu dinh \u0111i\u1ec1n\"): In early 1957, Di\u1ec7m started a new program called the \"Land Development\" to relocate poor inhabitants, demobilized soldiers, and minority ethnic groups in central and southern Vietnam into abandoned or unused land in Mekong Delta and Central Highlands, and cultivating technological and scientific achievements to transform South Vietnam and ensure security and prevent communist infiltration. Di\u1ec7m believed that the program would help improve civilians' lives, teach them the values of being self-reliant and hard working. At the end of 1963, the program had built more than two hundred settlements for a quarter of a million people. Nevertheless, the lacks of conditions in these areas along with the corruption and mercilessness of local officials failed the program.\nAgroville program (\"khu tr\u00f9 m\u1eadt\"): During late 1959 and early 1960, motivated by the idea of population reunification, Di\u1ec7m introduced the Agroville Program, which he intended to physically relocate residents who lived in remote and isolated regions in Mekong delta into new settlements in \"dense and prosperous areas\"\u00a0\u2013 proposing to offer them urban modernity and amenities without leaving their farms, and to keep them far away from the communists. Nonetheless, by late 1960, Di\u1ec7m had to admit that the program's objective failed since the residents were not happy with the program and the communists infiltrated it, and he had to discard it.\nAccording to Miller, the disagreement between the US and Di\u1ec7m over agrarian reform made their alliance \"move steadily from bad to worse\". Miller argues that Di\u1ec7m wished to support poor peasantry by gradual modernisation and moderate redistribution of land. Di\u1ec7m wanted to acquire and distribute the land of rich landowners, but also wished to protect the property of middle-landlords. One of the main concerns of Di\u1ec7m was overpopulation, aggravated by the mass migration of refugees from the North, something that Di\u1ec7m wished to alleviate by resettlement. Di\u1ec7m considered resettlement an important part of his economic nationalism, arguing that utilising Vietnamese land would increase the production of grains and rubber and allow South Vietnam to enter international trade. Ideologically, Di\u1ec7m considered this policy a key to his \"Personalist revolution\" \u2013 the resettled villages would be \"neither communist-style collectives nor incubators of rugged individualism\", but they would rather conform to his ideal of communitarianism. Rendering landless peasants freeholders was seen as a step towards reforming the Vietnamese society as a whole.\nIn late 1955, a Cai San Project was launched that aimed to settle northern refugees in rural areas previously occupied by H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o partisans. This project created an intense social conflict between the settlers and Cai San natives, and Di\u1ec7m offered a concession to the local landowners by decreeing that refugees must sign rental contracts with them. This sparked refugee demonstrations that only started to fade away when Di\u1ec7m ordered that refugees have the right to buy out the land they worked at. While initially considered a failure, especially due to the fact that the resettlement sparked anti-government sentiment and created social conflicts, Miller notes that Cai San became fairly prosperous by 1960, and the settlement did gradually evolve into a pro-government stronghold, thus succeeding in its aim at counter-insurgency. Many of the counter-insurgency programs progressed too quickly however, and ended up destabilising the regime. When Robert Thompson sent Filipino field operatives into local hamlet settlements, they reported that South Vietnamese peasants accepted Viet Cong claims that \"America had replaced France as a colonial power in Vietnam\".\nCounter-insurgency.\nDuring his presidency, Di\u1ec7m strongly focused on his central concern: internal security to protect his regime as well as maintain order and social change: staunch anti-subversion and anti-rebellion policies. After the B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean was defeated and the H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o and Cao \u0110\u00e0i were subdued, Di\u1ec7m concentrated on his most serious threat: the communists. Di\u1ec7m's main measures for internal security were threats, punishment and intimidation. His regime countered North Vietnamese and communist subversion (including the assassination of over 450 South Vietnamese officials in 1956) by launching campaigns known as \"Denounce the Communists\". Tens of thousands of suspected communists were detained in \"political re-education centers\". The North Vietnamese government claimed that over 65,000 individuals were imprisoned and 2,148 killed in the process by November 1957. In a 1961 letter to the International Control Commission, North Vietnamese general V\u00f5 Nguy\u00ean Gi\u00e1p stated that each \"Denounce the Communists\" campaign had resulted in hundreds arrested, wounded or killed, sometimes thousands. According to historian Gabriel Kolko, from 1955 to by the end of 1958, 40,000 political prisoners had been jailed and many were executed. Historian Guenter Lewy\u00a0considers such figures exaggerated, stating that there were only 35,000 prisoners in total in South Vietnam during the period.\nBy the end of 1959, Di\u1ec7m was able to entirely control each family and the communists had to suffer their \"darkest period\" in their history. Membership declined by two thirds and they had almost no power in the countryside of South Vietnam. Di\u1ec7m's repression extended beyond communists to anti-communist dissidents and anti-corruption whistleblowers. In 1956, after the \"Anti-Communist Denunciation Campaign\", Di\u1ec7m issued Ordinance No. 6, which placed anyone who was considered a threat to the state and public order in jail or house arrest.\nNevertheless, Di\u1ec7m's hard policies led to fear and resentment in many quarters in South Vietnam and negatively affected his relations with the US in terms of counter-insurgent methods. On 22 February 1957, when Di\u1ec7m delivered a speech at an agricultural fair in Bu\u00f4n Ma Thu\u1ed9t, a communist named H\u00e0 Minh Tri attempted to assassinate the president. He approached Di\u1ec7m and fired a pistol from close range, but missed, hitting the Secretary for Agrarian Reform's left arm. The weapon then jammed and security overpowered Tri before he was able to fire another shot. Di\u1ec7m was unmoved by the incident. The assassination attempt was the desperate response of the communists to Di\u1ec7m's relentless anti-communist policies.\nAs opposition to Di\u1ec7m's rule in South Vietnam grew, a low-level insurgency began to take shape there in 1957. Finally, in January 1959, under pressure from southern communist cadres who were being successfully targeted by Di\u1ec7m's secret police, Hanoi's Central Committee issued a secret resolution authorizing the use of armed insurgency in the South with supplies and troops from the North. On 20 December 1960, under instructions from Hanoi, southern communists established the Vietcong (VC) in order to overthrow the government of the south. On 11 November 1960, a failed coup attempt against Di\u1ec7m was led by Lieutenant Colonel V\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n \u0110\u00f4ng and Colonel Nguy\u1ec5n Ch\u00e1nh Thi of the ARVN Airborne Division. There was a further attempt to assassinate Di\u1ec7m and his family in February 1962 when two air force officers\u00a0\u2013 acting in unison\u00a0\u2013 bombed the Presidential Palace.\nIn 1962, the cornerstone of Di\u1ec7m's counterinsurgency effort \u2013 the Strategic Hamlet Program (\"Vietnamese:\" \"\u1ea4p Chi\u1ebfn l\u01b0\u1ee3c\"), \"the last and most ambitious of Di\u1ec7m's government's nation building schemes\", was implemented, calling for the consolidation of 14,000 villages of South Vietnam into 11,000 secure hamlets, each with its own houses, schools, wells, and watchtowers supported by South Vietnamese government. The hamlets were intended to isolate the VC from the villages, their source for recruiting soldiers, supplies, and information, and to transform the countryside. In the end, because of many shortcomings, the Strategic Hamlet Program was not as successful as had been expected and was cancelled after the assassination of Di\u1ec7m. However, according to Miller, the program created a remarkable turnabout in Di\u1ec7m's regime in their war against communism. Frederick Nolting reported that Di\u1ec7m named reestablishing control and security as his number one priority regarding the countryside. While appearing receptive to building an \"infrastructure of democracy\" in the rural areas, Di\u1ec7m emphasised that it would have to wait until the conclusion of the war. However, the Strategic Hamlet Program was exposed as an almost complete failure in the aftermath of the 1 November 1963 coup that left Di\u1ec7m murdered. US officials discovered, for example, that only 20% of the 8,600 hamlets that the Di\u1ec7m regime had reported \"Complete\" met the minimum American standards of security and readiness.\nReligious policies and the Buddhist crisis.\nSouth Vietnam was often portrayed as having a Buddhist majority, comprising 70\u201390% of the population. These figures, reported by foreign journalists, were overestimated, as Westerners commonly mistook folk religion for Buddhism. The actual number of Buddhists was much smaller, at most about 27%.\nDi\u1ec7m was widely regarded by \"orthodox\" historians as having pursued pro-Catholic policies that antagonized many Buddhists. Specifically, the government was regarded as being biased towards Catholics in public service and military promotions, as well as the allocation of land and business favors. According to Marvin Gettleman, Di\u1ec7m once told a high-ranking officer, forgetting that he was a Buddhist, \"Put your Catholic officers in sensitive places. They can be trusted.\" The distribution of weapons to village self-defense militias intended to repel VC guerrillas saw weapons only given to Catholics. Some Buddhist villages converted en masse to Catholicism in order to receive aid or to avoid being forcibly resettled by Di\u1ec7m's regime, with Buddhists in the army being denied promotion if they refused to convert to Catholicism. Some Catholic priests ran their own private armies. S\u0142owiak argues that Di\u1ec7m's favoritism towards Catholics was not a sign of corruption and nepotism, but that it was necessary for Di\u1ec7m to favor people loyal towards him, given the precarious internal situation of Vietnam.\nThe Catholic Church was the largest landowner in the country, and the \"private\" status imposed on Buddhism by the French required official permission to conduct public Buddhist activities and was never repealed by Di\u1ec7m. Catholics were also \"de facto\" exempt from the \"corv\u00e9e\" labor that the government obliged all citizens to perform; US aid was disproportionately distributed to Catholic-majority villages. The land owned by the Catholic Church was exempt from land reform. Under Di\u1ec7m, the Catholic Church enjoyed special exemptions in property acquisition, and in 1959, Di\u1ec7m dedicated his country to the Virgin Mary. The white and gold Catholic flag was regularly flown at all major public events in South Vietnam. David Halberstam accused the Di\u1ec7m government of placing the newly constructed Hue and Dalat universities under Catholic authority to foster a Catholic-skewed academic environment. \nPortrayals by Western media at the time were distorted, as Vietnamese Buddhism in fact flourished under Di\u1ec7m's First Republic. Di\u1ec7m had contributed to Buddhist communities in South Vietnam by giving them permission to carry out activities that were banned by the French and supported money for Buddhist schools, ceremonies, and building more pagodas. Among the eighteen members of Di\u1ec7m's cabinet, there were five Catholics, five Confucians, and eight Buddhists, including a vice-president and a foreign minister. Only three of the top nineteen military officials were Catholics.\nThe regime's relations with the United States worsened during 1963, as discontent among South Vietnam's Buddhist majority was simultaneously heightened. In May, in the heavily Buddhist central city of Hu\u1ebf\u00a0\u2013 the seat of Di\u1ec7m's elder brother as the local Catholic archbishop\u00a0\u2013 the Buddhist majority was prohibited from displaying Buddhist flags during Vesak celebrations commemorating the birth of Gautama Buddha when the government cited a regulation prohibiting the display of non-government flags. A few days earlier, however, white and yellow Catholic papal flags flew at the 25th anniversary commemoration of Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Th\u1ee5c's elevation to the rank of bishop. According to Miller, Di\u1ec7m then proclaimed the flag embargo because he was annoyed with the commemoration for Th\u1ee5c. However, the ban on religious flags led to a protest led by Th\u00edch Tr\u00ed Quang against the government, which was suppressed by Di\u1ec7m's forces, and unarmed civilians were killed in the clash. Di\u1ec7m and his supporters blamed the Vi\u1ec7t C\u1ed9ng for the deaths and claimed the protesters were responsible for the violence. Although the provincial chief expressed sorrow for the killings and offered to compensate the victims' families, they resolutely denied that government forces were responsible for the killings and blamed the Viet Cong. According to Di\u1ec7m, it was the communists who threw a grenade into the crowd.\nThe Buddhists pushed for a five-point agreement: freedom to fly religious flags, an end to arbitrary arrests, compensation for the Hu\u1ebf victims, punishment for the officials responsible, and religious equality. Di\u1ec7m then banned demonstrations and ordered his forces to arrest those who engaged in civil disobedience. On 3 June 1963, protesters attempted to march towards the T\u1eeb \u0110\u00e0m pagoda. Six waves of ARVN tear gas and attack dogs failed to disperse the crowds. Finally, brownish-red liquid chemicals were doused on praying protesters, resulting in 67 being hospitalized for chemical injuries. A curfew was subsequently enacted.\nThe turning point came in June when a Buddhist monk, Th\u00edch Qu\u1ea3ng \u0110\u1ee9c, set himself on fire in the middle of a busy Saigon intersection in protest of Di\u1ec7m's policies; photos of this event were disseminated around the world, and for many people these pictures came to represent the failure of Di\u1ec7m's government. A number of other monks publicly self-immolated, and the US grew increasingly frustrated with the unpopular leader's public image in both Vietnam and the United States. Di\u1ec7m used his conventional anti-communist argument, identifying the dissenters as communists. As demonstrations against his government continued throughout the summer, the special forces loyal to Di\u1ec7m's brother, Nhu, conducted an August raid of the X\u00e1 L\u1ee3i pagoda in Saigon. Pagodas were vandalized, monks beaten, and the cremated remains of Qu\u1ea3ng \u0110\u1ee9c, which included his heart, a religious relic, were confiscated. Simultaneous raids were carried out across the country, with the T\u1eeb \u0110\u00e0m pagoda in Hu\u1ebf looted, the statue of Gautama Buddha demolished, and the body of a deceased monk confiscated. When the populace came to the defense of the monks, the resulting clashes saw 30 civilians killed and 200 wounded. In all 1,400 monks were arrested, and some thirty were injured across the country. The United States indicated its disapproval of Di\u1ec7m's administration when ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. visited the pagoda. No further mass Buddhist protests occurred during the remainder of Di\u1ec7m's rule.\nMadame Nhu Tr\u1ea7n L\u1ec7 Xu\u00e2n, Nhu's wife, inflamed the situation by mockingly applauding the suicides, stating, \"If the Buddhists want to have another barbecue, I will be glad to supply the gasoline.\" The pagoda raids stoked widespread public disquiet in Saigon. Students at Saigon University boycotted classes and rioted, which led to arrests, imprisonments, and the closure of the university; this was repeated at Hu\u1ebf University. When high school students demonstrated, Di\u1ec7m arrested them as well; over 1,000 students from Saigon's leading high school, most of them children of Saigon civil servants, were sent to re-education camps, including, reportedly, children as young as five, on charges of anti-government graffiti. Di\u1ec7m's foreign minister V\u0169 V\u0103n M\u1eabu resigned, shaving his head like a Buddhist monk in protest. When he attempted to leave the country on a religious pilgrimage to India, he was detained and kept under house arrest.\nAt the same time that the Buddhist crisis was taking place, a French diplomatic initiative to end the war had been launched. The initiative was known to historians as the \"Maneli affair\", after Mieczys\u0142aw Maneli, the Polish Commissioner to the International Control Commission who served as an intermediary between the two Vietnams. In 1963, North Vietnam was suffering its worst drought in a generation. Maneli conveyed messages between Hanoi and Saigon negotiating a declaration of a ceasefire in exchange for South Vietnamese rice being traded for North Vietnamese coal. On 2 September 1963, Maneli met with Nhu at his office in the Gia Long Palace, a meeting that Nhu leaked to the American columnist Joseph Alsop, who revealed it to the world in his \"A Matter of Fact\" column in the \"Washington Post\". Nhu's purpose in leaking the meeting was to blackmail the United States with the message that if Kennedy continued to criticize Di\u1ec7m's handling of the Buddhist crisis, Di\u1ec7m would reach an understanding with the Communists. The Kennedy administration reacted with fury at what Alsop had revealed. In a message to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Roger Hilsman urged that a coup against Di\u1ec7m be encouraged to take place promptly, saying that the mere possibility that Di\u1ec7m might make a deal with the Communists meant that he had to go.\nThere have been many interpretations of the Buddhist crisis and the immolation of Th\u00edch Qu\u1ea3ng \u0110\u1ee9c in 1963. Relating the events to the larger context of Vietnamese Buddhism in the 20th century and looking at the interactions between Di\u1ec7m and Buddhist groups, the Buddhist protests during Di\u1ec7m's regime were not only the struggles against discrimination in religious practices and religious freedom, but also the resistance of Vietnamese Buddhism to Di\u1ec7m's nation-building policies centered by a personalist revolution that Buddhists considered a threat to the revival of Vietnamese Buddhist power. Until the end of his life, Di\u1ec7m, along with his brother Nhu still believed that their nation-building was successful and they could resolve the Buddhist crisis in their own way, like what they had done with the Hinh crisis in 1954 and the struggle with the B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean in 1955.\nJerema S\u0142owiak of Jagiellonian University notes that the American media coverage skewed the true background of the conflict, spreading the \"narrative of evil dictator Di\u1ec7m oppressing good, peaceful Buddhists\". Because of this, Di\u1ec7m was considered a brutal and corrupt dictator in the United States at the time of his assassination. However, Di\u1ec7m enjoyed relatively good relations with the Buddhists until 1963, and sponsored numerous Buddhist temples, especially X\u00e1 L\u1ee3i Pagoda in 1956. Vietnamese Buddhists had a nationalist vision for Vietnam of their own, and were political enemies of Di\u1ec7m, engaged in \"a clash of two competing visions of Vietnam\". The Buddhist challenge to Di\u1ec7m was politically motivated and constituted struggle for power rather than a religious conflict \u2013 the Buddhists protested mainly against the Ngo family and rejected Di\u1ec7m's concessions, as their explicit goal was removal of Di\u1ec7m. Th\u00edch Tr\u00ed Quang, the leader of the Buddhist movement, insisted that the agitation must not stop until the South Vietnamese government is overthrown, and stated his intention to \"call for suicide volunteers\" if necessary. Edward Miller also argues that the primary cause of the protests was the opposition to Di\u1ec7m and his agenda rather than the discriminatory policies, as the Buddhist movements of Vietnam had their own political goals that starkly contrasted with Di\u1ec7m's. Di\u1ec7m reacted to the Buddhist resistance the same way he reacted to the Sect Crisis of 1955, and X\u00e1 L\u1ee3i Pagoda raids successfully broke the protesters' movement. The military supported Di\u1ec7m, and army leaders helped plan the raids and advocated for a forceful response to the protests, and only American disapproval drove military cliques to reconsider their support for Di\u1ec7m.\nForeign policy.\nThe foreign policy of the Republic of Vietnam (RVN), according to Fishel, \"to a very considerable extent\", was the policy of Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Di\u1ec7m himself during this period. He was the decisive factor in formulating foreign policies of the RVN, besides the roles of his adviser \u2013 Ng\u00f4 \u0110\u00ecnh Nhu and his foreign ministers: Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n \u0110\u1ed9 (1954\u20131955), V\u0169 V\u0103n M\u1eabu (1955\u20131963) and Ph\u1ea1m \u0110\u0103ng L\u00e2m (1963) who played subordinate roles in his regime. Nevertheless, since Di\u1ec7m had to pay much attention to domestic issues in the context of the Vietnam War, foreign policy did not receive appropriate attention from him. Di\u1ec7m paid more attention to countries that affected Vietnam directly and he seemed to personalize and emotionalize relations with other nations. The issues Di\u1ec7m paid more attention in foreign affairs were: the Geneva Accords, the withdrawal of the French, international recognition, the cultivation of the legitimacy of the RVN and the relations with the United States, Laos (good official relations) and Cambodia (complicated relations, especially due to border disputes and minority ethnicities), and especially North Vietnam. Besides, the RVN also focused on diplomatic relations with other Asian countries to secure its international recognition.\nDi\u1ec7m's attitude toward India was not harmonious due to India's non-alignment policy, which Di\u1ec7m assumed favored communism. It was not until in 1962, when India voted for a report criticizing the communists for supporting the invasion of South Vietnam, that Di\u1ec7m eventually reviewed his opinions toward India. For Japan, Di\u1ec7m's regime established diplomatic relations for the recognition of war reparations, which led to a reparation agreement in 1959 with the amount of US$49\u00a0million (equivalent to US$514\u00a0million in 2023). Di\u1ec7m also established friendly relations with non-communist states, especially South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, Thailand, Laos and the Federation of Malaya, where Di\u1ec7m's regime shared the common recognition of communist threats.\nRegarding the relations with communist North Vietnam, Di\u1ec7m maintained total hostility and never made a serious effort to establish any relations with it. In relations with France, as an anti-colonialism nationalist, Di\u1ec7m did not believe in France and France was always a negative factor in his foreign policy. He also never \"looked up on France as a counterweight to American influence\". However, in 1963, Di\u1ec7m's government entered into secret negotiations with communist North Vietnam, partly because of the economic difficulties of the North. The two sides agreed that the two Vietnams would exist for a period of exchange and interaction before general elections and a coalition government headed by Di\u1ec7m in the South would be established.\nConcerning relations with the US, although Di\u1ec7m admitted the importance of the US-RVN alliance, he perceived that the US's assistance to the RVN was primarily serving its own national interest, rather than the RVN's national interest. Taylor adds that Di\u1ec7m's distrust of the US grew because of its Laotian policy, which gave North Vietnam access to South Vietnam's border through southern Laos. Di\u1ec7m also feared the escalation of American military personnel in South Vietnam, which threatened his nationalist credentials and the independence of his government. In early 1963, the Ng\u00f4 brothers even revised their alliance with the US. Moreover, they also disagreed with the US on how to best react to the threat from North Vietnam. While Di\u1ec7m believed that before opening the political system for the participation of other political camps, military, and security matters should be taken into account; the US wanted otherwise and was critical of Di\u1ec7m's clientelistic government, where political power based on his family members and trusted associates. The Buddhist crisis in South Vietnam decreased American confidence in Di\u1ec7m, and eventually led to the coup d'\u00e9tat sanctioned by the US. Ultimately, nation-building politics \"shaped the evolution and collapse of the US-Diem alliance\". The different visions in the meanings of concepts \u2013 democracy, community, security, and social change \u2013 were substantial, and were a key cause of the strains throughout their alliance.\nCoup and assassination.\nAs the Buddhist crisis deepened in July 1963, non-communist Vietnamese nationalists and the military began preparations for a coup. B\u00f9i Di\u1ec5m, later South Vietnam's Ambassador to the United States, reported in his memoirs that General L\u00ea V\u0103n Kim requested his aid in learning what the United States might do about Di\u1ec7m's government. Di\u1ec5m had contacts in both the embassy and with the high-profile American journalists then in South Vietnam, David Halberstam (\"New York Times\"), Neil Sheehan (United Press International), and Malcolm Browne (Associated Press).\nThe coup d'\u00e9tat was designed by a military revolutionary council including ARVN generals led by General D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh. Lieutenant Colonel Lucien Conein, a CIA officer, had become a liaison between the US Embassy and the generals, who were led by Tr\u1ea7n V\u0103n \u0110\u00f4n, and they met each other for the first time on 2 October 1963, at T\u00e2n S\u01a1n Nh\u1ea5t airport. Three days later, Conein met with General D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Minh to discuss the coup and the stance of the US towards it. Conein then delivered the White House's message of American non-intervention, which was reiterated by Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., the U.S. ambassador, who gave secret assurances to the generals that the United States would not interfere.\nThe coup was chiefly planned by the Vietnamese generals. Unlike the coup in 1960, the plotters of the 1963 coup knew how to gain broad support from other ARVN officer corps. They obtained the support of Generals T\u00f4n Th\u1ea5t \u0110\u00ednh, \u0110\u1ed7 Cao Tr\u00ed, and Nguy\u1ec5n Kh\u00e1nh of the III, II, and I Corps respectively. However, commander of the IV Corps Hu\u1ef3nh V\u0103n Cao remained loyal to Di\u1ec7m.\nOn 1 November 1963, Conein donned his military uniform and stuffed three million Vietnamese piastres into a bag to be given to General Minh. Conein then called the CIA station and gave a signal indicating that the planned coup against Di\u1ec7m was about to start. Minh and his co-conspirators swiftly overthrew the government.\nWith only the palace guard remaining to defend Di\u1ec7m and his younger brother Nhu, the generals called the palace offering Di\u1ec7m exile if he surrendered. That evening, however, Di\u1ec7m and his entourage escaped via an underground passage to Cha Tam Catholic Church in Cholon, where they were captured the following morning. On 2 November 1963, the brothers were assassinated together in the back of an M113 armored personnel carrier with a bayonet and revolver by Captain Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Nhung, under orders from Minh . Di\u1ec7m was buried in an unmarked grave in M\u1ea1c \u0110\u0129nh Chi Cemetery. In 1983 the Vietnamese government closed the cemetery, and ordered all remains to be exhumed and removed. Di\u1ec7m and his brother were reburied in L\u00e1i Thi\u00eau Cemetery.\nAftermath.\nUpon learning of Di\u1ec7m's ouster and assassination, Ho Chi Minh reportedly stated: \"I can scarcely believe the Americans would be so stupid\". The North Vietnamese Politburo was more explicit:The consequences of the 1 November coup d'\u00e9tat will be contrary to the calculations of the US imperialists ... Di\u1ec7m was one of the strongest individuals resisting the people and Communism. Everything that could be done in an attempt to crush the revolution was carried out by Di\u1ec7m. Di\u1ec7m was one of the most competent lackeys of the US imperialists \u00a0... Among the anti-Communists in South Vietnam or exiled in other countries, no one has sufficient political assets and abilities to cause others to obey. Therefore, the lackey administration cannot be stabilized. The coup d'\u00e9tat on 1 November 1963 will not be the last.\nAfter Di\u1ec7m's assassination, South Vietnam was unable to establish a stable government and several coups took place. It then fared badly in the war against the communists. While the United States continued to influence South Vietnam's government, the assassination bolstered North Vietnamese attempts to characterize the South Vietnamese as \"supporters of colonialism\".\nLegacy.\nOrthodox scholars argue that Diem as a corrupt tyrannical puppet, while revisionist historians believe Diem was an independent leader who knew what was necessary to allow his young regime to survive. According to Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, \"Diem established an autocratic regime that was staffed at the highest levels by members of his own family\u2026 The military tactics Diem used against the insurgency were heavy-handed and ineffective and served only to deepen his government's unpopularity and isolation.\" \nDi\u1ec7m's assassination led to the collapse of his regime and to the end of the first Republic of Vietnam. His nine years of power from 1954 to 1963 can be evaluated at many levels by his part in resolving the northern refugees issue, establishing and consolidating the power of his regime, subduing the sects, and pacifying the country. Di\u1ec7m stabilized the Southern Vietnam, which had suffered in the First Indochina War, and built a relatively stable government in Saigon in the late 1950s. The normality and domestic security created conditions for economic recovery and the development of education in South Vietnam, which contributed educated human resources to serve the nation. \nAccording to historian Philip Catton, Di\u1ec7m was first and foremost a Vietnamese nationalist who was wary of dependence on the United States and \"feared the Americans nearly as much as the Communist insurgents\". Di\u1ec7m constantly clashed with his American advisors over policies and had a completely different understanding of both democracy and Catholic values in comparison to the West. Keith Taylor argues that while Di\u1ec7m's rule was authoritarian, it was also necessary given the precarious situation of the south. His claim that the South Vietnamese army would gradually gain experience and skill in both warfare and intelligence under Di\u1ec7m's command, and his assassination turned the tide in favor of the north, with the subsequent governments proving inefficient and incapable of organising successful resistance to Viet Cong advances.\nRecent scholarship reveals South Vietnamese discourse illustrated Di\u1ec7m's agency and single-mindedness, challenging earlier assumptions of his subservience to the United States. Even his contemporaries were surprised when the \"Pentagon Papers\" showed just how determined he was to resist American interference. While many anti-communist South Vietnamese came to admire him personally, they rejected his centralized, clandestine political system, which ignored growing public dissatisfaction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "54018", "revid": "1123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54018", "title": "Cuscutaceae", "text": ""}
{"id": "54019", "revid": "19091773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54019", "title": "Cuscuta", "text": "Genus of parasitic plants\nCuscuta (), commonly known as dodder or amarbel, is a genus of over 201 species of yellow, orange, or red (rarely green) parasitic plants. Formerly treated as the only genus in the family Cuscutaceae, it now is accepted as belonging in the morning glory family, Convolvulaceae, on the basis of the work of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group. The genus is found throughout the temperate and tropical regions of the world, with the greatest species diversity in subtropical and tropical regions; the genus becomes rare in cool temperate climates, with only four species native to northern Europe.\nFolk names include strangle tare, strangleweed, scaldweed, beggarweed, lady's laces, fireweed, wizard's net, devil's guts, devil's hair, devil's ringlet, goldthread, hailweed, hairweed, hellbine, love vine, pull-down, angel hair, and witch's hair.\nDescription.\n\"Cuscuta\" can be identified by its thin stems appearing leafless, with the leaves reduced to minute scales. In these respects it closely resembles the similarly parasitic, but unrelated genus, \"Cassytha\". From mid-summer to early autumn, the vines can produce small fruit that take the same color as the vine, and are approximately the size of a common pea. It has very low levels of chlorophyll; some species such as \"Cuscuta reflexa\" can photosynthesize slightly, while others such as \"C. europaea\" are entirely dependent on the host plants for nutrition.\nDodder flowers range in color from white to pink to yellow to cream. Some flower in the early summer, others later, depending on the species. The seeds are minute and produced in large quantities. They have a hard coating, and typically can survive in the soil for 5\u201310 years, sometimes longer.\nDodder seeds sprout at or near the surface of the soil. Although dodder germination can occur without a host, it has to reach a green plant quickly and is adapted to grow towards the nearby plants by following chemosensory clues. If a plant is not reached within 5 to 10 days of germination, the dodder seedling will die. Before a host plant is reached, the dodder, as other plants, relies on food reserves in the embryo; the cotyledons, though present, are vestigial.\nParasitism.\nAfter a dodder attaches itself to a plant, it wraps itself around it. If the host contains food beneficial to dodder, the dodder produces haustoria that insert themselves into the vascular system of the host. The vestigial root of the dodder in the soil then dies. The dodder can grow and attach itself to multiple plants. In tropical areas, it can grow more or less continuously and may reach high into the canopy of shrubs and trees; in cold temperate regions, it is an annual plant and is restricted to relatively low vegetation that can be reached by new seedlings each spring.\nDodder is parasitic on a very wide variety of plants, including a number of agricultural and horticultural crop species, such as alfalfa, lespedeza, flax, clover, potatoes, chrysanthemum, dahlia, helenium, trumpet vine, ivy and petunias. It is an ectoparasite and is categorized as holoparasitic plant, or a plant that is non-photosynthetic and is completely dependent on a host.\nDodder ranges in severity based on its species and the species of the host, the time of attack, and whether any viruses are also present in the host plant. By debilitating the host plant, dodder decreases the ability of plants to resist viral diseases, and dodder can also spread plant diseases from one host to another if it is attached to more than one plant. This is of economic concern in agricultural systems, where an annual drop of 10% yield can be devastating. There has been an emphasis on dodder vine control in order to manage plant diseases in the field.\nHost location.\nA report published in \"Science\" in 2006 demonstrated that dodder use airborne volatile organic compound cues to locate their host plants. Seedlings of \"C. pentagona\" exhibit positive growth responses to volatiles released by tomato and other species of host plants. When given a choice between volatiles released by the preferred host tomato and the non-host wheat, the parasite grew toward the former. Further experiments demonstrated attraction to a number of individual compounds released by host plants and repellence by one compound released by wheat. These results do not rule out the possibility that other cues, such as light, may also play a role in host location.\nHost defenses.\nLess is known about host defenses against dodder and other parasitic plants than is known about plant defenses against herbivores and pathogens. In one study, tomato plants were found to employ complex mechanisms to defend against dodder. Two pathways, using jasmonic acid and salicylic acid, were activated in response to attack by \"Cuscuta pentagona\". Dodder attack was also found to induce production of volatiles, including 2-carene, \u03b1-pinene, limonene, and \u03b2-phellandrene. It is not known if or how these volatiles defend the host, but they could potentially interfere with the dodder's ability to locate and select hosts. Also, the presence of trichomes on the tomato stem effectively blocks the dodder from attaching to the stem.\nPrevention and treatment.\nMany countries have laws prohibiting import of dodder seed, requiring crop seeds to be free of dodder seed contamination. Before planting, all clothes should be inspected for dodder seed when moving from an infested area to a non-infested crop. When dealing with an infested area, swift action is necessary. Recommendations include planting a non-host crop for several years after the infestation, pulling up host crops immediately, particularly before the dodder produces seed, and use of preemergent herbicides such as Dacthal in the spring. Examples of non-host crops include grasses and many other monocotyledons. If dodder is found before it chokes a host plant, it may be simply removed from the soil. If choking has begun, the host plant must be pruned significantly below the dodder infestation, as dodder is versatile and able to grow back from its haustoria.\nUse in Chinese traditional medicine.\n\"C. chinensis\" seeds () have long been used for osteoporosis in China and some other Asian countries. \"C. chinensis\" is a commonly used traditional Chinese medicine which is believed to strengthen the liver and kidneys. Cuscuta species are also used as medicine in Himalayan regional medical traditions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54020", "revid": "1108727163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54020", "title": "EAPC", "text": "EAPC may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54022", "revid": "11104410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54022", "title": "Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council", "text": "Multilateral forum of NATO states\nThe Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) is a post\u2013Cold War, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) institution. The EAPC is a multilateral forum created to improve relations between NATO and non-NATO countries in Europe and Central Asia. States meet to cooperate and discuss political and security issues. It was formed on 29 May 1997 at a Ministers\u2019 meeting held in Sintra, Portugal, as the successor to the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC), which was created in 1991.\nThe EAPC provides an overall political framework for NATO\u2019s cooperation with its partner countries in the Euro-Atlantic area. It works alongside the Partnership for Peace (PfP), which was created in January 1994. There are 50 members, including all 32 NATO member countries and 18 Partnership for Peace countries. Of its members, the United States has had a notable role in the council. In the post-Cold War era, the United States served as one of the key members of the EAPC that continued to push for engagement with Russia, which is an EAPC partner country.\nFollowing the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Russia and Belarus were suspended from the Council.\nBackground.\nThe NACC and PfP.\nThe EAPC serves as a successor of the NACC. The NACC, established in 1991, was created with the intention of being a forum of discussion and cooperation with NATO\u2019s former Warsaw Pact adversaries. The NACC allowed for multilateral political consultation and cooperation, which helped build confidence in the early 1990s. Additionally, the NACC paved the way for the launch of the PfP in 1994. NATO launched the PfP with the goal of forging a real partnership of peace, instead of simply engaging in the dialogue. Its role was to expand and intensify political and military cooperation throughout Europe, increase stability, diminish threats to peace, and build relationships. However, the PfP needed the assistance of another organization, such as the EAPC, to work on these tasks.\nBy 1997, the Allies involved in the NACC recognized the desire to build a security forum that would include other Western European partners. Partners were beginning to deepen cooperation with NATO, and support for defence reform and transitions towards democracy were increasing. They needed a forum that was larger and better suited for increasingly sophisticated relationships, and therefore the EAPC succeeded the NACC in 1997.\nRole and structure.\nIn addition to providing the overall political framework for cooperation, the EAPC provides a framework for the bilateral relationship developed between NATO and individual partner countries under the PfP program. The EAPC\u2019s actions are based on two-year action plans. These focus on consultation and cooperation on a range of political and security related issues. Under the EAPC, the ambassadors meet monthly while the foreign and defense ministers meet annually. The council's role is to maintain long-term consultation and cooperation; do crisis management and peace support operations; deal with regional issues; arms control; issues related to the proliferation of weapons and mass destruction; and international terrorism. On the defence level, the EAPC is responsible for planning, budgeting, policy and strategy, civil emergency planning, disaster preparedness, nuclear safety, air control, and scientific discovery. In addition to this, the EAPC is tasked with promoting and coordinating practical cooperation and exchange of expertise in key areas such as combatting terrorism, border security, and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and small arms. NATO and EAPC\u2019s policies have agreed to support international efforts in regards to the UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on women, peace and security, and combating human trafficking.\nSecurity forums.\nOn May 24-25th, 2005, the EAPC held its first Security Forum in Are, Sweden. It brought together Ministers and senior decision-makers from NATO and partner countries; and representatives of civil society and think tanks. Its goal was to engage with civil society and recognize the role NGOs play in NATO\u2019s agenda regarding peace-building and reconstruction, particularly in areas of the Balkans and Afghanistan. NATO noted that delegates had the opportunity to hold deeper discussions on Euro-Atlantic issues compared to regular ministerial meetings.\nIn June 2007, the second Forum was held in Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia. Its focus was finding a comprehensive approach to Afghanistan, energy security, and integrating the Balkans into the Euro-Atlantic structure. The Forum included Ministers, senior officials, parliamentarians, academics, NGOs, and journalists. Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, the Secretary-General of NATO stated that they wanted participants from a range of professional backgrounds to bring about ideas, have open discussions, and understand different perspectives.\nMembership.\nThere are 50 member countries of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, this includes:\nThe 32 NATO member countries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 18 partner countries:\nFour liberal democracies with capitalist economies that were militarily neutral during, and after, the Cold War:\nTwelve former Soviet communist republics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwo former Yugoslav communist republics:\nUSA involvement in the EAPC.\nThe USA served as one of the founding members of the NACC, the predecessor of the EAPC, in December 1991. Following the collapse of the NACC and the fusion of the PfP and the EAPC, the United States continued to serve on the EAPC as one of its key members.\nIn the post-Cold War era, The USA objective was to express more global interests in confronting crises and challenges. USA officials remained hopeful that cooperation with Russia was possible. According to Ingrid Lundestad, the inclusion of Russia within the EAPC was understood to provide reconciliation and stability to the United States and the Euro-Atlantic region.\nThe promotion of democracy and market economics serves as an incentive for the United States to be involved in the EAPC. Greater European integration in the United States, combined with a persistent transatlantic bond, is one of the greatest motivators for the United States to be involved in the EAPC.\nRussia and the EAPC.\nIn the early 1990s, They wished to promote democratic and economic reforms in the Euro-Atlantic area, particularly with Russia following a Cold-War period. Russia serves as a partner country in the EAPC. Their involvement can be traced to the first meeting of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council on December 20, 1991. The meeting took place with NATO, Eastern European nations, and the USSR present. Near the end of this meeting, the Soviet Ambassador received a message that as the meeting was taking place, the Soviet Union would cease to exist the following day. The Soviet Ambassador noted at that point that he would only be representing the Russian Federation, and no longer the Soviet Union.\nBy 1994, Russia joined the Partnership for Peace (PfP), strengthening the ties between Russia and NATO. Upon the fusion of the PfP and NACC, Russia automatically became a member of the EAPC in 1997. The same year, the NATO-Russia Founding Act was also signed, showing cooperation following a Cold-War era. While Russia primarily rejected the notion of an alliance, rather embracing practical cooperation with NATO and its organizations such as the Euro-Atlantic Partnership, in the 1990s Russia signed and engaged with a number of partnerships with NATO, such as the NATO-Russia Partnership Commission (NRC), which, in 1997, turned into the NATO-Russia Standing Joint Commission.\nAccording to Vladimir Baranovsky, Russia\u2019s objectives with the EAPC fall largely in the desire to promote security. Baranovsky says that Russia\u2019s initiatives include stabilizing Europe, promoting cooperation and interaction between Europe in \u2018traditional\u2019 security-related areas and in new ideas, and narrowing differences over political and legal interpretations of Europe\u2019s security. He also says that the most cooperative method to enhance traditional security is a three-way partnership with the United States, Russia, and NATO, and Russia is able to find this in the EAPC. Arms control in Europe is also discussed within the Council, and Russia finds an additional incentive to be a part of the EAPC due to this.\nResults.\nAs explored in Russia and the EAPC section, the EAPC has previously served as a \u2018reset\u2019 in US-Russia relations, and by extension NATO-Russia relations.\nToday, the EAPC members continue to engage in partnership and dialogue. It has maintained a focus on security, stability, and democratic transformation in the Euro-Atlantic region. \"EAPC members exchange views on current political and security-related issues, including the evolving security situation in Kosovo, where peacekeepers from Allied and partner countries are deployed together. Longer-term consultation and cooperation also take place in a variety of areas, for example arms control and non-proliferation, counter-terrorism, and civil preparedness and civil emergency response\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54023", "revid": "19300763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54023", "title": "Peter Bonetti", "text": "English footballer (1941\u20132020)\nPeter Philip Bonetti (27 September 1941 \u2013 12 April 2020) was an English professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper for Chelsea, the St. Louis Stars, Dundee United and England. He was known for his safe handling, lightning reflexes and his graceful style, for which he was given the nickname \"The Cat\". He was one of several goalkeepers (Gordon West of Everton was another) who specialised in a one-armed throw which could achieve a similar distance to a drop kick.\nBonetti played seven times for England, but mainly served the team as a back-up to Gordon Banks; he was part of the winning England squad for the 1966 FIFA World Cup, but did not play. He belatedly received a winners' medal in 2009, after the Football Association led a successful campaign for non-playing members of the squad to be recognised. After Banks fell ill before the 1970 FIFA World Cup quarter-final, Bonetti played as England lost 3\u20132 to West Germany.\nEarly life.\nBonetti was born in Putney, southwest London. His family moved to Worthing, Sussex in 1948. His parents ran a caf\u00e9 on the seafront next to the Dome Cinema. They were Swiss-Italian emigrants from Ticino. Bonetti attended St Mary's Catholic Primary School, Worthing. He shone at an early age, playing for Worthing.\nClub career.\nChelsea.\nChelsea signed him from the Reading youth team after his mother had written to manager Ted Drake, requesting that he give her son a trial. Whilst a Chelsea junior, Bonetti made five appearances for Croydon Amateurs in the Surrey Senior League thanks to youth team coach Albert Tennant who was also coaching Croydon at that time. He made his first team debut in 1960, and a few weeks later helped the Chelsea youth team win the FA Youth Cup. From the 1960\u201361 season onward, he was Chelsea's first-choice goalkeeper, a position he held more-or-less constantly for the next nineteen years.\nChelsea were relegated in Bonetti's second full season, which saw the appointment of Tommy Docherty as manager. Bonetti emerged as a key figure in a talented young team which included Bobby Tambling, Terry Venables, John Hollins and Barry Bridges. The team went into the penultimate match of the season needing to beat promotion rivals Sunderland to have a chance of going up. Chelsea won 1\u20130, with Bonetti making a brilliant last minute save to deny George Mulhall and maintain his team's promotion chances; a 7\u20130 win over Portsmouth secured instant promotion back to the First Division.\nThe new Chelsea team challenged for honours during the 1960s, with Bonetti a key figure throughout, although more often than not the team narrowly missed out. The club won the League Cup in 1965 with a 3\u20132 aggregate victory over Leicester City. Leicester put Chelsea under heavy pressure in the second leg at Filbert Street, but an inspired performance from Bonetti helped secure a 0\u20130 draw, and thus the trophy for his team. For most of that season Chelsea were on course to add both the league title and the FA Cup, but ultimately missed out. They were beaten by Liverpool in the FA Cup; meanwhile, their title challenge ended with a few matches left, following a bust-up between Docherty and several of his first-team players (though not Bonetti). The disunity behind the scenes meant that a much-weakened team was fielded in a key match against Burnley, in which Bonetti conceded six goals.\nBonetti played in every match of Chelsea's Inter-Cities Fairs Cup run the following season, putting in a series of impressive displays against the likes of Roma, A.C. Milan and Barcelona, though the team was eventually knocked out in the semi-final, as they were in the FA Cup for the second consecutive year. The signing of Alex Stepney at the end of that season briefly threatened his position as Chelsea's first-choice goalkeeper, and he considered putting in a transfer request, but Stepney ultimately made only one appearance for the club and was sold to Manchester United a few months later. Chelsea eventually reached an FA Cup final in 1967, where they faced Tottenham Hotspur, but the team got outplayed on the day and Bonetti could do little to stop Spurs winning 2\u20131.\nThat was the closest he came to winning another trophy with Chelsea until 1970, by which time Docherty had been succeeded by Dave Sexton. In 1970, Chelsea again reached the FA Cup final and this time faced reigning league champions Leeds United. Over the two fiercely contested matches, Bonetti had what was perhaps the finest moment of his playing career. Chelsea were outplayed for large spells in the first final at Wembley Stadium and he made a series of crucial saves to help them emerge with a 2\u20132 draw. Shortly into the replay at Old Trafford, his left knee was badly injured after a challenge from Leeds' Mick Jones. He returned to the field after treatment, but was effectively playing on one leg for the rest of the match and was powerless to stop Jones scoring the opener a few minutes later. In spite of the injury, and being targeted by the Leeds forwards, he made crucial saves throughout the match, denying both Peter Lorimer and Terry Cooper, and resisted more pressure from Leeds after Chelsea had taken the lead in extra time to help secure a 2\u20131 win. Such were Bonetti's performances that season, he was voted runner-up in the FWA Footballer of the Year awards.\nA year later, the team added the European Cup Winners' Cup after another replayed win in the final, this time over Spanish giants Real Madrid in Athens. Chelsea took a 2\u20130 lead in the replay, but Real dominated for much of the second half, and it was another inspired performance from Bonetti that helped them hold on for a 2\u20131 win.\nThat was his last trophy with the club, although they narrowly missed out on more in the following years, losing in the 1972 League Cup final to Stoke City and in the semi-final of the same competition to Norwich City a year later. Financial and disciplinary problems within the club prevented them from building on their success.\nSt Louis Stars.\nBonetti left on a free transfer in 1975, joining the St. Louis Stars of the North American Soccer League. That year, he made 21 appearances for the team and helped them top the Central Division that summer and reach the play-off semi-final.\nReturn to Chelsea.\nHe then returned to Chelsea, where his experience proved invaluable in helping new manager Eddie McCreadie's young team gain promotion in 1976\u201377. Two years later, in May 1979, he played his final appearance for Chelsea, a 1\u20131 draw with Arsenal, having made a total of 729 appearances for the club in nineteen years \u2013 only Ron Harris has made more \u2013 and kept over 200 clean sheets. He conceded one goal or less in two-thirds of his appearances for Chelsea.\nInternational career.\nBonetti earned seven caps for England, kept out of the team by Gordon Banks. He was a member of England's successful 1966 FIFA World Cup squad, but did not make an appearance.\nBonetti's England career is largely remembered for one match \u2013 the 1970 FIFA World Cup quarter-final against West Germany in Mexico. He was thrust into the starting line-up at only around an hour's notice, as a replacement for Banks who was suffering from severe food poisoning. England relinquished a 2\u20130 second-half lead and lost 3\u20132 after extra time. Bonetti received a large amount of blame from the public, as he was considered to have let in two easy goals in normal time, and never played for England again.\nIn the 1966 World Cup final, only the 11 players on the pitch at the end of the 4\u20132 win over West Germany received medals. Following a Football Association-led campaign to persuade FIFA to award medals to all winning squad members, Bonetti was presented with his medal by prime minister Gordon Brown at a ceremony at 10 Downing Street on 10 June 2009.\nRetirement.\nAfter leaving Chelsea, Bonetti moved to the Isle of Mull where he ran a guesthouse and became a postman. While living in Scotland, he briefly came out of retirement to make several appearances for Dundee United as understudy to Hamish McAlpine. Following his retirement from playing, Bonetti moved into coaching and had spells with Chelsea and the England national team, as well as working with Kevin Keegan at Newcastle United, Fulham and Manchester City.\nDuring his time as a Chelsea coach, he was persuaded to play two matches for Isthmian League Division Two club Woking, including an FA Cup debut in a 1\u20130 win over Football Conference team Weymouth. At one time, he held the record for the most appearances for a single club by a goalkeeper, but was overtaken in the 1990s by Portsmouth's Alan Knight.\nAfter 2005, Bonetti made several appearances for an Old England XI in various charity matches, notably against celebrity teams, usually coming on for the last 10 minutes of each match.\nBonetti died on 12 April 2020, aged 78, following a long illness. On 18 April 2022, his ashes were left behind the goal at the Shed End at Stamford Bridge.\nSource:\nCareer statistics.\n\"Totals include one Charity Shield appearance in 1970\u201371.\"\nHonours.\nChelsea Youth\nChelsea\nSt. Louis Stars\nEngland\nIndividual\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54024", "revid": "46051783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54024", "title": "Equity (law)", "text": "Set of legal principles supplementing but distinct from the Common Law\nIn the field of jurisprudence, equity is the particular body of law, developed in the English Court of Chancery, with the general purpose of providing legal remedies for cases wherein the common law is inflexible and cannot fairly resolve the disputed legal matter. Conceptually, equity was part of the historical origins of the system of common law of England, yet is a field of law separate from common law, because equity has its own unique rules and principles, and was administered by courts of equity. \nEquity exists in domestic law, both in civil law and in common law systems, as well as in international law. The tradition of equity begins in antiquity with the writings of Aristotle (\"epieikeia\") and with Roman law (\"aequitas\"). Later, in civil law systems, equity was integrated in the legal rules, while in common law systems it became an independent body of law.\nEquity in common law jurisdictions (general).\nIn jurisdictions following the English common law system, equity is the body of law which was developed in the English Court of Chancery and which is now administered concurrently with the common law. \nFor much of its history, the English common law was principally developed and administered in the central royal courts: the Court of King's Bench, the Court of Common Pleas, and the Exchequer. Equity was the name given to the law which was administered in the Court of Chancery. The Judicature Acts of the 1870s effected a procedural fusion of the two bodies of law, ending their institutional separation. The reforms did not fuse the actual bodies of law however. As an example, this lack of fusion meant it was still not possible to receive an equitable remedy for a purely common law wrong. Judicial or academic reasoning which assumes the contrary has been described as a \"fusion fallacy\".\nJurisdictions which have inherited the common law system differ in their treatment of equity. Over the course of the twentieth century some common law systems began to place less emphasis on the historical or institutional origin of substantive legal rules. In England and Wales, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, equity remains a distinct body of law. Modern equity includes, among other things:\n\"Black's Law Dictionary\", 10th ed., definition 4, differentiates \"common law\" (or just \"law\") from \"equity\". Before 1873, England had two complementary court systems: courts of \"law\" which could only award money damages and recognized only the legal owner of property, and courts of \"equity\" (courts of chancery) that could issue injunctive relief (that is, a court order to a party to do something, give something to someone, or stop doing something) and recognized trusts of property. This split propagated to many of the colonies, including the United States. The states of Delaware, Mississippi, South Carolina, and Tennessee continue to have divided Courts of Law and Courts of Chancery. In New Jersey, the appellate courts are unified, but the trial courts are organized into a Chancery Division and a Law Division. There is a difference of opinion in Commonwealth countries as to whether equity and common law have been fused or are merely administered by the same court, with the orthodox view that they have not (expressed as rejecting the \"fusion fallacy\") prevailing in Australia, while support for fusion has been expressed by the New Zealand Court of Appeal.\nFor most purposes, the U.S. federal system and most states have merged the two courts.\nThe latter part of the twentieth century saw increased debate over the utility of treating equity as a separate body of law. These debates were labelled the \"fusion wars\". A particular flashpoint in this debate centred on the concept of unjust enrichment and whether areas of law traditionally regarded as equitable could be rationalised as part of a single body of law known as the law of unjust enrichment.\nHistory of equity in common law jurisdictions.\nAfter the Norman Conquest of England in the 11th century, royal justice came to be administered in three central courts: the Court of King's Bench, the Court of Common Pleas, and the Exchequer. The common law developed in these royal courts, which were created by the authority of the King of England, and whose jurisdiction over disputes between the King's subjects was based upon the King's writ. Initially, a writ was probably a vague order to do right by the plaintiff, and it was usually a writ of grace, issued at the pleasure of the King.\nDuring the 12th and 13th centuries, writ procedure gradually evolved into something much more rigid. All writs to commence actions had to be purchased by litigants from the Chancery, the head of which was the Lord Chancellor. After writs began to become more specific and creative (in terms of the relief sought), Parliament responded in 1258 by providing in the Provisions of Oxford that the Chancellor could no longer create new writs without permission from the King and the King's Council (the curia regis). Pursuant to this authorization, litigants could purchase certain enumerated writs (as a matter of course) which later became known as writs (as a matter of right). Each of these writs was associated with particular circumstances and led to a particular kind of judgment. Procedure in the common law courts became tightly focused on the form of action (the particular procedure authorized by a particular writ to enforce a particular substantive right), rather than what modern lawyers would now call the cause of action (the underlying substantive right to be enforced).\nBecause the writ system was limited to enumerated writs for enumerated rights and wrongs, it sometimes produced unjust results. Thus, even though the King's Bench might have jurisdiction over a case and might have the power to issue the perfect writ, the plaintiff might still not have a case if there was not a single form of action combining them. Lacking a legal remedy, the plaintiff's only option would be to petition the King.\nLitigants began to seek relief against unfair judgments of the common law courts by petitioning the King. Such petitions were initially processed by the King's Council, which itself was quite overworked, and the Council began to delegate the hearing of such petitions to the Lord Chancellor. This delegation is often justified by the fact that the Lord Chancellor was literally the Keeper of the King's Conscience, although Francis Palgrave argued that the delegation was initially driven by practical concerns and the moral justification came later. The moral justification went as follows: as Keeper of the King's Conscience, the Chancellor \"would act in particular cases to admit 'merciful exceptions' to the King's general laws to ensure that the King's conscience was right before God\". This concern for the King's conscience was then extended to the conscience of the defendant in Chancery, in that the Chancellor would intervene to prevent \"unconscionable\" conduct on the part of the defendant, in order to protect the conscience of the King. \nBy the 14th century, it appears that Chancery was operating as a court, affording remedies for which the strict procedures of the common law worked injustice or provided no remedy to a deserving plaintiff. Chancellors often had theological and clerical training and were well versed in Roman law and canon law. During this era, the Roman concept of influenced the development of the distinctly different but related English concept of equity: \"The equity administered by the early English chancellors\u00a0... [was] confessedly borrowed from the aequitas and the judicial powers of the Roman magistrates.\" By the 15th century, the judicial power of Chancery was clearly recognised. \nEarly Chancery pleadings vaguely invoked some sort of higher justice, such as with the formula \"for the love of God and in way of charity\". During the 15th century, Chancery pleadings began to expressly invoke \"conscience\", to the point that English lawyers in the late 15th century thought of Chancery as a court of \"conscience\", not a court of \"equity\". However, the \"reasoning of the medieval chancellors has not been preserved\" as to what they actually meant by the word \"conscience\", and modern scholars can only indirectly guess at what the word probably meant. The publication of the treatise \"The Doctor and Student\" in the early 16th century marked the beginning of Chancery's transformation from a court of conscience to a court of equity. \nBefore that point in time, the word \"equity\" was used in the common law to refer to a principle of statutory interpretation derived from : the idea that written laws ought to be interpreted \"according to the intention rather than the letter\" of the law. What was new was the application of the word \"equity\" to \"the extraordinary form of justice administered by the chancellor\", as a convenient way to distinguish Chancery jurisprudence from the common law.\nA common criticism of Chancery practice as it developed in the early medieval period was that it lacked fixed rules, varied greatly from Chancellor to Chancellor, and the Chancellor was exercising an unbounded discretion. The counterargument was that equity mitigated the rigour of the common law by looking to substance rather than to form.\nThe early chancellors were influenced by their training in theology and canon law, but the law of equity they applied was not canon law, but a new kind of law purportedly driven by conscience. Whatever it meant in the medieval era, the word \"conscience\" clearly carried a subjective connotation (as it still does today). Complaints about equity as an arbitrary exercise of conscience by nonlawyer Chancellors became quite frequent under the chancellorship of Thomas Wolsey (1515\u20131529), who \"had no legal training, and delighted in putting down lawyers\". \nIn 1546, Chancellor Thomas Wriothesley, a nonlawyer, was accused of trying to inject the civil law into Chancery. This was a \"wild exaggeration\", but as a result, the Crown began to transition away from clergy and nonlawyers and instead appointed only lawyers trained in the common law tradition to the position of Lord Chancellor (although there were six more nonlawyer chancellors in the decades after Wriothesley). The last person without training in the common law before 2016 to serve as Lord Chancellor was Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury, who served briefly from 1672 to 1673. (Liz Truss was appointed as Lord Chancellor in 2016, but this was after the position had been stripped of its judicial powers by the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, leaving the Chancellor of the High Court as the highest judge sitting in equity in England and Wales.)\nThe development of a court of equity as a remedy for the rigid procedure of the common law courts meant it was inevitable that the two systems would come into conflict. Litigants would go \"jurisdiction shopping\" and often would seek an equitable injunction prohibiting the enforcement of a common law court order. The penalty for disobeying an equitable injunction and enforcing an unconscionable common law judgment was imprisonment.\nThe 1615 conflict between common law and equity came about because of a \"clash of strong personalities\" between Lord Chancellor Ellesmere and the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sir Edward Coke. Chief Justice Coke began the practice of issuing writs of \"habeas corpus\" that required the release of people imprisoned for contempt of chancery orders. This tension reached a climax in the Earl of Oxford's case (1615) where a judgment of Chief Justice Coke was allegedly obtained by fraud. Chancellor Ellesmere issued an injunction from the Chancery prohibiting the enforcement of the common law order. The two courts became locked in a stalemate, and the matter was eventually referred to the Attorney General, Sir Francis Bacon. Sir Francis, by authority of King James I, upheld the use of the equitable injunction and concluded that in the event of any conflict between the common law and equity, equity would prevail.\nChancery continued to be the subject of extensive criticism, the most famous of which was 17th-century jurist John Selden's aphorism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Equity is a roguish thing: for law we have a measure, know what to trust to; equity is according to the conscience of him that is Chancellor, and as that is larger or narrower, so is equity. 'Tis all one as if they should make the standard for the measure we call a foot, a Chancellor's foot; what an uncertain measure would this be? One Chancellor has a long foot, another a short foot, a third an indifferent foot: 'tis the same thing in a Chancellor's conscience.\nAfter 1660, Chancery cases were regularly reported, several equitable doctrines developed, and equity started to evolve into a system of precedents like its common law cousin. Over time, equity jurisprudence would gradually become a \"body of equitable law, as complex, doctrinal, and rule-haunted as the common law ever was\".\nOne indicator of equity's evolution into a coherent body of law was Lord Eldon's response to Selden in an 1818 chancery case: \"I cannot agree that the doctrines of this court are to be changed with every succeeding judge. Nothing would inflict on me greater pain, in quitting this place, than the recollection that I had done anything to justify the reproach that the equity of this court varies like the Chancellor's foot.\"\nEquity's primacy over common law in England was later enshrined in the Judicature Acts of the 1870s, which also served to fuse the courts of equity and the common law (although emphatically not the systems themselves) into one unified court system.\nStatute of Uses 1535.\nOne area in which the Court of Chancery assumed a vital role was the enforcement of uses, a role that the rigid framework of land law could not accommodate. This role gave rise to the basic distinction between legal and equitable interests.\nIn order to avoid paying land taxes and other feudal dues, lawyers developed a primitive form of trust called the \"use\" that enabled one person (who was not required to pay tax) to hold the legal title of the land for the use of another person. The effect of this trust was that the first person owned the land under the common law, but the second person had a right to use the land under the law of equity.\nHenry VIII enacted the Statute of Uses in 1535 (which became effective in 1536) in an attempt to outlaw this practice and recover lost revenue. The Act effectively made the beneficial owner of the land the legal owner and therefore liable for feudal dues.\nThe response of the lawyers to this Statute was to create the \"use upon a use\". The Statute recognized only the first use, and so land owners were again able to separate the legal and beneficial interests in their land.\nComparison of equity traditions in common law countries.\nAustralia.\nEquity remains a cornerstone of Australian private law. A string of cases in the 1980s saw the High Court of Australia re-affirm the continuing vitality of traditional equitable doctrines. In 2009 the High Court affirmed the importance of equity and dismissed the suggestion that unjust enrichment has explanatory power in relation to traditional equitable doctrines such as subrogation.\nThe state of New South Wales is particularly well known for the strength of its Equity jurisprudence. However, it was only in 1972 with the introduction of reform to the Supreme Court Act 1970 (NSW) that empowered both the Equity and Common Law Division of the Supreme Court of NSW to grant relief in either equity or common law. In 1972 NSW also adopted one of the essential sections of the Judicature reforms, which emphasised that where there was a conflict between the common law and equity, equity would always prevail. Nevertheless, in 1975 three alumni of Sydney Law School and judges of the NSW Supreme Court, Roddy Meagher, William Gummow and John Lehane produced \"\". It remains one of the most highly regarded practitioner texts in Australia and England. The work is now in its 5th edition and edited by Dyson Heydon, former Justice of the High Court, Justice Mark Leeming of the New South Wales Court of Appeal, and Dr Peter Turner of Cambridge University.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nEquity remains a distinct part of the law of England and Wales. The main challenge to it has come from academic writers working within the law of unjust enrichment. Scholars such as Peter Birks and Andrew Burrows argue that in many cases the inclusion of the label \"legal\" or \"equitable\" before a substantive rule is often unnecessary. Many English universities, such as Oxford and Cambridge, continue to teach Equity as a standalone subject. Leading practitioner texts include \"Snell's Equity\", \"Lewin on Trusts\", and \"Hayton &amp; Underhill's Law of Trusts and Trustees\".\nLimits on the power of equity in English law were clarified by the House of Lords in The Scaptrade case (\"Scandinavian Trading Tanker Co. A.B. v Flota Petrolera Ecuatoriana\" [1983] 2 AC 694, 700), where the notion that the court's jurisdiction to grant relief was \"unlimited and unfettered\" (per Lord Simon of Glaisdale in \"Shiloh Spinners Ltd v. Harding\" [1973] A.C. 691, 726) was rejected as a \"beguiling heresy\". In a subsequent Privy Council ruling on \"Union Eagle Ltd v Golden Achievement Ltd\" (1997), Lord Hoffman gave an account of \"why it continues to beguile and why it is a heresy\".\nScotland.\nThe courts of Scotland have never recognised a division between the normal common law and equity, and as such the Court of Session (the supreme civil court of Scotland) has exercised an equitable and inherent jurisdiction known as the . The enables the Court to provide a legal remedy where statute or the common law are silent, and to prevent mistakes in procedure or practice that would lead to injustice. The exercise of this power is limited by adherence to precedent, and when legislation or the common law already specify the relevant remedy. Thus, the Court cannot set aside a statutory power, but can deal with situations where the law is silent, or where there is an omission in statute. Such an omission is sometimes termed a .\nIndia.\nIn India the common law doctrine of equity had traditionally been followed even after it became independent in 1947. However, in 1963 the Specific Relief Act was passed by the Parliament of India following the recommendation of the Law Commission of India and repealing the earlier \"Specific Relief Act\" of 1877. Under the 1963 Act, most equitable concepts were codified and made statutory rights, thereby ending the discretionary role of the courts to grant equitable reliefs. The rights codified under the 1963 Act were as under:\nWith this codification, the nature and tenure of the equitable reliefs available earlier have been modified to make them statutory rights and are also required to be pleaded specifically to be enforced. Further to the extent that these equitable reliefs have been codified into rights, they are no longer discretionary upon the courts or as the English law has it, \"Chancellor's foot\" but instead are enforceable rights subject to the conditions under the 1963 Act being satisfied. Nonetheless, in the event of situations not covered under the 1963 Act, the courts in India continue to exercise their inherent powers in terms of Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which applies to all civil courts in India.\nThere is no such inherent powers with the criminal courts in India except with the High Courts in terms of Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Further, such inherent powers are vested in the Supreme Court of India in terms of Article 142 of the Constitution of India which confers wide powers on the Supreme Court to pass orders \"as is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause of matter pending before it\".\nUnited States.\nIn modern practice, perhaps the most important distinction between law and equity is the set of remedies each offers. The most common civil remedy a court of law can award is monetary damages. Equity, however, enters injunctions or decrees directing someone either to act or to forbear from acting. Often, this form of relief is in practical terms more valuable to a litigant; for example, a plaintiff whose neighbor will not return his only milk cow, which had wandered onto the neighbor's property, may want that particular cow back, not just its monetary value. However, in general, a litigant cannot obtain equitable relief unless there is \"no adequate remedy at law\"; that is, a court will not grant an injunction unless monetary damages are an insufficient remedy for the injury in question. Law courts can also enter certain types of immediately enforceable orders, called \"writs\" (such as a writ of habeas corpus), but they are less flexible and less easily obtained than an injunction.\nAnother distinction is the unavailability of a jury in equity: the judge is the trier of fact. In the American legal system, the right of jury trial in civil cases tried in federal court is guaranteed by the Seventh Amendment \"in Suits at common law\", cases that traditionally would have been handled by the law courts. The question of whether a case should be determined by a jury depends largely on the type of relief the plaintiff requests. If a plaintiff requests damages in the form of money or certain other forms of relief, such as the return of a specific item of property, the remedy is considered legal, and a jury is available as the fact-finder. On the other hand, if the plaintiff requests an injunction, declaratory judgment, specific performance, modification of contract, or some other non-monetary relief, the claim would usually be one in equity.\nThomas Jefferson explained in 1785 that there are three main limitations on the power of a court of equity: \"If the legislature means to enact an injustice, however palpable, the court of Chancery is not the body with whom a correcting power is lodged. That it shall not interpose in any case which does not come within a general description and admit of redress by a general and practicable rule.\" The US Supreme Court, however, has concluded that courts have wide discretion to fashion relief in cases of equity. The first major statement of this power came in \"Willard v. Tayloe\", 75 U.S. 557 (1869). The Court concluded that \"relief is not a matter of absolute right to either party; it is a matter resting in the discretion of the court, to be exercised upon a consideration of all the circumstances of each particular case.\" \"Willard v. Tayloe\" was for many years the leading case in contract law regarding intent and enforcement. as well as equity.\nIn the United States, the federal courts and most state courts have merged law and equity into courts of general jurisdiction, such as county courts. However, the substantive distinction between law and equity has retained its old vitality. This difference is not a mere technicality, because the successful handling of certain law cases is difficult or impossible unless a temporary restraining order (TRO) or preliminary injunction is issued at the outset, to restrain someone from fleeing the jurisdiction taking the only property available to satisfy a judgment, for instance. Furthermore, certain statutes like the Employee Retirement Income Security Act specifically authorize \"only\" equitable relief, which forces American courts to analyze in lengthy detail whether the relief demanded in particular cases brought under those statutes would have been available in equity.\nEquity courts were widely distrusted in the northeastern United States following the American Revolution. A serious movement for merger of law and equity began in the states in the mid-19th century, when David Dudley Field II convinced New York State to adopt what became known as the Field Code of 1848. The federal courts did not abandon the old law/equity separation until the promulgation of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in 1938.\nThree states still have separate courts for law and equity: Delaware, whose Court of Chancery is where most cases involving Delaware corporations (which includes a disproportionate number of multi-state corporations) are decided; Mississippi; and Tennessee. However, merger in some states is less than complete; some other states (such as Illinois and New Jersey) have separate divisions for legal and equitable matters in a single court. Virginia had separate law and equity dockets (in the same court) until 2006. Besides corporate law, which developed out of the law of trusts, areas traditionally handled by chancery courts included wills and probate, adoptions and guardianships, and marriage and divorce. Bankruptcy was also historically considered an equitable matter; although bankruptcy in the United States is today a purely federal matter, reserved entirely to the United States Bankruptcy Courts by the enactment of the United States Bankruptcy Code in 1978, bankruptcy courts are still officially considered \"courts of equity\" and exercise equitable powers under Section 105 of the Bankruptcy Code.\nAfter US courts merged law and equity, American law courts adopted many of the procedures of equity courts. The procedures in a court of equity were much more flexible than the courts at common law. In American practice, certain devices such as joinder, counterclaim, cross-claim and interpleader originated in the courts of equity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFor a history of equity in England, including the Statute of Uses 1535:\nFor a general treatise on Equity, including a historical analysis:\nFor a brief outline of the maxims, doctrines and remedies developed under equity:"}
{"id": "54025", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54025", "title": "Rubiaceae", "text": "Family of flowering plants\nRubiaceae () is a family of flowering plants, commonly known as the coffee, madder, or bedstraw family. It consists of terrestrial trees, shrubs, lianas, or herbs that are recognizable by simple, opposite leaves with interpetiolar stipules and sympetalous actinomorphic flowers. The family contains about 14,200 species in about 615 genera, which makes it the fourth-largest angiosperm family by number of species. Rubiaceae has a cosmopolitan distribution; however, the largest species diversity is concentrated in the tropics and subtropics. Economically important genera include \"Coffea\", the source of coffee; \"Cinchona\", the source of the antimalarial alkaloid quinine; ornamental cultivars (\"e.g.\", \"Gardenia\", \"Ixora\", \"Pentas\"); and historically some dye plants (\"e.g.\", \"Rubia\").\nDescription.\nThe Rubiaceae are morphologically easily recognizable as a coherent group by a combination of characters: opposite or whorled leaves that are simple and entire, interpetiolar stipules, tubular sympetalous actinomorphic corollas and an inferior ovary.\nA wide variety of growth forms are present: shrubs are most common (e.g. \"Coffea\", \"Psychotria\"), but members of the family can also be trees (e.g. \"Cinchona\", \"Nauclea\"), lianas (e.g. \"Psychotria samoritourei\"), or herbs (e.g. \"Galium\", \"Spermacoce\"). Some epiphytes are also present (e.g. \"Myrmecodia\"). The plants usually contain iridoids, various alkaloids, and raphide crystals are common. The leaves are simple, undivided, and entire; there is only one case of pinnately compound leaves (\"Pentagonia osapinnata\"). Leaf blades are usually elliptical, with a cuneate base and an acute tip. In three genera (\"Pavetta\", \"Psychotria\", \"Sericanthe\"), bacterial leaf nodules can be observed as dark spots or lines on the leaves. The phyllotaxis is usually decussate, rarely whorled (e.g. \"Fadogia\"), or rarely seemingly alternate resulting from the reduction of one leaf at each node (e.g. \"Sabicea sthenula\"). Characteristic for the Rubiaceae is the presence of stipules that are mostly fused to an interpetiolar structure on either side of the stem between the opposite leaves. Their inside surface often bears glands called \"colleters\", which produce mucilaginous compounds protecting the young shoot. The \"whorled\" leaves of the herbaceous tribe Rubieae have classically been interpreted as true leaves plus interpetiolar leaf-like stipules. The inflorescence is a cyme, rarely of solitary flowers (e.g. \"Rothmannia\"), and is either terminal or axillary and paired at the nodes. The 4-5-merous (rarely pleiomerous; e.g. six in \"Richardia\") flowers are usually bisexual and usually epigynous. The perianth is usually biseriate, although the calyx is absent in some taxa (e.g. \"Theligonum\"). The calyx mostly has the lobes fused at the base; unequal calyx lobes are not uncommon, and sometimes (e.g. \"Mussaenda\") one lobe is enlarged and coloured (a so-called \"semaphyl\"). The corolla is sympetalous, mostly actinomorphic, usually tubular, mostly white or creamy but also yellow (e.g. \"Gardenia\" spp., \"Mycelia basiflora\"), and rarely blue (e.g. \"Faramea calyptrata\") or red (e.g. \"Alberta magna\", \"Ixora coccinea\"). The stamens are alternipetalous and epipetalous. Anthers are longitudinal in dehiscence, but are poricidal in some genera (e.g. \"Rustia\", \"Tresanthera\"). The gynoecium is syncarpous with an inferior ovary (rarely secondarily superior, e.g. \"Gaertnera\", \"Pagamea\"). Placentation is axial, rarely parietal (e.g. \"Gardenia\"); ovules are anatropous to hemitropous, unitegmic, with a funicular obturator, one to many per carpel. Nectaries are often present as a nectariferous disk atop the ovary. The fruit is a berry, capsule (e.g. \"Oldenlandia\"), drupe (e.g. \"Coffea\", \"Psychotria\"), or schizocarp (e.g. \"Cremocarpon\"). Red fruits are fairly dominant (e.g. \"Coffea arabica\"); yellow (e.g. \"Rosenbergiodendron formosum\"), orange (e.g. \"Vangueria infausta\"), or blackish fruits (e.g. \"Pavetta gardeniifolia\") are equally common; blue fruits are rather exceptional save in the Psychotrieae and associated tribes. Most fruits are about 1\u00a0cm in diameter; very small fruits are relatively rare and occur in herbaceous tribes; very large fruits are rare and confined to the Gardenieae. The seeds are endospermous.\nDistribution and habitat.\nRubiaceae have a cosmopolitan distribution and are found in nearly every region of the world, except for extreme environments such as the polar regions and deserts. The distribution pattern of the family is very similar to the global distribution of plant diversity overall. However, the largest diversity is distinctly concentrated in the humid tropics and subtropics. An exception is the tribe Rubieae, which is cosmopolitan but centered in temperate regions. Only a few genera are pantropical (e.g. \"Ixora\", \"Psychotria\"), many are paleotropical, while Afro-American distributions are rare (e.g. \"Sabicea\"). Endemic rubiaceous genera are found in most tropical and subtropical floristic regions of the world. The highest number of species is found in Colombia, Venezuela, and New Guinea. When adjusted for area, Venezuela is the most diverse, followed by Colombia and Cuba.\nThe Rubiaceae consist of terrestrial and predominantly woody plants. Woody rubiaceous shrubs constitute an important part of the understorey of low- and mid-altitude rainforests. Rubiaceae are tolerant of a broad array of environmental conditions (soil types, altitudes, community structures, etc.) and do not specialize in one specific habitat type (although genera within the family often specialize).\nEcology.\nFlower biology.\nMost members of the Rubiaceae are zoophilous, pollinated mainly by insects. Entomophilous species produce nectar from an epigynous disk at the base of the corolla tube to attract insects. Ornithophily is rare and is found in red-flowered species of \"Alberta\", \"Bouvardia\", and \"Burchellia\". Anemophilous species are found in the tribes Anthospermeae and Theligoneae and are characterized by hermaphroditic or unisexual flowers that exhibit a set of specialized features, such as striking sexual dimorphism, increased receptive surface of the stigmas and pendulous anthers.\nAlthough most Rubiaceae species are hermaphroditic, outbreeding is promoted through sequential hermaphroditism and spatial isolation of the reproductive organs. More complex reproductive strategies include secondary pollen presentation, heterostyly, and unisexual flowers.\nSecondary pollen presentation (also known as stylar pollen presentation or ixoroid pollen mechanism) is especially known from the Gardenieae and related tribes. The flowers are proterandrous and the pollen is shed early onto the outside of the stigmas or the upper part of the style, which serve as a pollen receptacle. Increased surface area and irregularity of the pollen receptacle, caused by swellings, hairs, grooves or ridges often ensure a more efficient pollen deposition. After elongation of the style, animals transport the pollen to flowers in the female or receptive stage with exposed stigmatic surfaces. A pollen catapult mechanism is present in the genera \"Molopanthera\" and \"Posoqueria\" (tribe Posoquerieae) that projects a spherical pollen mass onto visiting hawk moths.\nHeterostyly is another mechanism to avoid inbreeding and is widely present in the family Rubiaceae. The tribes containing the largest number of heterostylous species are Spermacoceae and Psychotrieae. Heterostyly is absent in groups that have secondary pollen presentation (e.g. Vanguerieae).\nUnisexual flowers also occur in Rubiaceae and most taxa that have this characteristic are dioecious. The two flower morphs are however difficult to observe as they are rather morphologically similar; male flowers have a rudimentary pistil with the ovaries empty and female flowers sterile or rudimentary stamens with empty anthers. Flowers that are morphologically hermaphrodite, but functionally dioecious occur in \"Pyrostria\".\nFruit biology.\nThe dispersal units in Rubiaceae can be entire fruits, syncarps, mericarps, pyrenes or seeds. Fleshy fruit taxa are probably all (endo)zoochorous (e.g. tribes Pavetteae, Psychotrieae), while the dispersal of dry fruits is often unspecialized (e.g. tribes Knoxieae, Spermacoceae). When seeds function as diaspores, the dispersal is either anemochorous or hydrochorous. The three types of wind-dispersed diaspores in Rubiaceae are dust seeds (rare, e.g. \"Lerchea\"), plumed seeds (e.g. \"Hillia\"), and winged seeds (e.g. \"Coutarea\"). Long-distance dispersal by ocean currents is very rare (e.g. the seashore tree \"Guettarda speciosa\"). Other dispersal mechanisms are absent or at least very rare. Some Spermacoceae having seeds with elaiosomes are probably myrmecochorous (e.g. \"Spermacoce hepperiana\"). Epizoochorous taxa are limited to herbaceous Rubiaceae (e.g. \"Galium aparine\" fruits are densely covered with hooked bristly hairs).\nAssociations with other organisms.\nThe genera \"Anthorrhiza\", \"Hydnophytum\", \"Myrmecodia\", \"Myrmephytum\", and \"Squamellaria\" are succulent epiphytes that have evolved a mutualistic relationship with ants. Their hypocotyl grows out into an ant-inhabited tuber. Some shrubs or trees have ant holes in their stems (e.g. \"Globulostylis\"). Some Rubiaceae species have domatia that are inhabited by mites (viz. acarodomatia; e.g. \"Plectroniella armata\").\nAn intimate association between bacteria and plants is found in three rubiaceous genera (viz. \"Pavetta\", \"Psychotria\", and \"Sericanthe\"). The presence of endophytic bacteria is visible by eye because of the formation of dark spots or nodules in the leaf blades. The endophytes have been identified as \"Burkholderia\" bacteria. A second type of bacterial leaf symbiosis is found in the genera \"Fadogia\", \"Fadogiella\", \"Globulostylis\", \"Rytigynia\", and \"Vangueria\" (all belonging to the tribe Vanguerieae), and in some species of \"Empogona\" and \"Tricalysia\" (both belonging to the tribe Coffeeae), where \"Burkholderia\" bacteria are found freely distributed among the mesophyll cells and no leaf nodules are formed. The hypothesis regarding the function of the symbiosis is that the endophytes provide chemical protection against herbivory by producing certain toxic secondary metabolites.\nSystematics.\nThe family Rubiaceae is named after \"Rubia\", a name used by Pliny the Elder in his Naturalis Historia for madder (\"Rubia tinctorum\"). The roots of this plant have been used since ancient times to extract alizarin and purpurin, two red dyes used for coloring clothes. The name \"rubia\" is therefore derived from the Latin word \"ruber\", meaning \"red\". The well-known genus \"Rubus\" (blackberries and raspberries) is unrelated and belongs to Rosaceae, the rose family.\nTaxonomy.\nThe name Rubiaceae (nomen conservandum) was published in 1789 by Antoine Laurent de Jussieu, but the name was already mentioned in 1782.\nSeveral historically accepted families are included in Rubiaceae: Aparinaceae, Asperulaceae, Catesbaeaceae, Cephalanthaceae, Cinchonaceae, Coffeaceae, Coutariaceae, Dialypetalanthaceae, Galiaceae, Gardeniaceae, Guettardaceae, Hameliaceae, Hedyotidaceae, Henriqueziaceae, Houstoniaceae, Hydrophylacaceae, Lippayaceae, Lygodisodeaceae, Naucleaceae, Nonateliaceae, Operculariaceae, Pagamaeaceae, Psychotriaceae, Randiaceae, Sabiceaceae, Spermacoceaceae, Theligonaceae.\nSubfamilies and tribes.\nThe classical classification system of Rubiaceae distinguished only two subfamilies: Cinchonoideae, characterized by more than one ovule in each locule, and Coffeoideae, having one ovule in each locule. This distinction, however, was criticized because of the distant position of two obviously related tribes, viz. Gardenieae with many ovules in Cinchonoideae and Ixoreae with one ovule in Coffeoideae, and because in species of \"Tarenna\" the number of ovules varies from one to several in each locule. During the 20th century, other morphological characters were used to delineate subfamilies, e.g. stylar pollen presentation, raphides, endosperm, heterostyly, etc. On this basis, three or eight subfamilies were recognised. The last subfamilial classification solely based on morphological characters divided Rubiaceae into four subfamilies: Cinchonoideae, Ixoroideae, Antirheoideae, and Rubioideae. In general, problems of subfamilies delimitation in Rubiaceae based on morphological characters are linked with the extreme naturalness of the family, hence a relatively low divergence of its members.\nThe introduction of molecular phylogenetics in Rubiaceae research has corroborated or rejected several of the conclusions made in the pre-molecular era. There was support for the subfamilies Cinchonoideae, Ixoroideae, and Rubioideae, although differently circumscribed, and Antirheoideae was shown to be polyphyletic. For a long time, the classification with three subfamilies (Cinchonoideae, Ixoroideae, and Rubioideae) was followed. However, an alternative opinion existed with only two subfamilies: an expanded Cinchonoideae (that includes Ixoroideae, Coptosapelteae, and Luculieae) and Rubioideae. Finally, more and more evidence pointed towards a two-family classification. The adoption of the Melbourne Code for botanical nomenclature had an unexpected impact on many names that have been long in use and are well-established in literature. According to the Melbourne Code, the subfamilial name Ixoroideae had to be replaced by Dialypetalanthoideae. This means that the two subfamilies in Rubiaceae now are: Dialypetalanthoideae and Rubioideae. The monogeneric tribes Coptosapelteae, Acranthereae, and Luculieae are not placed within a subfamily and are sister to the rest of Rubiaceae. The following overview shows the latest classification of the family, with two subfamilies and 72 tribes. The approximate number of species and genera are indicated between brackets (species/genera).\nRubioideae.\nAuthority: Verdc.; over 8000 spp.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDialypetalanthoideae.\nAuthority: Reveal; almost 6000 spp.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGenera.\nThe family Rubiaceae contains about 14,200 species in 615 genera. This makes it the fourth-largest family of flowering plants by number of species and the fifth-largest by number of genera. In total, 1386 generic names have been published, with almost half of the names appearing in the 19th century. The average increase of new generic names is 5.05 per year.\nThe median number of species per genus is 4 but there are 30 genera with more than 100 species and 191 genera are monotypic, which account for 31% of all genera but only for 1.3% of all species. \"Psychotria\", with around 1645 species, is the largest genus in the family and the third-largest genus in angiosperms, after the legume \"Astragalus\" and the orchid \"Bulbophyllum\".\nGeneric names are between 3 and 20 letters long and names beginning with P are the most frequent. The names often have their origin in Greek and commonly refer to a plant feature or are named after a person.\nPhylogeny.\nMolecular studies have demonstrated the phylogenetic placement of Rubiaceae within the order Gentianales and the monophyly of the family is confirmed. The relationships of the two subfamilies of Rubiaceae together with the tribes Acranthereae, Coptosapelteae, and Luculieae are shown in the phylogenetic tree below. The placement of these three tribes relative to the two subfamilies has not been fully resolved.\nEvolution.\nThe fossil history of the Rubiaceae goes back at least as far as the Eocene. The geographic distribution of these fossils, coupled with the fact that they represent all three subfamilies, is indicative of an earlier origin for the family, probably in the Late Cretaceous or Paleocene. Although fossils dating back to the Cretaceous and Palaeocene have been referred to the family by various authors, none of these fossils has been confirmed as belonging to the Rubiaceae.\nThe oldest confirmed fossils, which are fruits that strongly resemble those of the genus \"Emmenopterys\", were found in the Washington and are 48\u201349 million years old. A fossil infructescence and fruit found in 44 million-year-old strata in Oregon was assigned to \"Emmenopterys dilcheri\", an extinct species. The next-oldest fossils date to the Late Eocene and include \"Canthium\" from Australia, \"Faramea\" from Panama, \"Guettarda\" from New Caledonia, and \"Paleorubiaceophyllum\", an extinct genus from the southeastern United States.\nFossil Rubiaceae are known from three regions in the Eocene (North America north of Mexico, Mexico-Central America-Caribbean, and Southeast Pacific-Asia). In the Oligocene, they are found in these three regions plus Africa. In the Miocene, they are found in these four regions plus South America and Europe.\nUses.\nFood.\nNo staple foods are found in the Rubiaceae, but some species are consumed locally and fruits may be used as famine food. Examples are African medlar fruits (e.g. \"V. infausta\", \"V. madagascariensis\"), African peach (\"Nauclea latifolia\"), and noni (\"Morinda citrifolia\").\nBeverage.\nThe most economically important member of the family is the genus \"Coffea\" used in the production of coffee. \"Coffea\" includes 124 species, but only three species are cultivated for coffee production: \"C. arabica\", \"C. canephora\", and \"C. liberica\".\nMedicinal.\nThe bark of trees in the genus \"Cinchona\" is the source of a variety of alkaloids, the most familiar of which is quinine, one of the first agents effective in treating malaria. Woodruff (\"Galium odoratum\") is a small herbaceous perennial that contains coumarin, a natural precursor of warfarin, and the South American plant \"Carapichea ipecacuanha\" is the source of the emetic ipecac. \"Psychotria viridis\" is frequently used as a source of dimethyltryptamine in the preparation of ayahuasca, a psychoactive decoction. The bark of the species \"Breonadia salicina\" have been used in traditional African medicine for many years. The leaves of the Kratom plant (\"Mitragyna speciosa\") contain a variety of alkaloids, including several psychoactive alkaloids and is traditionally prepared and consumed in Southeast Asia, where it has been known to exhibit both painkilling and stimulant qualities, behaving as a \u03bc-opioid receptor agonist, and often being used in traditional Thai medicine in a similar way to and often as a replacement for opioid painkillers like morphine.\nOrnamentals.\nOriginally from China, the common gardenia (\"Gardenia jasminoides\") is a widely grown garden plant and flower in frost-free climates worldwide. Several other species from the genus are also seen in horticulture. The genus \"Ixora\" contains plants cultivated in warmer-climate gardens; the most commonly grown species, \"Ixora coccinea\", is frequently used for pretty red-flowering hedges. \"Mussaenda\" cultivars with enlarged, colored calyx lobes are shrubs with the aspect of \"Hydrangea\"; they are mainly cultivated in tropical Asia. The New Zealand native \"Coprosma repens\" is a commonly used plant for hedges. The South African \"Rothmannia globosa\" is seen as a specimen tree in horticulture. \"Nertera granadensis\" is a well-known house plant cultivated for its conspicuous orange berries. Other ornamental plants include \"Mitchella\", \"Morinda\", \"Pentas\", and \"Rubia\".\nDyes.\nRose madder, the crushed root of \"Rubia tinctorum\", yields a red dye, and the tropical \"Morinda citrifolia\" yields a yellow dye.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54026", "revid": "33669511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54026", "title": "Gambier", "text": "Gambier may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54027", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54027", "title": "GNUtella", "text": ""}
{"id": "54028", "revid": "40083020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54028", "title": "Uncaria", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nUncaria is a genus of flowering plants in the family Rubiaceae. It has about 40 species. Their distribution is pantropical, with most species native to tropical Asia, three from Africa and the Mediterranean and two from the neotropics. They are known colloquially as gambier, cat's claw or u\u00f1a de gato. The latter two names are shared with several other plants. The type species for the genus is \"Uncaria guianensis\".\nIndonesian Gambier (\"U. gambir\") is a large tropical vine with leaves typical of the genus, being opposite and about long. The South American \"U. tomentosa\" is called U\u00f1a de Gato. \"Uncaria sinensis\" is common in China.\n\"Uncaria\" was named in 1789 by Johann von Schreber in his \"Genera Plantarum\" edition 8[a] (not to be confused with books of the same title by Linnaeus, Jussieu, and others). The genus name is derived from the Latin word \"uncus\", meaning \"a hook\". It refers to the hooks, formed from reduced branches, that \"Uncaria\" vines use to cling to other vegetation.\n\"Uncaria\" is a member of the tribe Naucleeae, but its position within that tribe remains unresolved.\nDescription.\nWoody lianas; climbing by hooks formed from reduced, modified branches. Stipules entire or bifid. Inflorescences are compact heads at the ends of horizontal, very reduced branches. Corolla lobes without appendages. Seeds with a long wing at each end, the lower wing deeply bifid.\nSpecies.\nAs of March\u00a02023[ [update]], Plants of the World Online accepted the following species:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUses.\nDiplomat Edmund Roberts noted that, upon his visit to China in the 1830s, Chinese were using \"U. gambir\" for tanning, and noted that the \"U. gambir\" made \"leather porous and rotten.\" He also noted that Chinese would chew it with areca nut. The plant extract contains some 150 identified phytochemicals, including catechins, proanthocyanins, and chalcone-flavan-3-ol dimers, called gambiriins. Cat's claw (\"U. tomentosa\") and the Chinese \"Uncaria\" species are used in traditional medicine, although there is no high-quality clinical evidence they have any medicinal properties.\nAdverse effects.\nAlthough cat's claw appears to be safe for human use below 350 milligrams per day over 6 weeks, its adverse effects may include nausea, diarrhea, upset stomach, and an increased risk of bleeding if used with an anticoagulant drug.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54029", "revid": "35035024", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54029", "title": "Cubomania", "text": "Surrealist method of making collages\nCubomania is a Surrealist technique of making collages by cutting an image into squares and reassembling without regard for the original image at random to create something new. \nThe technique was invented by the Romanian surrealist Gherasim Luca. Luca introduced cubomania at two exhibitions in Bucharest, in 1945 and 1946, and in small publications. Luca positioned cubomania as a mix of Karl Marx's and Andr\u00e9 Breton's ideas. It was a critique of the alleged objectivity of social conditions and rejected the tyranny over liberty. \nIt has been described as a \"statistical method\".\nPenelope Rosemont and Joseph Jablonski have suggested that cubomania can \"subvert the enslaving 'message' of advertising and to free images from repressive contexts.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54030", "revid": "40527531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54030", "title": "Vanilla Sky", "text": "2001 film by Cameron Crowe\nVanilla Sky is a 2001 American science fiction psychological thriller film starring Tom Cruise as a magazine publisher who begins to question reality after being disfigured in a car crash. Written and directed by Cameron Crowe, who also produced with Cruise and Paula Wagner, it is an English-language remake of 1997 Spanish film \"Open Your Eyes\", which was scribed by Alejandro Amen\u00e1bar and Mateo Gil. The supporting cast includes Pen\u00e9lope Cruz (who reprises her role from the original), Kurt Russell, Jason Lee, Noah Taylor, and Cameron Diaz.\n\"Vanilla Sky\" was released on December 14, 2001, grossed more than $203 million worldwide against a production budget of $68 million, and received mixed critical reception. Diaz's performance was widely praised, earning her a Screen Actors Guild and a Golden Globe Award nomination. The song \"Vanilla Sky\" by Paul McCartney was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song. The film later gained a cult following.\nPlot.\nDavid Aames Jr., the owner of a large publishing company he inherited from his father, is in prison. Wearing a prosthetic mask, David tells his life story to court psychologist Dr. Curtis McCabe. In flashbacks, David leaves the duties of the publisher to his father's trusted associates while living as a playboy in Manhattan. He is introduced to Sofia Serrano by his best friend, Brian Shelby, during a party.\nDavid and Sofia spend the night together at Sofia's apartment and fall in love, unaware that David's current lover, Julie Gianni, has followed them there. As David leaves, Julie offers him a ride and soon reveals her jealousy of Sofia. She deliberately crashes the car, killing herself and disfiguring David. Doctors cannot repair his face using plastic surgery, forcing David to wear a prosthetic mask, and the mental and physical scarring from the accident causes him to become withdrawn and depressed. David joins Brian and Sofia at a club, but they all leave after David starts an argument while drunk. After David insults them and they part ways, David passes out on the street outside the club.\nThe next day, Sofia returns and apologises to David. She takes him home; the two form a relationship; and he slowly begins to recover. After surgeons find a way to repair David's face despite their prior prognosis, he is plagued by bizarre experiences - such as brief flashbacks of his disfigurement and an encounter with a mysterious man at a bar who informs him that David is omnipotent, demonstrated by the entire bar falling silent at David's command. One day, while at Sofia's, David awakens to find himself in bed with Julie, whose face has replaced Sofia's in their photographs. In shock, he suffocates Julie. David is arrested and imprisoned and his facial disfigurement is mysteriously restored.\nMcCabe conducts several more interviews, which serve to help David to recall the name \"Life Extension\". Seeing a company with that name on TV, McCabe arranges to take David there under guard. Rebecca Dearborn, a company representative, explains how Life Extension uses cryonic suspension to save those with terminal illnesses until a cure can be found, keeping them in a lucid dream state to otherwise exercise their mind. David realises that he is in cryonic suspension and that the world he inhabits is his lucid dream, which has become a nightmare. He escapes McCabe and the guards while calling for \"tech support\", and rushes for the building's lobby, which is suddenly empty. An elevator opens, revealing the strange man from the bar. As the elevator climbs to the top of an impossibly tall building, the man explains that he is Tech Support and that David has been in suspension for 150 years.\nUnable to face the twin traumas of the loss of his love, Sofia, and his facial injuries, he had opted for Life Extension, to be awakened when technology could repair his face, and left the publishing company in the hands of his father's associates, ultimately overdosing on medication and causing Brian to arrange a three-day memorial for him in his home. As part of the program, David had chosen to experience a lucid dream, in which his life would resume the morning after Sofia left him; however, a glitch in the software had caused other elements of his subconscious to distort his dream.\nDavid and Tech Support emerge on the rooftop, high above the clouds. There, Tech Support tells David that although they have corrected the flaw, he now has a choice of either being returned to the dream or being restored to life, requiring a literal leap of faith off the roof that will wake him from his sleep. David chooses the latter, despite McCabe warning him against it. Before jumping, David envisions Brian and Sofia to say his goodbyes. He leaps from the edge of the building, and his life flashes before him. A female voice invites him to open his eyes, and the movie ends with a shot of his eye opening.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Tom Cruise as David Aames, Jr.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the days after completing \"Almost Famous\", the opportunity to keep our film-making team together was too attractive to pass up. I'd always written my own original screenplays, but \"Open Your Eyes\", with its open-ended and impressionistic themes, felt like a great song for our 'band' to cover.\n\u2014Cameron Crowe, explaining his reason for directing \"Vanilla Sky\".\nAfter the American debut of Alejandro Amen\u00e1bar's 1997 Spanish film \"Abre los ojos\" (\"Open Your Eyes\") at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, Tom Cruise and his producing partner Paula Wagner optioned the remake rights. Hoping to entice director Cameron Crowe, who collaborated with Cruise on \"Jerry Maguire\", Cruise invited Crowe over to his house to view the film. Cruise has stated:\nI've been offered a lot of films to buy and remake, and I never have because I felt it was too connected with the culture of that place, whatever country it was from. But this was a universal story that was still open-ended, that still felt like it needed another chapter to be told.\nThe title of the film is a reference to depictions of skies in certain paintings by Claude Monet. In addition to Monet's impressionistic artwork, the film's tone was derived from the acoustic ballad \"By Way of Sorrow\" by Julie Miller and a line from an early interview of Elvis Presley in which he said, \"I feel lonely, even in a crowded room.\"\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography for \"Vanilla Sky\" began in late 2000 and lasted six weeks. On November 12, 2000, shooting for the scene of the deserted Times Square in New York took place in the early hours of the day. A large section of traffic was blocked off around Times Square while the scene was shot. \"There was a limit on how long the city would let us lock everything up even on an early Sunday morning when much of NYC would be slow getting up,\" said Steadicam operator Larry McConkey. \"Several times we rehearsed with Steadicam and Crane including a mockup of an unmovable guardrail that we had to work the crane arm around. [Cruise] participated in these rehearsals as well so we shared a clear understanding of what my limitations and requirements would be.\"\nFilming lasted for six weeks around the New York City area, which included scenes in Central Park, the Upper West Side, SoHo, and Brooklyn. One prominent location in the area was the Cond\u00e9 Nast Building that served as Aames Publishing and David's office. After filming finished in New York, production moved to Los Angeles, where the remaining interior shots were completed at Paramount Studios. Crowe intentionally left in shots of the World Trade Center after the September 11 attacks as a tribute.\nDespite the film's distorted aspects of reality, the style of cinematography remains grounded for much of the film. \"I didn't do anything that was overtly obvious, because the story revolves around the main character not knowing whether he's in a state of reality, a dream or a nightmare, so we want it to feel a little ambiguous,\" said cinematographer John Toll. \"We want the audience to make discoveries as [Cruise]'s character does, rather than ahead of him.\" \"American Cinematographer\" magazine wrote a feature story on the lighting designer Lee Rose's work on the film.\nAlternate ending.\nThe 2015 Blu-ray release offers the option to watch the film with an alternative ending. This ending expands on the details at the end of the film. While it all leads to the same conclusion, there are additional scenes, alternative takes, and alternative dialogue.\nAfter Rebecca describes the lucid dream, David rushes out of the room but does not immediately dash towards the elevator. He meets McCabe in the restroom who tries to convince him that this is all a hoax and a con and that his case is going to trial. David tells him that he's only in his imagination. Much like in the theatrical cut, the Beach Boys' \"Good Vibrations\" plays, but this version makes it clear that David hears the music and that he chose it; meanwhile, McCabe tries to convince him there is no music.\nAt this point, David dashes out of the restroom for the elevator the way he does in the theatrical cut, but the scene in the lobby is expanded: David shoots the police officer who is firing at him and is then surrounded by a SWAT team whom McCabe tries to talk down, but the SWAT team fires at both of them. They black out and wake up in the emptied lobby where McCabe continues to applaud what he believes is a performance while David gets into the elevator with Ventura, who tells him what happened at the end of his real life.\nOnce they reach the roof, McCabe reenters again and his pleas to David not to believe Ventura become more and more desperate until he collapses onto the ground in despair. David's interaction with Sofia is extended as he tells her he loves her but \"can't settle for a dream\". He then jumps off the building, screaming \"I want to wake up!\" as images from his life flash before his eyes. He wakes up in bed and a voice tells him \"Open your eyes. You're going to be fine.\"\nMusic.\n\"Vanilla Sky\"'s score was by Crowe's then wife, Nancy Wilson, who also scored \"Jerry Maguire\" and \"Almost Famous\". Wilson spent nine months on the film's music, which was done through experimentation of sound collages. \"We were trying to balance out the heaviness of the story with sugary pop-culture music,\" she said. \"We made sound collages of all kinds. We were channeling Brian Wilson to a large extent. I was recording things through hoses, around corners, playing guitars with cello bows, and with [music editor] Carl Kaller, we tried all kinds of wacky stuff. In the murder\u2013sex scene sound collage, Cameron even used Brian Wilson's speaking voice from a \"Pet Sounds\" mix session.\"\nBesides the publicly available soundtrack album, Music from Vanilla Sky, the original score was released as a \"for your consideration\" release for Academy Awards nomination and never released publicly for sale.\nThe eponymous song from the soundtrack, written and recorded by Paul McCartney, was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song. Additional songs featured included Radiohead's song \"Everything in Its Right Place\", and \"Svefn-g-englar\" by the Icelandic group Sigur R\u00f3s.\nInterpretations.\nAccording to Cameron Crowe's commentary, there are five different interpretations of the ending:\nCrowe notes that the presence of a \"Vanilla Sky\" during the morning reunion after the nightclub scene marks the first lucid dream scene, and that everything that follows from then on is a dream.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Vanilla Sky\" opened at number one at the box office in the United States when it was first presented on December 14, 2001. The opening weekend took in a gross income of $25,015,518 (24.9%). The final domestic gross income was $100.61 million while the international gross income was slightly higher at $102.76 million for a total worldwide gross income of $203.39 million.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, 42% of 173 critic reviews are positive and the average rating is 5.3/10. The site's consensus states: \"An ambitious mix of genres, \"Vanilla Sky\" collapses into an incoherent jumble. Cruise's performance lacks depth, and it's hard to feel sympathy for his narcissistic character.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 45 out of 100 based on 33 reviews, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade \"D\u2212\" on a scale from A to F.\nRoger Ebert's printed review of \"Vanilla Sky\" awarded the film three out of four stars:\nEbert interpreted the ending as an explanation for \"the mechanism of our confusion\", rather than a device that tells \"us for sure what actually happened.\" Film critic Richard Roeper ranked the film the second best of 2001.\nStephen Holden of \"The New York Times\" calls \"Vanilla Sky\" a \"highly entertaining, erotic science-fiction thriller that takes Mr. Crowe into Steven Spielberg territory\", but then says: \"As it leaves behind the real world and begins exploring life as a waking dream (this year's most popular theme in Hollywood movies with lofty ideas), \"Vanilla Sky\" loosens its emotional grip and becomes a disorganised and abstract if still-intriguing meditation on parallel themes. One is the quest for eternal life and eternal youth; another is guilt and the ungovernable power of the unconscious mind to undermine science's utopian discoveries. David's redemption ultimately consists of his coming to grips with his own mortality, but that redemption lacks conviction.\"\nSalon.com called \"Vanilla Sky\" an \"aggressively plotted puzzle picture, which clutches many allegedly deep themes to its heaving bosom without uncovering even an onion-skin layer of insight into any of them.\" The review rhetorically asks: \"Who would have thought that Cameron Crowe had a movie as bad as \"Vanilla Sky\" in him? It's a punishing picture, a betrayal of everything that Crowe has proved he knows how to do right. ... But the disheartening truth is that we can see Crowe taking all the right steps, the most Crowe-like steps, as he mounts a spectacle that overshoots boldness and ambition and idiosyncrasy and heads right for arrogance and pretension\u2014and those last two are traits I never would have thought we'd have to ascribe to Crowe.\" Edward Guthmann of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film 2/4 and wrote: \"The film's aim\u2014to dazzle and inspire\u2014is sapped by Cruise's vein-popping, running-the-marathon performance.\"\nPeter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" and Gareth Von Kallenbach of the publication \"Film Threat\" compared \"Vanilla Sky\" unfavorably to \"Open Your Eyes\". Bradshaw says \"Open Your Eyes\" is \"certainly more distinctive than\" \"Vanilla Sky\", which he describes as an \"extraordinarily narcissistic high-concept vanity project for producer-star Tom Cruise.\" Other reviewers extrapolate from the knowledge that Cruise had bought the rights to do a version of Amen\u00e1bar's film. A \"Village Voice\" reviewer characterized \"Vanilla Sky\" as \"hauntingly frank about being a manifestation of its star's cosmic narcissism\".\nKenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called Cameron Diaz \"compelling as the embodiment of crazed sensuality\" and \"The New York Times\" reviewer said she gives a \"ferociously emotional\" performance. Edward Guthmann of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" similarly says of the film, \"most impressive is Cameron Diaz, whose fatal-attraction stalker is both heartbreaking and terrifying.\" For her performance, Diaz won multiple critics' groups awards, as well as being nominated for the Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, Critics' Choice Movie Award, Saturn Award, and AFI Award. Pen\u00e9lope Cruz's performance earned her a Razzie Award nomination for Worst Actress (in addition to her roles in \"Blow\" and \"Captain Corelli's Mandolin\").\nHome media.\n\"Vanilla Sky\" was released on DVD and VHS on May 21, 2002, Blu-ray in 2015, and Ultra HD Blu-ray in 2023.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54031", "revid": "977095508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54031", "title": "Surjective", "text": ""}
{"id": "54032", "revid": "26325918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54032", "title": "Brocard (law)", "text": "Legal principle expressed in Latin\nA brocard is a legal maxim in Latin that is, in a strict sense, derived from traditional legal authorities, even from ancient Rome.\nHistory.\nAccording to the dictionaries, the word is a variant of the Latinized name of Burchard of Worms (died AD 1025), Bishop of Worms, Germany, who compiled 20 volumes of \"Ecclesiastical Rules\", although some sources disagree. Begun in AD 1008, the materials took Burchard four years to compile. He wrote it while living in a small structure on top of a hill in the forest outside Worms, after his defeat of Duke Otto and while raising his adopted child. The collection, which he called the \"Collectarium Canonum\" or \"Decretum\", became a primary source for canon law.\nAlong with numerous documents from a variety of sources, including the Old Testament and Saint Augustine of Hippo, Burchard included the \"Canon Episcopi\" in this collection, under the belief that it dated from an episcopal \"Council of Anquira\" in AD 314, but no other evidence of this council exists. Because of this inclusion, Burchard has been described as something of a rationalist. As the source of canon law, Burchard's \"Decretum\" was supplanted around 1150 by the , a much larger collection that further attempted to reconcile contradictory elements of canon law.\nBurchard spent the years 1023 to 1025 promulgating \"Leges et Statuta Familiae S. Petri Wormatiensis\", a collection of religious laws he endorsed as just and hoped to have officially approbated.\nSpargo points out that early compilations of brocards sometimes contained miscellaneous trivia in Latin, and a hard association of the term \"brocard\" with a legal maxim came later. As an example, he quotes a 1521 work published in Toulouse: (a bookcase is a place where the books are returned).\nAlthough the Romans first came to Britain in 55 BC, Roman Law has had negligible influence on English common law. Latin legal phrases are used in English only because Latin was the \"lingua franca\" of the Medieval era. Although some of these phrases are in common use in law, such as \"res ipsa loquitur\", \"novus actus interveniens\", \"talem qualem\", \"de minimis non curat lex\", and \"consensus ad idem\", the common law is not premised on the principles of civil law, and their use is being replaced by that of vernacular substitutes. For example, \"Black's Law Dictionary\" previously included numerous brocards among its entries.\nAlthough the Romans did not conquer Scotland, Scots Law is a mixed legal system in which \"brocards are regarded as part of the common law\".\nEtymology.\nMultiple sources, including the Oxford English Dictionary, derive the term from the name of Bishop Burkhardt, although contemporaneous Medieval Latin spelling was typically \"Burkhardus\". Spargo in 1948 pointed out that Friedrich Carl von Savigny, an 18th century authority on canon law, declared association to be solely due to a similarity in sound, and stated that the origin of the term is \"very uncertain\". So did the Encyclop\u00e9die des sciences eccl\u00e9siastiques in 1937.\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"brocard\" at Wiktionary"}
{"id": "54033", "revid": "44865517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54033", "title": "List of horse breeds", "text": "The following list of horse and pony breeds includes standardized breeds, some strains within breeds that are considered distinct populations, types of horses with common characteristics that are not necessarily standardized breeds but are sometimes described as such, and terms that describe groupings of several breeds with similar characteristics.\nWhile there is no single definition of the term \"breed\", it can be defined as a population sharing common ancestry, which has been subjected to similar selection objectives, and which conforms to certain established \u201cbreed standards\u201d. Its members may be called \"purebred\". In most cases, bloodlines of horse breeds are recorded with a breed registry. The concept is somewhat flexible in horses, as open stud books are created for recording pedigrees of horse breeds that are not yet fully true-breeding.\nRegistries are considered the authority as to whether a given breed is listed as a \"horse\" or a \"pony\". There are also a number of \"color breed\", sport horse, and gaited horse registries for horses with various phenotypes or other traits, which admit any animal fitting a given set of physical characteristics, even if there the trait is not a true-breeding characteristic. Other recording entities or specialty organizations may recognize horses from multiple breeds, or are recording designer crossbreds. Such animals may be classified here as a breed, a crossbreed, or a \"type\u201d, depending on the stage of breed recognition.\nHorse breeds.\nIn some cultures and for some competition-sanctioning organizations, a horse that normally matures less than about 145 cm or \u00a0hands when fully grown may be classified as a \"pony\". However, unless the principal breed registry or breed standard describes the breed as a pony, it is listed in this section, even if some or all representatives are small or have some pony characteristics. Ponies are listed in the section below.\nPony breeds.\nIf a breed is described as a \"pony\" by the breed standard or principal breed registry, it is listed in this section, even if some individuals have horse characteristics. All other breeds are listed in the section above.\nColor \"breeds\".\nThere are some registries that accept horses (and sometimes ponies and mules) of almost any breed or type for registration. Color is either the only criterion for registration or the primary criterion. These are called \"color breeds\", because unlike \"true\" horse breeds, there are few other physical requirements, nor is the stud book limited in any fashion. As a general rule, the color also does not always breed on (in some cases due to genetic impossibility), and offspring without the stated color are usually not eligible for recording with the color breed registry. There are breeds that have color that usually breeds \"true\" as well as distinctive physical characteristics and a limited stud book. These horses are true breeds that have a preferred color, not color breeds, and include the Friesian horse, the Cleveland Bay, the Appaloosa, and the American Paint Horse.\nThe best-known \"color breed\" registries that accept horses from many different breeds are for the following colors:\nCrossbred registration.\nThe distinction is hotly debated between a standardized breed, a developing breed with an open studbook, a registry of recognized crossbred horses, and a designer crossbred. For the purposes of this list, certain groups of horses that have an organization or registry that records individual animals for breeding purposes, at least in some nations, but does not clearly fall to either the breed or type categories are listed here.\nThis list does not include organizations that record horses strictly for competition purposes. \nTypes of horse.\nA \"type\" of horse is not a breed but is used here to categorize groups of horses or horse breeds that are similar in appearance (phenotype) or use. A type usually has no breed registry, and often encompasses several breeds. However, in some nations, particularly in Europe, there is a recording method or means of studbook selection for certain types to allow them to be licensed for breeding. Horses of a given type may be registered as one of several different recognized breeds, or a grouping may include horses that are of no particular pedigree but meet a certain standard of appearance or use.\nArchaic types.\nPrior to approximately the 13th century, few pedigrees were written down, and horses were classified by physical type or use. Thus, many terms for Horses in the Middle Ages did not refer to breeds as we know them today, but rather described appearance or purpose. These terms included:\nExtinct breeds.\nMany breeds of horse have become extinct, either because they have died out, or because they have been absorbed into another breed:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54034", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54034", "title": "Misnay\u2013Schardin effect", "text": "Characteristic of the detonation of a broad sheet of explosive\nThe Misnay\u2013Schardin effect, or platter effect, is a characteristic of the detonation of a broad sheet of explosive.\nDescription.\nExplosive blasts expand directly away from, and perpendicular to, the surface of an explosive. Unlike the blast from a rounded explosive charge, which expands in all directions, the blast produced by an explosive sheet expands primarily perpendicular to its plane, in both directions. However, if one side is backed by a heavy or fixed mass, most of the blast (i.e. most of the rapidly expanding gas and its kinetic energy) will be reflected in the direction away from the mass.\nUses.\nThe Misnay\u2013Schardin effect was studied and experimented with by explosive experts J\u00f3zsef Misnay (sometimes spelled Misznay incorrectly), a Hungarian, and Hubert Schardin, a German, who initially sought to develop a more effective antitank mine for Nazi Germany. Some sources claim that World War II ended before their design became usable, but they and others continued their work. Misnay designed two weapons: the 43M\u00a0TAK antitank mine and the 44M\u00a0L\u0150TAK side-attack mine. The Hungarian army used these weapons in 1944\u20131945.\nThe later AT2 and M18\u00a0Claymore mines rely on this effect."}
{"id": "54035", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54035", "title": "Jus soli", "text": "Birthright of anyone born in the territory of a state to nationality or citizenship\nJus soli ( , ), meaning 'right of soil', is the right of anyone born in the territory of a state to nationality or citizenship. \"Jus soli\" was part of the English common law, in contrast to \"jus sanguinis\" ('right of blood') associated with the French Civil Code of 1804.\n\"Jus soli\" is the predominant rule in the Americas; explanations for this geographical phenomenon include: the establishment of lenient laws by past European colonial powers to entice immigrants from the Old World and displace native populations in the New World, along with the emergence of successful wars of independence movements that widened the definition and granting of citizenship, as a prerequisite to the abolishment of slavery since the 19th century.\nThere are 35 countries that provide citizenship unconditionally to anyone born within their national borders. Some countries outside the Americas with mixed systems extend \"jus soli\" citizenship on a limited basis to children who are not otherwise eligible for any national citizenship, such as children born to women who are unwed or from countries that do not recognize maternal \"jus sanguinis\" citizenship. Others impose a residency requirement requiring parents to live in the country for a certain number of years before children born in the country become eligible for conditional \"jus soli\" citizenship. These mixed systems were implemented to fulfill treaty obligations after the atrocities of World War II increased awareness about the vulnerability of stateless persons. When the sovereignty over a territory is transferred from one state to another, individuals may be given the right of option of nationality based on \"jus soli\" or other rules.\nSince the early 1980s (with the British Nationality Act 1981), developed countries have been restricting the right of jus soli (and jus sanguinis, as it happened to the Italian nationality law) in response to anti-immigration political pressures and to discourage economic migration from former colonies and non-developed countries.\nAs of 2025, Canada and the United States are the only advanced economies (according to IMF) of the world that still grant unrestricted birthright citizenship, including to children from illegal immigrant parents.\nBackground.\nJus soli, sometimes called \"lex soli\", is the principle of citizenship acquired by the place of birth. Children born to a parent in the diplomatic or consular service of another state are often not eligible for \"jus soli\" citizenship in a host State.\nUnconditional \"jus soli\" is mostly found in the Americas. Some countries outside the Americas with mixed systems extend \"jus soli\" citizenship on a limited basis to children who are not otherwise eligible for any national citizenship, such as children born to women who are unwed or from countries do not recognize maternal \"jus sanguinis\" citizenship. Others impose a residency requirement requiring parents to live in the country for a certain number of years before children born in the country become eligible for conditional \"jus soli\" citizenship. UNHCR gives ten reasons for why people become stateless including laws related to marriage, administrative practices, renunciation of citizenship and nationality laws that discriminate on the basis of gender.\nReduction of statelessness.\nCountries that have acceded to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness are obligated to grant nationality to people born in their territory who would otherwise become stateless persons. These mixed systems were implemented to fulfill treaty obligations after the atrocities of World War II increased awareness about the vulnerability of stateless persons.\nThe American Convention on Human Rights similarly provides that \"Every person has the right to the nationality of the state in whose territory he was born if he does not have the right to any other nationality.\"\nBirthright citizenship.\nThe \"New Oxford American Dictionary\" defines birthright citizenship as \"a legal right to citizenship for all children born in a country's territory, regardless of parentage\". In the United States \"jus sanguinis\" is not a constitutional right or a birth right. Citizenship by \"jus sanguinis\" is a legal status conferred by statute. The term birthright citizenship usually means \"jus soli\" citizenship.\nBirthright citizenship is rooted in colonial history when settlers born in the colonial United States were considered \"natural born\" subjects of the King of England. The idea of conferring citizenship based on being born within the borders of the United States comes from this history. Allegiance based on natural law principles was the core concept of citizenship in \"Calvin's Case\" in which Edward Coke said that \"they that are born under the obedience, power, faith, ligealty or ligeance of the King are natural subjects and no aliens\". The American concept of citizenship is derived from republican principles and may have been influenced by the French writer Emer de Vattel.\n On 20 January 2025, President Donald Trump, as part of his Agenda 47, signed an executive order aiming to end the practice of birthright citizenship. The order mandates for at least one parent to be a U.S citizen or lawful permanent resident for persons born in the U.S to become U.S. citizens at birth. The order was scheduled to come into effect on 19 February, but on 23 January, a federal judge in Seattle was the first to block its enforcement after referring it as unconstitutional. Four federal judges have blocked the order. Three federal appellate courts have upheld the judges blocks on the order. On 13 March, the administration asked the Supreme Court to intervene to allow the order to move forward by challenging three judges injunctions. On 17 April, the Supreme Court decided to hear oral arguments on 15 May to determine whether the administration can enforce the order while legislation continues by considering whether the judges exceeded their authority when they issued their nationwide injunctions. On 27 June, by a 6-3 ruling the Supreme Court narrowed all judges injunctions on the order allowing the order to come into effect on 27 July. Due to individuals, organizations, and twenty-two states suing to block the order it does not apply in twenty-two states and to individuals that are part of a class action lawsuit or in their individual case when certified by a judge. On 10 July, a district judge in New Hampshire was the first to certify a class action lawsuit from immigration rights attorneys blocking the order indefinitely nationwide. Four judges have blocked the order after certifying lawsuits from plaintiffs. Two federal appellate courts have upheld blocks on the order due to the certification of class action lawsuits by ruling the order as unconstitutional. On 26 September the administration asked the Supreme Court to review the constitutionality of the order.\nRestricted \"jus soli\".\nThere is a trend in some countries toward restricting \"jus soli\" by requiring that at least one of the child's parents be a citizen, national or legal permanent resident of the state in question at time of the child's birth. Modification of \"jus soli\" has been criticized as contributing to economic inequality, the perpetuation of unfree labour from a helot underclass and statelessness. \"Jus soli\" has been restricted in the following countries:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54036", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54036", "title": "Jus sanguinis", "text": "Citizenship by parents' nationality\n ( , ), meaning 'right of blood', is a principle of nationality law by which nationality is determined or acquired by the nationality of one or both parents. Children at birth may be nationals of a particular state if either or both of their parents have nationality of that state. It may also apply to national identities of ethnic, cultural, or other origins. Citizenship can also apply to children whose parents belong to a diaspora and were not themselves citizens of the state conferring citizenship. This principle contrasts with \"jus soli\" ('right of soil'), which is solely based on the place of birth.\nIn the 21st century, almost all states apply some combination of \"jus soli\" and \"jus sanguinis\" in their nationality laws to varying degrees, in contrast to largely pure forms of either as used in the 19th and 20th centuries. Historically, the most common application of \"jus sanguinis\" is a right of a child to their father's nationality. Today, the majority of countries extend this right on an equal basis to the mother. Some apply this right irrespective of the place of birth, while others may limit it to those born in the state. Some countries provide that a child acquires the nationality of the mother if the father is unknown or stateless, and some irrespective of the place of birth. Some such children may acquire the nationality automatically while others may need to apply for a parent's nationality. \nMost countries with mixed systems extend \"jus soli\" citizenship on a limited basis only to children born in their sovereign territory who do not qualify for citizenship elsewhere to avoid statelessness\u2014an obligation for states party to the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness.\nWhen the sovereignty over a territory is transferred from one state to another, individuals may be given the right of option of nationality based on \"jus sanguinis\", typically on the condition of emigration from the ceded territory, or other rules.\nModern development.\nOriginally, the term \"nation\" was synonymous with \"ethnicity\". However, at the end of the 19th century, the French-German debate on nationality saw the French, such as Ernest Renan, oppose the German conception, exemplified by Johann Fichte, who believed in an 'objective nationality', based on blood, race, or language. Renan's republican conception (with perhaps the presence of a German-speaking population in Alsace-Lorraine) explain France's early adoption of \"jus soli\".\nMixed standards.\nMany nations have a mixture of \"jus sanguinis\" and \"jus soli\". For example, the United States grants citizenship based on \"jus soli\" to almost all people born within its borders, and also grants citizenship based on \"jus sanguinis\" to children born outside its borders to U.S. citizen parents subject to the parents meeting certain residency or physical presence criteria. The United Kingdom usually applies \"jus sanguinis\", but also has a \"jus soli\" principle for children of foreign citizens living in the U.K. depending on the parents' nationality and legal residence status.\nAbout 60% of all countries worldwide have a limited \"jus soli\" principle that extends citizenship to children born within their borders who do not qualify for citizenship in any other country. Countries which ratified the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness are obligated to enact laws as a solution for statelessness.\nComplications due to imposed boundaries.\nSome modern European states which arose out of the dissolved Austro-Hungarian or Ottoman empires have huge numbers of ethnic populations outside of their new 'national' boundaries, as do most of the former Soviet states. Such long-standing diasporas do not conform to codified 20th-century European rules of citizenship.\nIn many cases, \"jus sanguinis\" rights are mandated by international treaty, with citizenship definition imposed by the national and international community. In other cases, minorities are subject to legal and extra-legal persecution and choose to immigrate to their ancestral home country. States offering \"jus sanguinis\" rights to ethnic citizens and their descendants include Italy, Greece, Turkey, Bulgaria, Lebanon, Armenia, Hungary and Romania.\nCurrent \"Leges sanguinis\" states.\nMany countries provide citizenship on preferential terms to individuals with ethnic ties to these countries (so-called \"leges sanguinis\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54037", "revid": "37273639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54037", "title": "Wack-off", "text": ""}
{"id": "54039", "revid": "48409969", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54039", "title": "Colosseum (disambiguation)", "text": "The Colosseum is an elliptical amphitheater in Rome, Italy.\nColosseum or coliseum may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54040", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54040", "title": "Roccoco", "text": ""}
{"id": "54041", "revid": "14176974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54041", "title": "Talcott Parsons", "text": "American sociologist (1902\u20131979)\nTalcott Parsons (December 13, 1902 \u2013 May 8, 1979) was an American sociologist of the classical tradition, best known for his social action theory and structural functionalism. Parsons is considered one of the most influential figures in sociology in the 20th century. After earning a PhD in economics, he served on the faculty at Harvard University from 1927 to 1973. In 1930, he was among the first professors in its new sociology department. Later, he was instrumental in the establishment of the Department of Social Relations at Harvard.\nBased on empirical data, Parsons' social action theory was the first broad, systematic, and generalizable theory of social systems developed in the United States and Europe. Some of Parsons' largest contributions to sociology in the English-speaking world were his translations of Max Weber's work and his analyses of works by Weber, \u00c9mile Durkheim, and Vilfredo Pareto. Their work heavily influenced Parsons' view and was the foundation for his social action theory. Parsons viewed voluntaristic action through the lens of the cultural values and social structures that constrain choices and ultimately determine all social actions, as opposed to actions that are determined based on internal psychological processes. Although Parsons is generally considered a structural functionalist, towards the end of his career, in 1975, he published an article that stated that \"functional\" and \"structural functionalist\" were inappropriate ways to describe the character of his theory.\nFrom the 1970s on, a new generation of sociologists criticized Parsons' theories as socially conservative and his writings as unnecessarily complex. Sociology courses have placed less emphasis on his theories than at the peak of his popularity (from the 1940s to the 1970s). However, there has been a recent resurgence of interest in his ideas.\nParsons was a strong advocate for the professionalization of sociology and its expansion in American academia. He was elected president of the American Sociological Association in 1949 and served as its secretary from 1960 to 1965.\nEarly life.\nParsons was born on December 13, 1902, in Colorado Springs, Colorado, to Edward Smith Parsons and Mary Augusta Ingersoll. His father had attended Yale Divinity School, was ordained as a Congregationalist minister, and served first as a minister for a pioneer community in Greeley, Colorado. At the time of Parsons' birth, his father was a professor in English and vice-president at Colorado College. \nDuring his Congregational ministry in Greeley, Edward had become sympathetic to the Social Gospel movement but tended to view it from a higher theological position and was hostile to the ideology of socialism.\nEducation.\nAmherst College.\nAs an undergraduate, Parsons studied biology and philosophy at Amherst College and received his BA in 1924. Amherst College had become the Parsons' family college by tradition; his father and his uncle Frank had attended it, as had his elder brother, Charles Edward. Initially, Parsons was attracted to a career in medicine, as he was inspired by his elder brother so he studied a great deal of biology and spent a summer working at the Oceanographic Institution at Woods Hole, Massachusetts.\nParsons' biology professors at Amherst were Otto C. Glaser and Henry Plough. Gently mocked as \"Little Talcott, the gilded cherub,\" Parsons became one of the student leaders at Amherst. Parsons also took courses with Walton Hale Hamilton and the philosopher Clarence Edwin Ayres, both known as \"institutional economists\". Hamilton, in particular, drew Parsons toward social science. They exposed him to literature by authors such as Thorstein Veblen, John Dewey, and William Graham Sumner. Parsons also took a course with George Brown in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant and a course in modern German philosophy with Otto Manthey-Zorn, who was a great interpreter of Kant. Parsons showed from early on, a great interest in the topic of philosophy.\nTwo term papers that Parsons wrote as a student for Clarence E. Ayres at Amherst have survived. They are referred to as the Amherst Papers and have been of strong interest to Parsons scholars. The first was written on December 19, 1922, \"The Theory of Human Behavior in its Individual and Social Aspects.\" The second was written on March 27, 1923, \"A Behavioristic Conception of the Nature of Morals\". The papers reveal Parsons' early interest in social evolution. The Amherst Papers also reveal that Parsons did not agree with his professors since he wrote in his Amherst papers that technological development and moral progress are two structurally-independent empirical processes.\nLondon School of Economics.\nAfter Amherst, he studied at the London School of Economics for a year, where he was exposed to the work of Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski, R. H. Tawney, L. T. Hobhouse, and Harold Laski. During his days at LSE, he made friends with E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Meyer Fortes, and Raymond Firth, who all participated in the Malinowski seminar. Also, he made a close personal friendship with Arthur and Eveline M. Burns.\nAt LSE he met Helen Bancroft Walker, a young American, and they married on April 30, 1927. The couple had three children: Anne, Charles, and Susan.\nUniversity of Heidelberg.\nIn June, Parsons went on to the University of Heidelberg, where he received his PhD in sociology and economics in 1927. At Heidelberg, he worked with Alfred Weber, Max Weber's brother; Edgar Salin, his dissertation adviser; Emil Lederer; and Karl Mannheim. He was examined on Kant's \"Critique of Pure Reason\" by the philosopher Karl Jaspers. At Heidelberg, Parsons was also examined by Willy Andreas on the French Revolution. Parsons wrote his Dr. Phil. thesis on \"The Concept of Capitalism in the Recent German Literature\", with his main focus on the work of Werner Sombart and Weber. It was clear from his discussion that he rejected Sombart's quasi-idealistic views and supported Weber's attempt to strike a balance between historicism, idealism and neo-Kantianism.\nThe most crucial encounter for Parsons at Heidelberg was with the work of Max Weber about whom he had never heard before. Weber became tremendously important for Parsons because his upbringing with a liberal but strongly-religious father had made the question of the role of culture and religion in the basic processes of world history a persistent puzzle in his mind. Weber was the first scholar who truly provided Parsons with a compelling theoretical \"answer\" to the question.\nParsons decided to translate Weber's work into English and approached Marianne Weber, Weber's widow. Parsons would eventually translate several of Weber's works. His time in Heidelberg had him invited by Marianne Weber to \"sociological teas\", which were study group meetings that she held in the library room of her and Max's old apartment. One scholar that Parsons met at Heidelberg who shared his enthusiasm for Weber was Alexander von Schelting. Parsons later wrote a review article on von Schelting's book on Weber. Generally, Parsons read extensively in religious literature, especially works focusing on the sociology of religion. One scholar who became especially important for Parsons was Ernst D. Troeltsch. Parsons also read widely on Calvinism. His reading included the work of Emile Doumerque, Eug\u00e9ne Choisy, and Henri Hauser.\nEarly academic career.\nHarvard University.\nIn 1927, after a year of teaching at Amherst (1926\u20131927), Parsons entered Harvard University, as an instructor in the Economics Department, where he followed F.\u00a0W. Taussig's lectures on economist Alfred Marshall and became friends with the economist historian Edwin Gay, the founder of Harvard Business School. Parsons also became a close associate of Joseph Schumpeter and followed his course General Economics. Parsons was at odds with some of the trends in Harvard's department which then went in a highly-technical and a mathematical direction. He looked for other options at Harvard and gave courses in \"Social Ethics\" and in the \"Sociology of Religion\".\nThe chance for a shift to sociology came in 1930, when Harvard's Sociology Department was created under Russian scholar Pitirim Sorokin. Parsons became one of the new department's two instructors, along with Carle Zimmerman. Parsons established close ties with biochemist and sociologist Lawrence Joseph Henderson, who took a personal interest in Parsons' career at Harvard. Parsons became part of L.\u00a0J. Henderson's famous Pareto study group, in which some of the most important intellectuals at Harvard participated, including Crane Brinton, George C. Homans, and Charles P. Curtis. Parsons wrote an article on Pareto's theory and later explained that he had adopted the concept of \"social system\" from reading Pareto. Parsons also made strong connections with two other influential intellectuals with whom he corresponded for years: economist Frank H. Knight and businessman Chester Barnard. The relationship between Parsons and Sorokin turned sour. A pattern of personal tensions was aggravated by Sorokin's deep dislike for American civilization, which he regarded as a sensate culture that was in decline. Sorokin's writings became increasingly anti-scientistic in his later years, widening the gulf between his work and Parsons' and turning the increasingly positivistic American sociology community against him. Sorokin also tended to belittle all sociology tendencies that differed from his own writings, and by 1934 was quite unpopular at Harvard.\nSome of Parsons' students in the department of sociology were Robin Williams Jr., Robert K. Merton, Kingsley Davis, Wilbert Moore, Edward C. Devereux, Logan Wilson, Nicholas Demereth, John Riley Jr., and Mathilda White Riley. Later cohorts of students included Harry Johnson, Bernard Barber, Marion Levy and Jesse R. Pitts. Parsons established, at the students' request, an informal study group which met year after year in Adams' house. Toward the end of Parsons' career, German systems theorist Niklas Luhmann also attended his lectures.\nIn 1932, Parsons bought a farmhouse near the small town of Acworth, but Parsons often, in his writing, referred to it as \"the farmhouse in Alstead\". The farmhouse was a very humble structure with almost no modern utilities. Still, it became central to Parsons' life, and many of his most important works were written there.\nIn the academic year of 1939\u20131940 Parsons and Schumpeter conducted an informal faculty seminar at Harvard, which discussed the concept of rationality. Among the participants were D.\u00a0V. McGranahan, Abram Bergson, Wassily Leontief, Gottfried Haberler, and Paul Sweezy. Schumpeter contributed the essay \"Rationality in Economics\", and Parsons submitted the paper \"The Role of Rationality in Social Action\" for a general discussion.\nNeoclassical economics vs. institutionalists.\nIn the discussion between neoclassical economics and the institutionalists, which was one of the conflicts that prevailed within the field of economics in the 1920s and early 1930s, Parsons attempted to walk a very fine line. He was very critical about neoclassical theory, an attitude he maintained throughout his life and that is reflected in his critique of Milton Friedman and Gary Becker. He was opposed to the utilitarian bias within the neoclassical approach and could not embrace them fully. However, he agreed partly on their theoretical and methodological style of approach, which should be distinguished from its substance. He was thus unable to accept the institutionalist solution. In a 1975 interview, Parsons recalled a conversation with Schumpeter on the institutionalist methodological position: An economist like Schumpeter, by contrast, would absolutely have none of that. I remember talking to him about the problem and .. I think Schumpeter was right. If economics had gone that way [like the institutionalists] it would have had to become a primarily empirical discipline, largely descriptive, and without theoretical focus. That's the way the 'institutionalists' went, and of course Mitchell was affiliated with that movement.\nAnti-Nazism.\nParsons returned to Germany in the summer of 1930 and became an eyewitness to the feverish atmosphere in Weimar Germany during which the Nazi Party rose to power. Parsons received constant reports about the rise of Nazism through his friend, Edward Y. Hartshorne, who was traveling there. Parsons began, in the late 1930s, to warn the American public about the Nazi threat, but he had little success, as a poll showed that 91 percent of the country opposed the Second World War.\nOne of the first articles that Parsons wrote was \"New Dark Age Seen If Nazis Should Win\". He was one of the key initiators of the Harvard Defense Committee, aimed at rallying the American public against the Nazis. Parsons' voice sounded again and again over Boston's local radio stations, and he also spoke against Nazism during a dramatic meeting at Harvard, which was disturbed by antiwar activists. Together with graduate student Charles O. Porter, Parsons rallied graduate students at Harvard for the war effort. During the war, Parsons conducted a special study group at Harvard, which analyzed what its members considered the causes of Nazism, and leading experts on that topic participated.\nWorld War II.\nIn the spring of 1941, a discussion group on Japan began to meet at Harvard. The group's five core members were Parsons, John K. Fairbank, Edwin O. Reischauer, William M. McGovern, and Marion Levy Jr. A few others occasionally joined the group, including Ai-Li Sung and Edward Y. Hartshorne. The group arose out of a strong desire to understand the country, but, as Levy frankly admitted, \"Reischauer was the only one who knew anything about Japan.\" Parsons, however, was eager to learn more about it and was \"concerned with general implications.\"\nIn 1942, Parsons worked on arranging a major study of occupied countries with Bartholomew Landheer of the Netherlands Information Office in New York. Parsons motivated Georges Gurvitch, Conrad Arnsber], Safranek and Theodore Abel to participate, but it never materialized for lack of funding. In early 1942, Parsons unsuccessfully approached Hartshorne, who had joined the Psychology Division of the Office of the Coordinator of Information (COI) in Washington to interest his agency in the research project. In February 1943, Parsons became the deputy director of the Harvard School of Overseas Administration, which educated administrators to \"run\" the occupied territories in Germany and the Pacific Ocean. The task of finding relevant literature on both Europe and Asia was mindboggling and occupied a fair amount of Parsons' time. One scholar Parsons came to know was Karl August Wittfogel and they discussed Weber. On China, Parsons received fundamental information from Chinese scholar Ai-Li Sung Chin and her husband, Robert Chin. Another Chinese scholar Parsons worked closely with in this period was Hsiao-Tung Fei (or Fei Xiaotong), who had studied at the London School of Economics and was an expert on the social structure of the Chinese village.\nIntellectual exchanges.\nParsons met Alfred Sch\u00fctz during the rationality seminar, which he conducted together with Schumpeter, at Harvard in the spring of 1940. Sch\u00fctz had been close to Edmund Husserl and was deeply embedded in the latter's phenomenological philosophy. Sch\u00fctz was born in Vienna but moved to the US in 1939, and for years, he worked on the project of developing a phenomenological sociology, primarily based on an attempt to find some point between Husserl's method and Weber's sociology. Parsons had asked Sch\u00fctz to give a presentation at the rationality seminar, which he did on April 13, 1940, and Parsons and Sch\u00fctz had lunch together afterward. Sch\u00fctz was fascinated with Parsons' theory, which he regarded as the state-of-the-art social theory, and wrote an evaluation of Parsons' theory that he kindly asked Parsons to comment. That led to a short but intensive correspondence, which generally revealed that the gap between Sch\u00fctz's sociologized phenomenology and Parsons' concept of voluntaristic action was far too great. From Parsons' point of view, Sch\u00fctz's position was too speculative and subjectivist, and tended to reduce social processes to the articulation of a \"Lebenswelt\" consciousness. For Parsons, the defining edge of human life was action as a catalyst for historical change, and it was essential for sociology, as a science, to pay strong attention to the subjective element of action, but it should never become completely absorbed in it since the purpose of a science was to explain causal relationships, by covering laws or by other types of explanatory devices. Sch\u00fctz's basic argument was that sociology cannot ground itself and that epistemology was not a luxury but a necessity for the social scientist. Parsons agreed but stressed the pragmatic need to demarcate science and philosophy and insisted moreover that the grounding of a conceptual scheme for empirical theory construction cannot aim at absolute solutions but needs to take a sensible stock-taking of the epistemological balance at each point in time. However, the two men shared many basic assumptions about the nature of social theory, which has kept the debate simmering ever since. By request from Ilse Sch\u00fctz, after her husband's death, Parsons gave permission to publish the correspondence between him and Sch\u00fctz. Parsons also wrote \"A 1974 Retrospective Perspective\" to the correspondence, which characterized his position as a \"Kantian point of view\" and found that Sch\u00fctz's strong dependence on Husserl's \"phenomenological reduction\" would make it very difficult to reach the kind of \"conceptual scheme\" that Parsons found essential for theory-building in social sciences.\nBetween 1940 and 1944, Parsons and Eric Voegelin exchanged intellectual views through correspondence. Parsons had probably met Voegelin in 1938 and 1939, when Voegelin held a temporary instructor appointment at Harvard. The bouncing point for their conversation was Parsons' manuscript on anti-Semitism and other materials that he had sent to Voegelin. Discussion touched on the nature of capitalism, the rise of the West, and the origin of Nazism. The key to the discussion was the implication of Weber's interpretation of Protestant ethics and the impact of Calvinism on modern history. Although the two scholars agreed on many fundamental characteristics about Calvinism, their understanding of its historical impact was quite different. Generally, Voegelin regarded Calvinism as essentially a dangerous totalitarian ideology; Parsons argued that its current features were temporary and that the functional implications of its long-term, emerging value-l system had revolutionary and not only \"negative\" impact on the general rise of the institutions of modernity.\nThe two scholars also discussed Parsons' debate with Sch\u00fctz and especially why Parsons had ended his encounter with Schutz. Parsons found that Schutz, rather than attempting to build social science theory, tended to get consumed in philosophical detours. Parsons wrote to Voegelin: \"Possibly one of my troubles in my discussion with Schuetz lies in the fact that by cultural heritage I am a Calvinist. I do not want to be a philosopher \u2013 I shy away from the philosophical problems underlying my scientific work. By the same token I don't think he wants to be a scientist as I understand the term until he has settled all the underlying philosophical difficulties. If the physicists of the 17th century had been Schuetzes there might well have been no Newtonian system.\"\nIn 1942, Stuart C. Dodd published a major work, \"Dimensions of Society\", which attempted to build a general theory of society on the foundation of a mathematical and quantitative systematization of social sciences. Dodd advanced a particular approach, known as an \"S-theory\". Parsons discussed Dodd's theoretical outline in a review article the same year. Parsons acknowledged Dodd's contribution to be an exceedingly formidable work but argued against its premises as a general paradigm for the social sciences. Parsons generally argued that Dodd's \"S-theory\", which included the so-called \"social distance\" scheme of Bogardus, was unable to construct a sufficiently sensitive and systematized theoretical matrix, compared with the \"traditional\" approach, which has developed around the lines of Weber, Pareto, \u00c9mile Durkheim, Sigmund Freud, William Isaac Thomas, and other important agents of an action-system approach with a clearer dialogue with the cultural and motivational dimensions of human interaction.\nIn April 1944, Parsons participated in a conference, \"On Germany after the War\", of psychoanalytical oriented psychiatrists and a few social scientists to analyze the causes of Nazism and to discuss the principles for the coming occupation.\nDuring the conference, Parsons opposed what he found to be Lawrence S. Kubie's reductionism. Kubie was a psychoanalyst, who strongly argued that the German national character was completely \"destructive\" and that it would be necessary for a special agency of the United Nations to control the German educational system directly. Parsons and many others at the conference were strongly opposed to Kubie's idea. Parsons argued that it would fail and suggested that Kubie was viewing the question of Germans' reorientation \"too exclusively in psychiatric terms\". Parsons was also against the extremely harsh Morgenthau Plan, published in September 1944. After the conference, Parsons wrote an article, \"The Problem of Controlled Institutional Change\", against the plan.\nParsons participated as a part-time adviser to the Foreign Economic Administration Agency between March and October 1945 to discuss postwar reparations and deindustrialization.\nParsons was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1945.\nTaking charge at Harvard.\nParsons' situation at Harvard University changed significantly in early 1944, when he received a good offer from Northwestern University. Harvard reacted to the offer by appointing Parsons as the chairman of the department, promoting him to the rank of full professor and accepting the process of reorganization, which led to the establishment of the new department of Social Relations. Parsons' letter to Dean Paul Buck, on April 3, 1944, reveals the high point of this moment. Because of the new development at Harvard, Parsons chose to decline an offer from William Langer to join the Office of Strategic Services, the predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency. Langer proposed for Parsons to follow the American army in its march into Germany and to function as a political adviser to the administration of the occupied territories. Late in 1944, under the auspices of the Cambridge Community Council, Parsons directed a project together with Elizabeth Schlesinger. They investigated ethnic and racial tensions in the Boston area between students from Radcliffe College and Wellesley College. This study was a reaction to an upsurge of anti-Semitism in the Boston area, which began in late 1943 and continued into 1944. At the end of November 1946, the Social Research Council (SSRC) asked Parsons to write a comprehensive report of the topic of how the social sciences could contribute to the understanding of the modern world. The background was a controversy over whether the social sciences should be incorporated into the National Science Foundation.\nParsons' report was in form of a large memorandum, \"Social Science: A Basic National Resource\", which became publicly available in July 1948 and remains a powerful historical statement about how he saw the role of modern social sciences.\nPostwar.\nRussian Research Center.\nParsons became a member of the executive committee of the new Russian Research Center at Harvard in 1948, which had Parsons' close friend and colleague, Clyde Kluckhohn, as its director. Parsons went to Allied-occupied Germany in the summer of 1948, was a contact person for the RRC, and was interested in the Russian refugees who were stranded in Germany. He happened to interview in Germany a few members of the Vlasov Army, a Russian Liberation Army that had collaborated with the Germans during the war. The movement was named after Andrey Vlasov, a Soviet general captured by the Germans in June 1942. The Vlasov movement's ideology was a hybrid of elements and has been called \"communism without Stalin\", but in the Prague Manifesto (1944), it had moved toward the framework of a constitutional liberal state.\nIn Germany in the summer of 1948 Parsons wrote several letters to Kluckhohn to report on his investigations.\nAnticommunism.\nParsons' fight against communism was a natural extension of his fight against fascism in the 1930s and the 1940s. For Parsons, communism and fascism were two aspects of the same problem; his article \"A Tentative Outline of American Values\", published posthumously in 1989, called both collectivistic types \"empirical finalism\", which he believed was a secular \"mirror\" of religious types of \"salvationalism\". In contrast, Parsons highlighted that American values generally were based on the principle of \"instrumental activism\", which he believed was the outcome of Puritanism as a historical process. It represented what Parsons called \"worldly asceticism\" and represented the absolute opposite of empirical finalism. One can thus understand Parsons' statement late in life that the greatest threat to humanity is every type of \"fundamentalism\". By the term \"empirical finalism\", he implied the type of claim assessed by cultural and ideological actors about the correct or \"final\" ends of particular patterns of value orientation in the actual historical world (such as the notion of \"a truly just society\"), which was absolutist and \"indisputable\" in its manner of declaration and in its function as a belief system. A typical example would be the Jacobins' behavior during the French Revolution. Parsons' rejection of communist and fascist totalitarianism was theoretically and intellectually an integral part of his theory of world history, and he tended to regard the European Reformation as the most crucial event in \"modern\" world history. Like Weber, he tended to highlight the crucial impact of Calvinist religiosity in the socio-political and socio-economic processes that followed. He maintained it reached its most radical form in England in the 17th century and in effect gave birth to the special cultural mode that has characterized the American value system and history ever since. The Calvinist faith system, authoritarian in the beginning, eventually released in its accidental long-term institutional effects a fundamental democratic revolution in the world. Parsons maintained that the revolution was steadily unfolding, as part of an interpenetration of Puritan values in the world at large.\nAmerican exceptionalism.\nParsons defended American exceptionalism and argued that, because of a variety of historical circumstances, the impact of the Reformation had reached a certain intensity in British history. Puritan, essentially Calvinist, value patterns had become institutionalized in Britain's internal situation. The outcome was that Puritan radicalism was reflected in the religious radicalism of the Puritan sects, in the poetry of John Milton, in the English Civil War, and in the process leading to the Glorious Revolution of 1688. It was the radical fling of the Puritan Revolution that provided settlers in early 17th-century Colonial America, and the Puritans who settled in America represented radical views on individuality, egalitarianism, skepticism toward state power, and the zeal of the religious calling. The settlers established something unique in the world that was under the religious zeal of Calvinist values.\nTherefore, a new kind of nation was born, the character of which became clear by the time of the American Revolution and in the U.S. Constitution, and its dynamics were later studied by Alexis de Tocqueville. The French Revolution was a failed attempt to copy the American model. Although America has changed in its social composition since 1787, Parsons maintained that it preserves the basic revolutionary Calvinist value pattern. That has been further revealed in the pluralist and highly individualized America, with its thick, network-oriented civil society, which is of crucial importance to its success and these factors have provided it with its historical lead in the process of industrialization.\nParsons maintained that this has continued to place it in the leading position in the world, but as a historical process and not in \"the nature of things\". Parsons viewed the \"highly special feature of the modern Western social world\" as \"dependent on the peculiar circumstances of its history, and not the necessary universal result of social development as a whole\".\nDefender of modernity.\nIn contrast to some \"radicals\", Parsons was a defender of modernity. He believed that modern civilization, with its technology and its constantly evolving institutions, was ultimately strong, vibrant, and essentially progressive. He acknowledged that the future had no inherent guarantees, but as sociologists Robert Holton and Bryan Turner said that Parsons was not nostalgic and that he did not believe in the past as a lost \"golden age\" but that he maintained that modernity generally had improved conditions, admittedly often in troublesome and painful ways but usually positively. He had faith in humanity's potential but not na\u00efvely. When asked at the Brown Seminary in 1973 if he was optimistic about the future, he answered, \"Oh, I think I'm basically optimistic about the human prospects in the long run.\" Parsons pointed out that he had been a student at Heidelberg at the height of the vogue of Oswald Spengler, author of \"The Decline of the West\", \"and he didn't give the West more than 50 years of continuing vitality after the time he wrote... Well, its more than 50 years later now, and I don't think the West has just simply declined. He was wrong in thinking it was the end.\"\nHarvard Department of Social Relations.\nAt Harvard, Parsons was instrumental in forming the Department of Social Relations, an interdisciplinary venture among sociology, anthropology, and psychology. The new department was officially created in January 1946 with him as the chairman and with prominent figures at the faculty, such as Stouffer, Kluckhohn, Henry Murray and Gordon Allport. An appointment for Hartshorne was considered but he was killed in Germany by an unknown gunman as he was driving on the highway. His position went instead to George C. Homans. The new department was galvanized by Parsons' idea of creating a theoretical and institutional base for a unified social science. Parsons also became strongly interested in systems theory and cybernetics and began to adopt their basic ideas and concepts to the realm of social science, giving special attention to the work of Norbert Wiener.\nSome of the students who arrived at the Department of Social Relations in the years after the Second World War were David Aberle, Gardner Lindzey, Harold Garfinkel, David G. Hays, Benton Johnson, Marian Johnson, Kaspar Naegele, James Olds, Albert Cohen, Norman Birnbaum, Robin Murphy Williams, Jackson Toby, Robert N. Bellah, Joseph Kahl, Joseph Berger, Morris Zelditch, Ren\u00e9e Fox, Tom O'Dea, Ezra Vogel, Clifford Geertz, Joseph Elder, Theodore Mills, Mark Field, Edward Laumann, and Francis Sutton.\nRen\u00e9e Fox, who arrived at Harvard in 1949, would become a very close friend of the Parsons family. Joseph Berger, who also arrived at Harvard in 1949 after finishing his BA from Brooklyn College, would become Parsons' research assistant from 1952 to 1953 and would get involved in his research projects with Robert F. Bales.\nAccording to Parsons' own account, it was during his conversations with Elton Mayo that he realized it was necessary for him to take a serious look at the work of Freud. In the fall of 1938, Parsons began to offer a series of non-credit evening courses on Freud. As time passed, Parsons developed a strong interest in psychoanalysis. He volunteered to participate in nontherapeutic training at the Boston Psychoanalytic Institute, where he began a didactic analysis with Grete Bibring in September 1946. Insight into psychoanalysis is significantly reflected in his later work, especially reflected in \"The Social System\" and his general writing on psychological issues and on the theory of socialization. That influence was also to some extent apparent in his empirical analysis of fascism during the war. Wolfgang K\u00f6hler's study of the mentality of apes and Kurt Koffka's ideas of Gestalt psychology also received Parsons' attention.\n\"The Social System\" and \"Toward a General Theory of Action\".\nDuring the late 1940s and the early 1950s, he worked very hard on producing some major theoretical statements. In 1951, Parsons published two major theoretical works, \"The Social System\" and \"Toward a General Theory of Action\". The latter work, which was coauthored with Edward Tolman, Edward Shils and several others, was the outcome of the so-called Carnegie Seminar at Harvard University, which had taken place in the period of September 1949 and January 1950. The former work was Parsons' first major attempt to present his basic outline of a general theory of society since \"The Structure of Social Action\" (1937). He discusses the basic methodological and metatheoretical principles for such a theory. He attempts to present a general social system theory that is built systematically from most basic premises and so he featured the idea of an interaction situation based on need-dispositions and facilitated through the basic concepts of cognitive, cathectic, and evaluative orientation. The work also became known for introducing his famous pattern variables, which in reality represented choices distributed along a \"Gemeinschaft\" vs. \"Gesellschaft\" axis.\nThe details of Parsons' thought about the outline of the social system went through a rapid series of changes in the following years, but the basics remained. During the early 1950s, the idea of the AGIL model took place in Parsons's mind gradually. According to Parsons, its key idea was sparked during his work with Bales on motivational processes in small groups.\nParsons carried the idea into the major work that he co-authored with a student, Neil Smelser, which was published in 1956 as \"Economy and Society\". \nWithin this work, the first rudimentary model of the AGIL scheme was presented. It reorganized the basic concepts of the pattern variables in a new way and presented the solution within a system-theoretical approach by using the idea of a cybernetic hierarchy as an organizing principle. The real innovation in the model was the concept of the \"latent function\" or the pattern maintenance function, which became the crucial key to the whole cybernetic hierarchy.\nDuring its theoretical development, Parsons showed a persistent interest in symbolism. An important statement is Parsons' \"The Theory of Symbolism in Relation to Action\". The article was stimulated by a series of informal discussion group meetings, which Parsons and several other colleagues in the spring of 1951 had conducted with philosopher and semiotician Charles W. Morris. His interest in symbolism went hand in hand with his interest in Freud's theory and \"The Superego and the Theory of Social Systems\", written in May 1951 for a meeting of the American Psychiatric Association. The paper can be regarded as the main statement of his own interpretation of Freud, but also as a statement of how Parsons tried to use Freud's pattern of symbolization to structure the theory of social system and eventually to codify the cybernetic hierarchy of the AGIL system within the parameter of a system of symbolic differentiation. His discussion of Freud also contains several layers of criticism that reveal that Parsons' use of Freud was selective rather than orthodox. In particular, he claimed that Freud had \"introduced an unreal separation between the superego and the ego\".\nSubscriber to systems theory.\nParsons was an early subscriber to systems theory. He had early been fascinated by the writings of Walter B. Cannon and his concept of homeostasis as well as the writings of French physiologist Claude Bernard. His interest in systems theory had been further stimulated by his contract with L.J. Henderson. Parsons called the concept of \"system\" for an indispensable master concept in the work of building theoretical paradigms for social sciences. From 1952 to 1957, Parsons participated in an ongoing Conference on System Theory under the chairmanship of Roy R. Grinker, Sr., in Chicago.\nParsons came into contact with several prominent intellectuals of the time and was particularly impressed by the ideas of social insect biologist Alfred Emerson. Parsons was especially compelled by Emerson's idea that, in the sociocultural world, the functional equivalent of the gene was that of the \"symbol\". Parsons also participated in two of the meetings of the famous Macy Conferences on systems theory and on issues that are now classified as cognitive science, which took place in New York from 1946 to 1953 and included scientists like John von Neumann. Parsons read widely on systems theory at the time, especially works of Norbert Wiener and William Ross Ashby, who were also among the core participants in the conferences. Around the same time, Parsons also benefited from conversations with political scientist Karl Deutsch on systems theory. In one conference, the Fourth Conference of the problems of consciousness in March 1953 at Princeton and sponsored by the Macy Foundation, Parsons would give a presentation on \"Conscious and Symbolic Processes\" and embark on an intensive group discussion which included exchange with child psychologist Jean Piaget.\nAmong the other participants were Mary A.B. Brazier, Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, Nathaniel Kleitman, Margaret Mead and Gregory Zilboorg. Parsons would defend the thesis that consciousness is essentially a social action phenomenon, not primarily a \"biological\" one. During the conference, Parsons criticized Piaget for not sufficiently separating cultural factors from a physiologistic concept of \"energy\".\nMcCarthy era.\nDuring the McCarthy era, on April 1, 1952, J. Edgar Hoover, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, received a personal letter from an informant who reported on communist activities at Harvard. During a later interview, the informant claimed that \"Parsons... was probably the leader of an inner group\" of communist sympathizers at Harvard. The informant reported that the old department under Sorokin had been conservative and had \"loyal Americans of good character\" but that the new Department of Social Relations had turned into a decisive left-wing place as a result of \"Parsons's manipulations and machinations\". On October 27, 1952, Hoover authorized the Boston FBI to initiate a security-type investigation on Parsons. In February 1954, a colleague, Stouffer, wrote to Parsons in England to inform him that Stouffer had been denied access to classified documents and that part of the stated reason was that Stouffer knew communists, including Parsons, \"who was a member of the Communist Party\".\nParsons immediately wrote an affidavit in defense of Stouffer, and he also defended himself against the charges that were in the affidavit: \"This allegation is so preposterous that I cannot understand how any reasonable person could come to the conclusion that I was a member of the Communist Party or ever had been.\" In a personal letter to Stouffer, Parsons wrote, \"I will fight for you against this evil with everything there is in me: I am in it with you to the death.\" The charges against Parsons resulted in Parsons being unable to participate in a UNESCO conference, and it was not until January 1955 that he was acquitted of the charges.\n\"Family, Socialization and Interaction Process\".\nSince the late 1930s, Parsons had continued to show great interest in psychology and in psychoanalysis. In the academic year of 1955\u20131956, he taught a seminar at Boston Psychoanalytic Society and Institute entitled \"Sociology and Psychoanalysis\". In 1956, he published a major work, \"Family, Socialization and Interaction Process\", which explored the way in which psychology and psychoanalysis bounce into the theories of motivation and socialization, as well into the question of kinship, which for Parsons established the fundamental axis for that subsystem he later would call \"the social community\".\nIt contained articles written by Parsons and articles written in collaboration with Robert F. Bales, James Olds, Morris Zelditch Jr., and Philip E. Slater. The work included a theory of personality as well as studies of role differentiation. The strongest intellectual stimulus that Parsons most likely got then was from brain researcher James Olds, one of the founders of neuroscience and whose 1955 book on learning and motivation was strongly influenced from his conversations with Parsons. Some of the ideas in the book had been submitted by Parsons in an intellectual brainstorm in an informal \"work group\" which he had organized with Joseph Berger, William Caudill, Frank E. Jones, Kaspar D. Naegele, Theodore M. Mills, Bengt G. Rundblad, and others. Albert J. Reiss from Vanderbilt University had submitted his critical commentary.\nIn the mid-1950s, Parsons also had extensive discussions with Olds about the motivational structure of psychosomatic problems, and at this time Parsons' concept of psychosomatic problems was strongly influenced by readings and direct conversations with Franz Alexander (a psychoanalyst, originally associated with the Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute, who was a pioneer of psychosomatic medicine), Grinker and John Spiegel.\nIn 1955, Fran\u00e7ois Bourricaud was preparing a reader of some of Parsons' work for a French audience, and Parsons wrote a preface for the book \"Au lecteur fran\u00e7ais\" (\"To the French Reader\"); it also went over Bourricaud's introduction very carefully. In his correspondence with Bourricaud, Parsons insisted that he did not necessarily treat values as the only, let alone \"the primary empirical reference point\" of the action system since so many other factors were also involved in the actual historical pattern of an action situation.\nCenter of Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.\nParsons spent 1957 to 1958 at the Center of Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in Palo Alto, California, where he met for the first time Kenneth Burke; Burke's flamboyant, explosive temperament made a great impression on Parsons, and the two men became close friends. Parsons explained in a letter the impression Burke had left on him: \"The big thing to me is that Burke more than anyone else has helped me to fill a major gap in my own theoretical interests, in the field of the analysis of expressive symbolism.\"\nAnother scholar whom Parsons met at the Center of Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences at Palo Alto was Alfred L. Kroeber, the \"dean of American anthropologists\". Kroeber, who had received his PhD at Columbia and who had worked with the Arapaho Indians, was about 81 when Parsons met him. Parsons had the greatest admiration for Kroeber and called him \"my favorite elder statesman\".\nIn Palo Alto, Kroeber suggested to Parsons that they write a joint statement to clarify the distinction between cultural and social systems, then the subject of endless debates. In October 1958, Parsons and Kroeber published their joint statement in a short article, \"The Concept of Culture and the Social System\", which became highly influential. Parsons and Kroeber declared that it is important both to keep a clear distinction between the two concepts and to avoid a methodology by which either would be reduced to the other.\nLater career.\nPublic conferences.\nIn 1955 to 1956, a group of faculty members at Cornell University met regularly and discussed Parsons' writings. The next academic year, a series of seven widely attended public seminars followed and culminated in a session at which he answered his critics. The discussions in the seminars were summed up in a book edited by Max Black, \"The Social Theories of Talcott Parsons: A Critical Examination\". It included an essay by Parsons, \"The Point of View of the Author\". The scholars included in the volume were Edward C. Devereux Jr., Robin M. Williams Jr., Chandler Morse, Alfred L. Baldwin, Urie Bronfenbrenner, Henry A. Landsberger, William Foote Whyte, Black, and Andrew Hacker. The contributions converted many angles including personality theory, organizational theory, and various methodological discussions. Parsons' essay is particularly notable because it and another essay, \"Pattern Variables Revisited\", both represented the most full-scale accounts of the basic elements of his theoretical strategy and the general principles behind his approach to theory-building when they were published in 1960.\nOne essay also included, in metatheoretical terms, a criticism of the theoretical foundations for so-called conflict theory.\nCriticism of theories.\nFrom the late 1950s to the student rebellion in the 1960s and its aftermath, Parsons' theory was criticized by some scholars and intellectuals of the left, who claimed that Parsons's theory was inherently conservative, if not reactionary. Alvin Gouldner even claimed that Parsons had been an opponent of the New Deal. Parsons' theory was further regarded as unable to reflect social change, human suffering, poverty, deprivation, and conflict. Theda Skocpol thought that the apartheid system in South Africa was the ultimate proof that Parsons's theory was \"wrong\".\nAt the same time, Parsons' idea of the individual was seen as \"oversocialized\", \"repressive\", or subjugated in normative \"conformity\". In addition, J\u00fcrgen Habermas and countless others were of the belief that Parsons' system theory and his action theory were inherently opposed and mutually hostile and that his system theory was especially \"mechanical\", \"positivistic\", \"anti-individualistic\", \"anti-voluntaristic\", and \"de-humanizing\" by the sheer nature of its intrinsic theoretical context.\nBy the same token, his evolutionary theory was regarded as \"uni-linear\", \"mechanical\", \"biologistic\", an ode to world system status quo, or simply an ill-concealed instruction manual for \"the capitalist nation-state\". The first manifestations of that branch of criticism would be intellectuals like Lewis Coser, Ralf Dahrendorf, David Lockwood, John Rex, C. Wright Mills, Tom Bottomore and Gouldner.\nDemocratic Party supporter.\nParsons supported John F. Kennedy on November 8, 1960; from 1923, with one exception, Parsons voted for Democrats all his life. He discussed the Kennedy election widely in his correspondence at the time. Parsons was especially interested in the symbolic implications involved in the fact of Kennedy's Catholic background for the implications for the United States as an integral community (it was the first time that a Catholic had become President of the United States).\nIn a letter to Robert N. Bellah, he wrote, \"I am sure you have been greatly intrigued by the involvement of the religious issue in our election.\" Parsons, who described himself as a \"Stevenson Democrat\", was especially enthusiastic that his favored politician, Adlai Stevenson II, had been appointed United States Ambassador to the United Nations. Parsons had supported Stevenson in 1952 and 1956 and was greatly disappointed that Stevenson lost heavily both times.\nModernization theory influence.\nIn the early 1960s, it became obvious that his ideas had a great impact on much of the theories of modernization at the time. His influence was very extensive but at the same time, the concrete adoption of his theory was often quite selective, half-hearted, superficial, and eventually confused. Many modernization theorists never used the full power of Parsons' theory but concentrated on some formalist formula, which often was taken out of the context that had the deeper meaning with which Parsons originally introduced them.\nIn works by Gabriel A. Almond and James S. Coleman, Karl W. Deutsch, S.\u00a0N. Eisenstadt, Seymour Martin Lipset, Samuel P. Huntington, David E. Apter, Lucian W. Pye, Sidney Verba, and Chalmers Johnson, and others, Parsons' influence is clear. Indeed, it was the intensive influence of Parsons' ideas in political sociology that originally got scholar William Buxton interested in his work. In addition, David Easton would claim that in the history of political science, the two scholars who had made any serious attempt to construct a general theory for political science on the issue of political support were Easton and Parsons.\nInterest in religion.\nOne of the scholars with whom he corresponded extensively with during his lifetime and whose opinion he highly valued was Robert N. Bellah. Parsons's discussion with Bellah would cover a wide range of topics, including the theology of Paul Tillich. The correspondence would continue when Bellah, in the early fall of 1960, went to Japan to study Japanese religion and ideology. In August 1960, Parsons sent Bellah a draft of his paper on \"The Religious Background of the American Value System\" to ask for his commentary.\nIn a letter to Bellah of September 30, 1960, Parsons discussed his reading of Perry Miller's \"Errand into the Wilderness\". Parsons wrote that Miller's discussion of the role of Calvinism \"in the early New England theology... is a first rate and fit beautifully with the broad position I have taken.\" Miller was a literary Harvard historian whose books such as \"The New England Mind\" established new standards for the writing of American cultural and religious history. Miller remained one of Parsons' most favoured historians throughout his life. Indeed, religion had always a special place in Parsons' heart, but his son, in an interview, maintained that he that his father was probably not really \"religious.\"\nThroughout his life, Parsons interacted with a broad range of intellectuals and others who took a deep interest in religious belief systems, doctrines, and institutions. One notable person who interacted with Parsons was Marie Augusta Neal, a nun of the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur who sent Parsons a huge number of her manuscripts and invited him to conferences and intellectual events in her Catholic Church. Neal received her PhD from Harvard under Parsons's supervision in 1963, and she would eventually become professor and then chair of sociology at Emmanuel College.\nCriticism of Riesman.\nParsons and Winston White cowrote an article, \"The Link Between Character and Society\", which was published in 1961. It was a critical discussion of David Riesman's \"The Lonely Crowd,\" which had been published a decade earlier and had turned into an unexpected bestseller, reaching 1 million sold copies in 1977. Riesman was a prominent member of the American academic left, influenced by Erich Fromm and the Frankfurt School. In reality, Riesman's book was an academic attempt to give credit to the concept of \"mass society\" and especially to the idea of an America suffocated in social conformity. Riesman had essentially argued that at the emerging of highly advanced capitalism, the America basic value system and its socializing roles had changed from an \"inner-directed\" toward an \"other-directed\" pattern of value-orientation.\nParsons and White challenged Riesman's idea and argued that there had been no change away from an inner-directed personality structure. The said that Riesman's \"other-directness\" looked like a caricature of Charles Cooley's looking-glass self, and they argued that the framework of \"institutional individualism\" as the basic code-structure of America's normative system had essentially not changed. What had happened, however, was that the industrialized process and its increased pattern of societal differentiation had changed the family's generalized symbolic function in society and had allowed for a greater permissiveness in the way the child related to its parents. Parsons and White argued that was not the prelude to greater \"otherdirectness\" but a more complicated way by which inner-directed pattern situated itself in the social environment.\nPolitical power and social influence.\n1963 was a notable year in Parsons's theoretical development because it was the year when he published two important articles: one on political power and one on the concept of social influence. The two articles represented Parsons's first published attempt to work out the idea of Generalized Symbolic Media as an integral part of the exchange processes within the AGIL system. It was a theoretical development, which Parsons had worked on ever since the publication of \"Economy and Society\" (1956).\nThe prime model for the generalized symbolic media was money and Parsons was reflecting on the question whether the functional characteristics of money represented an exclusive uniqueness of the economic system or whether it was possible to identify other generalized symbolic media in other subsystems as well. Although each medium had unique characteristics, Parsons claimed that power (for the political system) and influence (for the societal community) had institutional functions, which essentially was structurally similar to the general systemic function of money. Using Roman Jakobson's idea of \"code\" and \"message\", Parsons divided the components of the media into a question of value-principle versus coordination standards for the \"code-structure\" and the question of factor versus product control within those social process which carried the \"message\" components. While \"utility\" could be regarded as the value-principle for the economy (medium: money), \"effectiveness\" was the value-principle for the political system (by political power) and social solidarity for the societal community (by social influence). Parsons would eventually choose the concept of value-commitment as the generalized symbolic medium for the fiduciary system with integrity as the value principle.\nContacts with other scholars.\nIn August 1963, Parsons got a new research assistant, Victor Lidz, who would become an important collaborator and colleague. In 1964, Parsons flew to Heidelberg to celebrate the 100th birthday of Weber and discuss Weber's work with Habermas, Herbert Marcuse, and others. Parsons delivered his paper \"Evaluation and Objectivity in Social Science: An Interpretation of Max Weber's Contribution\". The meeting became mostly a clash between pro-Weberian scholars and the Frankfurt School. Before leaving for Germany, Parsons discussed the upcoming meeting with Reinhard Bendix and commented, \"I am afraid I will be something of a Daniel in the Lion's den.\" Bendix wrote back and told Parsons that Marcuse sounded very much like Christoph Steding, a Nazi philosopher.\nParsons conducted a persistent correspondence with noted scholar Benjamin Nelson, and they shared a common interest in the rise and the destiny of civilizations until Nelson's death in 1977. The two scholars also shared a common enthusiasm for the work of Weber and would generally agree on the main interpretative approach to the study of Weber. Nelson had participated in the Weber Centennial in Heidelberg.\nParsons was opposed to the Vietnam War but was disturbed by what he considered the anti-intellectual tendency in the student rebellion: that serious debate was often substituted by handy slogans from communists Karl Marx, Mao Zedong and Fidel Castro.\nOpposition to the Frankfurt School.\nNelson got into a violent argument with Herbert Marcuse and accused him of tarnishing Weber. In reading the written version of Nelson's contribution to the Weber Centennial, Parsons wrote, \"I cannot let the occasion pass without a word of congratulations which is strong enough so that if it were concert I should shout bravo.\" In several letters, Nelson would keep Parsons informed of the often-turbulent leftist environment of Marcuse. In the letter of September 1967, Nelson would tell Parsons how much he enjoyed reading Parsons' essay on \"Kinship and The Associational Aspect of Social Structure\". Also, one of the scholars on whose work Parsons and Nelson would share internal commentaries was Habermas.\nEthnicity, kinship, and diffuse solidarity.\nParsons had for years corresponded with his former graduate student David M. Schneider, who had taught at the University of California Berkeley until the latter, in 1960, accepted a position as professor in anthropology at the University of Chicago. Schneider had received his PhD at Harvard in social anthropology in 1949 and had become a leading expert on the American kinship system. Schneider, in 1968, published \"American Kinship: A Cultural Account\" which became a classic in the field, and he had sent Parsons a copy of the copyedited manuscript before its publication. Parsons was highly appreciative of Schneider's work, which became in many ways a crucial turning point in his own attempt to understand the fundamental elements of the American kinship system, a key to understanding the factor of ethnicity and especially building the theoretical foundation of his concept of the societal community, which, by the beginning of the early 1970s, had become a strong priority in the number of theoretical projects of his own intellectual life.\nParsons borrowed the term \"diffuse enduring solidarity\" from Schneider, as a major concept for his own considerations on the theoretical construction of the concept of the societal community. In the spring of 1968, Parsons and Schneider had discussed Clifford Geertz's article on religion as a cultural system on which Parsons wrote a review. Parsons, who was a close friend of Geertz, was puzzled over Geertz's article. In a letter to Schneider, Parsons spoke about \"the rather sharp strictures on what he [Geertz] calls the extremely narrow intellectual tradition with special reference to Weber, but also to Durkheim. My basic point is in this respect, he greatly overstated his case seeming to argue that this intellectual tradition was by now irrelevant.\"\nSchneider wrote back to Parsons, \"So much, so often, as I read Cliff's stuff I cannot get a clear consistent picture of just what the religious system consist in instead only how it is said to work.\"\nIn a letter of July 1968 to Gene Tanke of the University of California Press, Parsons offered a critical note on the state of psychoanalytical theory and wrote: \"The use of psychoanalytical theory in interpretation of social and historical subject matter is somewhat hazardous enterprise, and a good deal of nonsense has been written in the name of such attempts.\" Around 1969, Parsons was approached by the prestigious \"Encyclopedia of the History of Idea\" about writing an entry in the encyclopedia on the topic of the \"Sociology of Knowledge\". Parsons accepted and wrote one of his most powerful essays, \"The Sociology of Knowledge and the History of Ideas\", in 1969 or 1970. Parsons discussed how the sociology of knowledge, as a modern intellectual discipline, had emerged from the dynamics of European intellectual history and had reached a kind of cutting point in the philosophy of Kant and further explored by Hegel but reached its first \"classical\" formulation in the writing of Mannheim, whose brilliance Parsons acknowledged but disagreed with his German historicism for its antipositivistic epistemology; that was largely rejected in the more positivistic world of American social science. For various reasons, the editors of the encyclopedia turned down Parsons' essay, which did not fit the general format of their volume. The essay was not published until 2006.\nParsons had several conversations with Daniel Bell on a \"post-industrial society\", some of which were conducted over lunch at William James Hall. After reading an early version of Bell's \"magnum opus\", \"The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society\", Parsons wrote a letter to Bell, dated November 30, 1971, to offer his criticism. Among his many critical points, Parsons stressed especially that Bell's discussion of technology tended to \"separate off culture\" and treat the two categories \"as what I would call culture minus the cognitive component\".\nParsons' interest in the role of ethnicity and religion in the genesis of social solidarity within the local community heavily influenced another of his early 1960s graduate students, Edward Laumann. As a student, Laumann was interested in the role of social network structure in shaping community-level solidarity. Combining Parsons' interest in the role of ethnicity in shaping local community solidarity with W. Lloyd Warner's structural approach to social class, Laumann argued that ethnicity, religion, and perceived social class all play a large role in structuring community social networks. Laumann's work found that community networks are highly partitioned along lines of ethnicity, religion, and occupational social status. It also highlighted the tension individuals experience between their preference to associate with people who are like them (homophily) and their simultaneous desire to affiliate with higher-status others. Later, at the beginning of his career at the University of Chicago, Laumann would argue that how the impulses are resolved by individuals forms the basis of corporate or competitive class consciousness within a given community. In addition to demonstrating how community solidarity can be conceptualized as a social network and the role of ethnicity, religion, and class in shaping such networks, Laumann's dissertation became one of the first examples of the use of population-based surveys in the collection of social network data, and thus a precursor to decades of egocentric social network analysis. Parsons thus played an important role in shaping the early interest of social network analysis in homophily and the use of egocentric network data to assess group- and community-level social network structures.\nSystems theory on biological and social systems.\nIn his later years, Parsons became increasingly interested in working out the higher conceptual parameters of the human condition, which was in part what led him toward rethinking questions of cultural and social evolution and the \"nature\" of telic systems, the latter which he especially discussed with Bellah, Lidz, Fox, Willy de Craemer, and others. Parsons became increasingly interested in clarifying the relationship between biological and social theory. Parsons was the initiator of the first Daedalus conference on \"Some Relations between Biological and Social Theory\", sponsored by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Parsons wrote a memorandum dated September 16, 1971, in which he spelled out the intellectual framework for the conference. As Parsons explained in the memo, the basic goal of the conference was to establish a conceptual fundament for a theory of living systems. The first conference was held on January 7, 1972. Among the participants beside Parsons and Lidz were Ernst Mayr, Seymour Kety, Gerald Holton, A. Hunter Dupree, and William K. Wimsatt. A second Daedalus Conference on Living Systems was held on March 1\u20132, 1974 and included Edward O. Wilson, who was about to publish his famous work on sociobiology. Other new participants were John T. Bonner, Karl H. Pribram, Eric Lennenberg, and Stephen J. Gould.\nSociology of law.\nParsons began in the fall of 1972 to conduct a seminar on \"Law and Sociology\" with legal philosopher Lon L. Fuller, well known for his book \"The Morality of Law\" (1964). The seminar and conversations with Fuller stimulated Parsons to write one of his most influential articles, \"Law as an Intellectual Stepchild\". Parsons discuses Roberto Mangabeira Unger's \"Law in Modern Society\" (1976). Another indication of Parsons' interest in law was reflected in his students, such as John Akula, who wrote his dissertation in sociology, \"Law and the Development of Citizenship\" (1973). In September 1972, Parsons participated in a conference in Salzburg on \"The Social Consequences of Modernization in Socialist Countries\". Among the other participants were Alex Inkeles, Ezra Vogel, and Ralf Dahrendorf.\nCriticism of Bendix.\nIn 1972, Parsons wrote two review articles to discuss the work of Bendix, which provide a clear statement on Parsons' approach to the study of Weber. Bendix had become well known for his interpretations of Weber. In the first review article, Parsons analyzed the immigrant Bendix's \"Embattled Reason\", and he praised its attempt to defend the basic values of cognitive rationality, which he unconditionally shared, and he agreed with Bendix that the question of cognitive rationality was primarily a cultural issue, not a category that could be reduced from biological, economic, and social factors. However, Parsons criticized how Bendix had proceeded, who he felt especially had misrepresented the work of Freud and Durkheim. Parsons found that the misrepresentation was how Bendix tended to conceive the question of systematic theorizing, under the concept of \"reductionism\". Parsons further found that Bendix's approach suffered from a \"conspicuous hostility\" to the idea of evolution. Although Parsons assessed that Weber rejected the linear evolutionary approaches of Marx and Herbert Spencer, Weber might not have rejected the question of evolution as a generalized question.\nIn a second article, a review of Bendix and Guenther Roth's \"Scholarship and Partisanship: Essays on Max Weber\", Parsons continued his line of criticism. Parsons was especially concerned with a statement by Bendix that claimed Weber believed Marx's notion that ideas were \"the epiphenomena of the organization of production\". Parsons strongly rejected that interpretation: \"I should contend that certainly the intellectual 'mature' Weber never was an 'hypothetical' Marxist.\" Somewhere behind the attitudes of Bendix, Parsons detected a discomfort for the former to move out of an \"idiographic\" mode of theorizing.\nStudy of US university.\nIn 1973, Parsons published \"The American University\", which he had authored with Gerald M. Platt. The idea had originally emerged when Martin Meyerson and Stephen Graubard of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, in 1969, asked Parsons to undertake a monographic study of the American university system. The work on the book went on for years until it was finished in June 1972.\nFrom a theoretical point of view, the book had several functions. It substantiated Parsons' concept of the educational revolution, a crucial component in his theory of the rise of the modern world. What was equally intellectually compelling, however, was Parsons' discussion of \"the cognitive complex\", aimed at explaining how cognitive rationality and learning operated as an interpenetrative zone on the level of the general action-system in society. In retrospect, the categories of the cognitive complex are a theoretical foundation to understand what has been called the modern knowledge-based society.\nRetirement.\nHe officially retired from Harvard in 1973 but continued his writing, teaching, and other activities in the same rapid pace as before. Parsons also continued his extensive correspondence with a wide group of colleagues and intellectuals. He taught at the University of Pennsylvania, Brown University, Rutgers University, the University of Chicago, and the University of California at Berkeley. At Parsons' retirement banquet, on May 18, 1973, Robert K. Merton was asked to preside, while John Riley, Bernard Barber, Jesse Pitts, Neil J. Smelser, and John Akula were asked to share their experiences of the man with the audience.\nBrown seminars.\nOne scholar who became important in Parsons' later years was professor Martin U. Martel, of Brown University. They had made contact in the early 1970s at a discussion of an article that Martel had written about Parsons' work. Martel arranged a series of seminars at Brown University in 1973 to 1974, and Parsons spoke about his life and work and answered questions from students and faculty. Among the participants at the seminars were Martel, Robert M. Marsh, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, C. Parker Wolf, Albert F. Wessen, A. Hunter Dupree, Philip L. Quinn, Adrian Hayes and Mark A. Shields. In February to May 1974, Parsons also gave the Culver Lectures at Brown and spoke on \"The Evolution of Society\". The lectures and were videotaped.\nRefinement of AGIL model.\nLate in life, Parsons began to work out a new level of the AGIL model, which he called \"A Paradigm of the Human Condition\". The new level of the AGIL model crystallized in the summer of 1974. He worked out the ideas of the new paradigm with a variety of people but especially Lidz, Fox and Harold Bershady. The new metaparadigm featured the environment of the general action system, which included the physical system, the biological system, and what Parsons called the telic system. The telic system represents the sphere of ultimate values in a sheer metaphysical sense. Parsons also worked toward a more comprehensive understanding of the code-structure of social systems and on the logic of the cybernetic pattern of control facilitating the AGIL model. He wrote a bulk of notes: two being \"Thoughts on the Linking of Systems\" and \"Money and Time\". He had also extensive discussions with Larry Brownstein and Adrian Hayes on the possibility of a mathematical formalization of Parsons' theory.\nSick role theory.\nParsons had worked intensively with questions of medical sociology, the medical profession, psychiatry, psychosomatic problems, and the questions of health and illness. Most of all Parsons had become known for his concept of \"the Sick role\". The last field of social research was an issue that Parsons constantly developed through elaboration and self-criticism. Parsons participated at the World Congress of Sociology in Toronto in August 1974 at which he presented a paper, \"The Sick Role Revisited: A Response to Critics and an Updating in Terms of the Theory of Action\", which was published under a slightly different title, \"The Sick Role and the Role of the Physician Reconsidered\", in 1975. In this essay, Parsons highlighted that his concept of \"sick role\" never was meant to be confined to \"deviant behavior\", but \"its negative valuation should not be forgotten\". It was also important to keep a certain focus on the \"motivatedness\" of illness, since there is always a factor of unconscious motivation in the therapeutic aspects of the sick role.\nCriticism of broken covenant theory.\nIn 1975, Bellah published \"The Broken Covenant\". Bellah referred to the sermon delivered by John Winthrop (1587\u20131649) to his flock on the ship \"Arbella\" on the evening of the landing in Massachusetts Bay in 1630. Winthrop declared that the Puritan colonists' emigration to the New World was part of a covenant, a special pact with God, to create a holy community and noted: \"For we must consider that we shall be a city on the hill. The eyes of all people are upon us.\" Parsons disagreed strongly with Bellah's analysis and insisted that the covenant was not broken. Parsons later used much of his influential article, \"Law as an Intellectual Stepchild\", to discuss Bellah's position.\nParsons thought that Bellah trivialized the tensions of individual interests and society's interests by reducing them to \"capitalism\"; Bellah, in his characterization of the negative aspects of American society, was compelled by a charismatic-based optimalism moral absolutism.\nSymbolic interactionism.\nIn 1975, Parsons responded to an article by Jonathan H. Turner, \"Parsons as a Symbolic Interactionist: A Comparison of Action and Interaction Theory\". Parsons acknowledged that action theory and symbolic interactionism should not be regarded as two separate, antagonistic positions but have overlapping structures of conceptualization. Parsons regarded symbolic interactionism and the theory of George Herbert Mead as valuable contributions to action theory that specify certain aspects of the theory of the personality of the individual. Parsons, however, criticized the symbolic interactionism of Herbert Blumer since Blumer's theory had no end to the openness of action. Parsons regarded Blumer as the mirror image of Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, who tended to stress the quasi-determined nature of macro-structural systems. Action theory, Parsons maintained, represented a middle ground between both extremes.\nReview of Piaget.\nIn 1976, Parsons was asked to contribute to a volume to celebrate the 80th birthday of Jean Piaget. Parsons contributed with an essay, \"A Few Considerations on the Place of Rationality in Modern Culture and Society\". Parsons characterized Piaget as the most eminent contributor to cognitive theory in the 20th century. However, he also argued that the future study of cognition had to go beyond its narrow encounter with psychology to aim at a higher understanding of how cognition as a human intellectual force was entangled in the processes of social and cultural institutionalization.\nIn 1978, when James Grier Miller published his famous work \"Living Systems\", Parsons was approached by \"Contemporary Sociology\" to write a review article on Miller's work. Parsons had already complained in a letter to A. Hunter Dupree that American intellectual life suffered from a deep-seated tradition of empiricism and saw Miller's book the latest confirmation of that tradition. In his review, \"Concrete Systems and \"Abstracted Systems\", he generally praised the herculean task behind Miller's work but criticized Miller for getting caught in the effort of hierarchize concrete systems but underplay the importance of structural categories in theory building. Parsons also complained about Miller's lack of any clear distinction between cultural and non-cultural systems.\nLectures in Japan.\nJapan had long been a keen interest in Parsons' work. As early as 1958, a Japanese translation of \"Economy and Society\" appeared. Also, \"The Structure of Social Action\" was translated into Japanese. \"The Social System\" was translated into Japanese by Tsutomu Sato in 1974. Indeed, Ryozo Takeda had, as early as 1952 in his \"Shakaigaku no Kozo (\"The Framework of Sociology\")\" introduced Japanese scholars to some of Parsons' ideas. Parsons had visited Japan for the first time in 1972 and he gave a lecture on November 25 to the Japanese Sociological Association, \"Some Reflections on Post-Industrial Society\" that was published in \"The Japanese Sociological Review\". At the same time, Parsons participated in an international symposium on \"New Problems of Advanced Societies\", held in Tokyo, and he wrote short articles written that appeared in the proceedings of the symposium. Tominaga, born in 1931, a leading figure in Japanese sociology and a professor at the University of Tokyo, was asked by Lidz to contribute to a two-volume collection of essays to honor Parsons. Tominaga wrote an essay on the industrial growth model of Japan and used Parsons' AGIL model.\nIn 1977, Washio Kurata, the new dean of the Faculty of Sociology of Kwansei Gakuin University, wrote to Parsons and invited him to visit Japan during the 1978\u20131979 academic year. In early spring, Parsons accepted the invitation, and on October 20, 1978, Parsons arrived at the Osaka Airport, accompanied by his wife, and was greeted by a large entourage.\nParsons began weekly lectures at Kwansei's sociology department from October 23 to December 15. Parsons gave his first public lecture to a huge mass of undergraduates, \"The Development of Contemporary Sociology\".\nOn November 17\u201318, when the Sengari Seminar House was opened, Parsons was invited as the key speaker at the event and gave two lectures, \"On the Crisis of Modern Society\" and \"Modern Society and Religion\". Present were Tominaga, Mutsundo Atarashi, Kazuo Muto, and Hideichiro Nakano.\nOn November 25, lectures at Kobe University were organized by Hiroshi Mannari. Parsons lectured on organization theory to the faculty and the graduate students from the Departments of Economics, Management and Sociology. Also, faculty members from Kyoto and Osaka universities were present. A text was published the next year. On November 30 to December 1, Parsons participated in a Tsukuba University Conference in Tokyo; Parsons spoke on \"Enter the New Society: The Problem of the Relationship of Work and Leisure in Relation to Economic and Cultural Values\".\nOn December 5, Parsons gave a lecture at Kyoto University on \"A Sociologist Looks at Contemporary U.S. Society\".\nAt a special lecture at Osaka on December 12, Parsons spoke, at the suggestion of Tominaga, on \"Social System Theory and Organization Theory\" to the Japanese Sociological Association.\nOn December 14, Kwansei Gakuin University granted Parsons an honorary doctor degree. Some of his lectures would be collected into a volume by Kurata and published in 1983. The Parsons flew back to the US in mid-December 1978.\nDeath.\nParsons died May 8, 1979, in Munich on a trip to Germany, where he was celebrating the 50th anniversary of his degree at Heidelberg. The day before, he had given a lecture on social class to an audience of German intellectuals, including Habermas, Niklas Luhmann and Wolfgang Schluchter.\nWork.\nParsons produced a general theoretical system for the analysis of society, which he called \"theory of action\", based on the methodological and epistemological principle of \"analytical realism\" and on the ontological assumption of \"voluntaristic action\". Parsons' concept of analytical realism can be regarded as a kind of compromise between nominalist and realist views on the nature of reality and human knowledge. Parsons believed that objective reality can be related to only by a particular encounter of such reality and that general intellectual understanding is feasible through conceptual schemes and theories. Interaction with objective reality on an intellectual level should always be understood as an approach. Parsons often explained the meaning of analytical realism by quoting a statement by Henderson: \"A fact is a statement about experience in terms of a conceptual scheme.\"\nGenerally, Parsons maintained that his inspiration regarding analytical realism had been Lawrence Joseph Henderson and Alfred North Whitehead although he might have gotten the idea much earlier. It is important for Parsons' \"analytical realism\" to insist on the reference to an objective reality since he repeatedly highlighted that his concept of \"analytical realism\" was very different from the \"fictionalism\" of Hans Vaihiger (Hans Vaihinger):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We must start with the assertion that all knowledge which purports to be valid in anything like the scientific sense presumes both the reality of object known and of a knower. I think we can go beyond that and say that there must be a community of knowers who are able to communicate with each other. Without such a presupposition it would seem difficult to avoid the pitfall of solipsism. The so-called natural sciences do not, however, impute the \"status of knowing subjects\" to the objects with which they deal.\n\"The Structure of Social Action\".\n\"The Structure of Social Action\" (SSA), Parsons' most famous work, took form piece by piece. Its central figure was Weber, and the other key figures in the discussion were added, little by little, as the central idea took form. One important work that helped Parsons' central argument in was, in 1932, unexpectedly found: \u00c9lie Hal\u00e9vy's \"La formation du radicalisme philosophique\" (1901\u20131904); he read the three-volume work in French. Parsons explained, \"Well, Hal\u00e9vy was just a different world\u00a0... and helped me to really get in to many clarifications of the assumptions distinctive to the main line of British utilitarian thought; assumptions about the 'natural identity of interest', and so on. I still think it is one of the true masterpieces in intellectual history.\" Parsons first achieved significant recognition with the publication of \"The Structure of Social Action\" (1937), his first grand synthesis, combining the ideas of Durkheim, Weber, Pareto, and others. In 1998, the International Sociological Association listed it as the ninth most important sociological book of the 20th Century.\nAction theory.\nParsons' action theory can be characterized as an attempt to maintain the scientific rigour of positivism while acknowledging the necessity of the \"subjective dimension\" of human action incorporated in hermeneutic types of sociological theories. It is cardinal in Parsons' general theoretical and methodological view that human action must be understood in conjunction with the motivational component of the human act. Social science must consider the question of ends, purpose, and ideals in its analysis of human action. Parsons' strong reaction to behavioristic theory as well as to sheer materialistic approaches derives from the attempt of the theoretical positions to eliminate ends, purpose, and ideals as factors of analysis. Parsons, in his term papers at Amherst, was already criticizing attempts to reduce human life to psychological, biological, or materialist forces. What was essential in human life, Parsons maintained, was how the factor of culture was codified. Culture, however, was to Parsons an independent variable in that it could not be \"deducted\" from any other factor of the social system. That methodological intention is given the most elaborate presentation in \"The Structure of Social Action,\" which was Parsons' first basic discussion of the methodological foundation of the social sciences.\nSome of the themes in \"The Structure of Social Action\" had been presented in a compelling essay two years earlier in \"The Place of Ultimate Values in Sociological Theory\".\nAn intense correspondence and dialogue between Talcott Parsons and Alfred Schutz serves to highlight the meaning of central concepts in \"The Structure of Social Action.\"\nRelations to cybernetics and system theory.\nParsons developed his ideas during a period when systems theory and cybernetics were very much on the front burner of social and behavioral science. In using systems thinking, he postulated that the relevant systems treated in social and behavioral science were \"open:\" they were embedded in an environment with other systems. For social and behavioral science, the largest system is \"the action system,\" the interrelated behaviors of human beings, embedded in a physical-organic environment.\nAs Parsons developed his theory, it became increasingly bound to the fields of cybernetics and system theory but also to Emerson's concept of homeostasis and Ernst Mayr's concept of \"teleonomic processes\". On the metatheoretical level, Parson attempted to balance psychologist phenomenology and idealism on the one hand and pure types of what Parsons called the utilitarian-positivistic complex, on the other hand.\nThe theory includes a general theory of social evolution and a concrete interpretation of the major drives of world history. In Parsons' theory of history and evolution, the constitutive-cognitive symbolization of the cybernetic hierarchy of action-systemic levels has, in principle, the same function as genetic information in DNA's control of biological evolution, but that factor of metasystemic control does not \"determine\" any outcome but defines the orientational boundaries of the real pathfinder, which is action itself. Parsons compares the constitutive level of society with Noam Chomsky's concept of \"deep structure\".\nAs Parsons wrote, \"The deep structures do not as such articulate any sentences which could convey coherent meaning. The surface structures constitute the level at which this occurs. The connecting link between them is a set of rules of transformation, to use Chomsky's own phrase.\" The transformative processes and entities are generally, at least on one level of empirical analysis, performed or actualized by myths and religions, but philosophies, art systems, or even semiotic consumer behavior can, in principle, perform that function.\nUnified concept of social science.\nParsons' theory reflects a vision of a unified concept of social science and indeed of living systems in general. His approach differs in essence from Niklas Luhmann's theory of social systems because Parsons rejects the idea that systems can be autopoietic, short of the actual action system of individual actors. Systems have immanent capacities but only as an outcome of the institutionalized processes of action-systems, which, in the final analysis, is the historical effort of individual actors. While Luhmann focused on the systemic immanence, Parsons insisted that the question of autocatalytic and homeostatic processes and the question about the actor as the ultimate \"first mover\" on the other hand was not mutually exclusive. Homeostatic processes might be necessary if and when they occur but action is necessitating.\nIt is only that perspective of the ultimate reference in action that Parsons' dictum (that higher-order cybernetic systems in history will tend to control social forms that are organized on the lower levels of the cybernetic hierarchy) should be understood. For Parsons, the highest levels of the cybernetic hierarchy as far as the general action level is concerned is what Parsons calls the constitutive part of the cultural system (the L of the L). However, within the interactional processes of the system, attention should be paid especially to the cultural-expressivistic axis (the L-G line in the AGIL). By the term \"constitutive\", Parsons generally referred to very highly codified cultural values especially religious elements (but other interpretation of the term \"constitutive\" is possible).\nCultural systems have an independent status from that of the normative and orientational pattern of the social system; neither system can be reduced to the other. For example, the question of the \"cultural capital\" of a social system as a sheer historical entity (in its function as a \"fiduciary system\"), is not identical to the higher cultural values of that system; that is, the cultural system is embodied with a metastructural logic that cannot be reduced to any given social system or cannot be viewed as a materialist (or behavioralist) deduction from the \"necessities\" of the social system (or from the \"necessities\" of its economy). Within that context, culture would have an independent power of transition, not only as factors of actual sociocultural units (like Western civilization) but also how original cultural bases would tend to \"universalize\" through interpenetration and spread over large numbers of social systems as with Classical Greece and Ancient Israel, where the original social bases had died but the cultural system survived as an independently \"working\" cultural pattern, as in the case of Greek philosophy or in the case of Christianity, as a modified derivation from its origins in Israel.\nGeneral theory.\nIt is important to highlight that Parsons distinguished two \"meanings\" or modes of the term \"general theory\". He sometimes wrote about general theory as aspects of theoretical concerns of social sciences whose focus is on the most \"constitutive\" elements of cognitive concern for the basic theoretical systematization of a given field. Parsons would include the basic conceptual scheme for the given field, including its highest order of theoretical relations and naturally also the necessary specification of this system's axiomatic, epistemological, and methodological foundations from the point of view of logical implications. All the elements would signify the quest for a general theory on the highest level of theoretical concern.\nHowever, general theory could also refer to a more fully/operational system whose implications of the conceptual scheme were \"spelled out\" on lower levels of cognitive structuralization, levels standing closer to a perceived \"empirical object\". In his speech to the American Sociological Society in 1947, he spoke of five levels:\nDuring his life, he would work on developing all five fields of theoretical concerns but pay special attention to the development on the highest \"constitutive\" level, as the rest of the building would stand or fall on the solidity of the highest level.\nDespite myths, Parsons never thought that modern societies exist in some kind of perfect harmony with their norms or that most modern societies were necessarily characterized by some high level of consensus or a \"happy\" institutional integration. Parsons highlighted that is almost logically impossible that there can be any \"perfect fit\" or perfect consensus in the basic normative structure of complex modern societies because the basic value pattern of modern societies is generally differentiated in such a way that some of the basic normative categories exist in inherent or at least potential conflict with each other. For example, freedom and equality are generally viewed as fundamental and non-negotiable values of modern societies. Each represents a kind of ultimate imperative about what the higher values of humanity. However, as Parsons emphasizes, no simple answer on the priority of freedom or equality or any simple solution on how they possibly can be mediated, if at all. Therefore, all modern societies are faced with the inherent conflict prevailing between the two values, and there is no \"eternal solution\" as such. There cannot be any perfect match between motivational pattern, normative solutions, and the prevailing value pattern in any modern society. Parsons also maintained that the \"dispute\" between \"left\" and \"right\" has something to do with the fact that they both defend ultimately \"justified\" human values (or ideals), which alone is indispensable as values but are always in an endless conflictual position to each other.\nParsons always maintained that the integration of the normative pattern in society is generally problematic and that the level of integration that is reached in principle is always far from harmonious and perfect. If some \"harmonious pattern\" emerges, it is related to specific historical circumstances but is not a general law of the social systems.\nAGIL Paradigm.\nThe heuristic scheme that Parsons used to analyze systems and subsystems is called the \"AGIL paradigm\" or the \"AGIL scheme\". To survive or maintain equilibrium with respect to its environment, any system must to some degree:\nThe concepts can be abbreviated as AGIL and are called the system's functional imperatives. Parsons' AGIL model is an analytical scheme for the sake of theoretical \"production\", but it is not any simple \"copy\" or any direct historical \"summary\" of empirical reality. Also, the scheme itself does not explain \"anything\", just as the periodic table explains nothing by itself in the natural sciences. The AGIL scheme is a tool for explanations and is no better than the quality of the theories and explanation by which it is processed.\nIn the case of the analysis of a social action system, the AGIL paradigm, according to Parsons, yields four interrelated and interpenetrating subsystems: the behavioral systems of its members (A), the personality systems of those members (G), the social system (as such) (I), and the cultural system of that society (L). To analyze a society as a social system (the I subsystem of action), people are posited to enact roles associated with positions. The positions and roles become differentiated to some extent and, in a modern society, are associated with things such as occupational, political, judicial, and educational roles.\nConsidering the interrelation of these specialized roles as well as functionally differentiated collectivities (like firms and political parties), a society can be analyzed as a complex system of interrelated functional subsystems:\nThe pure AGIL model for all living systems:\nThe Social System Level:\nThe General Action Level:\nThe cultural level:\nThe Generalized Symbolic media:\nSocial System level:\nParsons elaborated upon the idea that each of these systems also developed some specialized symbolic mechanisms of interaction analogous to money in the economy, like influence in the social community. Various processes of \"interchange\" among the subsystems of the social system were postulated.\nParsons' use of social systems analysis based on the AGIL scheme was established in his work \"Economy and Society\" (with N. Smelser, 1956) and prevailed in all his subsequent work. However, the AGIL system existed only in a \"rudimentary\" form in the beginning and was gradually elaborated and expanded in the decades which followed. A brief introduction to Parsons' AGIL scheme appears in Chapter 2 of \"The American University\".\nThere is, however, no single place in his writing in which the total AGIL system is visually displayed or explained: the complete system has to be reconstructed from multiple places in his writing. The system displayed in \"The American University\" has only the most basic elements and should not be mistaken for the whole system.\nSocial evolutionism.\nParsons contributed to social evolutionism and neoevolutionism. He divided evolution into four sub-processes:\nFurthermore, Parsons explored the sub-processes within three stages of evolution:\nParsons viewed Western civilization as the pinnacle of modern societies and the United States as the one that is most dynamically developed.\nParsons' late work focused on a new theoretical synthesis around four functions that he claimed are common to all systems of action, from the behavioral to the cultural, and a set of symbolic media that enables communication across them. His attempt to structure the world of action according to a scheme that focused on order was unacceptable for American sociologists, who were retreating from the grand pretensions of the 1960s to a more empirical, grounded approach.\nPattern variables.\nParsons asserted that there are not two dimensions to societies (instrumental and expressive) but that there are qualitative differences between kinds of social interaction.\nHe observed that people can have personalized and formally detached relationships, based on the roles that they play. The \"pattern variables\" are what he called the characteristics that are associated with each kind of interaction.\nAn interaction can be characterized by one of the identifiers of each contrastive pair:\nLegacy.\nFrom the 1940s to the 1970s, Parsons was one of the most famous and most influential but also most controversial sociologists in the world, particularly in the US. His later works were met with criticism and were generally dismissed in the 1970s by the view that his theories were too abstract, inaccessible, and socially conservative.\nRecently, interest has increased in Parsons' ideas and especially often-overlooked later works. Attempts to revive his thinking have been made by Parsonsian sociologists and social scientists like Jeffrey Alexander, Bryan Turner, Richard M\u00fcnch, and Roland Robertson, and Uta Gerhardt has written about Parsons from a biographical and historical perspective. In addition to the United States, the key centers of interest in Parsons today are Germany, Japan, Italy, and the United Kingdom.\nParsons had a seminal influence and early mentorship of many American and international scholars, such as Ralf Dahrendorf, Alain Touraine, Niklas Luhmann, and Habermas. His best-known pupil was Merton. Parsons was a member of the American Philosophical Society.\nSelected bibliography.\nTranslations.\nIn 1930 Parson's published a translation of Weber's classic work \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54044", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54044", "title": "Gothic architecture", "text": "Architectural style of Medieval Europe\nGothic architecture is an architectural style that was prevalent in Europe from the late 12th to the 16th century, during the High and Late Middle Ages, surviving into the 17th and 18th centuries in some areas. It evolved from Romanesque architecture and was succeeded by Renaissance architecture. It originated in the \u00cele-de-France and Picardy regions of northern France. The style at the time was sometimes known as \"opus Francigenum\" (lit.\u2009'French work'); the term \"Gothic\" was first applied contemptuously during the later Renaissance, by those ambitious to revive the architecture of classical antiquity.\nThe defining design element of Gothic architecture is the pointed arch. The use of the pointed arch in turn led to the development of the pointed rib vault and flying buttresses, combined with elaborate tracery and stained glass windows.\nAt the Abbey of Saint-Denis, near Paris, the choir was reconstructed between 1140 and 1144, drawing together for the first time the developing Gothic architectural features. In doing so, a new architectural style emerged that emphasized verticality and the effect created by the transmission of light through stained glass windows.\nCommon examples are found in Christian ecclesiastical architecture, and Gothic cathedrals and churches, as well as abbeys, and parish churches. It is also the architecture of many castles, palaces, town halls, guildhalls, universities and, less prominently today, private dwellings. Many of the finest examples of medieval Gothic architecture are listed by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites.\nWith the development of Renaissance architecture in Italy during the mid-15th century, the Gothic style was supplanted by the new style, but in some regions, notably England and what is now Belgium, Gothic continued to flourish and develop into the 16th century. A series of Gothic revivals began in mid-18th century England, spread through 19th-century Europe and continued, largely for churches and university buildings, into the 20th century.\nName.\nMedieval contemporaries characterised the style in Latin as (\"French work\" or \"Frankish work\"), as (\"modern work\"), or as (\"new work\"). Italian-speakers could call it (\"German style\").\nThe term \"Gothic architecture\" originated as a pejorative description. Giorgio Vasari used the term \"barbarous German style\" in his \"Lives of the Artists\" (1550) to describe what is now considered the Gothic style, and in the introduction to the \"Lives\" he attributes various architectural features to the Goths, whom he held responsible for destroying the ancient buildings after they conquered Rome, and for erecting new ones in this style. When Vasari wrote, Italy had experienced a century of building in the Vitruvian architectural vocabulary of classical orders revived in the Renaissance and seen as evidence of a new Golden Age of learning and refinement. Thus the Gothic style, being in opposition to classical architecture, from that point of view was associated with the destruction of progress and of sophistication. The assumption that classical architecture was better than Gothic architecture was widespread and proved difficult to counter. Vasari was echoed in the 16th century by Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais, who referred to \"Gotz\" and \"Ostrogotz\".\nThe polymath architect Christopher Wren (1632\u20131723) disapproved of the label \"Gothic\" for pointed architecture. He compared it to Islamic architecture, which he called the \"Saracen style\", pointing out that the pointed arch's sophistication was not owed to the Goths but to the Islamic Golden Age. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This we now call the Gothic manner of architecture (so the Italians called what was not after the Roman style) though the Goths were rather destroyers than builders; I think it should with more reason be called the Saracen style, for these people wanted neither arts nor learning: and after we in the west lost both, we borrowed again from them, out of their Arabic books, what they with great diligence had translated from the Greeks.\u2014\u200a\nWren was the first to popularize the belief that it was not the Europeans, but the \"Saracens\" who had originated the Gothic style. (The term \"Saracen\", still in use in the 18th century, typically referred to all Muslims, including Arabs and Berbers.) Wren mentions Europe's architectural debt to the Saracens no fewer than twelve times in his writings. He also decidedly broke with tradition in his assumption that Gothic architecture did not merely represent a violent and bothersome mistake (as Vasari had suggested). Rather, Wren saw that the Gothic style had developed over time along the lines of a changing society, and that it was thus a legitimate architectural style in its own right.\nIt was no secret that Wren strongly disliked the building practices of the Gothic style. When he was appointed Surveyor of the Fabric at Westminster Abbey in the year 1698, he expressed his distaste for the Gothic style in a letter to the Bishop of Rochester:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing was thought magnificent that was not high beyond Measure, with the Flutter of Arch-buttresses, so we call the sloping Arches that poise the higher Vaultings of the Nave. The Romans always concealed their Butments, whereas the Normans thought them ornamental. These I have observed are the first Things that occasion the Ruin of Cathedrals, being so much exposed to the Air and Weather; the Coping, which cannot defend them, first failing, and if they give Way, the Vault must spread. Pinnacles are no Use, and as little Ornament.\u2014\u200a\nThe chaos of the Gothic left much to be desired in Wren's eyes. His aversion to the style was so strong that he refused to put a Gothic roof on the new St Paul's Cathedral, despite pressure to do so. Wren much preferred symmetry and straight lines in architecture, which is why he constantly praised the classic architecture of 'the Ancients' in his writings.\nEven though he openly expressed his distaste for the Gothic style, Wren did not blame the Saracens for any apparent lack of ingenuity. Quite the opposite: he praised the Saracens for their \"superior\" vaulting techniques and their widespread use of the pointed arch. Wren claimed the inventors of the Gothic had seen the Saracen architecture during the Crusades, also called the religious war or \"Holy War\", originated in the Kingdom of France in the year 1095:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Holy War gave the Christians, who had been there, an Idea of the Saracen Works, which were afterwards by them imitated in the West; and they refined upon it every day, as they proceeded in building Churches.\u2014\u200a\nSeveral chronological issues arise from this statement, which is one of the reasons why Wren's theory is rejected by many. The earliest examples of the pointed arch in Europe date from before the First Crusade of 1096\u20131099; this is widely regarded as proof that the Gothic style could not have possibly been derived from Saracen architecture. Several authors have nevertheless claimed that the Gothic style had most likely filtered into Europe in other ways, for example through Spain or Sicily. Spanish architecture influenced by the Moors could have favoured the emergence of the Gothic style long before the Crusades took place. This could have happened gradually through merchants, travelers and pilgrims.\nAccording to a 19th-century correspondent in the London journal \"Notes and Queries\", \"Gothic\" was a derisive misnomer; the pointed arcs and architecture of the later Middle Ages differed radically from the rounded arches prevalent in late antiquity and in the period of the Ostrogothic Kingdom (493\u2013553) in Italy:\nThere can be no doubt that the term 'Gothic' as applied to pointed styles of ecclesiastical architecture was used at first contemptuously, and in derision, by those who were ambitious to imitate and revive the Grecian orders of architecture, after the revival of classical literature. But, without citing many authorities, such as Christopher Wren, and others, who lent their aid in depreciating the old mediaeval style, which they termed Gothic, as synonymous with every thing that was barbarous and rude, it may be sufficient to refer to the celebrated Treatise of Sir Henry Wotton, entitled \"The Elements of Architecture\", ... printed in London so early as 1624. ... But it was a strange misapplication of the term to use it for the pointed style, in contradistinction to the circular, formerly called Saxon, now Norman, Romanesque, &amp;c. These latter styles, like Lombardic, Italian, and the Byzantine, of course belong more to the Gothic period than the light and elegant structures of the pointed order which succeeded them.\nInfluences.\nThe Gothic style of architecture was strongly influenced by the Romanesque architecture which preceded it; by the growing population and wealth of European cities, and by the desire to express local grandeur. It was influenced by theological doctrines which called for more light and by technical improvements in vaults and buttresses that allowed much greater height and larger windows. It was also influenced by the necessity of many churches, such as Chartres Cathedral and Canterbury Cathedral, to accommodate growing numbers of pilgrims. It adapted features from earlier styles. According to Charles Texier and Josef Strzygowski, after lengthy research and study of churches in the medieval city of Ani, the capital of the medieval kingdom of Armenia, they believed that they had discovered the oldest Gothic arch. According to these historians, the architecture of the Saint Hripsime Church near the Armenian religious seat Etchmiadzin was built in the fourth century A.D. and was repaired in 618. The cathedral of Ani was built in 980\u20131012. However many of the elements of Islamic and Armenian architecture that have been cited as influences on Gothic architecture also appeared in Late Roman and Byzantine architecture, the most noticeable example being the pointed arch and flying buttress. The most notable example is the capitals, which are forerunners of the Gothic style and deviated with serpentine lines and naturalistic forms from the Classical standards of ancient Greece and Rome.\nPeriods.\nArchitecture \"became a leading form of artistic expression during the late Middle Ages\". Gothic architecture began in the earlier 12th century in northwest France and England and spread throughout Latin Europe in the 13th century. By 1300, a first \"International Style\" of Gothic had developed, with common design features and formal language. A second \"international style\" emerged by 1400, alongside innovations in England and central Europe that produced both the perpendicular and flamboyant varieties. Typically, these typologies are identified as:\nHistory.\nEarly Gothic.\nNorman architecture on either side of the English Channel developed in parallel towards \"Early Gothic\". Gothic features, such as the rib vault, had appeared in England, Sicily and Normandy in the 11th century. Rib-vaults were employed in some parts of the cathedral at Durham (1093\u2013) and in Lessay Abbey in Normandy (1098). However, the first buildings to be considered fully Gothic are the royal funerary abbey of the French kings, the Abbey of Saint-Denis (1135\u20131144), and the archiepiscopal cathedral at Sens (1135\u20131164). They were the first buildings to systematically combine rib vaulting, buttresses, and pointed arches. Most of the characteristics of later \"Early English\" were already present in the lower \"chevet\" of Saint-Denis.\nThe Duchy of Normandy, part of the Angevin Empire until the 13th century, developed its own version of Gothic. One of these was the Norman chevet, a small apse or chapel attached to the choir at the east end of the church, which typically had a half-dome. The lantern tower was another common feature in Norman Gothic. One example of early Norman Gothic is Bayeux Cathedral (1060\u20131070) where the Romanesque cathedral nave and choir were rebuilt into the Gothic style. Lisieux Cathedral was begun in 1170. Rouen Cathedral (begun 1185) was rebuilt from Romanesque to Gothic with distinct Norman features, including a lantern tower, deeply moulded decoration, and high pointed arcades. Coutances Cathedral was remade into Gothic beginning about 1220. Its most distinctive feature is the octagonal lantern on the crossing of the transept, decorated with ornamental ribs, and surrounded by sixteen bays and sixteen lancet windows.\nSaint-Denis was the work of the Abbot Suger, a close adviser of Kings Louis VI and Louis VII. Suger reconstructed portions of the old Romanesque church with the rib vault in order to remove walls and to make more space for windows. He described the new ambulatory as \"a circular ring of chapels, by virtue of which the whole church would shine with the wonderful and uninterrupted light of most luminous windows, pervading the interior beauty.\" To support the vaults he also introduced columns with capitals of carved vegetal designs, modelled upon the classical columns he had seen in Rome. In addition, he installed a circular rose window over the portal on the fa\u00e7ade. These also became a common feature of Gothic cathedrals.\nSome elements of Gothic style appeared very early in England. Durham Cathedral was the first cathedral to employ a rib vault, built between 1093 and 1104. The first cathedral built entirely in the new style was Sens Cathedral, begun between 1135 and 1140 and consecrated in 1160. Sens Cathedral features a Gothic choir, and six-part rib vaults over the nave and collateral aisles, alternating pillars and doubled columns to support the vaults, and buttresses to offset the outward thrust from the vaults. One of the builders who is believed to have worked on Sens Cathedral, William of Sens, later travelled to England and became the architect who, between 1175 and 1180, reconstructed the choir of Canterbury Cathedral in the new Gothic style.\nSens Cathedral was influential in its strongly vertical appearance and in its three-part elevation, typical of subsequent Gothic buildings, with a clerestory at the top supported by a triforium, all carried on high arcades of pointed arches. In the following decades flying buttresses began to be used, allowing the construction of lighter, higher walls. French Gothic churches were heavily influenced both by the ambulatory and side-chapels around the choir at Saint-Denis, and by the paired towers and triple doors on the western fa\u00e7ade.\nSens was quickly followed by Senlis Cathedral (begun 1160), and Notre-Dame de Paris (begun 1160). Their builders abandoned the traditional plans and introduced the new Gothic elements from Saint-Denis. The builders of Notre-Dame went further by introducing the flying buttress, heavy columns of support outside the walls connected by arches to the upper walls. The buttresses counterbalanced the outward thrust from the rib vaults. This allowed the builders to construct higher, thinner walls and larger windows.\n\"Early English\" and \"High Gothic\".\nFollowing the destruction by fire of the choir of Canterbury Cathedral in 1174, a group of master builders was invited to propose plans for the reconstruction. The master-builder William of Sens, who had worked on Sens Cathedral, won the competition. Work began that same year, but in 1178 William was badly injured by falling from the scaffolding, and returned to France, where he died. His work was continued by William the Englishman who replaced his French namesake in 1178. The resulting structure of the choir of Canterbury Cathedral is considered the first work of \"Early English Gothic\". The cathedral churches of Worcester (1175\u2013), Wells (\"c\".1180\u2013), Lincoln (1192\u2013), and Salisbury (1220\u2013) are all, with Canterbury, major examples. \"Tiercerons\" \u2013 decorative vaulting ribs \u2013 seem first to have been used in vaulting at Lincoln Cathedral, installed \"c\".1200. Instead of a triforium, \"Early English\" churches usually retained a gallery.\nHigh Gothic (c.\u20091194\u20131250) was a brief but very productive period, which produced some of the great landmarks of Gothic art. The first building in the High Gothic () was Chartres Cathedral, an important pilgrimage church south of Paris. The Romanesque cathedral was destroyed by fire in 1194, but was swiftly rebuilt in the new style, with contributions from King Philip II of France, Pope Celestine III, local gentry, merchants, craftsmen, and Richard the Lionheart, king of England. The builders simplified the elevation used at Notre Dame, eliminated the tribune galleries, and used flying buttresses to support the upper walls. The walls were filled with stained glass, mainly depicting the story of the Virgin Mary but also, in a small corner of each window, illustrating the crafts of the guilds who donated those windows.\nThe model of Chartres was followed by a series of new cathedrals of unprecedented height and size. These were Reims Cathedral (begun 1211), where coronations of the kings of France took place; Amiens Cathedral (1220\u20131226); Bourges Cathedral (1195\u20131230) (which, unlike the others, continued to use six-part rib vaults); and Beauvais Cathedral (1225\u2013).\nIn central Europe, the High Gothic style appeared in the Holy Roman Empire, first at Toul (1220\u2013), whose Romanesque cathedral was rebuilt in the style of Reims Cathedral; then Trier's Liebfrauenkirche parish church (1228\u2013), and then throughout the \"Reich\", beginning with the Elisabethkirche at Marburg (1235\u2013) and the cathedral at Metz (\"c\".1235\u2013).\nIn High Gothic, the whole surface of the clerestory was given over to windows. At Chartres Cathedral, plate tracery was used for the rose window, but at Reims the bar-tracery was free-standing. Lancet windows were supplanted by multiple lights separated by \"geometrical\" bar-tracery. Tracery of this kind distinguishes \"Middle Pointed\" style from the simpler \"First Pointed\". Inside, the nave was divided into by regular bays, each covered by a quadripartite rib vaults.\nOther characteristics of the High Gothic were the development of rose windows of greater size, using bar-tracery, higher and longer flying buttresses, which could reach up to the highest windows, and walls of sculpture illustrating biblical stories filling the fa\u00e7ade and the fronts of the transept. Reims Cathedral had two thousand three hundred statues on the front and back side of the fa\u00e7ade.\nThe new High Gothic churches competed to be the tallest, with increasingly ambitious structures lifting the vault yet higher. Chartres Cathedral's height of was exceeded by Beauvais Cathedral's , but on account of the latter's collapse in 1248, no further attempt was made to build higher. Attention turned from achieving greater height to creating more awe-inspiring decoration.\n\"Rayonnant Gothic\" and \"Decorated Style\".\n\"Rayonnant Gothic\" maximized the coverage of stained glass windows such that the walls are effectively entirely glazed; examples are the nave of Saint-Denis (1231\u2013) and the royal chapel of Louis IX of France on the \u00cele de la Cit\u00e9 in the Seine \u2013 the Sainte-Chapelle (\"c\".1241\u20131248). The high and thin walls of French \"Rayonnant Gothic\" allowed by the flying buttresses enabled increasingly ambitious expanses of glass and decorated tracery, reinforced with ironwork. Shortly after Saint-Denis, in the 1250s, Louis IX commissioned the rebuilt transepts and enormous rose windows of Notre-Dame de Paris (1250s for the north transept, 1258 for the beginning of south transept). This first 'international style' was also used in the clerestory of Metz Cathedral (\"c\". 1245\u2013), then in the choir of Cologne's cathedral (\"c\". 1250\u2013), and again in the nave of the cathedral at Strasbourg (\"c\". 1250\u2013). Masons elaborated a series of tracery patterns for windows \u2013 from the basic \"geometrical\" to the \"reticulated\" and the \"curvilinear \u2013\" which had superseded the lancet window. Bar-tracery of the \"curvilinear, flowing\", and \"reticulated\" types distinguish \"Second Pointed\" style.\n\"Decorated Gothic\" similarly sought to emphasize the windows, but excelled in the ornamentation of their tracery. Churches with features of this style include Westminster Abbey (1245\u2013), the cathedrals at Lichfield (after 1257\u2013) and Exeter (1275\u2013), Bath Abbey (1298\u2013), and the retro choir at Wells Cathedral (\"c\".1320\u2013).\nThe \"Rayonnant\" developed its second 'international style' with increasingly autonomous and sharp-edged tracery mouldings apparent in the cathedral at Clermont-Ferrand (1248\u2013), the papal collegiate church at Troyes, Saint-Urbain (1262\u2013), and the west fa\u00e7ade of Strasbourg Cathedral (1276\u20131439)). By 1300, there were examples influenced by Strasbourg in the cathedrals of Limoges (1273\u2013), Regensburg (\"c\". 1275\u2013), and in the cathedral nave at York (1292\u2013).\nLate Gothic: flamboyant and perpendicular.\nCentral Europe began to lead the emergence of a new, international \"flamboyant\" style with the construction of a new cathedral at Prague (1344\u2013) under the direction of Peter Parler. This model of rich and variegated tracery and intricate reticulated rib-vaulting was definitive in the \"Late Gothic\" of continental Europe, emulated not only by the collegiate churches and cathedrals, but by urban parish churches which rivalled them in size and magnificence. The minster at Ulm and other parish churches like the Heilig-Kreuz-M\u00fcnster at Schw\u00e4bisch Gm\u00fcnd (\"c\".1320\u2013), St Barbara's Church at Kutn\u00e1 Hora (1389\u2013), and the Heilig-Geist-Kirche (1407\u2013) and St Martin's Church (\"c\".1385\u2013) in Landshut are typical. Use of ogees was especially common.\nThe \"flamboyant\" style was characterised by the multiplication of the ribs of the vaults, with new purely decorative ribs, called tiercons and liernes, and additional diagonal ribs. One common ornament of \"flamboyant\" in France is the \"arc-en-accolade\", an arch over a window topped by a pinnacle, which was itself topped with fleuron, and flanked by other pinnacles. Examples of French \"flamboyant\" building include the west fa\u00e7ade of Rouen Cathedral, and especially the fa\u00e7ades of Sainte-Chapelle de Vincennes (1370s) and choir Mont-Saint-Michel's abbey church (1448).\nIn England, ornamental rib-vaulting and tracery of \"Decorated Gothic\" co-existed with, and then gave way to, the \"perpendicular\" style from the 1320s, with straightened, orthogonal tracery topped with fan-vaulting. \"Perpendicular\" \"Gothic\" was unknown in continental Europe and unlike earlier styles had no equivalent in Scotland or Ireland. It first appeared in the cloisters and chapter-house (c.\u20091332) of Old St Paul's Cathedral in London by William de Ramsey. The chancel of Gloucester Cathedral (c.\u20091337\u20131357) and its latter 14th century cloisters are early examples. Four-centred arches were often used, and lierne vaults seen in early buildings were developed into fan vaults, first at the latter 14th century chapter-house of Hereford Cathedral (demolished 1769) and cloisters at Gloucester, and then at Reginald Ely's King's College Chapel, Cambridge (1446\u20131461) and the brothers William and Robert Vertue's Henry VII Chapel (c.\u20091503\u20131512) at Westminster Abbey. \"Perpendicular\" is sometimes called \"Third Pointed\" and was employed over three centuries; the fan-vaulted staircase at Christ Church, Oxford built around 1640.\nLacey patterns of tracery continued to characterize continental Gothic building, with very elaborate and articulated vaulting, as at Saint Barbara's, Kutn\u00e1 Hora (1512). In certain areas, Gothic architecture continued to be employed until the 17th and 18th centuries, especially in provincial and ecclesiastical contexts, notably at Oxford.\nDecline and transition.\nBeginning in the mid-15th century, the Gothic style gradually lost its dominance in Europe. It had never been popular in Italy, and in the mid-15th century the Italians, drawing upon ancient Roman ruins, returned to classical models. The dome of Florence Cathedral (1420\u20131436) by Filippo Brunelleschi, inspired by the Pantheon, Rome, was one of the first Renaissance landmarks, but it also employed Gothic technology; the outer skin of the dome was supported by a framework of twenty-four ribs. In the 16th century, as Renaissance architecture from Italy began to appear in France and other countries in Europe. The Gothic style began to be described as outdated, ugly and even barbaric. The term \"Gothic\" was first used as a pejorative description. Giorgio Vasari used the term \"barbarous German style\" in his 1550 \"Lives of the Artists\" to describe what is now considered the Gothic style. In the introduction to the \"Lives\" he attributed various architectural features to the Goths whom he held responsible for destroying the ancient buildings after they conquered Rome, and erecting new ones in this style. In the 17th century, Moli\u00e8re also mocked the Gothic style in the 1669 poem \"La Gloire\": \"...the insipid taste of Gothic ornamentation, these odious monstrosities of an ignorant age, produced by the torrents of barbarism...\" The dominant styles in Europe became in turn Italian Renaissance architecture, Baroque architecture, and the grand classicism of the \"style Louis XIV\".\nThe Kings of France had first-hand knowledge of the new Italian style, because of the military campaign of Charles VIII to Naples and Milan (1494), and especially the campaigns of Louis XII and Fran\u00e7ois I (1500\u20131505) to restore French control over Milan and Genoa. They brought back Italian paintings, sculpture and building plans, and, more importantly, Italian craftsmen and artists. The Cardinal Georges d'Amboise, chief minister of Louis XII, built the Chateau of Gaillon near Rouen (1502\u20131510) with the assistance of Italian craftsmen. The Ch\u00e2teau de Blois (1515\u20131524) introduced the Renaissance loggia and open stairway. Fran\u00e7ois I installed Leonardo da Vinci at his Chateau of Chambord in 1516, and introduced a Renaissance long gallery at the Palace of Fontainebleau in 1528\u20131540. In 1546 Fran\u00e7ois I began building the first example of French classicism, the square courtyard of the Louvre Palace designed by Pierre Lescot.\nNonetheless, new Gothic buildings, particularly churches, continued to be built. New Gothic churches built in Paris in this period included Saint-Merri (1520\u20131552) and Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois. The first signs of classicism in Paris churches did not appear until 1540, at Saint-Gervais-Saint-Protais. The largest new church, Saint-Eustache (1532\u20131560), rivalled Notre-Dame in size, long, wide, and high. As construction of this church continued, elements of Renaissance decoration, including the system of classical orders of columns, were added to the design, making it a Gothic-Renaissance hybrid.\nIn Germany, some Italian elements were introduced at the Fugger Chapel of St. Anne's Church, Augsburg (1510\u20131512), combined with Gothic vaults; and others appeared in the Church of St. Michael in Munich, but in Germany Renaissance elements were used primarily for decoration. Some Renaissance elements also appeared in Spain, in the new palace begun by Emperor Charles V in Granada, within the Alhambra (1485\u20131550), inspired by Bramante and Raphael, but it was never completed. The first major Renaissance work in Spain was El Escorial, the monastery-palace built by Philip II of Spain.\nUnder Henry VIII and Elizabeth I, England was largely isolated from architectural developments on the continent. The first classical building in England was the Old Somerset House in London (1547\u20131552) (since demolished), built by Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset, who was regent as Lord Protector for Edward VI until the young king came of age in 1547. Somerset's successor, John Dudley, 1st Duke of Northumberland, sent the architectural scholar John Shute to Italy to study the style. Shute published the first book in English on classical architecture in 1570. The first English houses in the new style were Burghley House (1550s\u20131580s) and Longleat, built by associates of Somerset. With those buildings, a new age of architecture began in England.\nGothic architecture, usually churches or university buildings, continued to be built. Ireland was an island of Gothic architecture in the 17th and 18th centuries, with the construction of Derry Cathedral (completed 1633), Sligo Cathedral (c.\u20091730), and Down Cathedral (1790\u20131818) are other examples. In the 17th and 18th century several important Gothic buildings were constructed at Oxford University and Cambridge University, including Tom Tower (1681\u201382) at Christ Church, Oxford, by Christopher Wren. It also appeared, in a whimsical fashion, in Horace Walpole's Twickenham villa, Strawberry Hill (1749\u20131776). The two western towers of Westminster Abbey were constructed between 1722 and 1745 by Nicholas Hawksmoor, opening a new period of Gothic Revival.\nGothic architecture survived the early modern period and flourished again in a revival from the late 18th century and throughout the 19th. \"Perpendicular\" was the first Gothic style revived in the 18th century.\nSurvival, rediscovery and revival.\nIn England, partly in response to a philosophy propounded by the Oxford Movement and others associated with the emerging revival of 'high church' or Anglo-Catholic ideas during the second quarter of the 19th century, neo-Gothic began to become promoted by influential establishment figures as the preferred style for ecclesiastical, civic and institutional architecture. The appeal of this Gothic Revival (which after 1837, in Britain, is sometimes termed Victorian Gothic), gradually widened to encompass \"low church\" as well as \"high church\" clients. This period of more universal appeal, spanning 1855\u20131885, is known in Britain as High Victorian Gothic.\nThe Palace of Westminster in London by Sir Charles Barry with interiors by a major exponent of the early Gothic Revival, Augustus Welby Pugin, is an example of the Gothic revival style from its earlier period in the second quarter of the 19th century. Examples from the \"High Victorian Gothic\" period include George Gilbert Scott's design for the Albert Memorial in London, and William Butterfield's chapel at Keble College, Oxford. From the second half of the 19th century onwards, it became more common in Britain for neo-Gothic to be used in the design of non-ecclesiastical and non-governmental buildings types. Gothic details even began to appear in working-class housing schemes subsidised by philanthropy, though given the expense, less frequently than in the design of upper and middle-class housing.\nThe middle of the 19th century was a period marked by the restoration, and in some cases modification, of ancient monuments and the construction of neo-Gothic edifices such as the nave of Cologne Cathedral and the Sainte-Clotilde of Paris as speculation of mediaeval architecture turned to technical consideration. London's Palace of Westminster, St Pancras railway station, New York's Trinity Church and St Patrick's Cathedral are also famous examples of Gothic Revival buildings. The style also reached the Far East in the period, for instance the Anglican St John's Cathedral located at the centre of Victoria City in Central, Hong Kong.\nStructural elements.\nPointed arches.\nThe defining characteristic of the Gothic style is the pointed arch, which was widely used in both structure and decoration. The pointed arch did not originate in Gothic architecture; they had been employed for centuries in the Near East in pre-Islamic as well as Islamic architecture for arches, arcades, and ribbed vaults. In Gothic architecture, particularly in the later Gothic styles, they became the most visible and characteristic element, giving a sensation of verticality and pointing upward, like the spires. Gothic rib vaults covered the nave, and pointed arches were commonly used for the arcades, windows, doorways, in the tracery, and especially in the later Gothic styles decorating the fa\u00e7ades. They were also sometimes used for more practical purposes, such as to bring transverse vaults to the same height as diagonal vaults, as in the nave and aisles of Durham Cathedral, built in 1093.\nThe earliest Gothic pointed arches were lancet lights or lancet windows, which are narrow windows terminating in a lancet arch. A lancet arch has a radius longer than their breadth (width) and resembles the blade of a lancet. In the 12th-century \"First Pointed\" phase of Gothic architecture (also called the \"Lancet style\") and before the introduction of tracery in the windows in later styles, lancet windows predominated Gothic building.\nThe Flamboyant style of Gothic architecture is particularly known for lavish pointed details such as the \"arc-en-accolade\", where a pointed arch over a doorway was topped by a pointed sculptural ornament called a fleuron and by pointed pinnacles on either side. The arches of the doorway were further decorated with small cabbage-shaped sculptures called \"chou-fris\u00e9s\".\nRib vaults.\nThe Gothic rib vault was one of the essential elements that made the great height and large windows of Gothic architecture possible. Unlike the semi-circular barrel vault of Roman and Romanesque buildings, where the weight pressed directly downward, and required thick walls and small windows, the Gothic rib vault was made of diagonal crossing arched ribs. These ribs directed the thrust outwards to the corners of the vault, and downwards via slender colonnettes and bundled columns, to the pillars and columns below. The space between the ribs was filled with thin panels of small pieces of stone, which were much lighter than earlier groin vaults. The outward thrust against the walls was countered by the weight of buttresses and later flying buttresses. As a result, the massive, thick walls of Romanesque buildings were no longer needed, as since the vaults were supported by columns and piers, the walls could be made thinner and higher, and filled with windows.\nThe earlier Gothic rib vaults, used at Sens Cathedral (begun between 1135 and 1140) and Notre-Dame de Paris (begun 1163), were divided by the ribs into six compartments. They were very difficult to build and could only cross a limited space. Since each vault covered two bays, they needed support on the ground floor from alternating columns and piers. In later construction, the design was simplified, and the rib vaults were divided into only four compartments. The alternating rows of alternating columns and piers receiving the vaults' weight were replaced by simple pillars, each receiving the same weight. A single vault could cross the nave. This method was used at Chartres Cathedral (1194\u20131220), Amiens Cathedral (begun 1220), and Reims Cathedral. The four-part vaults made it possible for taller buildings to be constructed. Notre-Dame, which had begun with six-part vaults, reached a height of . Amiens Cathedral, which had begun with the newer four-part ribs, reached a height of at the transept.\nLater vaults (13th\u201315th century).\nIn France, the four-part rib vault, with two diagonals crossing at the center of the traverse, was the type used almost exclusively until the end of the Gothic period. However, in England, several imaginative new vaults were invented which had more elaborate decorative features. They became a signature of the later English Gothic styles.\nThe first of these new vaults had an additional rib, called a tierceron, which ran down the median of the vault. It first appeared in the vaults of the choir of Lincoln Cathedral at the end of the 12th century, then at Worcester Cathedral in 1224, and then the south transept of Lichfield Cathedral.\nThe 14th century brought the invention of several new types of vaults which were more and more decorative. These vaults often copied the forms form of the elaborate tracery of the Late Gothic styles. These included the stellar vault, where a group of additional ribs between the principal ribs forms a star design. The oldest vaults of this kind were found in the crypt of Saint Stephen at Westminster Palace, built about 1320. A second type was called a reticulated vault, which had a network of additional decorative ribs, in triangles and other geometric forms, placed between or over the traverse ribs. These were first used in the choir of Bristol Cathedral in about 1311. Another late Gothic form, the fan vault, with ribs spreading upwards and outwards, appeared later in the 14th century. An example is the cloister of Gloucester Cathedral (c.\u20091370).\nAnother new form was the skeleton vault, which appeared in the English Decorated style. It has an additional network of ribs, like the ribs of an umbrella, which criss-cross the vault but are only directly attached to it at certain points. It appeared in a chapel of Lincoln Cathedral in 1300. and then several other English churches. This style of vault was adopted in the 14th century in particular by German architects, particularly Peter Parler, and in other parts of central Europe. Another exists in the south porch of the Prague Cathedral\nElaborate vaults also appeared in civic architecture. An example is the ceiling of the Vladislav Hall in Prague Castle in Bohemia designed by Benedikt Ried in 1493. The ribs twist and intertwine in fantasy patterns, which later critics called \"Rococo Gothic\".\nColumns and piers.\nIn early French Gothic architecture, the capitals of the columns were modeled after Roman columns of the Corinthian order, with finely-sculpted leaves. They were used in the ambulatory of the Abbey church of Saint-Denis. According to its builder, the Abbot Suger, they were inspired by the columns he had seen in the ancient baths in Rome. They were used later at Sens, at Notre-Dame de Paris and at Canterbury in England.\nIn early Gothic churches with six-part rib vaults, the columns in the nave alternated with more massive piers to provide support for the vaults. With the introduction of the four-part rib vault, all of the piers or columns in the nave could have the same design. In the High Gothic period, a new form was introduced, composed of a central core surrounded several attached slender columns, or colonettes, going up to the vaults. These clustered columns were used at Chartres, Amiens, Reims and Bourges, Westminster Abbey and Salisbury Cathedral. Another variation was a quadrilobe column, shaped like a clover, formed of four attached columns. In England, the clustered columns were often ornamented with stone rings, as well as columns with carved leaves.\nLater styles added further variations. Sometimes the piers were rectangular and fluted, as at Seville Cathedral, In England, parts of columns sometimes had contrasting colours, using combining white stone with dark Purbeck marble. In place of the Corinthian capital, some columns used a stiff-leaf design. In later Gothic, the piers became much taller, reaching up more than half of the nave. Another variation, particularly popular in eastern France, was a column without a capital, which continued upward without capitals or other interruption, all the way to the vaults, giving a dramatic display of verticality.\nFlying buttresses.\nAn important feature of Gothic architecture was the flying buttress, a half-arch outside the building which carried the thrust of weight of the roof or vaults inside over a roof or an aisle to a heavy stone column. The buttresses were placed in rows on either side of the building, and were often topped by heavy stone pinnacles, both to give extra weight and for additional decoration.\nButtresses had existed since Roman times, usually set directly against the building, but the Gothic vaults were more sophisticated. In later structures, the buttresses often had several arches, each reaching in to a different level of the structure. The buttresses permitted the buildings to be both taller, and to have thinner walls, with greater space for windows.\nOver time, the buttresses and pinnacles became more elaborate supporting statues and other decoration, as at Beauvais Cathedral and Reims Cathedral. The arches had an additional practical purpose; they contained lead channels which carried rainwater off the roof; it was expelled from the mouths of stone gargoyles placed in rows on the buttresses.\nFlying buttresses were used less frequently in England, where the emphasis was more on length than height. One example of English buttresses was Canterbury Cathedral, whose choir and buttresses were rebuilt in Gothic style by William of Sens and William the Englishman. However, they were very popular in Germany: in Cologne Cathedral the buttresses were lavishly decorated with statuary and other ornament, and were a prominent feature of the exterior.\nTowers and spires.\nTowers, spires and fl\u00e8ches were an important feature of Gothic churches. They presented a dramatic spectacle of great height, helped make their churches the tallest and most visible buildings in their city, and symbolised the aspirations of their builders toward heaven. They also had a practical purpose; they often served as bell towers supporting belfries, whose bells told the time by announcing religious services, warned of fire or enemy attack, and celebrated special occasions like military victories and coronations. Sometimes the bell tower is built separate from a church; the best-known example of this is the Leaning Tower of Pisa.\nThe towers of cathedrals were usually the last part of the structure to be built. Since cathedral construction usually took many years, and was extremely expensive, by the time the tower were to be built public enthusiasm waned, and tastes changed. Many projected towers were never built, or were built in different styles than other parts of the cathedral, or with different styles on each level of the tower. At Chartres Cathedral, the south tower was built in the 12th century, in the simpler Early Gothic, while the north tower is the more highly decorated Flamboyant style. Chartres would have been even more exuberant if the second plan had been followed; it called for seven towers around the transept and sanctuary.\nIn the \u00cele-de-France, cathedral towers followed the Romanesque tradition of two identical towers, one on either side of the portals. The west front of the Saint-Denis, became the model for the early Gothic cathedrals and High Gothic cathedrals in northern France, including Notre-Dame de Paris, Reims Cathedral, and Amiens Cathedral.\nThe early and High Gothic Laon Cathedral has a square lantern tower over the crossing of the transept; two towers on the western front; and two towers on the ends of the transepts. Laon's towers, with the exception of the central tower, are built with two stacked vaulted chambers pierced by lancet openings. The two western towers contain life-size stone statues of sixteen oxen in their upper arcades, said to honour the animals who hauled the stone during the cathedral's construction.\nIn Normandy, cathedrals and major churches often had multiple towers, built over the centuries; the Abbaye aux Hommes (begun 1066), Caen has nine towers and spires, placed on the fa\u00e7ade, the transepts, and the centre. A lantern tower was often placed the centre of the nave, at the meeting point with the transept, to give light to the church below.\nIn later periods of Gothic, pointed needle-like spires were often added to the towers, giving them much greater height. A variation of the spire was the fl\u00e8che, a slender, spear-like spire, which was usually placed on the transept where it crossed the nave. They were often made of wood covered with lead or other metal. They sometimes had open frames, and were decorated with sculpture. Amiens Cathedral has a fl\u00e8che. The most famous example was that of Notre-Dame de Paris. The original fl\u00e8che of Notre-Dame was built on the crossing of the transept in the middle of the 13th century, and housed five bells. It was removed in 1786 during a program to modernize the cathedral, but was put back in a new form designed by Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc. The new fl\u00e8che, of wood covered with lead, was decorated with statues of the Apostles; the figure of St Thomas resembled Viollet-le-Duc. The fl\u00e8che was destroyed in the 2019 fire, but is now restored in the same design.\nIn English Gothic, the major tower was often placed at the crossing of the transept and nave, and was much higher than the other. The most famous example is the tower of Salisbury Cathedral, completed in 1320 by William of Farleigh. It was a remarkable feat of construction, since it was built upon the pillars of the much earlier church. A crossing tower was constructed at Canterbury Cathedral in 1493\u20131501 by John Wastell, who had previously worked on King's College at Cambridge. It was finished by Henry Yevele, who also built the present nave of Canterbury. The new central tower at Wells Cathedral caused a problem; it was too heavy for the original structure. An unusual double arch had to be constructed in the centre of the crossing to give the tower the extra support it needed.\nEngland's Gothic parish churches and collegiate churches generally have a single western tower. A number of the finest churches have masonry spires, with those of St James Church, Louth; St Wulfram's Church, Grantham; St Mary Redcliffe in Bristol; and Coventry Cathedral. These spires all exceed in height.\nWestminster Abbey's crossing tower has for centuries remained unbuilt, and numerous architects have proposed various ways of completing it since the 1250s, when work began on the tower under Henry III. A century and half later, an octagonal roof lantern resembling that of Ely Cathedral was installed instead, which was then demolished in the 16th century. Construction began again in 1724 to the design of Nicholas Hawksmoor, after first Christopher Wren had proposed a design in 1710, but stopped again in 1727. The crossing remains covered by the stub of the lantern and a 'temporary' roof.\nLater Gothic towers in Central Europe often followed the French model, but added even denser decorative tracery. Cologne Cathedral had been started in the 13th century, following the plan of Amiens Cathedral, but only the apse and the base of one tower were finished in the Gothic period. The original plans were conserved and rediscovered in 1817, and the building was completed in the 19th century following the origin design. It has two spectacularly ornamented towers, covered with arches, gables, pinnacles and openwork spires pointing upwards. The tower of Ulm Minster has a similar history, begun in 1377, stopped in 1543, and not completed until the 19th century.\nRegional variants of Gothic towers appeared in Spain and Italy. Burgos Cathedral was inspired by Northern Europe. It has an exceptional cluster of openwork spires, towers, and pinnacles, drenched with ornament. It was begun in 1444 by a German architect, Juan de Colonia (John of Cologne) and eventually completed by a central tower (1540) built by his grandson.\nIn Italy the towers were sometimes separate from the cathedral; and the architects usually kept their distance from the Northern European style. the leaning tower of Pisa Cathedral, built between 1173 and 1372, is the best-known example. The Campanile of Florence Cathedral was built by Giotto in the Florentine Gothic style, decorated with encrustations of polychrome marble. It was originally designed to have a spire.\nTracery.\nTracery is an architectural solution by which windows (or screens, panels, and vaults) are divided into sections of various proportions by stone \"bars\" or \"ribs\" of moulding. Pointed arch windows of Gothic buildings were initially (late 12th\u2013late 13th centuries) lancet windows, a solution typical of the \"Early Gothic\" or \"First Pointed\" style and of the \"Early English\" Gothic. Plate tracery was the first type of tracery to be developed, emerging in the later phase of \"Early Gothic\" or \"First Pointed\". \"Second Pointed\" is distinguished from \"First\" by the appearance of \"bar\u2013tracery\", allowing the construction of much larger window openings, and the development of \"Curvilinear\", \"Flowing\", and \"Reticulated\" tracery, ultimately contributing to the \"Flamboyant\" style. \"Late Gothic\" in most of Europe saw tracery patterns resembling lace develop, while in England \"Perpendicular Gothic\" or \"Third Pointed\" preferred plainer vertical mullions and transoms. Tracery is practical as well as decorative, because the increasingly large windows of Gothic buildings needed maximum support against the wind.\nPlate tracery, in which lights were pierced in a thin wall of ashlar, allowed a window arch to have more than one light \u2013 typically two side by side and separated by flat stone spandrels. The spandrels were then sculpted into figures like a roundel or a quatrefoil. Plate tracery reached the height of its sophistication with the 12th century windows of Chartres Cathedral and in the \"Dean's Eye\" rose window at Lincoln Cathedral.\nAt the beginning of the 13th century, plate tracery was superseded by bar-tracery. Bar-tracery divides the large lights from one another with moulded mullions. Stone bar-tracery, an important decorative element of Gothic styles, first was used at Reims Cathedral shortly after 1211, in the chevet built by Jean D'Orbais. It was employed in England around 1240. After 1220, master builders in England had begun to treat the window openings as a series of openings divided by thin stone bars, while before 1230 the apse chapels of Reims Cathedral were decorated with bar-tracery with cusped circles (with bars radiating from the centre). Bar-tracery became common after c.\u20091240, with increasing complexity and decreasing weight. The lines of the mullions continued beyond the tops of the window lights and subdivided the open spandrels above the lights into a variety of decorative shapes. \"Rayonnant\" style (c.\u20091230\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091350) was enabled by the development of bar-tracery in Continental Europe and is named for the radiation of lights around a central point in circular rose windows. \"Rayonnant\" also deployed mouldings of two different types in tracery, where earlier styles had used moulding of a single size, with different sizes of mullions. The rose windows of Notre-Dame de Paris (c.1270) are typical.\nThe early phase of \"Middle Pointed\" style (late 13th century) is characterized by \"Geometrical\" tracery \u2013 simple bar-tracery forming patterns of foiled arches and circles interspersed with triangular lights. The mullions of \"Geometrical\" style typically had capitals with curved bars emerging from them. \"Intersecting\" bar-tracery (c.1300) deployed mullions without capitals which branched off equidistant to the window-head. The window-heads themselves were formed of equal curves forming a pointed arch and the tracery-bars were curved by drawing curves with differing radii from the same centres as the window-heads. The mullions were in consequence branched into Y-shaped designs further ornamented with cusps. The intersecting branches produced an array of lozenge-shaped lights in between numerous lancet arched lights.\"Y-tracery\" was often employed in two-light windows c.1300.\n\"Second Pointed\" (14th century) saw \"Intersecting\" tracery elaborated with ogees, creating a complex reticular (net-like) design known as \"Reticulated\" tracery. \"Second Pointed\" architecture deployed tracery in highly decorated fashion known as \"Curvilinear\" and \"Flowing\" (\"Undulating\"). These types of bar-tracery were developed further throughout Europe in the 15th century into the \"Flamboyant\" style, named for the characteristic flame-shaped spaces between the tracery-bars. These shapes are known as \"daggers\", \"fish-bladders\", or \"mouchettes\".\n\"Third Pointed\" or \"Perpendicular Gothic\" developed in England from the later 14th century and is typified by \"Rectilinear\" tracery (\"panel\"-tracery). The mullions are often joined by transoms and continue up their straight vertical lines to the top of the window's main arch, some branching off into lesser arches, and creating a series of panel-like lights. \"Perpendicular\" strove for verticality and dispensed with the \"Curvilinear\" style's sinuous lines in favour of unbroken straight mullions from top to bottom, transected by horizontal transoms and bars. Four-centred arches were used in the 15th and 16th centuries to create windows of increasing size with flatter window-heads, often filling the entire wall of the bay between each buttress. The windows were themselves divided into panels of lights topped by pointed arches struck from four centres. The transoms were often topped by miniature crenellations. The windows at Cambridge of King's College Chapel (1446\u20131515) represent the heights of \"Perpendicular\" tracery.\nTracery was used on both the interior and exterior of buildings. It frequently covered the fa\u00e7ades, and the interior walls of the nave and choir were covered with blind arcades. It also often picked up and repeated the designs in the stained glass windows. Strasbourg Cathedral has a west front lavishly ornamented with bar tracery matching the windows.\nPlans.\nThe plan of Gothic cathedrals and churches was usually based on the Latin cross (or \"cruciform\") plan, taken from the ancient Roman Basilica, and from the later Romanesque churches. They have a long nave making the body of the church, where the parishioners worshipped; a transverse arm called the transept and, beyond it to the east, the choir, also known as a chancel or presbytery, that was usually reserved for the clergy. The eastern end of the church was rounded in French churches, and was occupied by several radiating chapels, which allowed multiple ceremonies to go on simultaneously. In English churches the eastern end also had chapels, but was usually rectangular. A passage called the ambulatory circled the choir. This allowed parishioners, and especially pilgrims, to walk past the chapels to see the relics displayed there without disturbing other services going on.\nEach vault of the nave formed a separate cell, with its own supporting piers or columns. The early cathedrals, like Notre-Dame, had six-part rib vaults, with alternating columns and piers, while later cathedrals had the simpler and stronger four-part vaults, with identical columns.\nFollowing the model of Romanesque architecture and the Basilica of Saint Denis, cathedrals usually had two towers flanking the west fa\u00e7ade. Towers over the crossing were common in England (Salisbury Cathedral), York Minister) but rarer in France.\nTransepts were usually short in early French Gothic architecture, but became longer and were given large rose windows in the Rayonnant period. The choirs became more important. The choir was often flanked by a double disambulatory, which was crowned by a ring of small chapels. In England, transepts were more important, and the floor plans were usually much more complex than in French cathedrals, with the addition of attached Lady Chapels, an octagonal Chapter House, and other structures (See plans of Salisbury Cathedral and York Minster below). This reflected a tendency in France to carry out multiple functions in the same space, while English cathedrals compartmentalized them. This contrast is visible in the difference between Amiens Cathedral, with its minimal transepts and semicircular apse, filled with chapels, on the east end, compared with the double transepts, projecting north porch, and rectangular east end of Salisbury and York.\nElevations and the search for height.\n px;\n left: px; \"&gt;\n px;\n top: -px;\"&gt;Arcade\npx;\n left: px; \"&gt;\n px;\n top: -px;\"&gt;Tribune\npx;\n left: px; \"&gt;\n px;\n top: -px;\"&gt;Triforium\npx;\n left: px; \"&gt;\n px;\n top: -px;\"&gt;Clerestory\nEarly Gothic Laon Cathedral (1150s\u20131230)\nGothic architecture was a continual search for greater height, thinner walls, and more light. This was clearly illustrated in the evolving elevations of the cathedrals.\nIn Early Gothic architecture, following the model of the Romanesque churches, the buildings had thick, solid walls with a minimum of windows in order to give enough support for the vaulted roofs. An elevation typically had four levels. On the ground floor was an arcade with massive piers alternating with thinner columns, which supported the six-part rib vaults. Above that was a gallery, called the tribune, which provided stability to the walls, and was sometimes used to provide seating for the nuns. Above that was a narrower gallery, called the triforium, which also helped provide additional thickness and support. At the top, just beneath the vaults, was the clerestory, where the high windows were placed. The upper level was supported from the outside by the flying buttresses. This system was used at Noyon Cathedral, Sens Cathedral, and other early structures.\nIn the High Gothic period, thanks to the introduction of the four part rib vault, a simplified elevation appeared at Chartres Cathedral and others. The alternating piers and columns on the ground floor were replaced by rows of identical circular piers wrapped in four engaged columns. The tribune disappeared, which meant that the arcades could be higher. This created more space at the top for the upper windows, which were expanded to include a smaller circular window above a group of lancet windows. The new walls gave a stronger sense of verticality and brought in more light. A similar arrangement was adapted in England, at Salisbury Cathedral, Lincoln Cathedral, and Ely Cathedral.\nAn important characteristic of Gothic church architecture is its height, both absolute and in proportion to its width, the verticality suggesting an aspiration to Heaven. The increasing height of cathedrals over the Gothic period was accompanied by an increasing proportion of the wall devoted to windows, until, by the late Gothic, the interiors became like cages of glass. This was made possible by the development of the flying buttress, which transferred the thrust of the weight of the roof to the supports outside the walls. As a result, the walls gradually became thinner and higher, and masonry was replaced with glass. The four-part elevation of the naves of early Cathedrals such as Notre-Dame (arcade, tribune, triforium, clerestory) was transformed in the choir of Beauvais Cathedral to very tall arcades, a thin triforium, and soaring windows up to the roof.\nBeauvais Cathedral reached the limit of what was possible with Gothic technology. A portion of the choir collapsed in 1284, causing alarm in all of the cities with very tall cathedrals. Panels of experts were created in Sienna and Chartres to study the stability of those structures. Only the transept and choir of Beauvais were completed, and in the 21st century, the transept walls were reinforced with cross-beams. No cathedral built since exceeded the height of the choir of Beauvais.\nWest front.\nChurches traditionally face east, with the altar at the east, and the west front, or fa\u00e7ade, was considered the most important entrance. Gothic fa\u00e7ades were adapted from the model of the Romanesque fa\u00e7ades. The fa\u00e7ades usually had three portals, or doorways, leading into the nave. Over each doorway was a tympanum, a work of sculpture crowded with figures. The sculpture of the central tympanum was devoted to the Last Judgement, that to the left to the Virgin Mary, and that to the right to the Saints honoured at that particular cathedral. In the early Gothic, the columns of the doorways took the form of statues of saints, making them literally \"pillars of the church\".\nIn the early Gothic, the fa\u00e7ades were characterized by height, elegance, harmony, unity, and a balance of proportions. They followed the doctrine expressed by Saint Thomas Aquinas that beauty was a \"harmony of contrasts\". Following the model of Saint-Denis and later Notre-Dame de Paris, the fa\u00e7ade was flanked by two towers proportional to the rest of the fa\u00e7ade, which balanced the horizontal and vertical elements. Early Gothic fa\u00e7ades often had a small rose window placed above the central portal. In England the rose window was often replaced by several lancet windows.\nIn the High Gothic period, the fa\u00e7ades grew higher, and had more dramatic architecture and sculpture. At Amiens Cathedral (c.\u20091220), the porches were deeper, the niches and pinnacles were more prominent. The portals were crowned with high arched gables, composed of concentric arches filled with sculpture. The rose windows became enormous, filling an entirely wall above the central portal, and they were themselves covered with a large pointed arch. The rose windows were pushed upwards by the growing profusion of decoration below. The towers were adorned with their own arches, often crowned with pinnacles. The towers themselves were crowned with spires, often of open-work sculpture. One of the finest examples of a Flamboyant fa\u00e7ade is Notre-Dame de l'\u00c9pine (1405\u20131527).\nWhile French cathedrals emphasized the height of the fa\u00e7ade, English cathedrals, particularly in earlier Gothic, often emphasized the width. The west front of Wells Cathedral is 146 feet across, compared with 116 feet wide at the nearly contemporary Amiens Cathedral, though Amiens is twice as high. The west front of Wells was almost entirely covered with statuary, like Amiens, and was given even further emphasis by its colors; traces of blue, scarlet, and gold are found on the sculpture, as well as painted stars against the dark background on other sections.\nItalian Gothic fa\u00e7ades have the three traditional portals and rose windows, or sometimes simply a large circular window without tracery plus an abundance of flamboyant elements, including sculpture, pinnacles and spires. However, they added distinctive Italian elements. as seen in the fa\u00e7ades of Siena Cathedral ) and of Orvieto Cathedral, The Orvieto fa\u00e7ade was largely the work of a master mason, Lorenzo Maitani, who worked on the fa\u00e7ade from 1308 until his death in 1330. He broke away from the French emphasis on height, and eliminated the column statutes and statuary in the arched entries, and covered the fa\u00e7ade with colourful mosaics of biblical scenes (The current mosaics are of a later date). He also added sculpture in relief on the supporting contreforts.\nAnother important feature of the Italian Gothic portal was the sculpted bronze door. The sculptor Andrea Pisano made the celebrated bronze doors for Florence Baptistry (1330\u20131336). They were not the first; Abbot Suger had commissioned bronze doors for Saint-Denis in 1140, but they were replaced with wooden doors when the Abbey was enlarged. Pisano's work, with its realism and emotion, pointed toward the coming Renaissance.\nEast end.\nCathedrals and churches were traditionally constructed with the altar at the east end, so that the priest and congregation faced the rising sun during the morning liturgy. The sun was considered the symbol of Christ and the Second Coming, a major theme in Cathedral sculpture. The portion of the church east of altar is the choir, reserved for members of the clergy. There is usually a single or double ambulatory, or aisle, around the choir and east end, so parishioners and pilgrims could walk freely easily around east end.\nIn Romanesque churches, the east end was very dark, due to the thick walls and small windows. In the ambulatory of the Basilica of Saint Denis, Abbot Suger first used the novel combination rib vaults and buttresses to replace the thick walls and replace them with stained glass, opening up that portion of the church to what he considered \"divine light\".\nIn French Gothic churches, the east end, or chevet, often had an apse, a semi-circular projection with a vaulted or domed roof. The chevet of large cathedrals frequently had a ring of radiating chapels, placed between the buttresses to get maximum light. There are three such chapels at Chartres Cathedral, seven at Notre Dame de Paris, Amiens Cathedral, Prague Cathedral and Cologne Cathedral, and nine at Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua in Italy. In England, the east end is more often rectangular, and gives access to a separate and large Lady Chapel, dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Lady Chapels were also common in Italy.\nSculpture.\nPortals and tympanum.\nSculpture was an important element of Gothic architecture. Its intent was present the stories of the Bible in vivid and understandable fashion to the great majority of the faithful who could not read. The iconography of the sculptural decoration on the fa\u00e7ade was not left to the sculptors. An edict of the Second Council of Nicaea in 787 had declared: \"The composition of religious images is not to be left to the inspiration of artists; it is derived from the principles put in place by the Catholic Church and religious tradition. Only the art belongs to the artist; the composition belongs to the Fathers.\"\nIn Early Gothic churches, following the Romanesque tradition, sculpture appeared on the fa\u00e7ade or west front in the triangular tympanum over the central portal. Gradually, as the style evolved, the sculpture became more and more prominent, taking over the columns of the portal, and gradually climbing above the portals, until statues in niches covered the entire fa\u00e7ade, as in Wells Cathedral, to the transepts, and, as at Amiens Cathedral, even on the interior of the fa\u00e7ade.\nSome of the earliest examples are found at Chartres Cathedral, where the three portals of the west front illustrate the three epiphanies in the Life of Christ. At Amiens, the tympanum over the central portal depicted the Last Judgement, the right portal showed the Coronation of the Virgin, and the left portal showed the lives of saints who were important in the diocese. This set a pattern of complex iconography which was followed at other churches.\nThe columns below the tympanum are in the form of statues of saints, literally representing them as \"the pillars of the church\". Each saint had his own symbol at his feet so viewers could recognize them; a winged lion meant Saint Mark, an eagle with four wings meant Saint John the Apostle, and a winged bull symbolized Saint Luke. Floral and vegetal decoration was also very common, representing the Garden of Eden; grapes represented the wines of Eucharist.\nThe tympanum over the central portal on the west fa\u00e7ade of Notre-Dame de Paris vividly illustrates the Last Judgement, with figures of sinners being led off to hell, and good Christians taken to heaven. The sculpture of the right portal shows the coronation of the Virgin Mary, and the left portal shows the lives of saints who were important to Parisians, particularly Saint Anne, the mother of the Virgin Mary.\nTo make the message even more prominent, the sculpture of the tympanum was painted in bright colors. following a system of colours codified in the 12th century; yellow, called \"gold\", symbolized intelligence, grandeur and virtue; white, called \"argent\", symbolized purity, wisdom, and correctness; black, or \"sable\", meant sadness, but also will; green, or \"sinople\", represented hope, liberty and joy; red or \"gueules\" (see gules) meant charity or victory; blue or \"azure\" symbolised the sky, faithfulness and perseverance; and violet, or \"pourpre\", was the colour of royalty and sovereignty.\nIn the later Gothic, the sculpture became more naturalistic; the figures were separated from the walls, and had much more expressive faces, showing emotion and personality. The drapery was very skilfully carved. The torments of hell were even more vividly depicted. The late Gothic sculpture at Siena Cathedral, by Nino Pisano, pointing toward the Renaissance, is particularly notable. Much of it is now kept in a museum to protect it from deterioration.\nGrotesques and Labyrinths.\nBesides saints and apostles, the exteriors of Gothic churches were also decorated with sculptures of a variety of fabulous and frightening grotesques or monsters. These included the chimera, a mythical hybrid creature which usually had the body of a lion and the head of a goat, and the strix or stryge, a creature resembling an owl or bat, which was said to eat human flesh. The strix appeared in classical Roman literature; it was described by the Roman poet Ovid, who was widely read in the Middle Ages, as a large-headed bird with transfixed eyes, rapacious beak, and greyish white wings. They were part of the visual message for the illiterate worshippers, symbols of the evil and danger that threatened those who did not follow the teachings of the church.\nThe gargoyles, which were added to Notre-Dame in about 1240, had a more practical purpose. They were the rain spouts of the church, designed to divide the torrent of water which poured from the roof after rain, and to project it outwards as far as possible from the buttresses and the walls and windows so that it would not erode the mortar binding the stone. To produce many thin streams rather than a torrent of water, a large number of gargoyles were used, so they were also designed to be a decorative element of the architecture. The rainwater ran from the roof into lead gutters, then down channels on the flying buttresses, then along a channel cut in the back of the gargoyle and out of the mouth away from the church.\nMany of the statues at Notre-Dame, particularly the grotesques, were removed from the fa\u00e7ade in the 17th and 18th century, or were destroyed during the French Revolution. They were replaced with figures in the Gothic style, designed by Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc during the 19th-century restoration. Similar figures appear on the other major Gothic churches of France and England.\nAnother common feature of Gothic cathedrals in France was a labyrinth or maze on the floor of the nave near the choir, which symbolised the difficult and often complicated journey of a Christian life before attaining paradise. Most labyrinths were removed by the 18th century, but a few, like the one at Amiens Cathedral, have been reconstructed, and the labyrinth at Chartres Cathedral still exists essentially in its original form.\nWindows and stained glass.\nIncreasing the amount of light in the interior was a primary objective of the founders of the Gothic movement. Abbot Suger described the new kind of architecture he had created in the east end of the Saint-Denis: \"a circular ring of chapels, by virtue of which the whole church would shine with the wonderful and uninterrupted light of most luminous windows, pervading the interior beauty.\"\nReligious teachings in the Middle Ages, particularly the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, a 6th-century mystic whose book, \"De Coelesti Hierarchia\", was popular among monks in France, taught that all light was divine. When the Abbot Suger ordered the reconstruction of choir of the abbey church at Saint-Denis, he had the builders create seventy windows, admitting as much light as possible, as the means by which the faithful could be elevated from the material world to the immaterial world.\nThe placement of the windows was also determined by religious doctrine. The windows on the north side, frequently in the shade, had windows depicting the Old Testament. The windows of the east, corresponding to the direction of the sunrise, had images of Christ and scenes from the New Testament.\nIn the Early Gothic period, the glass was particularly thick and was deeply coloured with metal oxides; cobalt for blue, copper for a ruby red, iron for green, and antimony for yellow. The process of making the windows was described in detail by the 12th-century monk known as Theophilus Presbyter. The glass of each colour was melted with the oxide, blown, shaped into small sheets, cracked with a hot iron into small pieces, and assembled on a large table. The details were painted onto the glass in vitreous enamel, then baked in a kiln to fuse the enamel on the glass. The pieces were fit into a framework of thin lead strips, and then put into a more solid frame or iron armatures between the panels. The finished window was set into the stone opening. Thin vertical and horizontal bars of iron, called \"vergettes\" or \"barlotierres\", were placed inside the window to reinforce the glass against the wind.\nThe use of iron rods between the panels of glass and a framework of stone mullions, or ribs, made it possible to create much larger windows. The three rose windows at Chartres (1203\u20131240) each were more than in diameter. Larger windows also appeared at York Minster (1140\u20131160) and Canterbury Cathedral (1178\u20131200)\nThe stained glass windows were extremely complex and expensive to create. King Louis IX paid for the rose windows in the transept of Notre-Dame de Paris, but other windows were financed by the contributions of the professions or guilds of the city. These windows usually had a panel which illustrated the work of the guild which funded it, such as the drapers, stonemasons, or coopers.\nThe 13th century saw the introduction of a new kind of window, with grisaille, or white glass, with a geometric pattern, usually joined with medallions of stained glass. These windows allowed much more light into the cathedral, but diminished the vividness of the stained glass, since there was less contrast between the dark interior and bright exterior. The most remarkable and influential work of stained glass in the 13th century was the royal chapel, Sainte-Chapelle (1243\u20131248), where the windows of the upper chapel, high, occupied all of the walls on the three sides, with 1,134 individual scenes. Sainte-Chapelle became the model for other chapels across Europe.\nThe 14th century brought a variety of new colours, and the use of more realistic shading and half-toning. This was done by the development of flashed glass. Clear glass was dipped into coloured glass, then portions of the coloured glass were ground away to give exactly the right shade. In the 15th century, artists began painting directly onto the glass with enamel colours. Gradually the art of glass came closer and closer to traditional painting.\nOne of the most celebrated Flamboyant buildings was the Sainte-Chapelle de Vincennes (1370s), with walls of glass from floor to ceiling. The original glass was destroyed, and is replaced by grisaille glass. King's College Chapel (15th century), also followed the model of walls entirely filled with glass.\nThe stained glass windows were extremely complex and expensive to create. King Louis IX paid for the rose windows in the transept of Notre-Dame de Paris, while other windows were often financed by the contributions of the professions or guilds of the city. These windows usually incorporated a panel which illustrates the work of the guild which funded it, such as the drapers, stonemasons, or barrel-makers.\nIn England, the stained glass windows also grew in size and importance; major examples were the Becket Windows at Canterbury Cathedral (1200\u20131230) and the windows of Lincoln Cathedral (1200\u20131220). Enormous windows were also an important element of York Minster and Gloucester Cathedral.\nMuch of the stained glass in Gothic churches today dates from later restorations, but a few, notably Chartres Cathedral and Bourges Cathedral, still have many of their original windows\nRose windows.\nRose windows were a prominent feature of many Gothic churches and cathedrals. The rose was a symbol of the Virgin Mary, and they were particularly used in churches dedicated to her. The French Gothic cathedrals of Chartres, Notre Dame de Paris, Reims, and Laon have them in the west fa\u00e7ade, and in the transepts as well. Amiens Cathedral, Strasbourg Cathedral and Westminster Abbey also have them in transepts. The designs of their tracery became increasingly complex, and gave their names to two periods; the Rayonnant and the Flamboyant. Two of the most famous Rayonnant rose windows were constructed in the transepts of Notre-Dame in the 13th century.\nPalaces.\nThe Gothic style was used in royal and papal residences as well as in churches. Prominent examples include the Palais de la Cit\u00e9 the Medieval Louvre, the Chateau de Vincennes in Paris, residences of the French kings, the Doge's Palace in Venice, and the Palace of the Kings of Navarre in Olite (1269\u20131512). Another is the Palais des Papes (Palace of the Popes), the former Papal residence in Avignon. It was constructed between 1252 and 1364, during the Avignon Papacy. Given the complicated political situation, it combined the functions of a church, a seat of government and a fortress.\nThe Palais de la Cit\u00e9 in Paris, close to Notre-Dame de Paris, begun in 1119, which was the principal residence of the French kings until 1417. Most of the Palais de la Cit\u00e9 is gone, but two of the original towers along the Seine, of the towers, the vaulted ceilings of the Hall of the Men-at-Arms (1302), (now in the Conciergerie); and the original chapel, Sainte-Chapelle, can still be seen.\nThe Louvre Palace was originally built by Philippe II of France beginning in 1190 to house the King's archives and treasures, and given machicoulis and features of a Gothic fortress. However, it was soon made obsolete by the development of artillery, and in the 15th century it was remodelled into a comfortable residential palace. While the outer walls retained their original military appearance, the castle itself, with a profusion of spires, towers, pinnacles, arches and gables, became a visible symbol of royalty and aristocracy. The style was copied in chateaux and other aristocratic residences across France and other parts of Europe.\nCivic architecture.\nIn the 15th century, following the late Gothic period or flamboyant style, elements of Gothic decoration began to appear in the town halls of northern France, Flanders and the Netherlands. The Rouen Courthouse in Normandy is representative of Flamboyant Gothic in France. The H\u00f4tel de Ville of Compi\u00e8gne has an imposing Gothic bell tower, featuring a spire surrounded by smaller towers, and its windows are decorated with ornate accolades or ornamental arches. Similarly flamboyant town halls were found in Arras, Douai, and Saint-Quentin, Aisne, and in modern Belgium, in Brussels, Ghent, Bruges, Audenarde, Mons and Leuven.\nGothic civil architecture in Spain includes the Silk Exchange in Valencia, Spain (1482\u20131548), a major marketplace, which has a main hall with twisting columns beneath its vaulted ceiling.\nUniversity Gothic.\nThe Gothic style was adopted in the late 13th to 15th centuries in early English university buildings, with inspiration coming from monasteries and manor houses. The oldest existing example in England is probably the Mob Quad of Merton College at Oxford University, constructed between 1288 and 1378.\nThe style was further refined by William of Wykeham, Chancellor of England and founder of New College, Oxford, in 1379. His architect, William Wynford, designed the New College quadrangle in the 1380s, which combined a hall, chapel, library, and residences for Fellows and undergraduates. A similar kind of academic cloister was created at Queen's College, Oxford, in the 1140s, likely designed by Reginald Ely.\nThe design of the colleges was influenced not only by abbeys, but also the design of English manor houses of the 14th and 15th century, such as Haddon Hall in Derbyshire. They were composed of rectangular courtyards with covered walkways which separated the wings. Some colleges, like Balliol College, Oxford, borrowed a military style from Gothic castles, with battlements and crenelated walls.\nKing's College Chapel, Cambridge is one of the finest examples of the late Gothic style. It was built by King Henry VI, who was displeased by the excessive decoration of earlier styles. He wrote in 1447 that he wanted his chapel \"to proceed in large form, clean and substantial, setting apart superfluity of too great curious works of entail and busy moulding.\" The chapel, built between 1508 and 1515, has glass walls from floor to ceiling, rising to spreading fan vaults designed by John Wastell. The glass walls are supported by large external buttresses concealed at the base by side chapels.\nOther European examples include Collegio di Spagna in the University of Bologna, built during the 14th and 15th centuries; the Collegium Carolinum of the Charles University in Prague in the Czech Republic (c.\u20091400); the Escuelas mayores of the University of Salamanca in Spain; and the Collegium Maius of the Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w, Poland.\nMilitary architecture.\nIn the 13th century, the design of the castle () evolved in response to contact with the more sophisticated fortifications of the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic world during the Crusades. These new fortifications were more geometric, with a central high tower called a keep () which could be defended even if the curtain walls of the castle were breached. The donjon of the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes, begun by Philip VI of France was a good example. It was high, and, even though within the moat and walls of the fortress, had its own separate drawbridge to going to higher floor.\nTowers, usually round, were placed at the corners and along the walls in the Phillipienne castle, close enough together to support each other. The walls had two levels of walkways on the inside, a crenellated parapet with merlons, and projecting machicolations from which missiles could be dropped on besiegers. The upper walls also had protected protruding balconies, \"\u00e9chauguettes\" and \"bret\u00e8ches\", from which soldiers could see what was happening at the corners or on the ground below. In addition, the towers and walls were pierced with arrowslits, which sometimes took the form of crosses to enable a wider field of fire for archers and crossbowmen.\nCastles were surrounded by a deep moat, spanned by a single drawbridge. The entrance was also protected by a grill of iron which could be opened and closed. The walls at the bottom were often sloping, and protected with earthen barriers. One good surviving example is the Ch\u00e2teau de Dourdan, near Nemours.\nAfter the end of the Hundred Years War (1337\u20131453), with improvements in artillery, the castles lost most of their military importance. They remained as symbols of the rank of their noble occupants; the narrowing openings in the walls were often widened into the windows of bedchambers and ceremonial halls. The tower of the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes became a part-time royal residence until the Palace of Versailles was completed.\nSynagogues.\nAlthough Christianity played a dominant role in the Gothic sacred architecture, Jewish communities were present in many European cities during the Middle Ages and they also built their houses of prayer in the Gothic style. Unfortunately, most of the Gothic synagogues did not survive, because they were often destroyed in connection with persecution of the Jews (e. g. in Bamberg, N\u00fcrnberg, Regensburg, Vienna). One of the best preserved examples of a Gothic synagogue is the Old New Synagogue in Prague which was completed around 1270 and never rebuilt.\nInfluences.\nRomanesque and Norman influence.\nRomanesque architecture and Norman architecture had a major influence upon Gothic architecture. The plan of the Gothic cathedral was based upon the plan of the ancient Roman basilica, which was adopted by Romanesque architecture. The Latin cross form, with a nave and transept, choir, disambulatory, and radiating chapels, came from the Romanesque model. The grand arcades of columns separating the central vessel of the nave from the collateral aisles, the triforium over the grand arcades, and the windows high on the walls allowing light into the nave were all also adapted from the Romanesque model. The portal with a tympanum filled with sculpture was another characteristic Romanesque feature, as was the use of the buttress to support the walls from the outside. Gothic architects improved them by adding the flying buttress with high arches connecting the buttresses to the upper walls. In the interior, Romanesque architecture used the barrel vault with a round arch to cover the nave, and a groin vault when two barrel vaults met at right angles. These vaults were the immediate ancestors of the Gothic rib vault. One of the first use of the Gothic rib vaults to cover a nave was in the Romanesque Durham Cathedral, (1093\u20131104).\nNorman Architecture, similar to the Romanesque style, also influenced the Gothic style. Early examples are found in Lessay Abbey in Normandy, which also featured early rib vaults in the nave similar to the Gothic vaults. Cefalu Cathedral (1131\u20131267) in Sicily, built when Sicily was under Norman rule, is another interesting example. It featured pointed arches and large Gothic rib vaults combined with ornamental mosaic decoration.\nRomanesque architecture had become a pan-European style and manner of construction, affecting buildings in countries as far apart as Ireland and Croatia, and Sweden and Sicily. The same wide geographic area was then affected by the development of Gothic architecture, but the acceptance of the Gothic style and methods of construction differed from place to place, as did the expressions of Gothic taste. The proximity of some regions meant that modern country borders did not define divisions of style. Many different factors like geographical/geological, economic, social, or political situations caused the regional differences in the great abbey churches and cathedrals of the Romanesque period that would often become even more apparent in the Gothic. For example, studies of the population statistics reveals disparities such as the multitude of churches, abbeys, and cathedrals in northern France while in more urbanised regions construction activity of a similar scale was reserved to a few important cities. Such an example comes from Roberto L\u00f3pez, wherein the French city of Amiens was able to fund its architectural projects whereas Cologne could not because of the economic inequality of the two. This wealth, concentrated in rich monasteries and noble families, would eventually spread certain Italian, Catalan, and Hanseatic bankers. This would be amended when the economic hardships of the 13th century were no longer felt, allowing Normandy, Tuscany, Flanders, and the southern Rhineland to enter into competition with France.\nIslamic influence.\nThe pointed arch, one of the defining attributes of Gothic, was earlier featured in Islamic architecture, Though it did not have the same functions. Precursor of pointed arch appeared in Byzantine and Sassanian architectures, This was evidenced in early church building in Syria and occasional secular structures, like the Karamagara Bridge; in Sassanian architecture, employed in palace and sacred construction. These pre-Islamic arches were decorative rather than structural in their function. The pointed arch as an architectonic principle was first clearly established in Islamic architecture; as an architectonic principle, the pointed arch was entirely alien to the pre-Islamic world. Use of the pointed arch seems to have taken off dramatically in Islamic architecture. It begins to appear throughout the Islamic world in close succession after its adoption in the late Umayyad or early Abbasid period. Some examples are the Al-Ukhaidir Palace (775 AD), the Abbasid reconstruction of the Al-Aqsa mosque in 780 AD, the Ramlah Cisterns (789 AD), the Great Mosque of Samarra (851 AD), and the Mosque of Ibn Tulun (879 AD) in Cairo. It also appears in one of the early reconstructions of the Great Mosque of Kairouan in Tunisia, and the Mosque\u2013Cathedral of C\u00f3rdoba in 987 AD. The pointed arch had already been used in Syria, but in the mosque of Ibn Tulun we have one of the earliest examples of its use on an extensive scale, some centuries before it was exploited in the West by the Gothic architects.\nA kind of rib vault was also used in Islamic architecture, for example in the ceiling of the Mosque-Cathedral of Cordoba. In Cordoba, the dome was supported by pendentives, which connected the dome to the arches below. The pendentives were decorated with ribs. Unlike the Gothic rib vault, the Islamic ribs were purely decorative; they did not extend outside of the vault, and they were not part of the structure supporting the roof.\nThe military and cultural contacts with the medieval Islamic world, including the Norman conquest of Islamic Sicily in 1090, the Crusades (beginning 1096), and the Islamic presence in Spain, may have influenced Medieval Europe's adoption of the pointed arch. Another feature of Gothic architecture, a kind of rib vault, had also earlier appeared in Islamic architecture, and spread to Western Europe via Islamic Spain and Sicily. The early rib vaults in Spain were used to support cupolas, and were decorative. The dome of the Mosque-Cathedral of Cordoba was supported by pendentives, rather than the vault. These were frequently used in Romanesque and Byzantine architecture, as in the dome of Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, which also was supported by pendentives. The Gothic rib vault, among other features, such as the flying buttress, have their antecedents in Romanesque architecture, such as Durham Cathedral, constructed between 1093 and 1096.\nIn those parts of the Western Mediterranean subject to Islamic control or influence, rich regional variants arose, fusing Romanesque and later Gothic traditions with Islamic decorative forms. For example, in Monreale and Cefal\u00f9 Cathedrals, the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville, and Teruel Cathedral.\nArmenian influence.\nA number of scholars have cited the Armenian Cathedral of Ani, completed 1001 or 1010, as a possible influence on the Gothic, especially due to its use of pointed arches and cluster piers. However, other scholars such as Sirarpie Der Nersessian, who rejected this notion as she argued that the pointed arches did not serve the same function of supporting the vault. Lucy Der Manuelian contends that some Armenians (historically documented as being in Western Europe in the Middle Ages) could have brought the knowledge and technique employed at Ani to the west.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54045", "revid": "48761880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54045", "title": "Old Italic scripts", "text": "Family of writing systems in ancient Italy\nThe Old Italic scripts are a family of ancient writing systems used in the Italian Peninsula between about 700 and 100 BC, for various languages spoken in that time and place. The most notable member is the Etruscan alphabet, which was the immediate ancestor of the Latin alphabet used by more than 100 languages today, including English. The runic alphabets used in Northern Europe are believed to have been separately derived from one of these alphabets by the 2nd century AD.\nOrigins.\nThe Old Italic alphabets ultimately derive from the Phoenician alphabet, but the general consensus is that the Etruscan alphabet was imported from the Euboean Greek colonies of Cumae and Ischia (Pitheko\u016bsai) situated in the Gulf of Naples in the 8th century BC; this Euboean alphabet is also called 'Cumaean' (after Cumae), or 'Chalcidian' (after its metropolis Chalcis). The Cumaean hypothesis is supported by the 1957\u201358 excavations of Veii by the British School at Rome, which found pieces of Greek pottery indicating that contacts between the Etruscan city of Veii and the Greek colonies of Cumae and Ischia have existed ever since the second half of the 8th century. Other scholars posit a different hypothetical Western Greek alphabet that was even older than those attested to have given rise to the Etruscan letters. Whatever the case, the Etruscans added the \"c\", the \"q\" and the combination of \"vh\" or \"hv\" (for /f/) in order to spell sounds that did not exist in Ancient Greek. The development and usage of their own Greek-derived alphabet arguably marked the end of the Villanovan culture and ushered in the Etruscan Orientalising period.\nAs the Etruscans were the leading civilization of Italy in that period, it is widely accepted that they spread their alphabet across the peninsula, and the other Old Italic scripts were derived from theirs. Scholars provide three reasons: Etruscans and non-Etruscans had strong contacts in the 8th and 7th centuries, surviving inscriptions from other languages appear later (after the end of the 8th century) than the earliest Etruscan ones (first amongst the Umbrians, Faliscans, Latins, and Sabines to the south, in the 6th century also in the Po Valley and amongst the Cisalpine Celtic, Venetic and Raetic tribes), and the letters used in these texts are evidently based on the Etruscan version of the Western Greek alphabet. However, some of them, including the Latin alphabet, retained certain Greek letters that the Etruscans themselves dropped at a rather early stage.\nThe Old Italic alphabets were used for various different languages, which included some Indo-European ones (predominantly from the Italic branch, but also in Gaulish and probably in inscriptions interpreted as Proto-Germanic) and some non-Indo-European ones (such as Etruscan itself).\nAlphabets related to Etruscan.\nThe following table shows the ancient Italic scripts that are presumed to be related to the Etruscan alphabet. Symbols that are assumed to be correspondent are placed on the same column. Many symbols occur with two or more variant forms in the same script; only one variant is shown here. The notations [\u2190] and [\u2192] indicate that the shapes shown were used when writing right-to-left and left-to-right, respectively.\nWarning: For the languages marked [?] the appearance of the \"Letters\" in the table is whatever one's browser's Unicode font shows for the corresponding code points in the Old Italic Unicode block. The same code point represents different symbol shapes in different languages; therefore, to display those glyph images properly one needs to use a Unicode font specific to that language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMissing from the above table:\nEtruscan alphabet.\nVarious Indo-European languages belonging to the Italic branch (Faliscan and members of the Sabellian group, including Oscan, Umbrian, and South Picene, and other Indo-European branches such as Venetic) originally used the alphabet. Faliscan, Oscan, Umbrian, North Picene, and South Picene all derive from an Etruscan form of the alphabet.\nNucerian alphabet.\nThe \"Nucerian alphabet\" is based on inscriptions found in southern Italy (Nocera Superiore, Sorrento, Vico Equense and other places). It is attested only between the 6th and the 5th century BC.\nThe most important sign is the /S/, shaped like a fir tree, and possibly a derivation from the Phoenician alphabet.\nRhaetic alphabets.\nAttested in almost 400 inscriptions from mainly the Trentino and South Tyrol regions of Northern Italy, and North Tyrol (Austria) in two distinct alphabets: the alphabet of Sanzeno, and the alphabet of Magr\u00e8 (near Schio). It was used to write the Rhaetic language.\nVenetic alphabet.\nAlphabet of Este: Similar but not identical to that of Magr\u00e8, Venetic inscriptions.\nCamunic alphabet.\nInscribed abecedaria and other short inscriptions found on rock drawings in Valcamonica.\nLatin alphabet.\n21 of the 26 archaic Etruscan letters were adopted for Old Latin from the 7th century BC, either directly from the Cumae alphabet, or via archaic Etruscan forms, compared to the classical Etruscan alphabet retaining B, D, K, O, Q, X but dropping \u0398, \u039e, \u03fa, \u03a6, and \u03a8.\nSouth Picene alphabet.\nThe South Picene alphabet, known from the 6th century BC, is most like the southern Etruscan alphabet in that it uses \"Q\" for /k/ and \"K\" for /g/.\n\u27e8.\u27e9 is a reduced \u27e8o\u27e9 and \u27e8:\u27e9 is a reduced \u27e88\u27e9, used for .\nUnicode.\nThe Old Italic alphabets were unified and added to the Unicode Standard in March 2001 with the release of version 3.1. The Unicode block for Old Italic is U+10300\u2013U+1032F without specification of a particular alphabet (i.e. the Old Italic alphabets are considered equivalent, and the font used will determine the variant).\nWriting direction (right-to-left, left-to-right, or boustrophedon) varies based on the language and even the time period. For simplicity most scholars use left-to-right and this is the Unicode default direction for the Old Italic block. For this reason, the glyphs in the code chart are shown with left-to-right orientation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54046", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54046", "title": "Bramble fruit", "text": ""}
{"id": "54047", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54047", "title": "Rubus", "text": "Genus of plants in the rose family\nRubus is a large and diverse genus of flowering plants in the rose family, Rosaceae, subfamily Rosoideae, most commonly known as brambles. Fruits of various species are known as raspberries, blackberries, dewberries, and bristleberries. It is a diverse genus, with the estimated number of \"Rubus\" species varying from 250 to over 1000, found across all continents except Antarctica.\nMost of these plants have woody stems with prickles like roses; spines, bristles, and gland-tipped hairs are also common in the genus. The \"Rubus\" fruit, sometimes called a bramble fruit, is an aggregate of drupelets. The term \"cane fruit\" or \"cane berry\" applies to any \"Rubus\" species or hybrid which is commonly grown with supports such as wires or canes, including raspberries, blackberries, and hybrids such as loganberry, boysenberry, marionberry and tayberry. The stems of such plants are also referred to as \"canes\".\nDescription.\nBramble bushes typically grow as shrubs (though a few are herbaceous), with their stems being typically covered in sharp prickles. They grow long, arching shoots that readily root upon contact with soil, and form a soil rootstock from which new shoots grow in the spring. The leaves are either evergreen or deciduous, and simple, lobed, or compound. The shoots typically do not flower or set fruit until the second year of growth (i.e. they are biennial). The rootstock is perennial. Most species are hermaphrodites with male and female parts being present on the same flower. Bramble fruits are aggregate fruits formed from smaller units called drupelets.\nAround 60\u201370% of species of \"Rubus\" are polyploid (having more than two copies of each chromosome), with species ranging in ploidy from diploid (2\u00d7, with 14 chromosomes) to tetradecaploid (14\u00d7).\nTaxonomy.\nModern classification.\n\"Rubus\" is the only genus in the tribe Rubeae.\n\"Rubus\" is very complex, particularly within the blackberry/dewberry subgenus (\"Rubus\"), with polyploidy, hybridization, and facultative apomixis apparently all frequently occurring, making species classification of the great variation in the subgenus one of the grand challenges of systematic botany. In publications between 1910 and 1914, German botanist Wilhelm Olbers Focke attempted to organize the genus into 12 subgenera, a classification system that since became widely accepted, though modern genetic studies have found that many of these subgenera are not monophyletic.\nSome treatments have recognized dozens of species each for what other, comparably qualified botanists have considered single, more variable species. On the other hand, species in the other \"Rubus\" subgenera (such as the raspberries) are generally distinct, or else involved in more routine one-or-a-few taxonomic debates, such as whether the European and American red raspberries are better treated as one species or two (in this case, the two-species view is followed here, with \"R.\u00a0idaeus\" and \"R.\u00a0strigosus\" both recognized; if these species are combined, then the older name \"R.\u00a0idaeus\" has priority for the broader species).\nThe classification presented below recognizes 13 subgenera within \"Rubus\", with the largest subgenus (\"Rubus\") in turn divided into 12 sections. Representative examples are presented, but many more species are not mentioned here. A\u00a0comprehensive 2019 study found subgenera \"Orobatus\" and \"Anoplobatus\" to be monophyletic, while all other subgenera to be paraphyletic or polyphyletic.\nPhylogeny.\nThe genus has a likely North American origin, with fossils known from the Eocene-aged Florissant Formation of Colorado, around 34 million years old. \"Rubus\" expanded into Eurasia, South America, and Oceania during the Miocene. Fossil seeds from the early Miocene of \"Rubus\" have been found in the Czech part of the Zittau Basin. Many fossil fruits of \u2020\"Rubus laticostatus\", \u2020\"Rubus microspermus\" and \u2020\"Rubus semirotundatus\" have been extracted from bore hole samples of the Middle Miocene fresh water deposits in Nowy Sacz Basin, West Carpathians, Poland.\nMolecular data have backed up classifications based on geography and chromosome number, but following morphological data, such as the structure of the leaves and stems, do not appear to produce a phylogenetic classification.\nSpecies.\nBetter-known species of \"Rubus\" include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA more complete subdivision is as follows:\nHybrid berries.\nThe term \"hybrid berry\" is often used collectively for those fruits in the genus \"Rubus\" which have been developed mainly in the U.S. and U.K. in the last 130 years. As \"Rubus\" species readily interbreed and are apomicts (able to set seed without fertilisation), the parentage of these plants is often highly complex, but is generally agreed to include cultivars of blackberries (\"R.\u00a0ursinus\", \"R.\u00a0fruticosus\") and raspberries (\"R.\u00a0idaeus\"). The British National Collection of \"Rubus\" stands at over 200 species and, although not within the scope of the National Collection, also hold many cultivars.\nThe hybrid berries include:-\nEtymology.\nThe generic name means blackberry in Latin and was derived from the word \"ruber\", meaning \"red\".\nThe blackberries, as well as various other \"Rubus\" species with mounding or rambling growth habits, are often called brambles. However, this name is not used for those like the raspberry that grow as upright canes, or for trailing or prostrate species, such as most dewberries, or various low-growing boreal, arctic, or alpine species. The scientific study of brambles is known as \"batology\".\n\"Bramble\" comes from Old English \"br\u00e6mbel\", a variant of \"br\u00e6mel\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54048", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54048", "title": "Steppe", "text": "Ecoregion of plain grasslands without trees\nIn physical geography, a steppe () is an ecoregion characterized by grassland plains without closed forests except near rivers and lakes.\nSteppe biomes may include:\nA steppe is usually covered with grass and shrubs, depending on the season and latitude. The term \"steppe climate\" denotes a semi-arid climate, which is encountered in regions too dry to support a forest, but not dry enough to be a desert.\nSteppes are usually characterized by a semi-arid or continental climate. Temperature extremes can be recorded in the summer of up to and in winter of down to . Besides this major seasonal difference, fluctuations between day and night are also significant: in both the highlands of Mongolia and northern Nevada, can be reached during the day with sub-freezing readings at night.\nSteppes average of annual precipitation and feature hot summers and cold winters when located in mid-latitudes. In addition to the precipitation level, its combination with potential evapotranspiration defines a steppe climate.\nClassification.\nSteppe can be classified by climate: \nIt can also be classified by vegetation type, e.g. shrub-steppe and alpine-steppe.\nCold steppe.\nThe world's largest steppe region, often referred to as \"the Great Steppe\", is found in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, and neighbouring countries stretching from Ukraine in the west through Russia, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan to the Altai, Koppet Dag and Tian Shan ranges in China. The Eurasian Steppe had a significant role in the spread of the horse, the wheel and Indo-European languages. In the Eurasian steppe, soils often consist of chernozem.\nThe inner parts of Anatolia in Turkey, Central Anatolia and East Anatolia in particular and also some parts of Southeast Anatolia, as well as much of Armenia and Iran are largely dominated by cold steppe.\nThe Pannonian Plain is another steppe region in Central Europe, centered in Hungary but also including portions of Slovakia, Poland, Ukraine, Romania, Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, and Austria. Another large steppe area (prairie) is located in the central United States, western Canada and the northern part of Mexico. The shortgrass prairie steppe is the westernmost part of the Great Plains region. The Columbia Plateau in southern British Columbia, Oregon, Idaho, and Washington state, is an example of a steppe region in North America outside of the Great Plains.\nIn South America, cold steppe can be found in Patagonia and much of the high elevation regions east of the southern Andes.\nRelatively small steppe areas can be found in the interior of the South Island of New Zealand.\nIn Australia, a moderately sized temperate steppe region exists in the northern and northwest regions of Victoria, extending to the southern and mid regions of New South Wales. This area borders the semi-arid and arid Australian Outback which is found farther inland on the continent.\nSubtropical steppe.\nIn Europe, some Mediterranean areas have a steppe-like vegetation, such as central Sicily in Italy, southern Portugal, parts of Greece in the southern Athens area, and central-eastern Spain, especially the southeastern coast (around Murcia), and places cut off from adequate moisture due to rain shadow effects such as Zaragoza.\nIn northern Africa, the Mediterranean area also hosts the same steppe-like vegetation, such as the Algerian-Moroccan Hautes Plaines and by extension the North Saharan steppe and woodlands.\nIn Asia, a subtropical steppe can be found in semi-arid lands that fringe the Thar Desert of the Indian subcontinent as well as much of the Deccan Plateau in the rain shadow of the Western Ghats, and the Badia of the Levant.\nIn Australia, subtropical steppe can be found in a belt surrounding the most severe deserts of the continent and around the Musgrave Ranges.\nIn North America this environment is typical of transition areas between zones with a Mediterranean climate and true deserts, such as Reno, Nevada, the inner part of California, and much of western Texas and adjacent areas in Mexico.\nHuman impact.\nHumans have severe impacts on their environments. Among many examples the following two give only an impression.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54049", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54049", "title": "Steppes", "text": ""}
{"id": "54050", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54050", "title": "Typographic unit", "text": "Units of measurement\nTypographic units are the units of measurement used in typography or typesetting. Traditional typometry units are different from familiar metric units because they were established in the early days of printing. Though most printing is digital now, the old terms and units have persisted.\nEven though these units are all very small, across a line of print they add up quickly. Confusions such as resetting text originally in type of one unit in type of another will result in words moving from one line to the next, resulting in all sorts of typesetting errors (viz. rivers, widows and orphans, disrupted tables, and misplaced captions). Before the popularization of desktop publishing, type measurements were done with a tool called a typometer.\nDevelopment.\nIn Europe, the Didot point system was created by Fran\u00e7ois-Ambroise Didot (1730\u20131804) in c. 1783. Didot's system was based on Pierre Simon Fournier's (1712\u20131768), but Didot modified Fournier's by adjusting the base unit precisely to a French Royal inch (\"pouce\"), as Fournier's unit was based on a less common foot.\nHowever, the basic idea of the point system \u2013 to generate different type sizes by multiplying a single minimum unit calculated by dividing a base measurement unit such as one French Royal inch \u2013 was not Didot's invention, but Fournier's. In Fournier's system, an approximate French Royal inch (\"pouce\") is divided by 12 to calculate 1 \"ligne\", which is then divided by 6 to get 1 point. Didot just made the base unit (one French Royal inch) identical to the standard value defined by the government.\n\"In Didot's point system:\"\nBoth in Didot's and Fournier's systems, some point sizes have traditional names such as \"Cicero\" (before introduction of point systems, type sizes were called by names such as \"Cicero\", \"Pica\", \"Ruby\", \"Great Primer\", etc.).\nThe Didot point system has been widely used in European countries. An abbreviation for it that these countries use is \"dd\", employing an old method for indicating plurals. Hence \"12\u00a0dd\" means twelve didot points.\nIn Britain and the United States, many proposals for type size standardization had been made by the end of 19th century (such as Bruce Typefoundry's mathematical system that was based on a precise geometric progression). However, no nationwide standard was created until the American Point System was decided in 1886.\nThe American Point System was proposed by Nelson C. Hawks of Marder Luse &amp; Company in Chicago in the 1870s, and his point system used the same method of size division as Fournier's; viz. dividing 1\u00a0inch by 6 to get 1 pica, and dividing it again by 12 to get 1 point. However, the American Point System standardized finally in 1886 is different from Hawks' original idea in that 1 pica is not precisely equal to 1\u20446 inch (neither the Imperial inch nor the US inch), as the United States Type Founders' Association defined the standard pica to be the Johnson Pica, which had been adopted and used by Mackellar, Smiths and Jordan type foundry (MS&amp;J), Philadelphia. As MS&amp;J was very influential in those days, many other type foundries were using the Johnson Pica. Also, MS&amp;J defined that 83 Picas are equal to 35 centimeters. The choice of the metric unit for the prototype was because at the time the Imperial and US inches differed in size slightly, and neither country could legally specify a unit of the other.\nThe Johnson Pica was named after Lawrence Johnson who had succeeded Binny &amp; Ronaldson in 1833. Binny &amp; Ronaldson was one of the oldest type foundries in the United States, established in Philadelphia in 1796. Binny &amp; Ronaldson had bought the type founding equipment of Benjamin Franklin's (1706\u20131790) type foundry established in 1786 and run by his grandson Benjamin Franklin Bache (1769\u20131798). The equipment is thought to be that which Benjamin Franklin purchased from Pierre Simon Fournier when he visited France for diplomatic purposes (1776\u201385).\nThe official standard approved by the Fifteenth Meeting of the Type Founders Association of the United States in 1886 was this Johnson pica, equal to exactly 0.166\u00a0inch. Therefore, the two other \u2013 very close \u2013 definitions, 1200\u00a0/\u00a07227\u00a0inch and 350\u00a0/\u00a083\u00a0mm, are both unofficial.\nMonotype wedges used in England and America were based on a pica = .1660\u00a0inch. But on the European continent all available wedges were based on the \"old-pica\" 1 pica - .1667\u00a0inch. These wedges were marked with an extra E behind the numbers of the wedge and the set. These differences can also be found in the tables of the manuals.\n\"In the American point system:\"\nThe American point system has been used in the US, Britain, Japan, and many other countries.\nToday, digital printing and display devices and page layout software use a unit that is different from these traditional typographic units. On many digital printing systems (desktop publishing systems in particular), the following equations are applicable (with exceptions, most notably the popular TeX typesetting system and its derivatives&lt;ref name=LaTeX/Length&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;).\nDigital displays and printing led to the use an additional unit:\nFournier's original method of division is now restored in today's digital typography.\nComparing a piece of type in didots for Continental European countries \u2013 12\u00a0dd, for example \u2013 to a piece of type for an English-speaking country \u2013 12\u00a0pt \u2013 shows that the main body of a character is actually about the same size. The difference is that the languages of the former often need extra space atop the capital letters for accent marks (e.g. \u00d1, \u00c2, \u00d6, \u00c9), but English rarely needs this.\nMetric units.\nThe traditional typographic units are based either on non-metric units, or on odd multiples (such as 35\u204483) of a metric unit. There are no specifically metric units for this particular purpose, although there is a DIN standard sometimes used in German publishing, which measures type sizes in multiples of 0.25\u00a0mm, and proponents of the metrication of typography generally recommend the use of the millimetre for typographical measurements, rather than the development of new specifically typographical metric units. The Japanese already do this for their own characters (using the \"kyu\", which is \"q\" in romanized Japanese and is also 0.25\u00a0mm), and have metric-sized type for European languages as well. One advantage of the q is that it reintroduces the proportional integer division of 3\u00a0mm (12\u00a0q) by 6 &amp; 4.\nDuring the age of the French Revolution or Napoleonic Empire, the French established a typographic unit of 0.4\u00a0mm, but except for the government's print shops, this did not catch on.\nIn 1973, the \"didot\" was restandardized in the EU as 0.375 (= 3\u20448)\u00a0mm. Care must be taken because the name of the unit is often left unmodified. The Germans, however, use the terms Fournier-Punkt and Didot-Punkt for the earlier ones, and Typografischer Punkt for this metric one. The TeX typesetting system uses the abbreviation dd for the earlier definition, and nd for the metric \"new didot\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54053", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54053", "title": "Wank (mountain)", "text": "Mountain in Loisach valley, Germany\nThe Wank () is a mountain in southern Germany, situated in the Loisach valley close to the Austrian border in the southwestern Ester Mountains range near Garmisch-Partenkirchen. It rises from about above mean sea level up to at the summit. The mountain is crowned by a grassy summit which has views over Garmisch-Partenkirchen and the surrounding region. The summit can be reached via the eponymous Wankbahn, a cable car system that runs during the summer months, or by a network of footpaths that criss-cross the area. A mountain hut on the summit, the Wank-Haus, provides food and accommodation, and a nearby scientific observatory plays a role in monitoring atmospheric and climatic conditions. The Wank is a destination for hikers, day-trippers from Garmisch-Partenkirchen and paragliders. \nPhysical characteristics.\nThe mountain's geology, which is dominated by calcareous rocks, is typical of the Bavarian Alps. Its climate is also typical of the region. Precipitation is high, ranging from about at valley level to at the summit. It peaks in the summer and is lowest in winter. The Wank's mean annual air temperature ranges from in the valley to at the summit. The prevailing wind comes from a westerly direction but for about 30 to 40 days a year the mountain experiences a warm, dry f\u00f6hn wind. A local wind system also operates in the area giving a daily uphill/downhill circulation. Inversion layers occur for about 30 days per year, predominantly in the autumn and winter.\nThe Wank was originally covered by a forest consisting of a mix of spruce, fir and beech trees. A process of man-made deforestation that began in the Roman period, when the trees were cut down and the mountain's slopes were grazed by horses, sheep, goats and cattle, resulted in much of the forest being destroyed by the 15th century. Forestry in the area was taken over by the Bavarian government in 1803 but the former forest cover did not regenerate due in part to the continued use of forest lands as pasture, storms and browsing by game animals. As a result, the current Wank forest is predominantly spruce (about 75%) and pine (15%). Forestry programmes are currently underway to improve the arboreal diversity of the mountain.\nWankbahn.\nThe Wank is linked to Garmisch-Partenkirchen by a cable car system called the Wankbahn, which usually operates between May and September during daylight hours. Construction began in 1928 under the auspices of the Wank-Bahn AG and the cable car entered service in 1929. It is long and rises from above sea level. The system has been upgraded several times since its opening. In 1960 its passenger capacity was increased from 125 to 210 persons per hour. A new Wankbahn was built in 1982, opening on 18 December, which increased the system's capacity to 1,000 persons per hour. Two 300\u00a0kW DC motors were installed to drive the cable.\nThe current Wankbahn is built in two sections, measuring long respectively, with a maximum height of above the ground. The Wankbahn's 135 cabins each have a capacity of four people. They take approximately 18 minutes at a speed of to reach the summit station. A \"Wankpass\" permits year-round access to the cable car.\nSummit.\nThe grassy summit of the Wank is topped by a cross, set up in July 1904 by the Werdenfelser Heimat Partenkirchen society. Nearby is an observatory and the Wank-Haus, also known as the Alois Huber Haus, a mountain hut that provides food and accommodation to visitors. The Wank-Haus was built by the local branch of the German Alpine Association (DAV) in 1911. Its construction was originally proposed in 1894 and was approved by the Bavarian Forest Service in 1903. It was designed by the Partenkirchen DAV's Treasurer, Alois Huber, and work began in July 1910. It was opened on 28 May 1911 and was renamed after Huber following his death in 1922. It has since been renovated and upgraded on several occasions, most recently in 2006.\nThe summit is known for its views across the region, which provide views of Garmisch-Partenkirchen and a panorama of the Zugspitze and the Wetterstein mountain range. Patrons of Garmisch's spas sometimes take-in the sunshine at the summit as part of their \"Liegekur\" (\"deckchair cure\").\nSummit observatory.\nThe summit observatory, which is located at an altitude of , is an important scientific measuring station operated by the Institute for Meteorology and Climate Research of Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. Since 1972 it has measured a variety of atmospheric and climatic phenomena, including the levels of ozone, nitric oxide, sulphur dioxide and various hydrocarbons in the atmosphere as well as meteorological data such as the levels of temperature, dew point, relative humidity, pressure, wind, global and direct irradiance. It became part of the World Meteorological Organization's Background Air Pollution Monitoring Network in 1982. Supplementary meteorological stations have also been established at middle elevation ( above sea level) and in the valley at . This has enabled scientists to measure a range of natural phenomena including the transport of air pollutants in the region and a marked decline since 1990 in the amount of atmospheric mercury pollution, an effect which has been attributed to the post-1989 closure of polluting factories in the former Eastern Bloc states.\nParagliding.\nThe mountain is a popular destination for enthusiasts of paragliding who take off from the summit plateau to fly south into the Garmisch-Partenkirchen valley or to peaks in the Wettersteingebirge. The mountain's thermals make it popular, as they enable paragliders to make long flights when the weather conditions are right.\nHumour.\nThe term \"wank\" is British slang for masturbation; this has made the mountain, and particularly the \"Wank-Haus\" restaurant and \"Wankpass\", a frequent target of humour among British people. Signage theft has also been linked to tourists amused by the name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54054", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54054", "title": "Neo-Nazi", "text": ""}
{"id": "54056", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54056", "title": "Rolemaster", "text": "Tabletop role-playing game\nRolemaster (originally Role Master) is a fantasy tabletop role-playing game published by Iron Crown Enterprises in 1980. The game system has undergone several revisions and editions since then.\nDescription.\n\"Rolemaster\" is a fantasy role-playing game system that has been characterized as highly complex, with a large number of charts and tables to be consulted for every action.\nCharacter creation and development.\n\"Rolemaster\" characters have ten attributes such as physical strength, memory, self-discipline, and agility with scores between 1 and 100. These scores can be determined either through a point-buy system or randomly. Each attribute is then used to relevant skill bonuses.\nSkills are purchased in Ranks; the more ranks a character has in a skill, the more able they are at actions covered by that skill.\nTask resolution.\nWhen a player wishes to attempt an action, the player rolls percentile dice, applies relevant modifiers, and looks the result up on the appropriate chart to determine the result. \nCombat.\nAn attacking combatant rolls percentile dice, adds their Offensive Bonus to the total, adds modifiers, and subtracts the defender's Defensive Bonus. The total is then applied to a table for the attacker's weapon. The attack total is cross-indexed with the type of armor (if any) worn by the defender and the result will be a number of concussion hits dealt, which are then subtracted from the defender's running total. If sufficient hits are dealt, the defender may become unconscious.\nIn addition to concussion hits, some dice rolls will result in a critical hit, which can vary in type and severity. The system of tables details what part of the body has been damaged, describing, as one reviewer noted, \"various horrific wounds in graphic detail.\"\nPublication history.\n\"Rolemaster\" has a total of five editions.\nFirst edition (RM1): 1980\u20131982.\nThis edition includes five books: \"Arms Law\", \"Claw Law\", \"Spell Law\", \"Character Law\" and \"Campaign Law\". These were available initially as individual books, and later as combined volumes and in boxed sets.\nSecond edition (RM2): 1984\u20131994.\nIn 1984, an initial boxed set was issued containing both expanded and revised rules. The box included \"Spell Law\", and a combined \"Arms Law &amp; Claw Law\", \"Character Law\", as well as the Vog Mur campaign module for the Loremaster setting.\nShortly after the first box, a new boxed set was released, containing all of the previous contents as well as \"The Cloudlords of Tanara\", a detailed setting and adventure supplement. The supplement introduced ICE's original Loremaster setting, which would later develop into the more sophisticated \"Shadow World\".\nSeveral additional supplementary books were published individually for the second edition, including three \"Creatures &amp; Treasures\" books, and many companion books that expanded the core rules.\nRolemaster Standard System: 1994.\nIn 1994 the game was revised and re-released as \"Rolemaster Standard System\" (RMSS). The biggest changes were to character generation, particularly in the number of skills available and the method for calculating bonuses for skills. \nMany supplementary rulebooks and accessories were subsequently published.\nRolemaster Fantasy Role Playing: 1999.\nIn 1999 the game underwent a slight restructuring when \"Rolemaster Fantasy Role Playing\" (RMFRP) was released, but this was mostly a rearranging of material with very few changes to the rules themselves.\nThe older single-volume \"Spell Law\" was divided into three separate books, \"Of Essence\", \"Of Channelling\" and \"Of Mentalism\", each of which expands that realm of power with additional professions and spell lists.\nRolemaster Unified: 2022.\nRolemaster Unified is a new edition based on a number of revisions from RMSS/RMFRP editions.\nVariant systems.\nIron Crown Enterprises (ICE) went defunct in 2000, and in 2001, they sold the intellectual rights to \"Rolemaster\" to the London-based company Aurigas Aldebaron, while the ICE brand name was licensed to a U.S.-based company named Mjolnir LLC. In 2016, the licensing went to Guild Companion Publications, with whom Aurigas Aldebaron merged. From 2017, the merger changed its name to Iron Crown Enterprises, effectively returning to its original, well-known publisher name.\nThroughout the various ownership and publisher name changes, \"Rolemaster\" remained sufficiently popular that the original books eventually sold out and went out of print. This led to several reprints by the new owners and publishers, resulting in three variants of the original \"Rolemaster\" game system.\nIn 1995, the boxed set Rolemaster: The Basics was issued as a simplified version of the \"Rolemaster Standard System\". The box contains rulebooks with all rules necessary for playing this simplified variant of the game.\nIn 2007, the second edition (RM2) rules system was revitalized and issued under the name Rolemaster Classic, or RMC for short. The revitalization was published by Guild Companion Publications and included new versions of all the old core rulebooks of \"Arms Law\", \"Spell Law\", \"Character Law\", and \"Creatures and Treasures\", but also an updated \"Rolemaster Companion\" and a new \"Combat Companion\" from 2008.\nAlso in 2007, Rolemaster Express, or RMX for short, was issued by Guild Companion Publications. It is a simplified version of the \"Rolemaster Classic System\", with all necessary rules combined into a single book.\nReception.\nRonald Pehr reviewed \"Rolemaster\" for \"Fantasy Gamer\" magazine and stated that \"As an experienced gamer, I admire \"Rolemaster\", appreciate the work that went into it, and could learn to enjoy playing it more often. If you've got a campaign world and want a fascinating set of rules to bring that world to life, \"Rolemaster\" is going to appeal to you. If you're not currently involved in fantasy role-playing \u2014 and don't have a lot of money to spend on it \u2014 \"Rolemaster\" is not for you.\"\nIn the August 1984 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue #88), Arlen Walker queried whether the hefty $48 price tag for the second edition boxed set was worth the money, and provided a long and in-depth examination of the box's contents. Walker had quibbles over the combat system, which seemed to generalize rather than individualize weapons; and he felt the book on animal encounters had very little information about the actual animals. Walker concluded, \"Is the \"Rolemaster\" system worth the $48, then? The answer is a resounding 'maybe.' If you want a freer, more open game than you are currently playing, I\u2019d say it is probably worth it. Even with the inconsistencies noted it still allows more freedom of choice than almost any other game. Although the physical size of the game is rather imposing, the actual mechanics run rather smoothly and simply.\"\nWalker also reviewed the separately published books \"Character Law\", \"Campaign Law\", \"Spell Law\", \"Claw Law\" and \"Arms Law\". \nTroy Christensen reviewed \"Rolemaster\" for \"Different Worlds\" magazine and stated that \"I found ICE's game lacking the special magic which distinguishes a good game from the bad. I found it just to be another high-priced game with tiring, overused rules. I cannot recommend this game to any serious role-player, I can suggest that it might be worth your while to purchase 'Spell Law' if you are interested in gaining new spells for your present role-playing game.\"\nRick Swan reviewed various editions of the game system:\nIn a 1996 reader poll conducted by UK games magazine \"Arcane\" to determine the 50 best roleplaying systems, \"Rolemaster\" was ranked 15th. \"Arcane\" editor Paul Pettengale commented: \"Often used as an archetypal example of a complex roleplaying system, \"Rolemaster\" is a fairly numbers-heavy game that also relies on the use of a lot of tables. Most notable are its notorious 'critical hit' charts, which are subdivided by damage type and describe various horrific wounds in graphic detail. If you're looking for a highly detailed and fairly complex system, \"Rolemaster\" has a great deal to recommend it. The rules are fairly well organised and very flexible, easily adaptable to a wide variety of situations. On the other hand, if you're not one for tables and calculations, it's probably not going to ring your bell.\"\nScott Taylor for \"Black Gate\" in 2013 rated \"Rolemaster\" as #6 in the top ten role-playing games of all time, saying \"Also attributed to the frame of the \"Middle-Earth Role-Playing Game\", which was the 2nd most popular fantasy RPG of the 1980s, I.C.E.'s \"Rolemaster\" must certainly make a showing as something of a heavyweight in the industry, even if it no longer exists as an entity\".\nPublications.\nThese are some of the many publications connected with the four editions of the \"Rolemaster\" game.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u00a0\u00a0Loremaster\n\u00a0\u00a0Shadow World\n\u00a0\u00a0Genre Supplements\n\u00a0\u00a0Shadow World\n\u00a0\u00a0Generic\n\u00a0\u00a0Shadow World\n\u00a0\u00a0Aernth\n\u00a0\u00a0The Echoes of Heaven\nSupplementary publications.\nSeveral publications and magazines with supplementary game material has been issued under the ICE brand over the years.\nFor the Rolemaster Standard System, \"Rolemaster Annual 1996\" and \"Rolemaster Annual 1997\" included new additional rules for that game system, including new professions, races, spelllists, and errata.\nFor the Rolemaster Fantasy Role Playing system, Guild Companion Publications (GCP) issued \"Rolemaster Quarterly\" from April 2006 to August 2007. The magazine was dedicated to presenting optional rules and play material, and a total of seven magazines were published.\nSeveral Electronic Roleplaying Assistants (ERAs) have been issued for use with the RMC, RMSS and RMFRP systems since 2005. They are computer applications, developed for use with Windows, Mac OSX and Linux, helping players and game masters running the game digitally, including character creation and management."}
{"id": "54057", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54057", "title": "IS\u2013LM model", "text": "Macroeconomic model relating interest rates and output\nThe IS\u2013LM model, or Hicks\u2013Hansen model, is a two-dimensional macroeconomic model which is used as a pedagogical tool in macroeconomic teaching. The IS\u2013LM model shows the relationship between interest rates and output in the short run. The intersection of the \"investment\u2013saving\" (IS) and \"liquidity preference\u2013money supply\" (LM) curves illustrates a \"general equilibrium\" where supposed simultaneous equilibria occur in both the goods and the money markets. The IS\u2013LM model shows the importance of various demand shocks (including the effects of monetary policy and fiscal policy) on output and consequently offers an explanation of changes in national income in the short run when prices are fixed or sticky. Hence, the model can be used as a tool to suggest potential levels for appropriate stabilisation policies. It is also used as a building block for the demand side of the economy in more comprehensive models like the AD\u2013AS model.\nThe model was developed by John Hicks in 1937 and was later extended by Alvin Hansen as a mathematical representation of Keynesian macroeconomic theory. Between the 1940s and mid-1970s, it was the leading framework of macroeconomic analysis. Today, it is generally accepted as being imperfect and is largely absent from teaching at advanced economic levels and from macroeconomic research, but it is still an important pedagogical introductory tool in most undergraduate macroeconomics textbooks. \nAs monetary policy since the 1980s and 1990s generally does not try to target money supply as assumed in the original IS\u2013LM model, but instead targets interest rate levels directly, some modern versions of the model have changed the interpretation (and in some cases even the name) of the LM curve, presenting it instead simply as a horizontal line showing the central bank's choice of interest rate. This allows for a simpler dynamic adjustment and supposedly reflects the behaviour of actual contemporary central banks more closely.\nHistory.\nThe IS\u2013LM model was introduced at a conference of the Econometric Society held in Oxford during September 1936. Roy Harrod, John R. Hicks, and James Meade all presented papers\ndescribing mathematical models attempting to summarize John Maynard Keynes' \"General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money\". Hicks, who had seen a draft of Harrod's paper, invented the IS\u2013LM model (originally using the abbreviation \"LL\", not \"LM\"). He later presented it in\n\"Mr. Keynes and the Classics: A Suggested Interpretation\". Hicks and Alvin Hansen developed the model further in the 1930s and early 1940s, Hansen extending the earlier contribution.\nThe model became a central tool of macroeconomic teaching for many decades. Between the 1940s and mid-1970s, it was the leading framework of macroeconomic analysis. It was particularly suited to illustrate the debate of the 1960s and 1970s between Keynesians and monetarists as to whether fiscal or monetary policy was most effective to stabilize the economy. Later, this issue faded from focus and came to play only a modest role in discussions of short-run fluctuations. \nThe IS-LM model assumes a fixed price level and consequently cannot in itself be used to analyze inflation. This was of little importance in the 1950s and early 1960s when inflation was not an important issue, but became problematic with the rising inflation levels in the late 1960s and 1970s, which led to extensions of the model to also incorporate aggregate supply in some form, e.g. in the form of the AD\u2013AS model, which can be regarded as an IS-LM model with an added supply side explaining rises in the price level.\nOne of the basic assumptions of the IS-LM model is that the central bank targets the money supply. However, a fundamental rethinking in central bank policy took place from the early 1990s when central banks generally changed strategies towards targeting inflation rather than money growth and using an interest rate rule to achieve their goal. As central banks started paying little attention to the money supply when deciding on their policy, this model feature became increasingly unrealistic and sometimes confusing to students. David Romer in 2000 suggested replacing the traditional IS-LM framework with an IS-MP model, replacing the positively sloped LM curve with a horizontal MP curve (where MP stands for \"monetary policy\"). He advocated that it had several advantages compared to the traditional IS-LM model. John B. Taylor independently made a similar recommendation in the same year. After 2000, this has led to various modifications to the model in many textbooks, replacing the traditional LM curve and story of the central bank influencing the interest rate level indirectly via controlling the supply of money in the money market to a more realistic one of the central bank determining the policy interest rate as an exogenous variable directly.\nToday, the IS-LM model is largely absent from macroeconomic research, but it is still a backbone conceptual introductory tool in many macroeconomics textbooks. \nFormation.\nThe point where the IS and LM schedules intersect represents a short-run equilibrium in the real and monetary sectors (though not necessarily in other sectors, such as labor markets): both the product market and the money market are in equilibrium. This equilibrium yields a unique combination of the interest rate and real GDP.\nIS (investment\u2013saving) curve.\nThe IS curve shows the causation from interest rates to planned investment to national income and output.\nFor the investment\u2013saving curve, the independent variable is the interest rate and the dependent variable is the level of income. The IS curve is drawn as downward-sloping with the interest rate \"r\" on the vertical axis and GDP (gross domestic product: \"Y\") on the horizontal axis. The IS curve represents the locus where total spending (consumer spending + planned private investment + government purchases + net exports) equals total output (real income, \"Y\", or GDP).\nThe IS curve also represents the equilibria where total private investment equals total saving, with saving equal to consumer saving \"plus\" government saving (the budget surplus) \"plus\" foreign saving (the trade surplus). The level of real GDP (Y) is determined along this line for each interest rate. Every level of the real interest rate will generate a certain level of investment and spending: lower interest rates encourage higher investment and more spending. The multiplier effect of an increase in fixed investment resulting from a lower interest rate raises real GDP. This explains the downward slope of the IS curve. In summary, the IS curve shows the causation from interest rates to planned fixed investment to rising national income and output.\nThe IS curve is defined by the equation\nformula_1\nwhere \"Y\" represents income, formula_2 represents consumer spending increasing as a function of disposable income (income, \"Y\", minus taxes, \"T\"(\"Y\"), which themselves depend positively on income), formula_3 represents business investment decreasing as a function of the real interest rate, \"G\" represents government spending, and \"NX\"(\"Y\") represents net exports (exports minus imports) decreasing as a function of income (decreasing because imports are an increasing function of income).\nLM (liquidity-money) curve.\nThe LM curve shows the combinations of interest rates and levels of real income for which the money market is in equilibrium. It shows where money demand equals money supply. For the LM curve, the independent variable is income and the dependent variable is the interest rate.\nIn the money market equilibrium diagram, the liquidity preference function is the willingness to hold cash. The liquidity preference function is downward sloping (i.e. the willingness to hold cash increases as the interest rate decreases). Two basic elements determine the quantity of cash balances demanded:\nMoney supply is determined by central bank decisions and willingness of commercial banks to loan money. Money supply in effect is perfectly inelastic with respect to nominal interest rates. Thus the money supply function is represented as a vertical line \u2013 money supply is a constant, independent of the interest rate, GDP, and other factors. Mathematically, the LM curve is defined by the equation formula_4, where the supply of money is represented as the real amount \"M\"/\"P\" (as opposed to the nominal amount \"M\"), with \"P\" representing the price level, and \"L\" being the real demand for money, which is some function of the interest rate and the level of real income.\nAn increase in GDP shifts the liquidity preference function rightward and hence increases the interest rate. Thus the LM function is positively sloped.\nShifts.\nOne hypothesis is that a government's deficit spending (\"fiscal policy\") has an effect similar to that of a lower saving rate or increased private fixed investment, increasing the amount of demand for goods at each individual interest rate. An increased deficit by the national government shifts the IS curve to the right. This raises the equilibrium interest rate (from i1 to i2) and national income (from Y1 to Y2), as shown in the graph above. The equilibrium level of national income in the IS\u2013LM diagram is referred to as aggregate demand.\nKeynesians argue spending may actually \"crowd in\" (encourage) private fixed investment via the accelerator effect, which helps long-term growth. Further, if government deficits are spent on productive public investment (e.g., infrastructure or public health) that spending directly and eventually raises potential output, although not necessarily more (or less) than the lost private investment might have. The extent of any crowding out depends on the shape of the LM curve. A shift in the IS curve along a relatively flat LM curve can increase output substantially with little change in the interest rate. On the other hand, a rightward shift in the IS curve along a vertical LM curve will lead to higher interest rates, but no change in output (this case represents the \"Treasury view\").\nRightward shifts of the IS curve also result from exogenous increases in investment spending (i.e., for reasons other than interest rates or income), in consumer spending, and in export spending by people outside the economy being modelled, as well as by exogenous decreases in spending on imports. Thus these too raise both equilibrium income and the equilibrium interest rate. Of course, changes in these variables in the opposite direction shift the IS curve in the opposite direction.\nThe IS\u2013LM model also allows for the role of monetary policy. If the money supply is increased, that shifts the LM curve downward or to the right, lowering interest rates and raising equilibrium national income. Further, exogenous decreases in liquidity preference, perhaps due to improved transactions technologies, lead to downward shifts of the LM curve and thus increases in income and decreases in interest rates. Changes in these variables in the opposite direction shift the LM curve in the opposite direction.\nIS\u2013LM model with interest targeting central bank.\nThe fact that contemporary central banks normally do not target the money supply, as assumed by the original IS\u2013LM model, but instead conduct their monetary policy by steering the interest rate directly, has led to increasing criticism of the traditional IS\u2013LM setup since 2000 for being outdated and confusing to students. In some textbooks, the traditional LM curve derived from an explicit money market equilibrium story consequently has been replaced by an LM curve simply showing the interest rate level determined by the central bank. Notably this is the case in Olivier Blanchard's widely-used intermediate-level textbook \"Macroeconomics\" since its 7th edition in 2017.\nIn this case, the LM curve becomes horizontal at the interest rate level chosen by the central bank, allowing a simpler kind of dynamics. Also, the interest rate level measured along the vertical axis may be interpreted as either the nominal or the real interest rate, in the latter case allowing inflation to enter the IS\u2013LM model in a simple way. The output level is still determined by the intersection of the IS and LM curves. The LM curve may shift because of a change in monetary policy or possibly a change in inflation expectations, whereas the IS curve as in the traditional model may shift either because of a change in fiscal policy affecting government consumption or taxation, or because of shocks affecting private consumption or investment (or, in the open-economy version, net exports). Additionally, the model distinguishes between the policy interest rate determined by the central bank and the market interest rate which is decisive for firms' investment decisions, and which is equal to the policy interest rate plus a premium which may be interpreted as a risk premium or a measure of the market power or other factors influencing the business strategies of commercial banks. This premium allows for shocks in the financial sector being transmitted to the goods market and consequently affecting aggregate demand.\nSimilar models, though called slightly different names, appear in the textbooks by Charles Jones and by Wendy Carlin and David Soskice and the CORE Econ project. Parallelly, texts by Akira Weerapana and Stephen Williamson have outlined approaches where the LM curve is replaced with a real interest rate rule.\nIncorporation into larger models.\nBy itself, the traditional IS\u2013LM model is used to study the short run when prices are fixed or sticky, and no inflation is taken into consideration. In addition, the model is often used as a sub-model of larger models which allow for a flexible price level. The addition of a supply relation enables the model to be used for both short- and medium-run analysis of the economy, or to use a different terminology: classical and Keynesian analysis.\nA main example of this is the Aggregate Demand-Aggregate Supply model \u2013 the AD\u2013AS model. In the aggregate demand-aggregate supply model, each point on the aggregate demand curve is an outcome of the IS\u2013LM model for aggregate demand Y based on a particular price level. Starting from one point on the aggregate demand curve, at a particular price level and a quantity of aggregate demand implied by the IS\u2013LM model for that price level, if one considers a higher potential price level, in the IS\u2013LM model the real money supply M/P will be lower and hence the LM curve will be shifted higher, leading to lower aggregate demand as measured by the horizontal location of the IS\u2013LM intersection; hence at the higher price level the level of aggregate demand is lower, so the aggregate demand curve is negatively sloped.\nIn the 2018 textbook \"Macroeconomics\" by Daron Acemoglu, David Laibson and John A. List, the corresponding model combining a traditional IS-LM setup with a relation for a changing price level is named an IS-LM-FE model (FE standing for \"full equilibrium\").\nAD-AS-like models with inflation instead of price levels.\nIn many modern textbooks, the traditional AD\u2013AS diagram is replaced by a variation in which the variables are not output and the price level, but instead output and inflation (i.e., the change in the price level). In this case, the relation corresponding to the AS curve is normally derived from a Phillips curve relationship between inflation and the unemployment gap. As policymakers and economists are generally concerned about inflation levels and not actual price levels, this formulation is considered more appropriate. This variation is often referred to as a dynamic AD\u2013AS model, but may also have other names. Olivier Blanchard in his textbook uses the term IS\u2013LM\u2013PC model (PC standing for Phillips curve). Others, among them Carlin and Soskice, refer to it as the \"three-equation New Keynesian model\", the three equations being an IS relation, often augmented with a term that allows for expectations influencing demand, a monetary policy (interest) rule and a short-run Phillips curve.\nVariations.\nIS-LM-NAC model.\nIn 2016, Roger Farmer and Konstantin Platonov presented a so-called IS-LM-NAC model (NAC standing for \"no arbitrage condition\", in casu between physical capital and financial assets), in which the long-run effect of monetary policy depends on the way in which people form beliefs. The model was an attempt to integrate the phenomenon of secular stagnation in the IS-LM model. Whereas in the IS-LM model, high unemployment would be a temporary phenomenon caused by sticky wages and prices, in the IS-LM-NAC model high unemployment may be a permanent situation caused by pessimistic beliefs - a particular instance of what Keynes called animal spirits. The model was part of a broader research agenda studying how beliefs may independently influence macroeconomic outcomes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54058", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54058", "title": "Hypanthium", "text": "Structure in angiosperms where basal portions form a cup-shaped tube\nIn angiosperms, a hypanthium or floral cup is a structure where basal portions of the calyx, the corolla, and the stamens form a cup-shaped tube. It is sometimes called a floral tube, a term that is also used for corolla tube and calyx tube.\nIt often contains the nectaries of the plant. It is present in many plant families, although varies in structural dimensions and appearance. This differentiation between the hypanthium in particular species is useful for identification. Some geometric forms are obconic shapes, as in toyon (\"Heteromeles\"), whereas some are saucer-shaped, as in \"Mitella caulescens\".\nIts presence is diagnostic of many families, including the Rosaceae, Grossulariaceae, and Fabaceae. In some cases, it can be so deep, with such a narrow top, that the flower can appear to have an inferior ovary\u00a0\u2013 the ovary is below the other attached floral parts. The hypanthium is known by different common names in differing species. In the eucalypts, it is referred to as the \"gum nut\"; in roses it is called the \"hip\".\nVariations in plant species.\nIn myrtles, the hypanthium can either surround the ovary loosely or tightly; in some cases, it can be fused to the walls of the ovary. It can vary in length. The rims around the outside of the hypanthium contain the calyx lobes or free sepals, petals and either the stamen or multiple stamen that are attached at one or two points.\nThe flowers of the rose family (Rosaceae) always have some type of hypanthium or at least a floral cup from which the sepals, petals and stamens all arise, which is lined with tissue known as \"nectaries\", which produce nectar, a sweet substance that attracts to the flower birds and bees, which receive pollen from the lining of the hypanthium, subsequently transferring it to the next flower they visit, usually a neighbouring plant, facilitating pollination.\nThe stamens borne on the hypanthium are the pollen-producing reproductive organs of the flower. The hypanthium helps in many ways with the reproduction pathways of most plants. It provides weather protection and a medium to sustain the lost pollen, increasing the probability of fertility and cross-pollination. The retained pollen can then attach to pollinators such as birds, bees, moths, beetles, bats, butterflies and other animals. Wind can act as an instigator for fertilisation. The hypanthium is also an adaptive feature for structural support. It helps the stem fuse with the flower, in turn strengthening the bond and overall stability and integrity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54060", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54060", "title": "City of Westminster", "text": "City and borough in London, England\nThe City of Westminster is a London borough with city status in Greater London, England. It is the site of the United Kingdom's Houses of Parliament and much of the British government. It contains a large part of central London, including most of the West End, such as the major shopping areas around Oxford Street, Regent Street, Piccadilly and Bond Street, and the entertainment district of Soho. Many London landmarks are within the borough, including Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, Whitehall, Westminster Cathedral, 10 Downing Street, and Trafalgar Square.\nThe borough also has a number of major parks and open spaces, including Hyde Park, and most of Regent's Park. Away from central London the borough also includes various inner suburbs, including St John's Wood, Maida Vale, Bayswater, Belgravia and Pimlico. The borough had a population of 204,300 at the 2021 census.\nThe original settlement of Westminster was historically a separate urban area to the west of London, growing up around the minster church of Westminster Abbey. Westminster was an important centre of royal authority from Saxon times, and was declared a city in 1540. It was gradually absorbed into the urban area of London, but London's official city boundaries remained unchanged, covering just the area called the City of London, broadly corresponding to the medieval walled city. From the 19th century some metropolis-wide administrative bodies were introduced. The County of London was created in 1889, replaced in 1965 by the larger administrative area of Greater London, which since 2000 has been led by the mayor of London. The cities of London and Westminster retain their separate city statuses despite having long been part of the same urban area.\nThe modern borough was created in 1965 as part of the same reforms which created Greater London, covering the area of the three former metropolitan boroughs of Westminster, Paddington and St Marylebone. The local authority is Westminster City Council. To the east, Westminster borders the City of London, with the boundary marked by Temple Bar. Other neighbouring boroughs (anti-clockwise from north-east) are Camden, Brent, Kensington and Chelsea, Wandsworth and Lambeth, the latter two being separated from Westminster by the River Thames. Charing Cross in Westminster is the notional centre of London, being the point from which distances from London are measured.\nHistory.\nAfter the depopulation of Roman London in the 5th century, an Anglo Saxon agricultural and trade settlement likely developed to its west, associated with the Middle Saxons, sometimes called Lundenwic ('London village' or London port'). Over time, Lundenburh ('London fort'), the former Roman city with its still-existing Roman walls, was repopulated and Lundenwic declined, becoming pastoral and partly known as Aldwych (Aldwic\u2014'old village'), the name of which lives on for a section of Westminster.\nThe origins of the City of Westminster pre-date the Norman Conquest of England. In the mid-11th century, King Edward the Confessor began the construction of an abbey at Westminster, only the foundations of which survive today. Between the abbey and the river he built a palace, thereby guaranteeing that the seat of Government would be fixed at Westminster, and inevitably drawing power and wealth west out of the old City of London.\nFor centuries Westminster and the City of London were geographically quite distinct. It was not until the sixteenth century that houses began to be built over the adjoining fields, eventually absorbing nearby villages such as Marylebone and Kensington, and gradually creating the vast Greater London that exists today.\nHenry VIII's dissolution of the monasteries abolished the abbey at Westminster, although the former abbey church is still called Westminster Abbey. The church was briefly the cathedral of the Diocese of Westminster created from part of the Diocese of London in 1540, by letters patent which also granted city status to Westminster, a status retained after the diocese was abolished in 1550.\nAdministrative history.\nThe area was historically part of the county of Middlesex. Whilst an important centre of royal authority from Saxon times, Westminster was not formally incorporated as a borough for local government purposes until 1900. However, it was declared a city in 1540 on the elevation of Westminster Abbey to being a cathedral. From at least 1545 there was also a Westminster parliamentary borough (constituency). The Anglican Diocese of Westminster was short-lived, being absorbed back into the Diocese of London in 1550. Despite having no borough corporation and having ceased to be the seat of a diocese, Westminster continued to be described as a city. In 1585 the Westminster Court of Burgesses was established to administer certain judicial powers in an area known as the City and Liberty of Westminster.\nFrom 1856 the area was also governed by the Metropolitan Board of Works, which was established to provide services across the metropolis of London. In 1889 the Metropolitan Board of Works' area was made the County of London. From 1856 until 1900 the lower tier of local government within the metropolis comprised various parish vestries and district boards. Within the City and Liberty of Westminster, the three parishes of St George Hanover Square, St James Piccadilly and St Martin-in-the-Fields were governed by their vestries, whilst the parishes covering the central part of Westminster formed the Westminster District and the parishes and territories adjoining the border with the City of London formed the Strand District. Beyond the liberty to the north, the two parishes of Paddington and St Marylebone were also governed by their vestries. The Westminster District was renamed the St Margaret and St John Combined Vestry in 1887, and unsuccessfully petitioned to be incorporated as a borough in 1897.\nIn 1900 the lower tier of local government within the County of London was reorganised into metropolitan boroughs. The parish of Paddington became the Metropolitan Borough of Paddington, and the parish of the St Marylebone became the Metropolitan Borough of St Marylebone. The various territories within the old City and Liberty of Westminster became the Metropolitan Borough of Westminster. The new boroughs came into being on 1 November 1900; a few days ahead of that a royal charter was issued conferring city status on the new borough of Westminster from its creation. The Court of Burgesses, which had ceded most practical powers to the newer authorities, was finally abolished in 1901.\nThe modern borough was created in 1965 under the London Government Act 1963. It was a merger of the old Paddington, St Marylebone and Westminster metropolitan boroughs, and Westminster's city status was transferred to the enlarged borough. In 1966 the city was granted the right to appoint a lord mayor.\nGovernance.\nThe local authority is Westminster City Council, which meets at Westminster Council House (also known as Marylebone Town Hall) and has its main offices at Westminster City Hall on Victoria Street.\nGreater London representation.\nSince 2000, for elections to the London Assembly, the borough forms part of the West Central constituency.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnicity.\nThe following table shows the ethnic group of respondents in the 1991 to 2021 censuses in Westminster.\nHousing.\nThe borough ranks highest on one standard criteria in analysing housing supply and demand, the proportion of private rented accommodation relative to other types of housing in England.\nIncome inequality.\nA study in 2017 by Trust for London and The New Policy Institute found that Westminster has the third-highest pay inequality of the 32 London boroughs. It also has the second-least affordable private rent for low earners in London, behind only Kensington and Chelsea.\nEducation.\nIn education, 82% of adults and 69% of 19-year-olds having Level 3 qualifications.\nDistricts.\nThe City of Westminster covers all or part of the following areas of London:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nMany global corporations have their global or European headquarters in the City of Westminster. Mayfair and St James's within the City of Westminster also have a large concentration of hedge fund and private equity funds. The West End is known as the Theatre District and is home to many of the leading performing arts businesses. Soho and its adjoining areas house a concentration of media and creative companies. Oxford Street is a busy shopping destination.\nLandmarks.\nThe City of Westminster contains some of the most famous sites in London, including Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, the Palace of Westminster (Houses of Parliament) and Big Ben.\nCentre of London.\nCharing Cross is the notional centre of London and the location where distances from London are measured. This custom appears to have begun with the set distances of the 12 Eleanor crosses to Lincoln, England in the north, and expanded even after destruction of most of the crosses.\nParks and open spaces.\nThese include Green Park, Hyde Park, Kensington Gardens, Regent's Park and St James's Park. In addition to parks and open spaces within the borough, the City owns and maintains East Finchley Cemetery and crematorium in the London Borough of Barnet.\nTransport.\nNational Rail stations.\nFour National Rail stations serve the City of Westminster:\nLondon Underground.\nThe City of Westminster is served by 27 London Underground stations and 10 of the 11 lines.\nElectric charging points.\nBy 2009 Westminster City Council had electric vehicle charging points in 15 locations through the city (13 car parks and two on-street points). Users pay an annual fee to cover administration costs to register and use the points. By 2018 there were 60 electric vehicle charging locations.\nTravel to work.\nIn March 2011, the main forms of transport that residents used to travel to work were: underground, metro, light rail, tram, 21.0% of all residents aged 16\u201374; on foot, 9.3%; bus, minibus or coach, 9.3%; driving a car or van, 6.0%; work mainly at or from home, 5.5%; bicycle, 3.1%; train, 3.0%.\nEducation.\nWestminster Children's Services administers many primary and secondary schools. In addition, there are several state-funded faith schools, primarily Church of England (CE), and Roman Catholic (RC), but Christian non-denominational (ND) schools are also in the borough, and there are several non-profit-making junior and senior independent schools.\nPublic libraries.\nThe city operates two reference libraries; Westminster Reference Library and Marylebone Information Service. Westminster Reference Library holds several special collections: of which the Sherlock Holmes, Arts and Business collections are the most comprehensive. In addition to the collections in Westminster Reference Library the city has two specialist libraries: the Westminster Music Library, the largest music library in the UK and the Westminster Chinese Library in the Charing Cross Library.\nFree City of Westminster operated public lending libraries in Westminster include:\nThe London Library, an independent lending library funded by subscription, is at 14 St James's Square.\nEmbassies and High Commissions.\nMany countries' embassies or High Commissions are in Westminster.\nCoat of arms.\nThe current Westminster coat of arms was given by an official grant on 2 September 1964.\nWestminster had other arms before, which had a chief identical to the chief in the present arms. The symbols in the lower two thirds of the shield stand for former municipalities now merged with the city, Paddington and St Marylebone. The original arms had a portcullis as the main charge, which now forms the crest.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Westminster.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54061", "revid": "44305693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54061", "title": "Amphitheatre", "text": "Open air entertainment venue\nAn amphitheatre (American English: amphitheater) is an open-air venue used for entertainment, performances, and sports. The term derives from the ancient Greek ('), from ('), meaning \"on both sides\" or \"around\" and (\"\"), meaning \"place for viewing\".\nAncient Greek theatres were typically built on hillsides and semi-circular in design. The first amphitheatre may have been built at Pompeii around 70 BC. Ancient Roman amphitheatres were oval or circular in plan, with seating tiers that surrounded the central performance area, like a modern open-air stadium. In contrast, both ancient Greek and ancient Roman theatres were built in a semicircle, with tiered seating rising on one side of the performance area.\nModern English parlance uses \"amphitheatre\" for any structure with sloping seating, including theatre-style stages with spectator seating on only one side, theatres in the round, and stadia. They can be indoor or outdoor.\nRoman amphitheatres.\nAbout 230 Roman amphitheatres have been found across the area of the Roman Empire. Their typical shape, functions and name distinguish them from Roman theatres, which are more or less semicircular in shape; from the circuses (similar to hippodromes) whose much longer circuits were designed mainly for horse or chariot racing events; and from the smaller stadia, which were primarily designed for athletics and footraces.\nRoman amphitheatres were circular or oval in plan, with a central arena surrounded by perimeter seating tiers. The seating tiers were pierced by entrance-ways controlling access to the arena floor, and isolating it from the audience. Temporary wooden structures functioning as amphitheaters would have been erected for the funeral games held in honour of deceased Roman magnates by their heirs, featuring fights to the death by gladiators, usually armed prisoners of war, at the funeral pyre or tomb of the deceased. These games are described in Roman histories as \"\", gifts, entertainments or duties to honour deceased individuals, Rome's gods and the Roman community.\nSome Roman writers interpret the earliest attempts to provide permanent amphitheaters and seating for the lower classes as populist political graft, rightly blocked by the Senate as morally objectionable; too-frequent, excessively \"luxurious\" \"\" would corrode traditional Roman morals. The provision of permanent seating was thought a particularly objectionable luxury.\nThe earliest permanent, stone and timber Roman amphitheatre with perimeter seating was built in the in 29 BCE. Most were built under Imperial rule, from the Augustan period (27 BCE\u201314 CE) onwards. Imperial amphitheatres were built throughout the Roman Empire, especial in provincial capitals and major colonies, as an essential aspect of \"Romanitas\". There was no standard size; the largest could accommodate 40,000\u201360,000 spectators. The most elaborate featured multi-storeyed, arcaded fa\u00e7ades and were decorated with marble, stucco and statuary. The best-known and largest Roman amphitheatre is the Colosseum in Rome, also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre (\"\"), after the Flavian dynasty who had it built. After the ending of gladiatorial games in the 5th century and of staged animal hunts in the 6th, most amphitheatres fell into disrepair. Their materials were mined or recycled. Some were razed, and others were converted into fortifications. A few continued as convenient open meeting places; in some of these, churches were sited.\nModern amphitheatres.\nIn modern english usage of the word, an amphitheatre is not only a circular, but can also be a semicircular or curved performance space, particularly one located outdoors. Contemporary amphitheatres often include standing structures, called bandshells, sometimes curved or bowl-shaped, both behind the stage and behind the audience, creating an area which echoes or amplifies sound, making the amphitheatre ideal for musical or theatrical performances. Small-scale amphitheatres can serve to host outdoor local community performances.\nNotable modern amphitheatres include the Shoreline Amphitheatre, the Hollywood Bowl and the Aula Magna at Stockholm University. The term \"amphitheatre\" is also used for some indoor venues, such as the (by now demolished) Gibson Amphitheatre and Chicago International Amphitheatre.\nNatural amphitheatres.\nA natural amphitheatre is a performance space located in a spot where a steep mountain or a particular rock formation naturally amplifies or echoes sound, making it ideal for musical and theatrical performances. An amphitheatre can be naturally occurring formations which would be ideal for this purpose, even if no theatre has been constructed there.\nNotable natural amphitheatres include the Drakensberg Amphitheatre in South Africa, Slane Castle in Ireland, the Supernatural Amphitheatre in Australia, and the Red Rocks and the Gorge Amphitheatres in the western United States.\nThere is evidence that the Anasazi people used natural amphitheatres for the public performance of music in Pre-Columbian times including a large constructed performance space in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54062", "revid": "37850770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54062", "title": "Southwark", "text": "District of Central London, England\nSouthwark ( ) is a district of Central London situated on the south bank of the River Thames, forming the north-western part of the wider modern London Borough of Southwark. The district, which is the oldest part of South London, developed due to its position at the southern end of the early versions of London Bridge, for centuries the only dry crossing on the river. Around 43 AD, engineers of the Roman Empire found the geographic features of the south bank here suitable for the placement and construction of the first bridge.\nLondon's historic core, the City of London, lay north of the bridge and for centuries the area of Southwark just south of the bridge was partially governed by the City, while other areas of the district were more loosely governed. The section known as Liberty of the Clink became a place of entertainment. By the 12th century Southwark had been incorporated as an ancient borough, and this historic status is reflected in the alternative name of the area, as Borough. The ancient borough of Southwark's river frontage extended from the modern borough boundary, just to the west of the Oxo Tower, to St Saviour's Dock (originally the mouth of the River Neckinger) in the east. In the 16th century, parts of Southwark near London Bridge became a formal City ward, Bridge Without.\nThe urban area expanded over the years and Southwark was completely separated administratively from the now small City in 1900, although some remnants of City administration remain in the Guildable Manor. Like other parts of London, it now falls under the Mayor of London and London Assembly in addition to its Burough authority. Local points of interest include Southwark Cathedral, Borough Market, Shakespeare's Globe theatre, The Shard, Tower Bridge, Butler's Wharf and the Tate Modern museum.\nHistory.\nToponymy.\nThe name \"Suthriganaweorc\" or \"Suthringa geweorche\" is recorded for the area in the 10th-century Anglo-Saxon document known as the \"Burghal Hidage\" and means \"fort of the men of Surrey\" or \"the defensive work of the men of Surrey\". Southwark is recorded in the 1086 Domesday Book as \"Sudweca\". The name means \"southern defensive work\" and is formed from the Old English \"s\u016b\u00fe\" (south) and \"weorc\" (work). The southern location is in reference to the City of London to the north, Southwark being at the southern end of London Bridge. In Old English, Surrey means \"southern district (or the men of the southern district)\", so the change from \"southern district work\" to the latter \"southern work\" may be an evolution based on the elision of the single syllable ge element, meaning district.\nRome.\nRecent excavation has revealed pre-Roman activity including evidence of early ploughing, burial mounds and ritual activity.\nThe natural geography of Southwark (now much altered by human activity), was the principal determining factor for the location of London Bridge, and therefore London itself.\nNatural setting.\nUntil relatively recent times, the Thames in central London was much wider and shallower at high tide. The natural shoreline of the City Of London was a short distance further back than it is now, and the high tide shoreline on the Southwark side was much further back, except for the area around London Bridge.\nSouthwark was mostly made up of a series of often marshy tidal islands in the Thames, with some of the waterways between these island formed by branches of the River Neckinger, a tributary of the Thames. A narrow strip of higher firmer ground ran on a N-S alignment and, even at high tide, provided a much narrower stretch of water, enabling the Romans to bridge the river.\nAs the lowest bridging point of the Thames in Roman Britain, it determined the position of Londinium; without London Bridge there is unlikely to have been a settlement of any importance in the area; previously the main crossing had been a ford near Vauxhall Bridge. Because of the bridge and the establishment of London, the Romans routed two Roman roads into Southwark: Stane Street and Watling Street which met in what in what is now Borough High Street.\nFor centuries London Bridge was the only Thames bridge in the area, until a bridge was built upstream more than to the west.\nArchaeological finds.\nIn February 2022, archaeologists from the Museum of London Archaeology (MOLA) announced the discovery of a well-preserved massive Roman mosaic which is believed to date from A.D. 175\u2013225. The dining room (triclinium) mosaic was patterned with knot patterns known as the Solomon's knot and dark red and blue floral and geometric shapes known as guilloche.\nArchaeological work at Tabard Street in 2004 discovered a plaque with the earliest reference to 'Londoners' from the Roman period on it.\nEnd of Roman Southwark.\nLondinium was abandoned at the end of the Roman occupation in the early 5th century and both the city and its bridge collapsed in decay. The settlement at Southwark, like the main settlement of London to the north of the bridge, had been more or less abandoned, a little earlier, by the end of the fourth century.\nSaxons and Vikings.\nSouthwark, the City, Westminster and neighbouring areas, before urbanisation. Canute's Trench, around the edge of Southwark, is shown.\nKing Alfred the Great.\nSouthwark appears to recover only during the time of King Alfred and his successors. Sometime about 886, the \"burh\" of Southwark was created and the Roman city area reoccupied. It was probably fortified to defend the bridge and hence the reemerging City of London to the north.\nSt Olaf.\nThis defensive role is highlighted by the role of the bridge in the 1014-1016 war between King Ethelred the Unready and his ally Olaf II Haraldsson (later King of Norway, and afterwards known as \"St Olaf\", or \"St Olave\") on one side, and Sweyn Forkbeard and his son Cnut (later King Cnut), on the other.\nLondon submitted to Swein in 1014, but on Swein's death, Ethelred returned, with Olaf in support. Swein had fortified London and the bridge, but according to Snorri Sturleson's saga, Edgar and Olaf tied ropes from the bridge's supporting posts and pulled it into the river, together with the Danish army, allowing Ethelred to recapture London. This may be the origin of the nursery rhyme \"London Bridge Is Falling Down\".\nThere was a church, St Olave's Church, dedicated to St Olaf before the Norman Conquest and this survived until the 1920's. St Olaf House (part of London Bridge Hospital), named after the church and its saint, stands on the spot. Tooley Street, being a corruption of \"St Olave's Street\", also takes its name from the former church.\nKing Canute.\nCnut returned in 1016, but capturing the city was a great challenge. To cut London off from upstream riverborne supplies, Cnut dug a trench around Southwark, so that he could sail or drag his ships around Southwark and get upstream in a way that allowed his boats to avoid the heavily defended London Bridge. In so doing he hoped to cut London off from river borne resupply from upstream. The Dane's efforts to recapture London were in vain, until he defeated Ethelred at the Battle of Assandun in Essex later that year, and became King of England. It is thought that the section of the Kent Road, at Lock Bridge, was \"Canute's Trench\". In May, 1016, In 1173, a channel following a similar course was used to drain the Thames to allowing building work on London Bridge.\nLater medieval period.\nSouthwark and in particular the Bridge, proved a formidable obstacle against William the Conqueror in 1066. He failed to force the bridge during the Norman conquest of England, but Southwark was devastated.\nAt Domesday, the area's assets were: Bishop Odo of Bayeux held the monastery (the site of modern Southwark Cathedral) and the tideway, which still exists as St Mary Overie dock; the King owned the church (probably St Olave's) and its tidal stream (St Olave's Dock); the dues of the waterway or mooring place were shared between King William I and Earl Godwin; the King also had the toll of the strand; and \"men of Southwark\" had the right to \"a haw and its toll\". Southwark's value to the King was \u00a316. Much of Southwark was originally owned by the church \u2013 the greatest reminder of monastic London is Southwark Cathedral, originally the priory of St Mary Overie.\nDuring the early Middle Ages, Southwark developed and was one of the four Surrey towns which returned Members of Parliament for the first commons assembly in 1295. An important market occupied the High Street from some time in the 13th century, which was controlled by the city's officers\u2014it was later removed in order to improve traffic to the Bridge, under a separate Trust by Act of Parliament of 1756 as the Borough Market on the present site. The area was renowned for its inns, especially The Tabard, from which Geoffrey Chaucer's pilgrims set off on their journey in \"The Canterbury Tales\".\nThe continuing defensive importance of London Bridge was demonstrated by its important role in thwarting Jack Cade's Rebellion in 1450; Cade's army tried to force its way across the bridge to enter the City, but was foiled in a battle which cost 200 lives. The bridge was also closed during the Siege of London in 1471, helping to foil attempts by the Bastard of Fauconberg to cross and capture the City.\nPost-medieval.\nJust west of the Bridge was the Liberty of the Clink manor, which was never controlled by the city, but was held under the Bishopric of Winchester's nominal authority. This lack of oversight helped the area become the entertainment district for London, with a concentration of sometimes disreputable attractions such as bull and bear-baiting, taverns, theatre and brothels.\nIn the 1580s, Reasonable Blackman worked as a silk weaver in Southwark, as one of the first people of African heritage to work as independent business owners in London in that era. In 1587, Southwark's first playhouse theatre, The Rose, opened. The Rose was set up by Philip Henslowe, and soon became a popular place of entertainment for all classes of Londoners. Both Christopher Marlowe and William Shakespeare, two of the finest writers of the Elizabethan age, worked at the Rose.\nIn 1599 the Globe Theatre, in which Shakespeare was a shareholder, was erected on the Bankside in the Liberty of the Clink. It burned down in 1613, and was rebuilt in 1614, only to be closed by the Puritans in 1642 and subsequently pulled down not long thereafter. A modern replica, called Shakespeare's Globe, has been built near the original site. The impresario in the later Elizabethan period for these entertainments was Shakespeare's colleague Edward Alleyn, who left many local charitable endowments, most notably Dulwich College.\nDuring the Second English Civil War, a force of Kentish Royalist Rebels approached London, hoping the lightly defended city might fall to them, or that the citizens would rise in their favour, however their hopes were quashed when Philip Skippon, in charge of the defence swiftly fortified the bridge making it all but impregnable to the modest Royalist force.\nOn 26 May 1676, ten years after the Great Fire of London, a great fire broke out, which continued for 17 hours before houses were blown up to create fire breaks. King Charles II and his brother, James, Duke of York, oversaw the effort.\nThere was also a famous fair in Southwark which took place near the Church of St George the Martyr. William Hogarth depicted this fair in his engraving of \"Southwark Fair\" (1733).\nSouthwark was also the location of several prisons, including those of the Crown or Prerogative Courts, the Marshalsea and King's Bench prisons, those of the local manors' courts, e.g., Borough Compter, The Clink and the Surrey county gaol originally housed at the White Lion Inn (also informally called the Borough Gaol) and eventually at Horsemonger Lane Gaol.\nOne other local family is of note, the Harvards. John Harvard went to the local parish free school of St Saviour's and on to Cambridge University. He migrated to the Massachusetts Colony and left his library and the residue of his will to the new college there, named after him as its first benefactor. Harvard University maintains a link, having paid for a memorial chapel within Southwark Cathedral (his family's parish church), and where its UK-based alumni hold services. John Harvard's mother's house is in Stratford-upon-Avon.\nUrbanisation.\nIn 1836 the first railway in the London area was created, the London and Greenwich Railway, originally terminating at Spa Road and later extended west to London Bridge.\nIn 1861, another great fire in Southwark destroyed a large number of buildings between Tooley Street and the Thames, including those around Hays Wharf (later replaced by Hays Galleria) and blocks to the west almost as far as St Olave's Church.\nThe first deep-level underground tube line in London was the City and South London Railway, now the Bank branch of the Northern line, opened in 1890, running from King William Street south through Borough to Stockwell. Southwark, since 1999, is also now served by Southwark, Bermondsey and London Bridge stations on the Jubilee line.\nAdministrative history.\nSouthwark is thought to have become a burh in 886. The area appears in the \"Domesday Book\" of 1086 within the hundred of Brixton as held by several Surrey manors.\nThe ancient borough of Southwark, enfranchised in 1295, initially consisted of the pre-existing Surrey parishes of St George the Martyr, St Olave, St Margaret and St Mary.\nSt Margaret and St Mary were abolished in 1541 and their former area combined to create Southwark St Saviour. Around 1555 Southwark St Thomas was split off from St Olave, and in 1733 Southwark St John Horsleydown was also split off.\nIn 1855 the parishes came into the area of responsibility of the Metropolitan Board of Works. The large St George the Martyr parish was governed by its own administrative vestry, but the smaller St John Horsleydown, St Olave and St Thomas parishes were grouped together to form the St Olave District. St Saviour was combined with Southwark Christchurch (the former liberty of Paris Garden) to form the St Saviour's District. In 1889 the area became part of the new County of London. St Olave and St Thomas were combined as a single parish in 1896.\nThe ancient borough of Southwark was traditionally known simply as The Borough \u2013 or Borough \u2013 to distinguish it from 'The City', and this name has persisted as an alternative name for the area. The medieval heart of Southwark was also, simultaneously, referred to as the ward of Bridge Without when administered by the city (from 1550 to 1900) and as an aldermanry until 1978.\nThe local government arrangements were reorganised in 1900 with the creation of the Metropolitan Borough of Southwark. It comprised the parishes of Southwark Christchurch, Southwark St Saviours, Southwark St George the Martyr and Newington. The Metropolitan Borough of Southwark was based at the former Newington Vestry Hall, now known as Walworth Town Hall. The eastern parishes that had formed the St Olave District instead became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Bermondsey. In 1965 the two boroughs were combined with the Metropolitan Borough of Camberwell to form the current London Borough of Southwark.\nA new Diocese of Southwark was established in 1905 from parts of the Diocese of Rochester; the diocese serves large parts of south London and Surrey.\nRelationship with the City of London.\nSouthwark was outside of the control of the City of London and was a haven for criminals and free traders, who would sell goods and conduct trades outside the regulation of the city's Livery Companies. In 1327 the City obtained control from King Edward III of the manor next to the south side of London Bridge known as the Town of Southwark (called latterly the Guildable Manor\u2014i.e., the place of taxes and tolls). The Livery Companies also ensured that they had jurisdiction over the area.\nFrom the Norman period manorial organisation obtained through major lay and ecclesiastic magnates. Southwark still has vestiges of this because of the connection with the City of London. In 1327 the city acquired from Edward III the original vill of Southwark and this was also described as \"the borough\". In 1536 Henry VIII acquired the Bermondsey Priory properties and in 1538 that of the Archbishop. In 1550 these were sold to the city.\nAfter many decades of petitioning, in 1550 Southwark was incorporated into the City of London as the ward of Bridge Without. However, the Alderman was appointed by the Court of Aldermen and no Common Councilmen were ever elected. This ward was constituted of the original Guildable Manor and the properties previously held by the church, under a charter of Edward VI, latterly called the King's Manor or Great Liberty. These manors are still constituted by the City under a Bailiff and Steward with their Courts Leet and View of Frankpledge Juries and Officers which still meet\u2014their annual assembly being held in November under the present High Steward (the Recorder of London). The Ward and Aldermanry were effectively abolished in 1978, by merging it with the Ward of Bridge Within. These manorial courts were preserved under the Administration of Justice Act 1977. Therefore, between 1750 and 1978 Southwark had two persons (the Alderman and the Recorder) who were members of the city's Court of Aldermen and Common Council who were elected neither by the City freemen or by the Southwark electorate but appointed by the Court of Aldermen.\nContemporary governance and representation.\nThe Borough and Bankside Community Council corresponds to the Southwark electoral wards of Cathedrals and Chaucer. They are part of the Bermondsey and Old Southwark Parliament constituency whose Member of Parliament is Neil Coyle. It is within the Lambeth and Southwark London Assembly constituency. Until 2022 Southwark was the location of City Hall, the administrative headquarters of the Greater London Authority and the meeting place of the London Assembly and Mayor of London. Since 2009, Southwark London Borough Council has its main offices at 160 Tooley Street, having moved administrative staff from the Camberwell Town Hall.\nGeography and attractions.\nIn common with much of the south bank of the Thames, the Borough has seen extensive regeneration in the last decade. Declining wharfage trade, light industry and factories have given way to residential development, shops, restaurants, galleries, and bars. Most notably, major office developments have arisen along London Bridge City and More London between Tooley Street and the riverside, housing international headquarters of accountancy, legal and other professional services consultancies. More London, in particular, features London's former City Hall building. The area is in easy walking distance of the City and the West End, which has helped its growth as a major business centre. London's tallest skyscraper, the Shard, is next to London Bridge Station.\nTo the north is the River Thames and London Bridge station. Southwark Cathedral, a priory then parish church, was made a cathedral in 1905, and is noted for its Merbecke Choir. Borough Market is a well-developed visitor attraction and has grown in size. The adjacent units have been converted and form a gastronomic focus for London. Borough High Street runs roughly north to south from London Bridge towards Elephant and Castle. The Borough runs further to the south than often realised; both St George's Cathedral and the Imperial War Museum are within the ancient boundaries, which border nearby Lambeth.\nIts entertainment district, in its heyday at the time of Shakespeare's Globe Theatre (which stood 1599\u20131642) has revived in the form of the post-1997 reinvention of the original theatre, Shakespeare's Globe, incorporating other smaller theatre spaces, an exhibition about Shakespeare's life and work and which neighbours Vinopolis and the London Dungeon. The Southbank area, primarily in Lambeth but shared with Southwark also hosts many artistic venues.\nAt its heart is the area known as Borough, which has an eclectic covered and semi-covered market and numerous food and drink venues as well as the skyscraper The Shard. The Borough is generally an area of mixed development, with council estates, major office developments, social housing and high value residential gated communities side by side with each other.\nTransport.\nThe area has three main tube stations: Borough, Southwark and one close to the river, which is combined with a railway terminus; London Bridge.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54063", "revid": "170083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54063", "title": "Logical programming", "text": ""}
{"id": "54064", "revid": "15948438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54064", "title": "Bakasi Peninsula", "text": ""}
{"id": "54066", "revid": "953420658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54066", "title": "Amphitheater", "text": ""}
{"id": "54069", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54069", "title": "Inductive logic programming", "text": "Learning logic programs from data\nInductive logic programming (ILP) is a subfield of symbolic artificial intelligence which uses logic programming as a uniform representation for examples, background knowledge and hypotheses. The term \"inductive\" here refers to philosophical (i.e. suggesting a theory to explain observed facts) rather than mathematical (i.e. proving a property for all members of a well-ordered set) induction. Given an encoding of the known background knowledge and a set of examples represented as a logical database of facts, an ILP system will derive a hypothesised logic program which entails all the positive and none of the negative examples.\nInductive logic programming is particularly useful in bioinformatics and natural language processing.\nHistory.\nBuilding on earlier work on Inductive inference, Gordon Plotkin was the first to formalise induction in a clausal setting around 1970, adopting an approach of generalising from examples. In 1981, Ehud Shapiro introduced several ideas that would shape the field in his new approach of model inference, an algorithm employing refinement and backtracing to search for a complete axiomatisation of given examples. His first implementation was the Model Inference System in 1981: a Prolog program that inductively inferred Horn clause logic programs from positive and negative examples. The term \"Inductive Logic Programming\" was first introduced in a paper by Stephen Muggleton in 1990, defined as the intersection of machine learning and logic programming. Muggleton and Wray Buntine introduced predicate invention and inverse resolution in 1988.\nSeveral inductive logic programming systems that proved influential appeared in the early 1990s. FOIL, introduced by Ross Quinlan in 1990 was based on upgrading propositional learning algorithms AQ and ID3. Golem, introduced by Muggleton and Feng in 1990, went back to a restricted form of Plotkin's least generalisation algorithm. The Progol system, introduced by Muggleton in 1995, first implemented inverse entailment, and inspired many later systems. Aleph, a descendant of Progol introduced by Ashwin Srinivasan in 2001, is still one of the most widely used systems as of 2022[ [update]].\nAt around the same time, the first practical applications emerged, particularly in bioinformatics, where by 2000 inductive logic programming had been successfully applied to drug design, carcinogenicity and mutagenicity prediction, and elucidation of the structure and function of proteins. Unlike the focus on automatic programming inherent in the early work, these fields used inductive logic programming techniques from a viewpoint of relational data mining. The success of those initial applications and the lack of progress in recovering larger traditional logic programs shaped the focus of the field.\nRecently, classical tasks from automated programming have moved back into focus, as the introduction of meta-interpretative learning makes predicate invention and learning recursive programs more feasible. This technique was pioneered with the Metagol system introduced by Muggleton, Dianhuan Lin, Niels Pahlavi and Alireza Tamaddoni-Nezhad in 2014. This allows ILP systems to work with fewer examples, and brought successes in learning string transformation programs, answer set grammars and general algorithms.\nSetting.\nInductive logic programming has adopted several different learning settings, the most common of which are learning from entailment and learning from interpretations. In both cases, the input is provided in the form of \"background knowledge B\", a logical theory (commonly in the form of clauses used in logic programming), as well as positive and negative examples, denoted formula_1 and formula_2 respectively. The output is given as a \"hypothesis\" \"H\", itself a logical theory that typically consists of one or more clauses.\nThe two settings differ in the format of examples presented.\nLearning from entailment.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], learning from entailment is by far the most popular setting for inductive logic programming. In this setting, the \"positive\" and \"negative\" examples are given as finite sets formula_1 and formula_2 of positive and negated ground literals, respectively. A \"correct hypothesis\" \"H\" is a set of clauses satisfying the following requirements, where the turnstile symbol formula_5 stands for logical entailment:\nformula_6\nCompleteness requires any generated hypothesis \"H\" to explain all positive examples formula_1, and consistency forbids generation of any hypothesis \"H\" that is inconsistent with the negative examples formula_2, both given the background knowledge \"B\".\nIn Muggleton's setting of concept learning, \"completeness\" is referred to as \"sufficiency\", and \"consistency\" as \"strong consistency\". Two further conditions are added: \"Necessity\", which postulates that \"B\" does not entail formula_1, does not impose a restriction on \"H\", but forbids any generation of a hypothesis as long as the positive facts are explainable without it. \"Weak consistency\", which states that no contradiction can be derived from formula_10, forbids generation of any hypothesis \"H\" that contradicts the background knowledge \"B\". Weak consistency is implied by strong consistency; if no negative examples are given, both requirements coincide. Weak consistency is particularly important in the case of noisy data, where completeness and strong consistency cannot be guaranteed.\nLearning from interpretations.\nIn learning from interpretations, the \"positive\" and \"negative\" examples are given as a set of complete or partial Herbrand structures, each of which are themselves a finite set of ground literals. Such a structure \"e\" is said to be a model of the set of clauses formula_11 if for any substitution formula_12 and any clause formula_13 in formula_11 such that formula_15, formula_16 also holds. The goal is then to output a hypothesis that is \"complete,\" meaning every positive example is a model of formula_11, and \"consistent,\" meaning that no negative example is a model of formula_11.\nApproaches to ILP.\nAn \"inductive logic programming system\" is a program that takes as an input logic theories formula_19 and outputs a correct hypothesis H with respect to theories formula_19. A system is \"complete\" if and only if for any input logic theories formula_19 any correct hypothesis H with respect to these input theories can be found with its hypothesis search procedure. Inductive logic programming systems can be roughly divided into two classes, search-based and meta-interpretative systems.\nSearch-based systems exploit that the space of possible clauses forms a complete lattice under the subsumption relation, where one clause formula_22 subsumes another clause formula_23 if there is a substitution formula_12 such that formula_25, the result of applying formula_12 to formula_22, is a subset of formula_23. This lattice can be traversed either bottom-up or top-down.\nBottom-up search.\nBottom-up methods to search the subsumption lattice have been investigated since Plotkin's first work on formalising induction in clausal logic in 1970. Techniques used include least general generalisation, based on anti-unification, and inverse resolution, based on inverting the resolution inference rule.\nLeast general generalisation.\nA \"least general generalisation algorithm\" takes as input two clauses formula_22 and formula_23 and outputs the least general generalisation of formula_22 and formula_23, that is, a clause formula_33 that subsumes formula_22 and formula_23, and that is subsumed by every other clause that subsumes formula_22 and formula_23. The least general generalisation can be computed by first computing all \"selections\" from formula_22 and formula_23, which are pairs of literals formula_40 sharing the same predicate symbol and negated/unnegated status. Then, the least general generalisation is obtained as the disjunction of the least general generalisations of the individual selections, which can be obtained by first-order syntactical anti-unification.\nTo account for background knowledge, inductive logic programming systems employ \"relative least general generalisations\", which are defined in terms of subsumption relative to a background theory. In general, such relative least general generalisations are not guaranteed to exist; however, if the background theory \"B\" is a finite set of ground literals, then the negation of \"B\" is itself a clause. In this case, a relative least general generalisation can be computed by disjoining the negation of \"B\" with both formula_22 and formula_23 and then computing their least general generalisation as before.\nRelative least general generalisations are the foundation of the bottom-up system Golem.\nInverse resolution.\nInverse resolution is an inductive reasoning technique that involves inverting the resolution operator.\nInverse resolution takes information about the resolvent of a resolution step to compute possible resolving clauses. Two types of inverse resolution operator are in use in inductive logic programming: V-operators and W-operators. A V-operator takes clauses formula_43 and formula_22as input and returns a clause formula_23 such that formula_43 is the resolvent of formula_22 and formula_23. A W-operator takes two clauses formula_49 and formula_50 and returns three clauses formula_22, formula_23 and formula_53 such that formula_49 is the resolvent of formula_22 and formula_23 and formula_50 is the resolvent of formula_23 and formula_53.\nInverse resolution was first introduced by Stephen Muggleton and Wray Buntine in 1988 for use in the inductive logic programming system Cigol. By 1993, this spawned a surge of research into inverse resolution operators and their properties.\nTop-down search.\nThe ILP systems Progol, Hail and Imparo find a hypothesis H using the principle of the inverse entailment for theories B, E, H: formula_60. First they construct an intermediate theory F called a bridge theory satisfying the conditions formula_61 and formula_62. Then as formula_63, they generalize the negation of the bridge theory F with anti-entailment. However, the operation of anti-entailment is computationally more expensive since it is highly nondeterministic. Therefore, an alternative hypothesis search can be conducted using the inverse subsumption (anti-subsumption) operation instead, which is less non-deterministic than anti-entailment.\nQuestions of completeness of a hypothesis search procedure of specific inductive logic programming system arise. For example, the Progol hypothesis search procedure based on the inverse entailment inference rule is not complete by \"Yamamoto's example\". On the other hand, Imparo is complete by both anti-entailment procedure and its extended inverse subsumption procedure.\nMetainterpretive learning.\nRather than explicitly searching the hypothesis graph, metainterpretive or \"meta-level\" systems encode the inductive logic programming program as a meta-level logic program which is then solved to obtain an optimal hypothesis. Formalisms used to express the problem specification include Prolog and answer set programming, with existing Prolog systems and answer set solvers used for solving the constraints.\nAnd example of a Prolog-based system is Metagol, which is based on a meta-interpreter in Prolog, while ASPAL and ILASP are based on an encoding of the inductive logic programming problem in answer set programming.\nEvolutionary learning.\nEvolutionary algorithms in ILP use a population-based approach to evolve hypotheses, refining them through selection, crossover, and mutation. Methods like EvoLearner have been shown to outperform traditional approaches on structured machine learning benchmarks. \nProbabilistic inductive logic programming.\nProbabilistic inductive logic programming adapts the setting of inductive logic programming to learning probabilistic logic programs. It can be considered as a form of statistical relational learning within the formalism of probabilistic logic programming.\nGiven\nthe goal of probabilistic inductive logic programming is to find a probabilistic logic program formula_66 such that the probability of positive examples according to formula_67 is maximized and the probability of negative examples is minimized.\nThis problem has two variants: parameter learning and structure learning. In the former, one is given the structure (the clauses) of H and the goal is to infer the probabilities annotations of the given clauses, while in the latter the goal is to infer both the structure and the probability parameters of H. Just as in classical inductive logic programming, the examples can be given as examples or as (partial) interpretations.\nParameter Learning.\nParameter learning for languages following the distribution semantics has been performed by using an expectation-maximisation algorithm or by gradient descent.\nAn expectation-maximisation algorithm consists of a cycle in which the steps of expectation and maximization are repeatedly performed. In the expectation step, the distribution of the hidden variables is computed according to the current values of the probability parameters, while in the maximisation step, the new values of the parameters are computed.\nGradient descent methods compute the gradient of the target function and iteratively modify the parameters moving in the direction of the gradient.\nStructure Learning.\nStructure learning was pioneered by Daphne Koller and Avi Pfeffer in 1997, where the authors learn the structure of first-order rules with associated probabilistic uncertainty parameters. Their approach involves generating the underlying graphical model in a preliminary step and then applying expectation-maximisation.\nIn 2008, De Raedt et al. presented an algorithm for performing theory compression on ProbLog programs, where theory compression refers to a process of removing as many clauses as possible from the theory in order to maximize the probability of a given set of positive and negative examples. No new clause can be added to the theory.\nIn the same year, Meert, W. et al. introduced a method for learning parameters and structure of ground probabilistic logic programs by considering the Bayesian networks equivalent to them and applying techniques for learning Bayesian networks.\nProbFOIL, introduced by De Raedt and Ingo Thon in 2010, combined the inductive logic programming system FOIL with ProbLog. Logical rules are learned from probabilistic data in the sense that both the examples themselves and their classifications can be probabilistic. The set of rules has to allow one to predict the probability of the examples from their description. In this setting, the parameters (the probability values) are fixed and the structure has to be learned.\nIn 2011, Elena Bellodi and Fabrizio Riguzzi introduced SLIPCASE, which performs a beam search among probabilistic logic programs by iteratively refining probabilistic theories and optimizing the parameters of each theory using expectation-maximisation.\nIts extension SLIPCOVER, proposed in 2014, uses bottom clauses generated as in Progol to guide the refinement process, thus reducing the number of revisions and exploring the search space more effectively. Moreover, SLIPCOVER separates the search for promising clauses from that of the theory: the space of clauses is explored with a beam search, while the space of theories is searched greedily.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY 4.0 (http://). Text taken from http://, Fabrizio Riguzzi, Elena Bellodi and Riccardo Zese, Frontiers Media. \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54070", "revid": "488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54070", "title": "Euro coinage", "text": ""}
{"id": "54071", "revid": "488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54071", "title": "Euro note", "text": ""}
{"id": "54073", "revid": "1302184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54073", "title": "Circus (disambiguation)", "text": "A circus is a traveling company of performers that may include acrobats, clowns, trained animals, and other novelty acts.\nCircus or The Circus may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54075", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54075", "title": "Euro banknote", "text": ""}
{"id": "54077", "revid": "45248925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54077", "title": "Perpetual motion", "text": "Work being continuously done without an external input of energy\nPerpetual motion is the motion of bodies that continues forever in an unperturbed system. A perpetual motion machine is a hypothetical machine that can do work indefinitely without an external energy source. This kind of machine is impossible, since its existence would violate the first and/or second laws of thermodynamics. These laws of thermodynamics apply regardless of the size of the system. Thus, machines that extract energy from finite sources cannot operate indefinitely because they are driven by the energy stored in the source, which will eventually be exhausted. A common example is devices powered by ocean currents, whose energy is ultimately derived from the Sun, which itself will eventually burn out.\nIn 2016, new states of matter, time crystals, were discovered in which, on a microscopic scale, the component atoms are in continual repetitive motion, thus satisfying the literal definition of \"perpetual motion\". However, these do not constitute perpetual motion machines in the traditional sense, or violate thermodynamic laws, because they are in their quantum ground state, so no energy can be extracted from them; they exhibit motion without energy.\nHistory.\nThe history of perpetual motion machines dates back to the Middle Ages. For millennia, it was not clear whether perpetual motion devices were possible or not, until the development of modern theories of thermodynamics showed that they were impossible. Despite this, many attempts have been made to create such machines, continuing into modern times. Modern designers and proponents often use other terms, such as \"over unity\", to describe their inventions.\nBasic principles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oh ye seekers after perpetual motion, how many vain chimeras have you pursued? Go and take your place with the alchemists.\nThere is a scientific consensus that perpetual motion in an isolated system violates either the first law of thermodynamics, the second law of thermodynamics, or both. The first law of thermodynamics is a version of the law of conservation of energy. The second law can be phrased in several different ways, the most intuitive of which is that heat flows spontaneously from hotter to colder places; relevant here is that the law observes that in every macroscopic process, there is friction or something close to it; another statement is that no heat engine (an engine which produces work while moving heat from a high temperature to a low temperature) can be more efficient than a Carnot heat engine operating between the same two temperatures.\nIn other words:\nStatements 2 and 3 apply to heat engines. Other types of engines that convert e.g. mechanical into electromagnetic energy, cannot operate with 100% efficiency, because it is impossible to design any system that is free of energy dissipation.\nMachines that comply with both laws of thermodynamics by accessing energy from unconventional sources are sometimes referred to as perpetual motion machines, although they do not meet the standard criteria for the name. By way of example, clocks and other low-power machines, such as Cox's timepiece, have been designed to run on the differences in barometric pressure or temperature between night and day. These machines have a source of energy, albeit one which is not readily apparent, so that they only seem to violate the laws of thermodynamics.\nEven machines that extract energy from long-lived sources - such as ocean currents - will run down when their energy sources inevitably do. They are not perpetual motion machines because they are consuming energy from an external source and are not isolated systems.\nClassification.\nOne classification of perpetual motion machines refers to the particular law of thermodynamics the machines purport to violate:\nImpossibility.\n\"Epistemic impossibility\" describes things which absolutely cannot occur within our \"current\" formulation of the physical laws. This interpretation of the word \"impossible\" is what is intended in discussions of the impossibility of perpetual motion in a closed system.\nThe conservation laws are particularly robust from a mathematical perspective. Noether's theorem, which was proven mathematically in 1915, states that any conservation law can be derived from a corresponding continuous symmetry of the action of a physical system. The symmetry which is equivalent to conservation of energy is the time invariance of physical laws. Therefore, if the laws of physics do not change with time, then the conservation of energy follows. For energy conservation to be violated to allow perpetual motion would require that the foundations of physics would change.\nScientific investigations as to whether the laws of physics are invariant over time use telescopes to examine the universe in the distant past to discover, to the limits of our measurements, whether ancient stars were identical to stars today. Combining different measurements such as spectroscopy, direct measurement of the speed of light in the past and similar measurements demonstrates that physics has remained substantially the same, if not identical, for all of observable time spanning billions of years.\nThe principles of thermodynamics are so well established, both theoretically and experimentally, that proposals for perpetual motion machines are universally dismissed by physicists. Any proposed perpetual motion design offers a potentially instructive challenge to physicists: one is certain that it cannot work, so one must explain \"how\" it fails to work. The difficulty (and the value) of such an exercise depends on the subtlety of the proposal; the best ones tend to arise from physicists' own thought experiments and often shed light upon certain aspects of physics. So, for example, the thought experiment of a Brownian ratchet as a perpetual motion machine was first discussed by Gabriel Lippmann in 1900 but it was not until 1912 that Marian Smoluchowski gave an adequate explanation for why it cannot work. However, during that twelve-year period scientists did not believe that the machine was possible. They were merely unaware of the exact mechanism by which it would inevitably fail.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The law that entropy always increases \u2013 the second law of thermodynamics \u2013 holds, I think, the supreme position among the laws of Nature. If someone points out to you that your pet theory of the universe is in disagreement with Maxwell's equations \u2013 then so much the worse for Maxwell's equations. If it is found to be contradicted by observation \u2013 well, these experimentalists do bungle things sometimes. But if your theory is found to be against the second law of thermodynamics I can give you no hope; there is nothing for it but to collapse in deepest humiliation.\u2014\u200a\nIn the mid-19th-century Henry Dircks investigated the history of perpetual motion experiments, writing a vitriolic attack on those who continued to attempt what he believed to be impossible:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is something lamentable, degrading, and almost insane in pursuing the visionary schemes of past ages with dogged determination, in paths of learning which have been investigated by superior minds, and with which such adventurous persons are totally unacquainted. The history of Perpetual Motion is a history of the fool-hardiness of either half-learned, or totally ignorant persons.\u2014\u200a\nTechniques.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nSome common ideas recur repeatedly in perpetual motion machine designs. Many ideas that continue to appear today were stated as early as 1670 by John Wilkins, Bishop of Chester and an official of the Royal Society. He outlined three potential sources of power for a perpetual motion machine, \"Chymical [\"sic\"] Extractions\", \"Magnetical Virtues\" and \"the Natural Affection of Gravity\".\nThe seemingly mysterious ability of magnets to influence motion at a distance without any apparent energy source has long appealed to inventors. One of the earliest examples of a magnetic motor was proposed by Wilkins and has been widely copied since: it consists of a ramp with a magnet at the top, which pulled a metal ball up the ramp. Near the magnet was a small hole that was supposed to allow the ball to drop under the ramp and return to the bottom, where a flap allowed it to return to the top again. However, if the magnet is to be strong enough to pull the ball up the ramp, it cannot then be weak enough to allow gravity to pull it through the hole. Faced with this problem, more modern versions typically use a series of ramps and magnets, positioned so the ball is to be handed off from one magnet to another as it moves. The problem remains the same.\nGravity also acts at a distance, without an apparent energy source, but to get energy out of a gravitational field (for instance, by dropping a heavy object, producing kinetic energy as it falls) one has to put energy in (for instance, by lifting the object up), and some energy is always dissipated in the process. A typical application of gravity in a perpetual motion machine is Bhaskara's wheel in the 12th century, whose key idea is itself a recurring theme, often called the overbalanced wheel: moving weights are attached to a wheel in such a way that they fall to a position further from the wheel's center for one half of the wheel's rotation, and closer to the center for the other half. Since weights further from the center apply a greater torque, it was thought that the wheel would rotate forever. However, since the side with weights further from the center has fewer weights than the other side, at that moment, the torque is balanced and perpetual movement is not achieved. The moving weights may be hammers on pivoted arms, or rolling balls, or mercury in tubes; the principle is the same.\nAnother theoretical machine involves a frictionless environment for motion. This involves the use of diamagnetic or electromagnetic levitation to float an object. This is done in a vacuum to eliminate air friction and friction from an axle. The levitated object is then free to rotate around its center of gravity without interference. However, this machine has no practical purpose because the rotated object cannot do any work as work requires the levitated object to cause motion in other objects, bringing friction into the problem. Furthermore, a \"perfect\" vacuum is an unattainable goal since both the container and the object itself would slowly vaporize, thereby degrading the vacuum.\nTo extract work from heat, thus producing a perpetual motion machine of the second kind, the most common approach (dating back at least to Maxwell's demon) is \"unidirectionality\". Only molecules moving fast enough and in the right direction are allowed through the demon's trap door. In a Brownian ratchet, forces tending to turn the ratchet one way are able to do so while forces in the other direction are not. A diode in a heat bath allows through currents in one direction and not the other. These schemes typically fail in two ways: either maintaining the unidirectionality costs energy (requiring Maxwell's demon to perform more thermodynamic work to gauge the speed of the molecules than the amount of energy gained by the difference of temperature caused) or the unidirectionality is an illusion and occasional big violations make up for the frequent small non-violations (the Brownian ratchet will be subject to internal Brownian forces and therefore will sometimes turn the wrong way).\nBuoyancy is another frequently misunderstood phenomenon. Some proposed perpetual-motion machines miss the fact that to push a volume of air down in a fluid takes the same work as to raise a corresponding volume of fluid up against gravity. These types of machines may involve two chambers with pistons, and a mechanism to squeeze the air out of the top chamber into the bottom one, which then becomes buoyant and floats to the top. The squeezing mechanism in these designs would not be able to do enough work to move the air down, or would leave no excess work available to be extracted.\nPatents.\nProposals for such inoperable machines have become so common that the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has made an official policy of refusing to grant patents for perpetual motion machines without a working model. The USPTO Manual of Patent Examining Practice states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd, further, that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe filing of a patent application is a clerical task, and the USPTO will not refuse filings for perpetual motion machines; the application will be filed and then most probably rejected by the patent examiner, after he has done a formal examination. Even if a patent is granted, it does not mean that the invention actually works, it just means that the examiner believes that it works, or was unable to figure out why it would not work.\nThe United Kingdom Patent Office has a specific practice on perpetual motion; Section 4.05 of the UKPO Manual of Patent Practice states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExamples of decisions by the UK Patent Office to refuse patent applications for perpetual motion machines include:\nThe European Patent Classification (ECLA) has classes including patent applications on perpetual motion systems: ECLA classes \"F03B17/04: Alleged perpetua mobilia\" and \"F03B17/00B: [... machines or engines] (with closed loop circulation or similar : ... Installations wherein the liquid circulates in a closed loop; Alleged perpetua mobilia of this or similar kind\".\nApparent perpetual motion machines.\nAs a perpetual motion machine can only be defined in a finite isolated system with discrete parameters, and since true isolated systems do not exist (among other things, due to quantum uncertainty), \"perpetual motion\" in the context of this article is better defined as a \"perpetual motion machine\", since a machine is a \"a mechanically, electrically, or electronically operated device for performing a task\", whereas \"motion\" is simply movement (such as Brownian motion). Distinctions aside, on the macro scale, there are concepts and technical drafts that propose \"perpetual motion\", but on closer analysis it is revealed that they actually \"consume\" some sort of natural resource or latent energy, such as the phase changes of water or other fluids or small natural temperature gradients, or simply cannot sustain indefinite operation. In general, extracting work from these devices is impossible.\nResource consuming.\nSome examples of such devices include:\nThought experiments.\nIn some cases a thought experiment appears to suggest that perpetual motion may be possible through accepted and understood physical processes. However, in all cases, a flaw has been found when all of the relevant physics is considered. Examples include:\nConspiracy theories.\nDespite being dismissed as pseudoscientific, perpetual motion machines have become the focus of conspiracy theories, alleging that they are being hidden from the public by corporations or governments, who would lose economic control if a power source capable of producing energy cheaply was made available.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54078", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54078", "title": "Robert Ludlum", "text": "American novelist (1927\u20132001)\nRobert Ludlum (May 25, 1927 \u2013 March 12, 2001) was an American author of 27 thriller novels, best known as the creator of Jason Bourne from the original \"The Bourne Trilogy\" series. The number of copies of his books in print is estimated between 300 million and 500 million. They have been published in 33 languages and 40 countries. Ludlum also published books under the pseudonyms Jonathan Ryder and Michael Shepherd.\nLife and career.\nEarly life and education.\nLudlum was born in New York City, the son of Margaret (n\u00e9e Wadsworth) and George Hartford Ludlum. He was educated at the Rectory School then Cheshire Academy and Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut, where he earned a B.A. in Drama in 1951.\nCareer.\nPrior to becoming an author, he had been a United States Marine, a theatrical actor and producer. In the 1950s, he produced shows at the Grant Lee theater in Fort Lee, New Jersey. From 1960 to 1970, he managed and produced shows at the Playhouse on the Mall at Bergen Mall in Paramus, New Jersey. His theatrical experience may have contributed to his understanding of the energy, escapism and action that the public wanted in a novel. He once remarked: \"I equate suspense and good theater in a very similar way. I think it's all suspense and what-happens-next. From that point of view, yes, I guess, I am theatrical.\"\nMany of Ludlum's novels have been made into films and mini-series, including \"The Osterman Weekend\", \"The Holcroft Covenant\", \"The Apocalypse Watch\", \"The Bourne Identity\", \"The Bourne Supremacy\" and \"The Bourne Ultimatum\". \"\", a book co-written with Gayle Lynds, was originally conceived as a mini-series; the book evolved from a short treatment Ludlum wrote for NBC. The Bourne movies, starring Matt Damon in the title role, have been commercially and critically successful (\"The Bourne Ultimatum\" won three Academy Awards in 2008), although the story lines depart significantly from the source material.\nDuring the 1970s, Ludlum lived in Leonia, New Jersey, where he spent hours each day writing at his home.\nDeath.\nLudlum died of a heart attack on March 12, 2001, at his home in Naples, Florida, while recovering from severe burns caused by a mysterious fire which occurred on February 10, 2001.\nIn 2005, the company which held all merchandising rights for Ludlum's works via his estate, Ludlum Entertainment, signed an agreement with Vivendi Universal Games to handle video game rights for ten years. \"The Bourne Conspiracy\" was published by Vivendi approximately one month prior to its acquisition by Activision Blizzard, and the license was subsequently reacquired by the estate. On February 2, 2009, his estate transferred video game rights to Ludlum\u2019s work to Electronic Arts.\nWriting analysis.\nLudlum's novels typically feature one heroic man, or a small group of crusading individuals, in a struggle against powerful adversaries whose intentions and motivations are evil and who are capable of using political and economic mechanisms in frightening ways. The world in his writings is one where global corporations, shadowy military forces and government organizations all conspired to preserve (if it was evil) or undermine (if it was law-abiding) the status quo.\nLudlum's novels were often inspired by conspiracy theories, both historical and contemporary. He wrote that \"The Matarese Circle\" was inspired by rumors about the Trilateral Commission, and it was published only a few years after the commission was founded. His depictions of terrorism in books such as \"The Holcroft Covenant\" and \"The Matarese Circle\" reflected the theory that terrorists, rather than being merely isolated bands of ideologically or politically motivated extremists, are actually pawns of governments or private organizations who are using them to facilitate the establishment of authoritarian rule.\nFilmography.\nMany of Ludlum's novels have been made into films and miniseries, although the storylines might depart significantly from the source material. In general, a miniseries is more faithful to the original novel on which it is based. Adaptations of Ludlum's works are published under the trademark Treadstone, which is held by the executor of the Robert Ludlum estate.\n1 announced/in development\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54080", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54080", "title": "Gentianales", "text": "Order of flowering plant\nGentianales is an order of flowering plant, included within the asterid clade of eudicots. It comprises more than 20,000 species in about 1,200 genera in 5 families. More than 80% of the species in this order belong to the family Rubiaceae.\nMany of these flowering plants are used in traditional medicine. They have been used to treat pain, anxiety, cancers and neurological conditions.\nAccording to molecular clock calculations, the lineage that led to Gentianales split from other plants about 108 million years ago or 81 million years ago.\nTaxonomy.\nIn the classification system of Dahlgren the Gentiales were in the superorder Gentianiflorae (also called Gentiananae). The following families are included according to the APG III system:\nPhylogeny.\nThe following phylogenetic tree is based on molecular phylogenetic studies of DNA sequences.\nEtymology.\nIt takes its name from the family Gentianaceae, which in turn is based on the name of the type genus, \"Gentiana\". The genus name is a tribute to Gentius, an Illyrian king.\nCharacteristics.\nThis large order has a variety of different plants, ranging from small herbaceous plants and saprophytes to shrubs and large trees. Species are, however, united by their simple and opposite leaves and typically have showy pentamerous flowers (flowers in which components occur in multiples of five) and show nuclear endosperm formation (in which cell division takes place without the cell wall forming between divisions). Many species have structures between the leaf petioles, such as ridges or stipules. Many species also have colleters; thick hair-like structures that secrete mucilage, a thick gluey substance.\nDistribution.\nSpecies of this order are found in moist climates around the world. They are most common in tropical regions.\nUses.\nMany gentianales contain toxic compounds and species have a variety of uses. Some species are also grown ornamentally. Well-known members of Gentianales are coffee, frangipani, \"Gardenia\", gentian, oleander, and periwinkle.\nCertain species belonging to the order Gentianales have been used in traditional medicine in rural southeastern Asia countries. \"Gelsemium sempervirens\" has been used in North American folk medicine to treat conditions such as anxiety, migraines/headaches, and neuralgia, while \"Gelsemium elegans\" has been used in China to treat rheumatoid arthritis pain, neuropathic pain, skin ulcers, and even cancers.\nThe compounds found in some species are used in the synthesis of modern medicines. Cinchona trees, for example, are a source of quinine, which is used to treat malaria. Vinblastine, which has anti-tumor properties as it disrupts cell division, is used in chemotherapy. It is extracted from the Madagascar periwinkle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54081", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54081", "title": "Maloideae", "text": "Subfamily of flowering plants\nThe Maloideae was the apple subfamily, a grouping used by some taxonomists within the rose family, Rosaceae. Recent molecular phylogenetic evidence has shown that the traditional Spiraeoideae and Amygdaloideae form part of the same clade as the traditional Maloideae, and the correct name for this group is Amygdaloideae. Earlier circumscriptions of Maloideae are more-or-less equivalent to subtribe Malinae or to tribe Maleae. The group includes a number of plants bearing commercially important fruits, such as apples and pears, while others are cultivated as ornamentals.\nIn its traditional circumscription this subfamily consisted exclusively of shrubs and small trees characterised by a pome, a type of accessory fruit that does not occur in other Rosaceae, and by a basal haploid chromosome count of 17 (instead of 7, 8, or 9 as in the other Rosaceae), involving approximately 28 genera with approximately 1100 species worldwide, with most species occurring in the temperate Northern Hemisphere.\nTaxonomy.\nThe subfamily was given the name Pomoideae Juss. in 1789, but this name is no longer accepted under the nomenclature codes because it is not based on a genus name. It has also been separated into its own family the Malaceae Small (formerly Pomaceae Lindl.).\nAn earlier intermediate classification expanded Maloideae to include four genera with dry non-pome fruit. These are \"Kageneckia\", \"Lindleya\", and \"Vauquelinia\", which have a haploid chromosome count of 15 or 17, and \"Gillenia\", which is herbaceous and has a haploid chromosome count of 9.\nA traditional circumscription of Maloideae includes the following genera:\nIntergeneric hybrids:\nGraft chimeras:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54083", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54083", "title": "Amygdaloideae", "text": "Subfamily of flowering plants\nAmygdaloideae is a subfamily within the flowering plant family Rosaceae. It was formerly considered by some authors to be separate from Rosaceae, and the family names Prunaceae and Amygdalaceae have been used. Reanalysis from 2007 has shown that the previous definition of subfamily Spiraeoideae was paraphyletic. To solve this problem, a larger subfamily was defined that includes the former Amygdaloideae, Spiraeoideae, and Maloideae. This subfamily, however, is to be called Amygdaloideae rather than Spiraeoideae under the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants as updated in 2011.\nAs traditionally defined, the Amygdaloideae includes such commercially important crops as plum, cherry, apricot, peach, and almond. The fruit of these plants are known as stone fruit (drupes), as each fruit contains a hard shell (the endocarp) called a \"stone\" or \"pit\", which contains the single seed.\nThe expanded definition of the Amygdaloideae adds to these commercially important crops such as apples and pears that have pome fruit, and also important ornamental plants such as \"Spiraea\" and \"Aruncus\" that have hard dry fruits.\nTaxonomic history.\nThe name Prunoideae is sometimes used, but is incorrect. The 1835 publication of that name by Gilbert Thomas Burnett (Burnett) is invalid because it lacks a description (or diagnosis or reference to an earlier description or diagnosis). Paul Fedorowitsch Horaninow (Horan.) published the name in 1847, but Amygdaloideae, published in 1832 by George Arnott Walker-Arnott, has priority and is therefore the correct name.\nThe taxonomy of this group of plants within the Rosaceae has recently been unclear. In 2001 it was reported that Amygdaloideae \"sensu stricto\" consists of two distinct genetic groups or \"clades\", \"Prunus\"\u2013\"Maddenia\" and \"Exochorda\"\u2013\"Oemleria\"\u2013\"Prinsepia\". Further refinement shows that \"Exochorda\"\u2013\"Oemleria\"\u2013\"Prinsepia\" is somewhat separate from \"Prunus\"\u2013\"Maddenia\"\u2013\"Pygeum\", and that the traditional subfamilies Maloideae and Spiraeoideae must be included in Amygdaloideae if a paraphyletic group is to be avoided. With this classification, the genus \"Prunus\" is considered to include \"Armeniaca\", \"Cerasus\", \"Amygdalus\", \"Padus\", \"Laurocerasus\", \"Pygeum\", and \"Maddenia\".\nRobert Frost alluded to the merging of Amygdalaceae into Rosaceae in his poem \"The Rose Family\", when he wrote \"The rose is a rose and was always a rose / But the theory now goes that the apple's a rose, / and the pear is, and \"so's the plum, I suppose\".\" In the next line he wrote, \"The dear [i.e., \"the dear Lord\", euphemized] only knows what will next prove a rose.\" This referred to shifting botanical opinion which had recently reunited Amygdalaceae, Spiraeaceae, and Malaceae into Rosaceae (which matches de Jussieu's 1789 classification).\nClassification.\nA recent classification places the following genera in the subfamily:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54084", "revid": "19691760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54084", "title": "Rosoideae", "text": "Subfamily of flowering plants\nThe rose subfamily Rosoideae consists of more than 850 species, including many shrubs, perennial herbs, and fruit plants such as strawberries and brambles. Only a few are annual herbs.\nThe circumscription of the Rosoideae is still not wholly certain; recent genetic research has resulted in several changes at the genus level and the removal from Rosoideae of some genera (notably \"Cercocarpus\", \"Cowania\", \"Dryas\" and \"Purshia\") previously included in the subfamily.\nGenera.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54085", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54085", "title": "Len Deighton", "text": "British author (born 1929)\nLeonard Cyril Deighton ( ; born 18 February 1929) is a British author. His publications have included cookery books and works on history, but he is best known for his spy novels.\nAfter completing his national service in the Royal Air Force, Deighton attended the Saint Martin's School of Art and the Royal College of Art in London; he graduated from the latter in 1955. He had several jobs before becoming a book and magazine illustrator and designed the cover for the first UK edition of Jack Kerouac's 1957 work \"On the Road\". He also worked for a period in an advertising agency. During an extended holiday in France he wrote his first novel, \"The IPCRESS File\", which was published in 1962 and was a critical and commercial success. He wrote several spy novels featuring the same central character, an unnamed working-class intelligence officer, cynical and tough. Between 1962 and 1966 Deighton was the food correspondent for \"The Observer\" and drew cookstrips\u2014black-and-white graphic recipes with a limited number of words. A selection of these was collected and published in 1965 as \"Len Deighton's Action Cook Book\", the first of five cookery books he wrote. Other topics of non-fiction include military history.\nMany of Deighton's books have been best-sellers and he has been favourably compared both to his contemporary John le Carr\u00e9 and his literary antecedents W. Somerset Maugham, Eric Ambler, Ian Fleming and Graham Greene. Deighton's fictional work is marked by a complex narrative structure, extensive research and an air of verisimilitude.\nSeveral of Deighton's works have been adapted for film and radio. Films include \"The Ipcress File\" (1965), \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1966), \"Billion Dollar Brain\" (1967) and \"Spy Story\" (1976). In 1988 Granada Television produced the miniseries \"Game, Set and Match\" based on his trilogy of the same name, and in 1995 BBC Radio 4 broadcast a real-time dramatisation of his 1970 novel \"Bomber\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiography.\nEarly life and early career: 1929\u20131961.\nLeonard Cyril Deighton was born in Marylebone, London, on 18 February 1929. His birth was in the infirmary of a workhouse as the local hospital was full. His father was the chauffeur and mechanic for Campbell Dodgson, the Keeper of Prints and Drawings at the British Museum; Deighton's mother was a part-time cook. At the time the family lived in Gloucester Place Mews near Baker Street. In 1940, during the Second World War, the eleven-year-old Deighton witnessed the arrest of Anna Wolkoff, a British subject of Russian descent for whom his mother cooked; Wolkoff was detained as a Nazi spy and charged with stealing correspondence between Winston Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt. Deighton said that observing her arrest was \"a major factor in my decision to write a spy story at my first attempt at fiction\".\nDeighton was educated at St Marylebone Grammar and William Ellis schools, but was moved to an emergency school for part of the Second World War. After leaving school Deighton worked as a railway clerk before being conscripted for national service at the age of 17, which he completed with the Royal Air Force (RAF). While in the RAF he was trained as a photographer, often recording crime scenes with the Special Investigation Branch (SIB) of the military police as part of his duties. During his work with the SIB he learned to fly and became an experienced scuba diver.\nAfter two-and-a-half years with the RAF, Deighton received a demobilisation grant, enabling him to study at Saint Martin's School of Art where he won a scholarship to the Royal College of Art; he graduated from the college in 1955. While studying he held a temporary job in 1951 as a pastry chef at the Royal Festival Hall. He worked as a flight attendant for British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) between 1956 and 1957 before becoming a professional illustrator. Much of his work as an illustrator was in advertising\u2014he worked for agencies in New York and London\u2014but he also illustrated magazines and over 200 book covers, including for the first UK edition of Jack Kerouac's 1957 work \"On the Road\".\nWriting career: 1961\u2013.\nWhile he was working at the Royal Festival Hall, Deighton would make sketches to remember some of the steps he took preparing dishes. He developed the idea into the concept of the \"cookstrip\", a full recipe within a cartoon-style illustration. Following the publication of one of Deighton's cookstrips in the \"Daily Express\" in 1961, \"The Observer\" commissioned him to provide a weekly series for its own magazine, which he did between March 1962 and August 1966. He later explained:\nI was buying expensive cookbooks. I'm very messy, and didn't want to take them into the kitchen. So I wrote out the recipes on paper, and it was easier for me to draw three eggs than write 'three eggs'. So I drew three eggs, then put in an arrow. For me it was a natural way to work.\nIn 1962 Deighton's first novel, \"The IPCRESS File\", was published; it had been written in 1960 while he was staying in the Dordogne, south west France. The book was soon a commercial success and was a best-seller in the UK, France and the US, selling more than 2.5\u00a0million copies in three years. The story\u2014written as a first-person narrative\u2014introduced a working-class protagonist, cynical and tough. Deighton did not want to invent a name for the character and later explained \"Some people felt that a contrivance, but I kept putting off inventing a name for him until I got to the end of the book and realised I could finish the book without giving him a name\".\nIn 2017 Deighton described how he did not consider the character an anti-hero, but \"a romantic, incorruptible figure in the mould of Philip Marlowe\". Deighton described the inspiration of using a working-class spy among the Oxbridge-educated members of the Establishment as coming from his time at the advertising agency, when he was the only member of the company's board not to have been educated at Eton. He said \"\"The IPCRESS File\" is about spies on the surface, but it's also really about a grammar school boy among public school boys and the difficulties he faces.\"\nDeighton published two further novels with his unnamed protagonist\u2014\"Horse Under Water\" (1963) and \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1964). \"Funeral in Berlin\" stayed on \"The New York Times\" best-seller list for twenty weeks and sold over forty thousand copies in hardback in 1965. He published two cookbooks in 1965, \"Len Deighton's Action Cook Book\" (a collection of his cookstrips from \"The Observer\") and (Where is the garlic), a collection of French recipes. They also sold well, making Deighton a best-selling author in two genres. Two further novels in the spy series followed\u2014\"Billion-Dollar Brain\" (1966) and \"An Expensive Place to Die\" (1967)\u2014after which he published his first historical non-fiction work, \"The Assassination of President Kennedy\" (1967), co-written with Michael Rand and Howard Loxton. During 1967 he also edited and contributed to \"Len Deighton's London Dossier\", a work that described itself as \"a real London guidebook\". The book suggested the Rowton Houses owned by Rowton Hotels Ltd were doss-houses for the homeless. He and the publishers Jonathan Cape were sued for libel; they apologised, withdrew the suggestions made in the book by amending the claim in unsold editions and paid substantial damages.\nIn September 1967 he wrote an article in \"The Sunday Times Magazine\" about Operation Snowdrop, an SAS attack on Benghazi during the Second World War. Deighton wrote that the raid \"suffered a lack of security\" because David Stirling, the leader of the raid, \"had insisted upon talking about the raid during two social gatherings at the British Embassy in Cairo although warned not to do so\". Stirling sued Deighton and Times Newspapers for libel the following year as the implication was that his indiscretion had endangered the lives of his men. Stirling explained in court that one of the social gatherings was a dinner with Winston Churchill, Field Marshal Jan Smuts, General Sir Alan Brooke, General Sir Claude Auchinleck and General Harold Alexander; the second occasion was a private conversation with Churchill. Deighton and Times Newspapers apologised, published a correction and paid damages.\nDuring the mid-1960s Deighton wrote for \"Playboy\" as a travel correspondent, and he provided a piece on the boom in spy fiction; \"An Expensive Place to Die\" was serialised in the magazine in 1967. In 1968 Deighton was the producer of the film \"Only When I Larf\", which was based on his novel of the same name. He was the writer and co-producer of \"Oh! What a Lovely War\" in 1969, but did not enjoy the process of making films, and had his name removed from the film's credits. In 1970 Deighton wrote \"Bomber\", a fictional account of an RAF Bomber Command raid that goes wrong. To produce the novel he used an IBM MT/ST, and it is possible that this was the first novel to be written using a word processor. Deighton was interviewed on \"Desert Island Discs\" in June 1976 by Roy Plomley.\nDeighton wrote \"\", published in 1977, after being advised to do so by the historian A.\u00a0J.\u00a0P. Taylor. The book was well received by readers and reviewers, although the inclusion of interviews with German participants led to criticism from some. Taylor wrote the introduction for the book, describing it as a \"brilliant analysis\"; Albert Speer, once the Minister of Armaments for Adolf Hitler, thought it \"an excellent, most thorough examination\".\n\"Fighter\" was followed in 1978 by another novel, \"SS-GB\", the idea for which came from Ray Hawkey, Deighton's friend from art school and the designer of the covers of several of his books. While the two were discussing what would have happened if the Germans had won the Second World War, Hawkey asked Deighton if he thought there could be an alternative history novel. ', Deighton's 1979 history of the rise of the Nazis and the fall of France, has a foreword written by General Walther Nehring, Chief of Staff to General Heinz Guderian. As at 2023 his last history book is ' (1993), which examined the events of the war up until 1942. Reviewing for \"The Times\", Henry Stanhope considers the work \"extremely readable\", although he questions the structure of the book which focuses on different theatres of war, rather than using a purely chronological history. This approach, Stanhope considers, \"presents a less complete picture to the reader\". The historian Allan R. Millett considers that the book would have been improved by wider research into the Russian, Japanese and American aspects of the war.\nBeginning in 1983 Deighton wrote three connected trilogies: \"Berlin Game\" (1983), \"Mexico Set\" (1984) and \"London Match\" (1985); \"Spy Hook\" (1988), \"Spy Line\" (1989) and \"Spy Sinker\" (1990); and \"Faith\" (1994), \"Hope\" (1995) and \"Charity\" (1996). \"Winter\", a companion novel dealing with the lives of a German family from 1899 to 1945, which also provides an historical background to several of the characters from the trilogies, was published in 1987. The trilogies are centred on Bernard Samson, a tough, cynical and disrespectful MI6 intelligence officer.\nPersonal life.\nDeighton married the illustrator Shirley Thompson in 1960; the couple were divorced in 1976, having not lived together for over five years. He left Britain in 1969, and has lived abroad since, including in Ireland, Austria, France, the US and Portugal. He lived for a while in Blackrock, County Louth, where he married Ysabele n\u00e9e\u00a0de Ranitz in February 1980, the daughter of a Dutch diplomat. The couple have two sons.\nDeighton does not like giving interviews, and these have been rare throughout his life; he also avoids appearing at literary festivals. He says that he does not enjoy being a writer and that \"The best thing about writing books is being at a party and telling some pretty girl you write books, the worst thing is sitting at a typewriter and actually writing the book.\" After completing \"Faith\", \"Hope\" and \"Charity\" in 1996, he decided to take a year off writing; at the end of the period, he decided that writing was \"a mug's game\" that he did not miss and did not have to do. By 2016 Deighton had retired from writing.\nWorks.\nAccording to the Gale \"Contemporary Novelists\" monographs, Deighton and fellow author John le Carr\u00e9 follow in the same literary tradition of British espionage writers as W. Somerset Maugham, Eric Ambler and Graham Greene. Deighton provides an \"energetic style\" and his fictional work is marked by a complex narrative structure, according to Gale. Deighton extensively researched the background and technical aspects of his storylines, and enjoyed this side of producing work; in 1976 he said \"I like the research better than I like writing books\". The literary analyst Gina Macdonald observes that the technical aspect of Deighton's work can overshadow the plots and characterisation in the novel when Deighton provides too much detail in a short passage, leading to what she calls \"banal conversations, stilted and unconvincing\". Deighton was elected to the Detection Club in 1969 and their work \"Howdunit\", published in 2020, was dedicated to him.\nNovels.\nAccording to the film and media historian Alan Burton, \"The IPCRESS File\"\u2014along with le Carr\u00e9's 1963 novel \"The Spy Who Came in from the Cold\"\u2014\"changed the nature of British spy fiction\" as it brought in \"a more insolent, disillusioned and cynical style to the espionage story\". The novel used appendices and footnotes which, according to Burton, gave verisimilitude to the work. The academic George Grella considers Deighton's novels to be \"stylish, witty [and] well-crafted\", and that they provide \"a convincingly detailed picture of the world of espionage while carefully examining the ethics and morality of that world\". Deighton has expressed his admiration for the police procedural, which he considers has an authentic feel, and approaches his fiction writing as a \"spy procedural\". Burton considers \"The IPCRESS File\" to be \"a marker of a new trend in mature, realistic espionage fiction\".\n\"The IPCRESS File\" appeared in bookshops at the same time as the James Bond film \"Dr. No\". Deighton acknowledged that his career had benefited from the enormous popularity of Bond, although he denied any similarity between his and Ian Fleming's books except being about spies. The academic Clive Bloom considers that after \"Funeral in Berlin\" was published in 1964, Deighton \"established a place for himself\u00a0... in the front rank of the spy genre, along with Graham Greene, Ian Fleming and John le Carr\u00e9\". Deighton's later works were less oblique than the earlier ones, and had, according to Bloom, \"more subtlety and deeper characterization\". Oliver Buckton, the professor of literature, also considers Deighton to be in the forefront of post-war spy writers. The crime writer and poet Julian Symons writes that \"[t]he constant crackle of his dialogue makes Deighton a kind of poet of the spy story\".\nGrella considers Deighton to be \"the angry young man of the espionage novel\", with the central characters of his main novels\u2014the unnamed protagonist from the \"IPCRESS\" series and Bernard Samson from the nine novels in which he appears\u2014both working-class, cynical and streetwise, in contrast to the upper-class and ineffective senior members of the intelligence service in their respective novels. His working-class heroes also stand in contrast to Fleming's Eton- and Fettes-educated smooth, upper-class character James Bond.\nAdaptations.\nSeveral of Deighton's novels have been adapted as films, which include \"The Ipcress File\" (1965), \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1966), \"Billion Dollar Brain\" (1967) and \"Spy Story\" (1976). All feature the books' unnamed character, but he was given the full name \"Harry Palmer\" for the films; either the actor Michael Caine\u2014who played Palmer in the films\u2014or the producer for two of the three films, Harry Saltzman, came up with the name. Two television films also featured Palmer: \"Bullet to Beijing\" (1995) and \"Midnight in Saint Petersburg\" (1996); they were not based on Deighton's stories. All the films except \"Spy Story\" feature Caine as Palmer. Deighton's hands were used in \"The Ipcress File\" in place of Caine's for a scene in which Palmer breaks eggs into a bowl and whisks them. In March 2022 \"The Ipcress File\", a television adaptation of Deighton's novel, was broadcast on UK television. Joe Cole was Palmer; Lucy Boynton and Tom Hollander also appeared in major roles.\n\"Berlin Game\", \"Mexico Set\" and \"London Match\", the first trilogy of his Bernard Samson novel series, were made into \"Game, Set and Match\", a thirteen-part television series by Granada Television in 1988. Although Quentin Tarantino expressed interest in adapting the trilogy, the project did not materialise. The nine Samson novels were in pre-production with Clerkenwell Films in 2013, with a script by Simon Beaufoy.\nIn 2017 the BBC adapted Deighton's novel \"SS-GB\" for a five-part miniseries, broadcast in one-hour episodes; Sam Riley played the lead role of Detective Superintendent Douglas Archer. In 1995 BBC Radio 4 broadcast a real-time dramatisation of \"Bomber\". The drama was in four broadcasts, each of two hours, from 2:30\u00a0pm to midnight, threaded through the station's schedule of news and current affairs.\nLegacy and influence.\nDeighton's work has been acknowledged by the thriller writer Jeremy Duns as being an influence on his own work. In \"Letters from Burma\", the politician Aung San Suu Kyi mentions reading Deighton's books while under house arrest. Suu Kyi wrote that she was passionate about Arthur Conan Doyle's tales of Sherlock Holmes and the spy novels of le Carr\u00e9 and Deighton. When asked by Christie's about his love for Indian art and how he started his collection, the writer V. S. Naipaul credited Deighton. \"I met Len Deighton, the thriller writer, at dinner many years ago. He demonstrated to me that Indian art could really be approachable. I bought from\u00a0... Maggs because of Len Deighton pushing me onto [them] as being a very fair dealer, saying that they do not charge you much more than they should. That's a marvellous thing to be told\".\nDeighton's 1970 novel \"Bomber\" was listed in Anthony Burgess's 1984 work \"Ninety-Nine Novels\" as one of the 99 best novels in English since 1939. \"Bomber\", the third album of the rock group Mot\u00f6rhead, was named after the novel, as the band's singer, Lemmy, was reading it at the time they were recording the album.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54086", "revid": "39203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54086", "title": "Reciprocal", "text": "Reciprocal may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "54087", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54087", "title": "Spiraeoideae", "text": "The subfamily Spiraeoideae was traditionally a subfamily of flowering plants within the family Rosaceae. The taxonomy of this subfamily has changed several times in the last century as more detailed studies have been carried out. Spiraeoideae as defined before 2007 is paraphyletic, leading some authors to define a broader subfamily which includes the Spiraeoideae as well as the Maleae (plants such as pears and apples whose fruits are pomes), and the Amygdaloideae (including almonds and plums, whose fruits are drupes). Such an expanded subfamily is to be called Amygdaloideae under the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants.\nThe traditional Spiraeoideae are shrubs. Most have simple leaves, but the genera \"Aruncus\" and \"Sorbaria\" have pinnately compound leaves. Carpels are usually 2\u20135. Most genera traditionally placed in the Spiraeoideae produce flowers with distinct follicles that, upon seed-set, mature to form fruits that are aggregates of follicles.\nA traditional classification places the following genera in the subfamily:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54088", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54088", "title": "Harry Palmer", "text": "Fictional secret agent\nHarry Palmer is the name given to the anti-hero protagonist of several films based on spy novels written by Len Deighton, in which the main character is an unnamed intelligence officer. For convenience, the novels are also often referred to as the \"Harry Palmer\" novels. \nMichael Caine played Harry Palmer in three films based on published novels featuring this character: \"The Ipcress File\" (1965), \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1966) and \"Billion Dollar Brain\" (1967). Caine also starred as this character in two other films not directly based on Deighton's novels.\n\"The Times\" called Caine \"the epitome of Sixties cool in his first outing as the secret agent Harry Palmer\". A trailer for his second role as Palmer described him as possessing \"horn rims, cockney wit and an iron fist\". The character's thick horn-rimmed glasses, girls, and disregard for authority were cited by Mike Myers as an influence for \"Austin Powers\"; Caine would later star in \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\" (2002), with his portrayal of Nigel Powers, father of secret agent Austin Powers, a spoof of Palmer.\nOrigin of the 'Harry Palmer' name.\nWhen developing the 1965 film \"The Ipcress File\", based on Len Deighton's 1962 novel of the same name, the production team needed a name for the previously anonymous protagonist, a rough-edged, petty crook turned spy. They chose \"Harry Palmer\", because they wanted a mundane name, 'one that means absolutely nothing, a common name', to distance him from Ian Fleming's James Bond, the stereotypical sophisticated, swashbuckling spy. Caine stated at the time of filming that he knew a dull kid at school called \"Palmer\", with Harry Saltzman saying 'good, and what about a first name?', to which Caine innocently remarked \"Harry\", not realising his gaffe until seeing Saltzman's stare.\nNovels.\nEarly novels.\nLen Deighton introduced the lead character in \"The IPCRESS File\", his first novel, published in November 1962. In that first-person novel, the intelligence officer is anonymous, although at one point he is greeted by someone saying \"Hello, Harry\"; he later says, \"Now my name isn't Harry, but in this business it's hard to remember whether it ever had been.\" Deighton's character is described as working class, living in a back street flat and seedy hotels, and shopping in supermarkets. He wears glasses, is hindered by bureaucracy, and craves a pay rise. It is revealed in passing that he is from Burnley, Lancashire, and that he was born in 1922 or 1923.\nFurther novels featuring this character followed, including \"Horse Under Water\" (1963), \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1964), \"Billion-Dollar Brain\" (1966), and \"An Expensive Place to Die\" (1967). Again, the lead character is never named, but they appear to be the same character in all of the books. In his 2009 afterword to \"Horse Under Water\", Deighton noted \"Now, writing a second book, I found it an advantage to have an anonymous hero. He might be the same man; or maybe not. I was able to make minor changes to him and his background...I realized that...identifying him as a northerner would make demands on my knowledge that I could not sustain. It would be more sensible to give him a background closer to my own.\"\nFrom the first novel onwards, the narrator shows knowledge of fine food and drink, painting, classical and 20th-century music, jazz, military history, and Latin. In \"Horse Under Water\", he is described as an expert on world currency.\nLater novels and discrepancies.\nIn 1974, the novel \"Spy Story\" was published, followed by \"Yesterday's Spy\" (1975), and \"Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Spy\" (1976) (also known as \"Catch a Falling Spy\" in North America). As the protagonist also remains anonymous in these novels, it is still open to debate whether the narrator of these last three novels is the same as in the earlier books. There is conflicting evidence for either view. Despite this, and despite the lead protagonist being unnamed, all eight books have been unofficially called the \"Harry Palmer novels\", based on the protagonist's name given in the subsequent film adaptations of \"The IPCRESS File\" and its sequels.\nEvidence for this narrator being different from the earlier novels comes from Deighton himself, who is quoted as saying that the narrator of \"Spy Story\" is not the same character as the narrator of \"The IPCRESS File\"; in fact, for most of \"Spy Story\", the narrator is named and addressed as \"Patrick Armstrong\" \u2013 although, as another character says, \"We have so many different names.\" Additionally, he is reported to be in his late 30s, whereas the narrator of \"The IPCRESS File\" was born in 1922 or 1923 (making him in his 40s), and thus implying that this protagonist is different from that of the earlier novels.\nEncouraging the unitary concept \u2013 that the later novels feature the same narrator \u2013 is the 1974 dust jacket to the Harcourt, Brace &amp; Jovanovich American edition of \"Spy Story\", in which the cover blurb states, \"He is back, after five long-years' absence, the insubordinate, decent, bespectacled English spy who fought, fumbled, and survived his outrageous way through the best-selling \"Horse Under Water\", \"Funeral in Berlin\", and the rest of those marvellous, celebrated Len Deighton spy thrillers.\" Likewise, on the 1976 edition dust jacket to \"Catch a Falling Spy\", the novel features \"Deighton's familiar hero, our bespectacled Englishman\". A number of minor characters from the earlier novels also appear in \"Spy Story\", further connecting the books.\nFilm adaptations.\n\"The Ipcress File\".\n\"The IPCRESS File\" novel came out just after the release of the first James Bond film \"Dr. No\" (1962). When the novel reached best-seller status, Eon Productions film producers Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli approached Deighton to write the script for the second Bond film, \"From Russia with Love\" (1963). Little of Deighton's screenplay was actually used on the shoot. Saltzman decided instead to make use of \"The IPCRESS File\" in the expectation of beginning a new secret agent film series. Unlike the Bond films, \"The Ipcress File\" was designed to have a somewhat different, mostly rather naturalistic style, with hints of the kitchen sink school, film adaptations of which Saltzman had produced. Saltzman, however, also contracted crew members who had worked on the Bond films, including production designer Ken Adam, film editor Peter Hunt, and film score composer John Barry. Michael Caine was chosen to play the lead role.\nIn the film version, Harry Palmer is a British Army sergeant forcibly drafted into the security services to work away a prison sentence for black marketeering. He worked first for Army Intelligence, then the Foreign Office. He works for the brilliant but slightly duplicitous Colonel Ross. Harry Palmer has much in common with Deighton, including passions for military history (Harvey Newbegin complains about his bookshelf contents in \"Billion Dollar Brain\"), cooking, and classical music.\nSequels.\nAfter the release of \"The Ipcress File\" (1965), Saltzman's production company made \"Funeral in Berlin\" (1966) and \"Billion Dollar Brain\" (1967), both starring Michael Caine. The second Harry Palmer novel \"Horse Under Water\" was not used. In 1976, Deighton's novel \"Spy Story\" was filmed with Michael Petrovitch as 'Patrick Armstrong'; it is unrelated to Saltzman's Harry Palmer films.\nIn the mid-1990s, two further Harry Palmer films were released, this time with original screenplays and with Michael Caine returning to the role. These were \"Bullet to Beijing\" (1995) and \"Midnight in Saint Petersburg\" (1996). Despite sometimes being titled \"Len Deighton's Bullet to Beijing\" and \"Len Deighton's Midnight in St Petersburg\", Deighton did not participate in the production of these films.\nAllusions.\nEvidence of Michael Caine's popular identification as Harry Palmer can be seen in films such as \"Blue Ice\" (1992), where he plays an ex-spy named 'Harry', and who has many similarities to Harry Palmer.\nCaine's Harry Palmer character (with the glasses, the girls, and disregard for authority) was an influence for Mike Myers\u2019 spy action comedy films \"Austin Powers\". At Myers's request, Caine starred in \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\" (2002), with his portrayal of Nigel Powers, father of secret agent Austin Powers, a spoof of Harry Palmer.\nIn \"\" (2014), Caine portrays the bespectacled head of a secret espionage unit.\nTelevision.\nA television adaptation of the same name, directed by James Watkins and starring Joe Cole as Palmer, premiered on ITV on 6 March 2022.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54089", "revid": "50925479", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54089", "title": "List of tram and light rail transit systems", "text": "The following is a list of cities that have current tram/streetcar (including heritage trams/heritage streetcars), or light rail systems as part of their regular public transit systems. In other words, this list only includes systems which operate year-round and provide actual transit service, not ones that are primarily tourist services, are seasonal-only, or are excursion-type tram operations.\nSome transit systems branded as \"light rail\" such as the Docklands Light Railway in London or the Ampang and Kelana Jaya lines of Kuala Lumpur qualify as metro systems (see medium-capacity rail system) and thus are not listed here \u2013 see List of metro systems.\nOnly \"currently operational\" tram and LRT systems are included in this listing \u2013 tram and LRT systems that have \"suspended operation\" or are presently under construction are \"excluded\".\nAfrica.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAsia.\nAll systems in Russia, including those in Asia, are listed together, for convenience, in the Europe section of this article, similarly all systems in Egypt are listed in the Africa section.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEurope.\nAll systems in Kazakhstan and Turkey, including those in Europe, are listed together, for convenience, in the Asia section of this article. All systems in Russia, including those in Asia, are listed together, for convenience, in this section.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNorth America.\nThe following systems provide regular transit service daily and year-round in North America, including those systems or lines using vintage or faux-vintage streetcars. For other heritage streetcar lines, ones with more limited service, see Streetcars in North America. North America, specifically more so the United States, once had extensive tram networks in almost all cities, but nearly all were removed for bus operations between the 1940s and the 1960s. These systems are listed at List of streetcar systems in the United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOceania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSouth America.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54090", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54090", "title": "Black helicopter conspiracy theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "54092", "revid": "2246483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54092", "title": "Vitamin B1", "text": ""}
{"id": "54093", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54093", "title": "Vitamin B2", "text": ""}
{"id": "54095", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54095", "title": "Vitamin B5", "text": ""}
{"id": "54098", "revid": "1311917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54098", "title": "Vitamin P", "text": ""}
{"id": "54099", "revid": "50631779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54099", "title": "Pantothenic acid", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPantothenic acid (vitamin B5) is a B vitamin and an essential nutrient. All animals need pantothenic acid in order to synthesize coenzyme A (CoA), which is essential for cellular energy production and for the synthesis and degradation of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats.\nPantothenic acid is the combination of pantoic acid and \u03b2-alanine. Its name comes from the Greek \"pantothen\", meaning \"from everywhere\", because pantothenic acid, at least in small amounts, is in almost all foods. Deficiency of pantothenic acid is very rare in humans. In dietary supplements and animal feed, the form commonly used is calcium pantothenate, because chemically it is more stable, and hence makes for longer product shelf-life, than sodium pantothenate and free pantothenic acid.\nDefinition.\nPantothenic acid is a water-soluble vitamin, one of the B vitamins. It is synthesized from the amino acid \u03b2-alanine and pantoic acid (see biosynthesis and structure of coenzyme A figures). Unlike vitamin E or vitamin K, which occurs in several chemically related forms known as vitamers, pantothenic acid is only one chemical compound. It is a starting compound in the synthesis of coenzyme A (CoA), a cofactor for many enzyme processes.\nUse in biosynthesis of coenzyme A.\nPantothenic acid is a precursor to CoA via a five-step process. The biosynthesis requires pantothenic acid, cysteine, and four equivalents of ATP (see figure). \nThis pathway is suppressed by end-product inhibition, meaning that CoA is a competitive inhibitor of pantothenate kinase, the enzyme responsible for the first step.\nCoenzyme A is necessary in the reaction mechanism of the citric acid cycle. This process is the body's primary catabolic pathway and is essential in breaking down the building blocks of the cell such as carbohydrates, amino acids and lipids, for fuel. CoA is important in energy metabolism for pyruvate to enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) as acetyl-CoA, and for \u03b1-ketoglutarate to be transformed to succinyl-CoA in the cycle. CoA is also required for acylation and acetylation, which, for example, are involved in signal transduction, and various enzyme functions. In addition to functioning as CoA, this compound can act as an acyl group carrier to form acetyl-CoA and other related compounds; this is a way to transport carbon atoms within the cell. CoA is also required in the formation of acyl carrier protein (ACP), which is required for fatty acid synthesis. Its synthesis also connects with other vitamins such as thiamin and folic acid.\nDietary recommendations.\nThe US Institute of Medicine (IOM) updated Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for B vitamins in 1998. At that time, there was not sufficient information to establish EARs and RDAs for pantothenic acid. In instances such as this, the Board sets Adequate Intakes (AIs), with the understanding that at some later date, AIs may be replaced by more exact information.\nThe current AI for teens and adults ages 14 and up is 5\u00a0mg/day. This was based in part on the observation that for a typical diet, urinary excretion was approximately 2.6\u00a0mg/day, and that bioavailability of food-bound pantothenic acid was roughly 50%. AI for pregnancy is 6\u00a0mg/day. AI for lactation is 7\u00a0mg/day. For infants up to 12 months, the AI is 1.8\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 1\u201313 years, the AI increases with age from 2 to 4\u00a0mg/day. Collectively the EARs, RDAs, AIs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs).\nWhile for many nutrients, the US Department of Agriculture uses food composition data combined with food consumption survey results to estimate average consumption, the surveys and reports do not include pantothenic acid in the analyses. Less formal estimates of adult daily intakes report about 4 to 7\u00a0mg/day.\nThe European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR. AI and UL are defined the same as in the US. For women and men over age 11, the Adequate Intake (AI) is set at 5\u00a0mg/day. AI for pregnancy is 5\u00a0mg/day, for lactation 7\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 1\u201310 years, the AI is 4\u00a0mg/day. These AIs are similar to the US AIs.\nSafety.\nAs for safety, the IOM sets Tolerable upper intake levels (ULs) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient. In the case of pantothenic acid, there is no UL, as there is no human data for adverse effects from high doses. The EFSA also reviewed the safety question and reached the same conclusion as in the United States \u2013 that there was not sufficient evidence to set a UL for pantothenic acid.\nLabeling requirements.\nFor US food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value (%DV). For pantothenic acid labeling purposes, 100% of the Daily Value was 10\u00a0mg, but as of May 2016 it was revised to 5\u00a0mg to bring it into agreement with the AI. \nCompliance with the updated labeling regulations was required by January 2020 for manufacturers with US$10\u00a0million or more in annual food sales, and by January 2021 for manufacturers with lower volume food sales. A table of the old and new adult daily values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.\nSources.\nDietary.\nFood sources of pantothenic acid include animal-sourced foods, including dairy foods and eggs. Potatoes, tomato products, oat-cereals, sunflower seeds, avocado are good plant sources. Mushrooms are good sources, too. Whole grains are another source of the vitamin, but milling to make white rice or white flour removes much of the pantothenic acid, as it is found in the outer layers of whole grains. In animal feeds, the most important sources are alfalfa, cereal, fish meal, peanut meal, molasses, rice bran, wheat bran, and yeasts.\nSupplements.\nDietary supplements of pantothenic acid commonly use pantothenol (or \"panthenol\"), a shelf-stable analog, which is converted to pantothenic acid once consumed. Calcium pantothenate \u2013 a salt \u2013 may be used in manufacturing because it is more resistant than pantothenic acid to factors that deteriorate stability, such as acid, alkali or heat. The amount of pantothenic acid in dietary supplement products may contain up to 1,000\u00a0mg (200 times the Adequate Intake level for adults), without evidence that such large amounts provide any benefit. According to WebMD, pantothenic acid supplements have a long list of claimed uses, but there is insufficient scientific evidence to support any of them.\nAs a dietary supplement, pantothenic acid is not the same as pantethine, which is composed of two pantothenic acid molecules linked by a disulfide bridge. Sold as a high-dose supplement (600\u00a0mg), pantethine may be effective for lowering blood levels of LDL cholesterol \u2013 a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases \u2013 but its long-term effects are unknown, so use should be supervised by a physician. Dietary supplementation with pantothenic acid does not have the cholesterol-lowering effect as pantethine.\nFortification.\nAccording to the Global Fortification Data Exchange, pantothenic acid deficiency is so rare that no countries require that foods be fortified.\nAbsorption, metabolism and excretion.\nWhen found in foods, most pantothenic acid is in the form of CoA or bound to acyl carrier protein (ACP). For the intestinal cells to absorb this vitamin, it must be converted into free pantothenic acid. Within the lumen of the intestine, CoA and ACP are hydrolyzed into 4'-phosphopantetheine. The 4'-phosphopantetheine is then dephosphorylated into pantetheine. Pantetheinase, an intestinal enzyme, then hydrolyzes pantetheine into free pantothenic acid. Free pantothenic acid is absorbed into intestinal cells via a saturable, sodium-dependent active transport system. At high levels of intake, when this mechanism is saturated, some pantothenic acid may also be additionally absorbed via passive diffusion. As a whole, when intake increases 10-fold, absorption rate decreases to 10%.\nPantothenic acid is excreted in urine. This occurs after its release from CoA. Urinary amounts are on the order of 2.6\u00a0mg/day, but decreased to negligible amounts when subjects in multi-week experimental situations were fed diets devoid of the vitamin.\nMutation of pantothenate kinase (the first enzyme in the pathway converting pantothenic acid to CoA) is the cause of pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), a rare neurodegenerative disease. \nDeficiency.\nPantothenic acid deficiency in humans is very rare and has not been thoroughly studied. In the few cases where deficiency has been seen (prisoners of war during World War II, victims of starvation, or limited volunteer trials), nearly all symptoms were reversed with orally administered pantothenic acid. Symptoms of deficiency are similar to other vitamin B deficiencies. There is impaired energy production, due to low CoA levels, which could cause symptoms of irritability, fatigue, and apathy. Acetylcholine synthesis is also impaired; therefore, neurological symptoms can also appear in deficiency; they include sensation of numbness or burning in hands and feet, paresthesia and muscle cramps. Additional symptoms could include restlessness, malaise, sleep disturbances, nausea, vomiting and abdominal cramps.\nIn animals, symptoms include disorders of the nervous, gastrointestinal, and immune systems, reduced growth rate, decreased food intake, skin lesions and changes in hair coat, and alterations in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. In rodents, there can be loss of hair color, which led to marketing of pantothenic acid as a dietary supplement which could prevent or treat graying of hair in humans (despite the lack of any human trial evidence).\nPantothenic acid status can be assessed by measuring either whole blood concentration or 24-hour urinary excretion. In humans, whole blood values less than 1\u00a0\u03bcmol/L are considered low, as is urinary excretion of less than 4.56\u00a0mmol/day.\nAnimal nutrition.\nCalcium pantothenate and dexpanthenol (D-panthenol) are European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) approved additives to animal feed. Supplementation is on the order of 8\u201320\u00a0mg/kg for pigs, 10\u201315\u00a0mg/kg for poultry, 30\u201350\u00a0mg/kg for fish and 8\u201314\u00a0mg/kg feed for pets. These are recommended concentrations, designed to be higher than what are thought to be requirements. There is some evidence that feed supplementation increases pantothenic acid concentration in tissues, i.e., meat, consumed by humans, and also for eggs, but this raises no concerns for consumer safety.\nNo dietary requirement for pantothenic acid has been established in ruminant species. Synthesis of pantothenic acid by ruminal microorganisms appears to be 20 to 30 times more than dietary amounts. Net microbial synthesis of pantothenic acid in the rumen of steer calves has been estimated to be 2.2\u00a0mg/kg of digestible organic matter consumed per day. Supplementation of pantothenic acid at 5 to 10 times theoretical requirements did not improve growth performance of feedlot cattle.\nSynthesis.\nBiosynthesis.\nBacteria synthesize pantothenic acid from the amino acids aspartate and a precursor to the amino acid valine. Aspartate is converted to \u03b2-alanine. The amino group of valine is replaced by a keto-moiety to yield \u03b1-ketoisovalerate, which, in turn, forms \u03b1-ketopantoate following transfer of a methyl group, then D-pantoate (also known as pantoic acid) following reduction. \u03b2-alanine and pantoic acid are then condensed to form pantothenic acid (see figure).\nIndustrial synthesis.\nThe industrial synthesis of pantothenic acid starts with the aldol condensation of isobutyraldehyde and formaldehyde. The resulting hydroxypivaldehyde is converted to its cyanohydrin derivative. which is cyclised to give racemic pantolactone. This sequence of reactions was first published in 1904.\nSynthesis of the vitamin is completed by resolution of the lactone using quinine, for example, followed by treatment with the calcium or sodium salt of \u03b2-alanine.\nHistory.\nThe term \"vitamin\" is derived from the word \"vitamine\", which was coined in 1912 by Polish biochemist Casimir Funk, who isolated a complex of water-soluble micronutrients essential to life, all of which he presumed to be amines. When this presumption was later determined not to be true, the \"e\" was dropped from the name, hence \"vitamin\". Vitamin nomenclature was alphabetical, with Elmer McCollum calling these fat-soluble A and water-soluble B. Over time, eight chemically distinct, water-soluble B vitamins were isolated and numbered, with pantothenic acid as vitamin B5.\nThe essential nature of pantothenic acid was discovered by Roger J. Williams in 1933 by showing it was required for the growth of yeast. Three years later Elvehjem and Jukes demonstrated that it was a growth and anti-dermatitis factor in chickens. Williams dubbed the compound \"pantothenic acid\", deriving the name from the Greek word \"pantothen\", which translates as \"from everywhere\". His reason was that he found it to be present in almost every food he tested. Williams went on to determine the chemical structure in 1940. In 1953, Fritz Lipmann shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine \"for his discovery of co-enzyme A and its importance for intermediary metabolism\", work he had published in 1946.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54100", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54100", "title": "Nicotinic Acid", "text": ""}
{"id": "54102", "revid": "491706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54102", "title": "Pyrodoxine", "text": ""}
{"id": "54104", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54104", "title": "Vitamin E", "text": "Class of 8 chemically related vitamins\nVitamin E is a group of eight compounds related in molecular structure that includes four tocopherols and four tocotrienols. The tocopherols function as fat-soluble antioxidants which may help protect cell membranes from reactive oxygen species.\nVitamin E is classified as an essential nutrient for humans. Various government organizations recommend that adults consume between 3 and 15\u00a0mg per day, while a 2016 worldwide review reported a median dietary intake of 6.2\u00a0mg per day. Sources rich in vitamin E include seeds, nuts, seed oils, peanut butter, vitamin E\u2013fortified foods, and dietary supplements. Symptomatic vitamin E deficiency is rare, usually caused by an underlying problem with digesting dietary fat rather than from a diet low in vitamin E. Deficiency can cause neurological disorders.\nTocopherols and tocotrienols both occur in \u03b1 (alpha), \u03b2 (beta), \u03b3 (gamma), and \u03b4 (delta) forms, as determined by the number and position of methyl groups on the chromanol ring. All eight of these vitamers feature a chromane double ring, with a hydroxyl group that can donate a hydrogen atom to reduce free radicals, and a hydrophobic side chain that allows for penetration into biological membranes. Both natural and synthetic tocopherols are subject to oxidation, so dietary supplements are esterified, creating tocopheryl acetate, (or other forms such as succinate or palmitate) for stability purposes.\nPopulation studies have suggested that people who consumed foods with more vitamin E, or who chose on their own to consume a vitamin E dietary supplement, had lower incidence of cardiovascular diseases, cancer, dementia, and other diseases. However, placebo-controlled clinical trials using alpha-tocopherol as a supplement, with daily amounts as high as 2,000\u00a0mg per day, could not always replicate these findings. In the United States, vitamin E supplement use peaked around 2002, but had declined by over 50% by 2006. Declining use was theorized to be due to publications of meta-analyses that showed either no benefits or actual negative consequences from high-dose vitamin E.\nVitamin E was discovered in 1922, isolated in 1935, and first synthesized in 1938. Because the vitamin activity was first identified as essential for fertilized eggs to result in live births (in rats), it was given the name \"tocopherol\" from Greek words meaning \"birth\" and \"to bear\" or \"carry\". Alpha-tocopherol, either naturally extracted from plant oils or, most commonly, as the synthetic tocopheryl acetate, is sold as a popular dietary supplement, either by itself or incorporated into a multivitamin product, and in oils or lotions for use on skin.\nChemistry.\nThe nutritional content of vitamin E is defined by equivalency to 100% RRR-configuration \u03b1-tocopherol activity. The molecules that contribute \u03b1-tocopherol activity are four tocopherols and four tocotrienols, within each group of four identified by the prefixes alpha- (\u03b1-), beta- (\u03b2-), gamma- (\u03b3-), and delta- (\u03b4-). For alpha(\u03b1)-tocopherol each of the three \"R\" sites has a methyl group (CH3) attached. For beta(\u03b2)-tocopherol: R1 = methyl group, R2 = H, R3 = methyl group. For gamma(\u03b3)-tocopherol: R1 = H, R2 = methyl group, R3 = methyl group. For delta(\u03b4)-tocopherol: R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = methyl group. The same configurations exist for the tocotrienols, except that the unsaturated side chain has three carbon-carbon double bonds whereas the tocopherols have a saturated side chain.\nStereoisomers.\nIn addition to distinguishing tocopherols and tocotrienols by position of methyl groups, the tocopherols have a phytyl tail with three chiral points or centers that can have a right or left orientation. The naturally occurring plant form of alpha-tocopherol is RRR-\u03b1-tocopherol, also referred to as d-tocopherol, whereas the synthetic form (all-racemic or \"all-rac\" vitamin E, also dl-tocopherol) is equal parts of eight stereoisomers RRR, RRS, RSS, SSS, RSR, SRS, SRR and SSR with progressively decreasing biological equivalency, so that 1.36\u00a0mg of dl-tocopherol is considered equivalent to 1.0\u00a0mg of d-tocopherol, the natural form. Rephrased, the synthetic has 73.5% of the potency of the natural.\nTocopherols.\nAlpha-tocopherol is a fat-soluble antioxidant functioning within the glutathione peroxidase pathway, and protecting cell membranes from oxidation by reacting with lipid radicals produced in the lipid peroxidation chain reaction. This removes the free radical intermediates and prevents the oxidation reaction from continuing. The oxidized \u03b1-tocopheroxyl radicals produced in this process may be recycled back to the active reduced form through reduction by other antioxidants, such as ascorbate, retinol or ubiquinol. Other forms of vitamin E have their own unique properties; for example, \u03b3-tocopherol is a nucleophile that can react with electrophilic mutagens.\nTocotrienols.\nThe four tocotrienols (alpha, beta, gamma, delta) are similar in structure to the four tocopherols, with the main difference being that the former have hydrophobic side chains with three carbon-carbon double bonds, whereas the tocopherols have saturated side chains. For \"alpha(\u03b1)\"-tocotrienol each of the three \"R\" sites has a methyl group (CH3) attached. For \"beta(\u03b2)\"-tocotrienol: R1 = methyl group, R2 = H, R3 = methyl group. For \"gamma(\u03b3)\"-tocotrienol: R1 = H, R2 = methyl group, R3 = methyl group. For \"delta(\u03b4)\"-tocotrienol: R1 = H, R2 = H, R3 = methyl group. Tocotrienols have only a single chiral center, which exists at the 2' chromanol ring carbon, at the point where the isoprenoid tail joins the ring. The other two corresponding centers in the phytyl tail of the corresponding tocopherols do not exist as chiral centers for tocotrienols due to unsaturation (C-C double bonds) at these sites. Tocotrienols extracted from plants are always dextrorotatory stereoisomers, signified as d-tocotrienols. In theory, levorotatory forms of tocotrienols (l-tocotrienols) could exist as well, which would have a 2S rather than 2R configuration at the molecules' single chiral center, but unlike synthetic dl-alpha-tocopherol, the marketed tocotrienol dietary supplements are extracted from palm oil or rice bran oil.\nTocotrienols are not essential nutrients; government organizations have not specified an estimated average requirement or recommended dietary allowance. A number of health benefits of tocotrienols have been proposed, including decreased risk of age-associated cognitive impairment, heart disease and cancer. Reviews of human research linked tocotrienol treatment to improved biomarkers for inflammation and cardiovascular disease, although those reviews did not report any information on clinically significant disease outcomes. Biomarkers for other diseases were not affected by tocotrienol supplementation.\nFunctions.\nVitamin E may have various roles as a vitamin. Many biological functions have been postulated, including a role as a lipid-soluble antioxidant. In this role, vitamin E acts as a radical scavenger, delivering a hydrogen (H) atom to free radicals. At 323 kJ/mol, the O-H bond in tocopherols is about 10% weaker than in most other phenols. This weak bond allows the vitamin to donate a hydrogen atom to the peroxyl radical and other free radicals, minimizing their damaging effect. The thus-generated tocopheryl radical is recycled to tocopherol by a redox reaction with a hydrogen donor, such as vitamin C.\nVitamin E affects gene expression and is an enzyme activity regulator, such as for protein kinase C (PKC) \u2013 which plays a role in smooth muscle growth \u2013 with vitamin E participating in deactivation of PKC to inhibit smooth muscle growth.\nSynthesis.\nBiosynthesis.\nPhotosynthesizing plants, algae, and cyanobacteria synthesize tocochromanols, the chemical family of compounds made up of four tocopherols and four tocotrienols; in a nutrition context this family is referred to as Vitamin E. Biosynthesis starts with formation of the closed-ring part of the molecule as homogentisic acid (HGA). The side chain is attached (saturated for tocopherols, polyunsaturated for tocotrienols). The pathway for both is the same, so that gamma- is created and from that alpha-, or delta- is created and from that the beta- compounds. Biosynthesis takes place in the plastids.\nThe main reason plants synthesize tocochromanols appears to be for antioxidant activity. Different parts of plants, and different species, are dominated by different tocochromanols. The predominant form in leaves, and hence leafy green vegetables, is \u03b1-tocopherol. Located in chloroplast membranes in close proximity to the photosynthetic process, they protect against damage from the ultraviolet radiation of sunlight. Under normal growing conditions, the presence of \u03b1-tocopherol does not appear to be essential, as there are other photo-protective compounds; plants that, through mutations, have lost the ability to synthesize \u03b1-tocopherol demonstrate normal growth. However, under stressed growing conditions such as drought, elevated temperature, or salt-induced oxidative stress, the plants' physiological status is superior if it has the normal synthesis capacity.\nSeeds are lipid-rich to provide energy for germination and early growth. Tocochromanols protect the seed lipids from oxidizing and becoming rancid. The presence of tocochromanols extends seed longevity and promotes successful germination and seedling growth. Gamma-tocopherol dominates in seeds of most plant species, but there are exceptions. For canola, corn and soy bean oils, there is more \u03b3-tocopherol than \u03b1-tocopherol, but for safflower, sunflower and olive oils the reverse is true. Of the commonly used food oils, palm oil is unique in that tocotrienol content is higher than tocopherol content. Seed tocochromanols content is also dependent on environmental stressors. In almonds, for example, drought or elevated temperature increase \u03b1-tocopherol and \u03b3-tocopherol content of the nuts. Drought increases the tocopherol content of olives, and heat likewise for soybeans.\nVitamin E biosynthesis occurs in the plastid and goes through two different pathways: the Shikimate pathway and the Methylerythritol Phosphate pathway (MEP pathway).\nThe Shikimate pathway generates the chromanol ring from the Homogentisic Acid (HGA), and the MEP pathway produces the hydrophobic tail which differs between tocopherol and tocotrienol. The synthesis of the specific tail is dependent on which molecule it originates from. In a tocopherol, its prenyl tail emerges from the geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGDP) group, while the phytyl tail of a tocotrienol stems from a phytyl diphosphate.\nIndustrial synthesis.\nThe synthetic product is all-rac-alpha-tocopherol, also referred to as dl-alpha tocopherol. It consists of eight stereoisomers (RRR, RRS, RSS, RSR, SRR, SSR, SRS and SSS) in equal quantities. \"It is synthesized from a mixture of toluene and 2,3,5-trimethyl-hydroquinone that reacts with isophytol to all-rac-alpha-tocopherol, using iron in the presence of hydrogen chloride gas as catalyst. The reaction mixture obtained is filtered and extracted with aqueous caustic soda. Toluene is removed by evaporation and the residue (all rac-alpha-tocopherol) is purified by vacuum distillation.\" The natural alpha tocopherol extracted from plants is RRR-alpha tocopherol, referred to as d-alpha-tocopherol. The synthetic has 73.5% of the potency of the natural. Manufacturers of dietary supplements and fortified foods for humans or domesticated animals convert the phenol form of the vitamin to an ester using either acetic acid or succinic acid because the esters are more chemically stable, providing for a longer shelf-life.\nDeficiency.\nA worldwide summary of more than one hundred human studies reported a median of 22.1\u00a0\u03bcmol/L for serum \u03b1-tocopherol and defined \u03b1-tocopherol deficiency as less than 12\u00a0\u03bcmol/L. It cited a recommendation that serum \u03b1-tocopherol concentration be \u226530\u00a0\u03bcmol/L to optimize health benefits. In contrast, the U.S. Dietary Reference Intake text for vitamin E concluded that a plasma concentration of 12\u00a0\u03bcmol/L was sufficient to achieve normal ex vivo hydrogen peroxide-induced hemolysis. A 2014 review defined less than 9\u00a0\u03bcmol/L as deficient, 9-12\u00a0\u03bcmol/L as marginal, and greater than 12\u00a0\u03bcmol/L as adequate.\nRegardless of which definition is used, vitamin E deficiency is rare in humans, occurring as a consequence of abnormalities in dietary fat absorption or metabolism rather than from a diet low in vitamin E. Cystic fibrosis and other fat malabsorption conditions can result in low serum vitamin E. One example of a genetic abnormality in metabolism is mutations of genes coding for alpha-tocopherol transfer protein (\u03b1-TTP). Humans with this genetic defect exhibit a progressive neurodegenerative disorder known as ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) despite consuming normal amounts of vitamin E. Large amounts of alpha-tocopherol as a dietary supplement are needed to compensate for the lack of \u03b1-TTP.\nBariatric surgery as a treatment for obesity can lead to vitamin deficiencies. Long-term follow-up reported a 16.5% prevalence of vitamin E deficiency. There are guidelines for multivitamin supplementation, but adherence rates are reported to be less than 20%.\nVitamin E deficiency due to either malabsorption or metabolic anomaly can cause nerve problems due to poor conduction of electrical impulses along nerves due to changes in nerve membrane structure and function. In addition to ataxia, vitamin E deficiency can cause peripheral neuropathy, myopathies, retinopathy, and impairment of immune responses.\nDrug interactions.\nThe amounts of alpha-tocopherol, other tocopherols, and tocotrienols that are components of dietary vitamin E, when consumed from foods, do not appear to cause any interactions with drugs. Consumption of alpha-tocopherol as a dietary supplement in amounts in excess of 300\u00a0mg/day may lead to interactions with aspirin, warfarin, tamoxifen and cyclosporine A in ways that alter function. For aspirin and warfarin, high amounts of vitamin E may potentiate anti-blood clotting action. In multiple clinical trials, vitamin E lowered blood concentration of the immunosuppressant medication cyclosporine A. The US National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements, raises a concern that co-administration of vitamin E could counter the mechanisms of anti-cancer radiation therapy and some types of chemotherapy, and so advises against its use in these patient populations. The references it cites report instances of reduced treatment adverse effects, but also poorer cancer survival, raising the possibility of tumor protection from the intended oxidative damage by the treatments.\nDietary recommendations.\nThe U.S. National Academy of Medicine updated estimated average requirements (EARs) and recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) for vitamin E in 2000. RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher than average requirements. Adequate intakes (AIs) are identified when there is not sufficient information to set EARs and RDAs. The EAR for vitamin E for women and men ages 14 and up is 12\u00a0mg/day. The RDA is 15\u00a0mg/day. As for safety, tolerable upper intake levels (\"upper limits\" or ULs) are set for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient. Hemorrhagic effects in rats were selected as the critical endpoint to calculate the upper limit via starting with the lowest-observed-adverse-effect-level. The result was a human upper limit set at 1000\u00a0mg/day. Collectively the EARs, RDAs, AIs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes.\nThe European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as dietary reference values, with population reference intakes (PRIs) instead of RDAs, and average requirements instead of EARs. AIs and ULs are defined the same as in the United States. For women and men ages 10 and older, the PRIs are set at 11 and 13\u00a0mg/day, respectively. PRI for pregnancy is 11\u00a0mg/day, for lactation 11\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 1\u20139 years the PRIs increase with age from 6 to 9\u00a0mg/day. The EFSA used an effect on blood clotting as a safety-critical effect. It identified that no adverse effects were observed in a human trial as 540\u00a0mg/day, used an uncertainty factor of 2 to derive an upper limit of half of that, then rounded to 300\u00a0mg/day.\nThe People's Republic of China publishes dietary guidelines without specifics for individual vitamins or minerals. The United Kingdom recommends 4\u00a0mg/day for adult men and 3\u00a0mg/day for adult women. The Japan National Institute of Health and Nutrition set adult AIs at 6.5\u00a0mg/day (females) and 7.0\u00a0mg/day (males), and 650\u2013700\u00a0mg/day (females), and 750\u2013900\u00a0mg/day (males) for upper limits (amounts depending on age). India recommends an adult intake of 7.5\u201310\u00a0mg/day and does not set an upper limit. The World Health Organization recommends that adults consume 10\u00a0mg/day.\nConsumption tends to be below these recommendations. A worldwide summary reported a median dietary intake of 6.2\u00a0mg/d for alpha-tocopherol.\nFood labeling.\nFor US food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of daily value. For vitamin E labeling purposes 100% of the daily value was 30 international units (IUs), but as of May 2016, it was revised to 15\u00a0mg to bring it into agreement with the RDA. A table of the old and new adult daily values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.\nEuropean Union regulations require that labels declare energy, protein, fat, saturated fat, carbohydrates, sugars, and salt. Voluntary nutrients may be shown if present in significant amounts. Instead of daily values, amounts are shown as percent of reference intakes (RIs). For vitamin E, 100% RI was set at 12\u00a0mg in 2011.\nThe international unit measurement was used by the United States in 1968\u20132016. 1 IU is the biological equivalent of about 0.667\u00a0mg d (RRR)-alpha-tocopherol (2/3\u00a0mg exactly), or of 0.90\u00a0mg of dl-alpha-tocopherol, corresponding to the then-measured relative potency of stereoisomers. In May 2016, the measurements were revised, such that 1\u00a0mg of \"Vitamin E\" is 1\u00a0mg of d-alpha-tocopherol or 2\u00a0mg of dl-alpha-tocopherol. The change was originally started in 2000, when forms of vitamin E other than alpha-tocopherol were dropped from dietary calculations by the IOM. The UL amount disregards any conversion. The EFSA has never used an IU unit, and their measurement only considers RRR-alpha-tocopherol.\nSources.\nOf the different forms of vitamin E, gamma-tocopherol (\u03b3-tocopherol) is the most common form found in the North American diet, but alpha-tocopherol (\u03b1-tocopherol) is the most biologically active.\nThe U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Agricultural Research Services, maintains a food composition database. The last major revision was Release 28, September 2015. Common naturally occurring vitamin E sources are shown in the table, as are some alpha-tocopherol fortified sources such as ready-to-eat cereals, infant formulas, and liquid nutrition products.\nTocotrienols occur in some food sources, the richest being palm oil, and to a lesser extent rice bran oil, barley, oats, and certain seeds, nuts and grains, and the oils derived from them.\nSupplements.\nVitamin E is fat soluble, so dietary supplement products are usually in the form of the vitamin, esterified with acetic acid to generate tocopheryl acetate, and dissolved in vegetable oil in a softgel capsule. For alpha-tocopherol, amounts range from 100 to 1000 IU per serving. Smaller amounts are incorporated into multi-vitamin/mineral tablets. Gamma-tocopherol and tocotrienol supplements are also available from dietary supplement companies. The latter are extracts from palm oil.\nFortification.\nThe World Health Organization does not have any recommendations for food fortification with vitamin E. The Food Fortification Initiative does not list any countries that have mandatory or voluntary programs for vitamin E. Infant formulas have alpha-tocopherol as an ingredient. In some countries, certain brands of ready-to-eat cereals, liquid nutrition products, and other foods have alpha-tocopherol as an added ingredient.\nNon-nutrient food additives.\nVarious forms of vitamin E are common food additives in oily food, used to deter rancidity caused by peroxidation. Those with an E number include:\nThese E numbers include all racemic forms and acetate esters thereof. Commonly found on food labels in Europe and some other countries, their safety assessment and approval are the responsibility of the European Food Safety Authority.\nAbsorption, metabolism, and excretion.\nTocotrienols and tocopherols, the latter including the stereoisomers of synthetic alpha-tocopherol, are absorbed from the intestinal lumen, incorporated into chylomicrons, and secreted into the portal vein, leading to the liver. Absorption efficiency is estimated at 51% to 86%, and that applies to all of the vitamin E family \u2013 there is no discrimination among the vitamin E vitamers during absorption. Bile is necessary for chylomicron formation, so disease conditions such as cystic fibrosis result in biliary insufficiency and vitamin E malabsorption. When consumed as an alpha-tocopheryl acetate dietary supplement, absorption is promoted when consumed with a fat-containing meal. Unabsorbed vitamin E is excreted via feces. Additionally, vitamin E is excreted by the liver via bile into the intestinal lumen, where it will either be reabsorbed or excreted via feces, and all of the vitamin E vitamers are metabolized and then excreted via urine.\nUpon reaching the liver, RRR-alpha-tocopherol is preferentially taken up by alpha-tocopherol transfer protein (\u03b1-TTP). All other forms are degraded to 2'-carboxethyl-6-hydroxychromane (CEHC), a process that involves truncating the phytic tail of the molecule, then either sulfated or glucuronidated. This renders the molecules water-soluble and leads to excretion via urine. Alpha-tocopherol is also degraded by the same process, to 2,5,7,8-tetramethyl-2-(2'-carboxyethyl)-6-hydroxychromane (\u03b1-CEHC), but more slowly because it is partially protected by \u03b1-TTP. Large intakes of \u03b1-tocopherol result in increased urinary \u03b1-CEHC, so this appears to be a means of disposing of excess vitamin E.\nAlpha-tocopherol transfer protein is coded by the \"TTPA\" gene on chromosome 8. The binding site for RRR-\u03b1-tocopherol is a hydrophobic pocket with a lower affinity for beta-, gamma-, or delta-tocopherols, or for the stereoisomers with an S configuration at the chiral 2 site. Tocotrienols are also a poor fit because the double bonds in the phytic tail create a rigid configuration that is a mismatch with the \u03b1-TTP pocket. A rare genetic defect of the \"TTPA\" gene results in people exhibiting a progressive neurodegenerative disorder known as ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) despite consuming normal amounts of vitamin E. Large amounts of alpha-tocopherol as a dietary supplement are needed to compensate for the lack of \u03b1-TTP. The role of \u03b1-TTP is to move \u03b1-tocopherol to the plasma membrane of hepatocytes (liver cells), where it can be incorporated into newly created very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) molecules. These convey \u03b1-tocopherol to cells in the rest of the body. As an example of a result of the preferential treatment, the US diet delivers approximately 70\u00a0mg/d of \u03b3-tocopherol, and plasma concentrations are on the order of 2\u20135 \u03bcmol/L; meanwhile, dietary \u03b1-tocopherol is about 7\u00a0mg/d, but plasma concentrations are in the range of 11\u201337 \u03bcmol/L.\nAffinity of \u03b1-TTP for vitamin E vitamers\nMedical applications.\nVitamin E has been suggested as a supplement for helping many health conditions, mostly due to its antioxidant activity and potential to protect cells from oxidative damage. In the US, the vitamin is widely available as an over-the-counter supplement; however, medical evidence supporting its effectiveness and safety for treating or preventing a variety of health conditions is mixed. Vitamin E can also interact with some medications and other supplements. Vitamin E has been studied as a treatment for skin health and skin ageing, immune function, and managing conditions like cardiovascular disease or Alzheimer's disease (AD), or certain types of cancer. Most studies have found limited or inconclusive benefits and the potential for some risks. It is most often recommended to obtain vitamin E through a balanced diet because high-dose supplementation may have health risks. There is evidence that the sale of dietary supplement vitamin E has decreased by up to 33% following a report showing little or no effect of vitamin E in preventing cancer or cardiovascular disease.\nIn 2023, it was the 290th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 500,000 prescriptions.\nAll-cause mortality.\nTwo meta-analyses concluded that as a dietary supplement, vitamin E neither improved nor impaired all-cause mortality. A meta-analysis of long-term clinical trials reported a non-significant 2% increase in all-cause mortality when alpha-tocopherol was the only supplement used. The same journal article reported a statistically significant 3% increase for results when alpha-tocopherol was used in combination with other nutrients (vitamin A, vitamin C, beta-carotene, selenium).\nAge-related macular degeneration.\nA Cochrane review concluded that there were no changes seen for risk of developing age-related macular degeneration (AMD) from long-term vitamin E supplementation and that supplementation may slightly increase the chances of developing late AMD.\nCognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease.\nTwo meta-analyses reported lower vitamin E blood levels in AD people compared to healthy, age-matched people. However, a review of vitamin E supplementation trials concluded that there was insufficient evidence to state that supplementation reduced the risk of developing AD or slowed the progression of AD.\nCancer.\nIn a 2022 update of an earlier report, the United States Preventive Services Task Force recommended against the use of vitamin E supplements for the prevention of cardiovascular disease or cancer, concluding there was insufficient evidence to assess the balance of benefits and harms, yet also concluding with moderate certainty that there is no net benefit of supplementation.\nAs for literature on different types of cancer, an inverse relationship between dietary vitamin E and kidney cancer and bladder cancer is seen in observational studies. A large clinical trial reported no difference in bladder cancer cases between treatment and placebo.\nAn inverse relationship between dietary vitamin E and lung cancer was reported in observational studies, but a large clinical trial in male tobacco smokers reported no impact on lung cancer between treatment and placebo, and a trial which tracked people who chose to consume a vitamin E dietary supplement reported an increased risk of lung cancer for those consuming more than 215\u00a0mg/day.\nFor prostate cancer, there are also conflicting results. A meta-analysis based on serum alpha-tocopherol content reported an inverse correlation in relative risk, but a second meta-analysis of observational studies reported no such relationship. A large clinical trial with male tobacco smokers and reported a 32% decrease in the incidence of prostate cancer, but the SELECT trial of selenium or vitamin E for prostate cancer enrolled men ages 55 or older and reported relative risk 17% higher for the vitamin group.\nFor colorectal cancer, a systematic review of randomized clinical trials and the large SELECT trial reported no statistically significant change in relative risk. The Women's Health Study reported no significant differences for incidences of all types of cancer, cancer deaths, or specifically for breast, lung or colon cancers.\nPotential confounding factors are the form of vitamin E used in prospective studies and the amounts. Synthetic, racemic mixtures of vitamin E isomers are not bioequivalent to natural, non-racemic mixtures, yet are widely used in clinical trials and as dietary supplement ingredients. One review reported a modest increase in cancer risk with vitamin E supplementation while stating that more than 90% of the cited clinical trials used the synthetic, racemic form dl-alpha-tocopherol.\nCancer health claims.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration initiated a process of reviewing and approving food and dietary supplement health claims in 1993. Reviews of petitions results in proposed claims being rejected or approved. If approved, specific wording is allowed on package labels. In 1999, a second process for claims review was created. If there is not a scientific consensus on the totality of the evidence, a Qualified Health Claim (QHC) may be established. The FDA does not \"approve\" qualified health claim petitions. Instead, it issues a Letter of Enforcement Discretion that includes very specific claim language and the restrictions on using that wording. The first QHCs relevant to vitamin E were issued in 2003: \"Some scientific evidence suggests that consumption of antioxidant vitamins may reduce the risk of certain forms of cancer.\" In 2009, the claims became more specific, allowing that vitamin E might reduce the risk of renal, bladder and colorectal cancers, but with required mention that the evidence was deemed weak and the claimed benefits highly unlikely. A petition to add brain, cervical, gastric and lung cancers was rejected. A further revision, May 2012, allowed that vitamin E may reduce risk of renal, bladder and colorectal cancers, with a more concise qualifier sentence added: \"FDA has concluded that there is very little scientific evidence for this claim.\" Any company product label making the cancer claims has to include a qualifier sentence.\nCataracts.\nA review measured serum tocopherol and reported higher serum concentration was associated with a 23% reduction in relative risk of age-related cataracts (ARC), with the effect due to differences in nuclear cataract rather than cortical or posterior subcapsular cataract. In contrast, meta-analyses reporting on clinical trials of alpha-tocopherol supplementation reported no statistically significant change to risk of ARC compared to placebo.\nCardiovascular diseases.\nIn a 2022 update of an earlier report, the United States Preventive Services Task Force recommended against the use of vitamin E supplements for the prevention of cardiovascular disease or cancer, concluding there was insufficient evidence to assess the balance of benefits and harms, yet also concluding with moderate certainty that there is no net benefit of supplementation.\nResearch on the effects of vitamin E on cardiovascular disease has produced conflicting results. In theory, oxidative modification of LDL-cholesterol promotes blockages in coronary arteries that lead to atherosclerosis and heart attacks, so vitamin E functioning as an antioxidant would reduce oxidized cholesterol and lower risk of cardiovascular disease. Vitamin E status has also been implicated in the maintenance of normal endothelial cell function of cells lining the inner surface of arteries, anti-inflammatory activity and inhibition of platelet adhesion and aggregation. An inverse relation has been observed between coronary heart disease and the consumption of foods high in vitamin E, and also higher serum concentration of alpha-tocopherol. The problem with observational studies is that these cannot confirm a relation between the lower risk of coronary heart disease and vitamin E consumption diets higher in vitamin E may also be higher in other, unidentified components that promote heart health, or lower in diet components detrimental to heart health, or people choosing such diets may be making other healthy lifestyle choices.\nA meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) reported that when consumed without any other antioxidant nutrient, the relative risk of heart attack was reduced by 18%. However, two large trials that were incorporated into the meta-analysis either did not show any benefit for heart attack, stroke, coronary mortality or all-cause mortality, or else a higher risk of heart failure in the alpha-tocopherol group.\nVitamin E supplementation does not reduce the incidence of ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke. However, supplementation of vitamin E with other antioxidants reduced risk of ischemic stroke by 9% while increased the risk for hemorrhagic stroke by 22%.\nDenial of cardiovascular health claims.\nIn 2001, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration rejected proposed health claims for vitamin E and cardiovascular health. The U.S. National Institutes of Health reviewed literature published up to 2008 and concluded \"In general, clinical trials have not provided evidence that routine use of vitamin E supplements prevents cardiovascular disease or reduces its morbidity and mortality.\" The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) reviews proposed health claims for the European Union countries. In 2010, the EFSA reviewed and rejected claims that a cause and effect relationship has been established between the dietary intake of vitamin E and maintenance of normal cardiac function or of normal blood circulation.\nNonalcoholic fatty liver disease.\nSupplemental vitamin E significantly reduced elevated liver enzymes, steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis, suggesting that the vitamin may be useful for treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and the more extreme subset known as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in adults, but not in children.\nExercise recovery.\nIn healthy adults, after exercise, vitamin E was shown to not have any benefits for post-exercise recovery, as measured by muscle soreness and muscle strength, or measured by indicators for inflammation or muscle damage, such as interleukin-6 and creatine kinase.\nParkinson's disease.\nFor Parkinson's disease, there is an observed inverse correlation seen with dietary vitamin E, but no confirming evidence from placebo-controlled clinical trials.\nPregnancy.\nSupplementation with a combination of vitamins E and C during pregnancy is not recommended by the World Health Organization. A Cochrane review concluded there was no support for the combination reducing risk of stillbirth, neonatal death, preterm birth, preeclampsia, or any other maternal or infant outcomes, either in healthy women or those considered at risk for pregnancy complications.\nTopical applications.\nThere is widespread use of tocopheryl acetate in some skincare and wound-treatment products as a topical medication, with claims for improved wound healing and reduced scar tissue, but reviews have repeatedly concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support these claims. There are also reports of allergic contact dermatitis from use of vitamin-E derivatives such as tocopheryl linoleate and tocopherol acetate in skin care products.\nVaping-associated lung injury.\nThe US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) stated in February 2020 that previous research suggested inhaled vitamin E acetate (\u03b1-tocopheryl acetate) may interfere with normal lung functioning. In September 2019, the US Food and Drug Administration had announced that vape liquids linked to recent vaping related lung disease outbreak in the United States, tested positive for vitamin E acetate which had been used as a thickening agent by illicit THC vape cartridge manufacturers. By November 2019, the CDC had identified vitamin E acetate as a very strong culprit of concern in the vaping-related illnesses, but has not ruled out other chemicals or toxicants as possible causes. These findings were based on fluid samples from the lungs of people with vaping-associated pulmonary injury. Pyrolysis of vitamin E acetate produces exceptionally toxic ketene gas, along with carcinogenic alkenes and benzene.\nHistory.\nVitamin E was discovered in 1922 by Herbert McLean Evans and Katharine Scott Bishop and first isolated in a pure form by Evans and Gladys Anderson Emerson in 1935 at the University of California, Berkeley. Because the vitamin activity was first identified as a dietary fertility factor in rats, it was given the name \"tocopherol\" from the Greek words \"\u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2\" [t\u00f3kos, birth], and \"\u03c6\u03ad\u03c1\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd\", [ph\u00e9rein, to bear or carry] meaning in sum \"to carry a pregnancy,\" with the ending \"-ol\" signifying its status as a chemical alcohol. George M. Calhoun, Professor of Greek at the University of California, was credited with helping with the naming process. Erhard Fernholz elucidated its structure in 1938 and shortly afterward the same year, Paul Karrer and his team first synthesized it.\nNearly 50 years after the discovery of vitamin E, an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association titled \"Vitamin in search of a disease\" read in part \"...research revealed many of the vitamin's secrets, but no certain therapeutic use and no definite deficiency disease in man.\" The animal discovery experiments had been a requirement for successful pregnancy, but no benefits were observed for women prone to miscarriage. Evidence for vascular health was characterized as unconvincing. The editorial closed with mention of some preliminary human evidence for protection against hemolytic anemia in young children.\nA role for vitamin E in coronary heart disease was first proposed in 1946 by Evan Shute and colleagues. More cardiovascular work from the same research group followed, including a proposal that megadoses of vitamin E could slow down and even reverse the development of atherosclerosis. Subsequent research showed no association between vitamin E supplementation and cardiovascular events such as nonfatal stroke or myocardial infarction, or cardiovascular mortality.\nThere is a long history of belief that topical application of vitamin E containing oil benefits burn and wound healing. This belief persists even though scientific reviews refuted this claim.\nThe role of vitamin E in infant nutrition has a long research history. From 1949 onward there were trials with premature infants suggesting that oral alpha-tocopherol was protective against edema, intracranial hemorrhage, hemolytic anemia and retrolental fibroplasia. A more recent review concluded that vitamin E supplementation in preterm infants reduced the risk of intracranial hemorrhage and retinopathy, but noted an increased risk of sepsis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54105", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54105", "title": "Tocopherol", "text": "Antioxidant compounds with vitamin E activity\nTocopherols (; TCP) are a class of organic compounds comprising various methylated phenols, many of which have vitamin E activity. Because the vitamin activity was first identified in 1936 from a dietary fertility factor in rats, it was named \"tocopherol\", from Greek 'birth' and 'to bear or carry', that is 'to carry a pregnancy', with the ending \"-ol\" signifying its status as a chemical alcohol.\n\u03b1-Tocopherol is the main source found in supplements and in the European diet, where the main dietary sources are olive and sunflower oils, while \u03b3-tocopherol is the most common form in the American diet due to a higher intake of soybean and corn oil.\nForms.\nVitamin E exists in eight different forms, four tocopherols and four tocotrienols. All feature a chromane ring, with a hydroxyl group that can donate a hydrogen atom to reduce free radicals and a hydrophobic side chain that allows for penetration into biological membranes. Both the tocopherols and tocotrienols occur in \u03b1 (alpha), \u03b2 (beta), \u03b3 (gamma), and \u03b4 (delta) forms, determined by the number and position of methyl groups on the chromanol ring. \nThe tocotrienols have the same methyl structure at the ring and the same Greek-letter methyl notation, but differ from the analogous tocopherols by the presence of three double bonds in the hydrophobic side chain. The unsaturation of the tails gives tocotrienols only a single stereoisomeric carbon (and thus two possible isomers per structural formula, one of which occurs naturally), whereas tocopherols have three centers (and eight possible stereoisomers per structural formula, again, only one of which occurs naturally).\nEach form has a different biological activity.\nIn general, the unnatural l-isomers of tocotrienols lack almost all vitamin activity, and half of the possible 8 isomers of the tocopherols (those with 2S chirality at the ring\u2013tail junction) also lack vitamin activity. Of the stereoisomers that retain activity, increasing methylation, especially full methylation to the \u03b1-form, increases vitamin activity. In tocopherols, this is due to the higher binding energy of the \u03b1-tocopherol form of the vitamin to the tocopherol binding protein.\nAs a food additive, tocopherol is labeled with these E numbers: E306 (tocopherol), E307 (\u03b1-tocopherol), E308 (\u03b3-tocopherol), and E309 (\u03b4-tocopherol). All of these are approved in the US, EU, and Australia and New Zealand for use as antioxidants.\n\u03b1-Tocopherol.\n\u03b1-Tocopherol is the form of vitamin E that is preferentially absorbed and accumulated in humans. The measurement of \"vitamin\u00a0E\" activity in international units (IU) was based on fertility enhancement by the prevention of miscarriages in pregnant rats relative to \u03b1-tocopherol.\nAlthough the mono-methylated form ddd-\u03b3-tocopherol is the most prevalent form of vitamin E in oils, there is evidence that rats can methylate this form to the preferred \u03b1-tocopherol, since several generations of rats retained \u03b1-tocopherol tissue levels, even when those generations were fed only \u03b3-tocopherol through their lives.\nThere are three stereocenters in \u03b1-tocopherol, so this is a chiral molecule. The eight stereoisomers of \u03b1-tocopherol differ in the arrangement of groups around these stereocenters. In the image of \"RRR\"-\u03b1-tocopherol below, all three stereocenters are in the \"R\" form. However, if the middle of the three stereocenters were changed (so the hydrogen was now pointing down and the methyl group pointing up), this would become the structure of \"RSR\"-\u03b1-tocopherol. These stereoisomers also may be named in an alternative older nomenclature, where the stereocenters are either in the \"d\" or \"l\" form.\n1 IU of tocopherol is defined as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 milligrams of \"RRR\"-\u03b1-tocopherol (formerly named d-\u03b1-tocopherol or sometimes ddd-\u03b1-tocopherol). 1\u00a0IU is also defined as 1\u00a0milligram of an equal mix of the eight stereoisomers, which is a racemic mixture called \"all-rac\"-\u03b1-tocopheryl acetate. This mix of stereoisomers is often called dl-\u03b1-tocopheryl acetate, even though it is more precisely dl,dl,dl-\u03b1-tocopheryl acetate). However, 1\u00a0IU of this racemic mixture is not now considered equivalent to 1\u00a0IU of natural (RRR) \u03b1-tocopherol, and the Institute of Medicine and the USDA now convert IU's of the racemic mixture to milligrams of equivalent RRR using 1\u00a0IU racemic mixture = 0.45 \"milligrams \u03b1-tocopherol\".\nTocotrienols.\nTocotrienols also belong to the vitamin E family. Tocotrienols have four natural 2' d-isomers (they have a stereoisomeric carbon only at the 2' ring-tail position). The four tocotrienols (in order of decreasing methylation: d-\u03b1-, d-\u03b2-, d-\u03b3-, and d-\u03b4-tocotrienol) have structures corresponding to the four tocopherols, except with an unsaturated bond in each of the three isoprene units that form the hydrocarbon tail, whereas tocopherols have a saturated phytyl tail (the phytyl tail of tocopherols gives the possibility for 2 more stereoisomeric sites in these molecules that tocotrienols do not have). Tocotrienols have seen less research as compared to tocopherols.\nFunction and dietary recommendations.\nMechanism of action.\nTocopherols are radical scavengers, delivering an H atom to quench free radicals. At 323\u00a0kJ/mol, the O\u2013H bond in tocopherols is approximately 10% weaker than in most other phenols. This weak bond allows the vitamin to donate a hydrogen atom to the peroxyl radical and other free radicals, minimizing their damaging effect. The thus generated tocopheryl radical is relatively unreactive, but reverts to tocopherol by a redox reaction with a hydrogen donor such as vitamin C. As they are fat-soluble, tocopherols are incorporated into cell membranes, which are thus protected from oxidative damage.\nDietary considerations.\nThe U.S. Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for adults is 15\u00a0mg/day. The RDA is based on the \u03b1-tocopherol form because it is the most active form as originally tested. Vitamin E supplements are absorbed best when taken with meals. The U.S. Institute of Medicine has set an upper tolerable intake level (UL) for vitamin E at 1,000\u00a0mg (1,500\u00a0IU) per day, using rodent data, specifically based on the highest level to not cause issues with blood coagulation.\nThe European Food Safety Authority sets UL at 300\u00a0mg (all forms, measured by molar equivalent of \u03b1-tocopherol) per day. This is derived from a human experiment testing up to 800\u00a0IU of racemic \u03b1-tocopherol acetate with no adverse events, with the conversion to 300\u00a0mg (rather than a typical 540\u00a0mg \u03b1-tocopherol equivalent) reflecting an understanding of bleeding being caused by excess vitamin E interfering with the absorption of vitamin K, which has a similar structure, instead of any regular biological activity of the vitamin. The value was last reviewed in 2024; it was noted that newer data on all-cause mortality were not clear enough to be incorporated into the UL analysis.\n\u03b1-Tocopherol equivalents.\nFor dietary purposes, vitamin E activity of vitamin E isomers is expressed as \u03b1-tocopherol equivalents (a-TEs). One a-TE is defined by the biological activity of 1\u00a0mg (natural) d-\u03b1-tocopherol in the resorption-gestation test, which measures the ability to prevent fetal resorption in rats. According to listings by FAO and others \u03b2-tocopherol should be multiplied by 0.5, \u03b3-tocopherol by 0.1, and \u03b1-tocotrienol by 0.3. The IU is converted to aTE by multiplying it with 0.67. These factors do not correlate with the antioxidant activity of vitamin\u00a0E isomers, where tocotrienols show even much higher activity in vivo.\nSources.\nThe U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Agricultural Research Services, maintains a food composition database. The last major revision was Release 28, September 2015. In general, food sources with the highest concentrations of vitamin E are vegetable oils, followed by nuts and seeds. Adjusting for typical portion sizes, however, for many people in the United States the most important sources of vitamin E include fortified breakfast cereals.\nDeficiency.\nVitamin E deficiency is rare, and in almost all instances caused by an underlying disease rather than a diet low in vitamin E. Vitamin E deficiency causes neurological problems due to poor nerve conduction. These include neuromuscular problems such as spinocerebellar ataxia and myopathies. Deficiency also may cause anemia, due to oxidative damage to red blood cells.\nCommercial versions.\nCommercial vitamin E sold as food, supplement, or cosmetic ingredient may be classified into several distinct categories. By the nature of the tocopherol part, they can be divided into:\nThey can also be divided into free tocophenol and ester (often acetate) forms.\nSynthetic all-racemic and d-\u03b1-tocopherol.\nSynthetic vitamin E derived from petroleum products is manufactured as all-racemic \u03b1-tocopheryl acetate with a mixture of eight stereoisomers. In this mixture, one \u03b1-tocopherol molecule in eight molecules are in the form of \"RRR\"-\u03b1-tocopherol (12.5% of the total).\nThe 8-isomer \"all-rac\" vitamin E is always marked on labels simply as dl-tocopherol or dl-tocopheryl acetate, even though it is (if fully written out) dl,dl,dl-tocopherol. The present largest manufacturers of this type are DSM and BASF.\nNatural \u03b1-tocopherol is the RRR-\u03b1 (or ddd-\u03b1) form. The synthetic dl,dl,dl-\u03b1 (\"dl-\u03b1\") form is not so active as the natural ddd-\u03b1 (\"d-\u03b1\") tocopherol form. This is mainly due to reduced vitamin activity of the four possible stereoisomers that are represented by the \"l\" or \"S\" enantiomer at the first stereocenter (an S or l configuration between the chromanol ring and the tail, i.e., the SRR, SRS, SSR, and SSS stereoisomers). The three unnatural \"2R\" stereoisomers with natural R configuration at this 2' stereocenter, but S at one of the other centers in the tail (i.e., RSR, RRS, RSS), appear to retain substantial RRR vitamin activity, because they are recognized by the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein, and thus maintained in the plasma, where the other four stereoisomers (SRR, SRS, SSR, and SSS) are not. Thus, the synthetic all-rac-\u03b1-tocopherol, in theory, would have approximately half the vitamin activity of RRR-\u03b1-tocopherol in humans. Experimentally, the ratio of activities of the 8 stereoisomer racemic mixture to the natural vitamin, is 1 to 1.36 in the rat pregnancy model (suggesting a measured activity ratio of 1/1.36 = 74% of natural, for the 8-isomer racemic mix, higher than 50%).\nAlthough it is clear that mixtures of stereoisomers are not so active as the natural \"RRR\"-\u03b1-tocopherol form, in the ratios discussed above, specific information on any side effects of the seven synthetic vitamin E stereoisomers is not readily available. On the other hand, there is enough evidence for the whole racemic mixture; in fact, both the US RDA and EFSA ULs for vitamin E are derived based on racemic data.\nMixed tocopherols.\n\"Mixed tocopherols\" in the USA contain at least 20% w/w other natural R, R,R- tocopherols, i.e. R, R,R-\u03b1-tocopherol content plus at least 25% R, R,R-\u03b2-, R, R,R-\u03b3-, R, R,R-\u03b4-tocopherols.\nSome brands may contain 20.0% w/w or more of the other tocopherols and measurable tocotrienols. Some mixed tocopherols with higher \u03b3-tocopherol content are marketed as \"High Gamma-Tocopherol\". The label should report each component in milligrams, except R, R,R-\u03b1-tocopherol may still be reported in IU. Mixed tocopherols also may be found in other nutritional supplements.\nEsters.\nManufacturers also commonly convert the phenol form of the vitamins (with a free hydroxyl group) to esters, using acetic or succinic acid. These tocopheryl esters are more stable and are easier to use in vitamin supplements. \u03b1-Tocopheryl esters are de-esterified in the gut and then absorbed as the free tocopherol. Tocopherol succinate, tocopheryl nicotinate, tocopheryl linolate, and tocopheryl palmitate esters are also used in cosmetics and some pharmaceuticals. Each milligram of \u03b1-tocopheryl acetate can be hydrolyzed into 0.91\u00a0mg of \u03b1-tocopherol; each mg of the succinate can be hydrolyzed into 0.81\u00a0mg of \u03b1-tocopherol.\nFree vitamin E acts as an antioxidant due to its exposed phenol group; this also renders it sensitive to degradation by oxygen. The ester form shields this group from oxidation, but this also prevents the ester form from directly acting as an antioxidant. Unlike free vitamin E, the ester form is not a very effective food antioxidant, as the phenol group is prevented from being oxidized by the attached ester group. On the other hand, the ester form can slowly hydrolyze into the free tocopherol form in the presence of water, releasing some antioxidant activity. The EFSA has found \u03b1-tocopherol acetate to be a safe stabilizer for plastic materials in contact with food.\nTocofersolan is a water soluble variant produced by linking the succinate ester with polyethylene glycol. It is approved in Europe as a way to supply vitamin E to people who cannot absorb fats.\nUses.\nObservational studies that measure dietary intake and/or serum concentration, and experimental studies that ideally are randomized clinical trials (RCTs), are two means of examining the effects or lack thereof of a proposed intervention on human health. Healthcare outcomes may be expected to be in accord between reviews of observational and experimental studies. If there is a lack of agreement, then factors other than design need to be considered. In observational studies on vitamin E, an inverse correlation between dietary intake and risk of a disease, or serum concentration and risk of a disease, may be considered suggestive, but any conclusions also should rest on randomized clinical trials of sufficient size and duration to measure clinically significant results. One concern with correlations is that other nutrients and non-nutrient compounds (such as polyphenols) may be higher in the same diets that are higher in vitamin E. Another concern for the relevance of RCTs described below is that while observational studies are comparing disease risk between low and high dietary intake of naturally occurring vitamin E from food (when worldwide, the adult median dietary intake is 6.2\u00a0mg/d for d-\u03b1-tocopherol; 10.2\u00a0mg/day when all of the tocopherol and tocotrienol isomers are included), the prospective RCTs often used 400 IU/day of synthetic dl-\u03b1-tocopherol as the test product, equivalent to 268\u00a0mg of \u03b1-tocopherol equivalents.\nSupplement popularity over time.\nIn the US, the popularity for vitamin E as a dietary supplement may have peaked around 2000. The Nurses' Health Study (NHS) and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS) tracked dietary supplement use by people over the age of 40 during years 1986\u20132006. For women, user prevalence was 16.1% in 1986, 46.2% in 1998, 44.3% in 2002, but had decreased to 19.8% in 2006. Similarly, for men, prevalence for same years was 18.9%, 52.0%, 49.4%, and 24.5%. The authors theorized that declining use in these health science aware populations may have been due to publications of studies that showed either no benefits or negative consequences from vitamin E supplements. There is other evidence for declining use of vitamin E. Within the U.S. military services, vitamin prescriptions written for active, reserve and retired military, and their dependents, were tracked over years 2007\u20132011. Vitamin E prescriptions decreased by 53% while vitamin C remained constant and vitamin D increased by 454%. A report on vitamin E sales volume in the USA documented a 50% decrease between 2000 and 2006, with a significant cause attributed to a well-publicized meta-analysis that had concluded that high-dosage vitamin E increased all-cause mortality.\nAge-related macular degeneration.\nA Cochrane review published in 2017 (updated in 2023) on antioxidant vitamin and mineral supplements for slowing the progression of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) identified only one vitamin E clinical trial. That trial compared 500 IU/day of \u03b1-tocopherol to placebo for four years and reported no effect on the progression of AMD in people already diagnosed with the condition. Another Cochrane review, same year, same authors, reviewed the literature on \u03b1-tocopherol preventing the development of AMD. This review identified four trials, duration 4\u201310 years, and reported no change to risk of developing AMD. A large clinical trial known as AREDS compared \u03b2-carotene (15\u00a0mg), vitamin C (500\u00a0mg), and \u03b1-tocopherol (400 IU) to placebo for up to ten years, with a conclusion that the anti-oxidant combination significantly slowed progression. However, because there was no group in the trial receiving only vitamin E, no conclusions could be drawn as to the contribution of the vitamin to the effect.\nComplementary and alternative medicine.\nProponents of megavitamin therapy and orthomolecular medicine advocate \"natural tocopherols.\" Meanwhile, clinical trials have largely concentrated on use of either a synthetic, all-racemic d-\u03b1-tocopheryl acetate or synthetic dl-\u03b1-tocopheryl acetate.\nAntioxidant theory.\nTocopherol is described as functioning as an antioxidant. A dose-ranging trial was conducted in people with chronic oxidative stress attributed to elevated serum cholesterol. Plasma F2-isoprostane concentration was selected as a biomarker of free radical-mediated lipid peroxidation. Only the two highest doses - 1600 and 3200 IU/day - significantly lowered F2-isoprostane.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nAlzheimer's disease (AD) and vascular dementia are common causes of decline of brain functions that occur with age. AD is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that worsens over time. The disease process is associated with plaques and tangles in the brain. Vascular dementia may be caused by ischemic or hemorrhagic infarcts affecting multiple brain areas, including the anterior cerebral artery territory, the parietal lobes, or the cingulate gyrus. Both types of dementia may be present. Vitamin E status (and that of other antioxidant nutrients) is conjectured as having a possible impact on risk of Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. A review of dietary intake studies reported that higher consumption of vitamin E from foods lowered the risk of developing AD by 24%. A second review examined serum vitamin E levels and reported lower serum vitamin E in AD patients compared to healthy, age-matched people. In 2017 a consensus statement from the British Association for Psychopharmacology included that until further information is available, vitamin E cannot be recommended for treatment or prevention of Alzheimer's disease.\nCancer.\nFrom reviews of observational studies, diets higher in vitamin E content were associated with a lower relative risk of kidney cancer, bladder cancer, and lung cancer When comparisons were made between the lowest and highest groups for dietary vitamin E consumption from food, the average reductions in relative risk were in the range of 16-19%. For all of these reviews, the authors noted that the findings needed to be confirmed by prospective studies. From randomized clinical trials (RCTs) in which \u03b1-tocopherol was administered as a dietary supplement, results differed from the dietary intake reviews. A RCT of 400 IU/day of \u03b1-tocopherol did not reduce risk of bladder cancer. In male tobacco smokers, 50\u00a0mg/day had no impact on developing lung cancer. A review of RCTs for colorectal cancer reported lack of a statistically significant reduction in risk. In male tobacco smokers, 50\u00a0mg/day reduced prostate cancer risk by 32%, but in a different trial, majority non-smokers, 400 IU/day increased risk by 17%. In women who consumed either placebo or 600 IU of natural-source vitamin E on alternate days for an average of 10.1 years there were no significant differences for breast cancer, lung cancer, or colon cancer.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration initiated a process of reviewing and approving food and dietary supplement health claims in 1993. A Qualified Health Claim issued in 2012 allows product label claims that vitamin E may reduce risk of renal, bladder, and colorectal cancers, with a stipulation that the label must include a mandatory qualifier sentence: \"FDA has concluded that there is very little scientific evidence for this claim.\" The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) reviews proposed health claims for the European Union countries. As of March 2018, EFSA has not evaluated any vitamin E and cancer prevention claims.\nCataracts.\nA meta-analysis from 2015 reported that for studies that reported serum tocopherol, higher serum concentration was associated with a 23% reduction in relative risk of age-related cataracts (ARC), with the effect due to differences in nuclear cataract rather than cortical or posterior subcapsular cataract - the three major classifications of age-related cataracts. However, this article and a second meta-analysis reporting on clinical trials of \u03b1-tocopherol supplementation reported no statistically significant change to risk of ARC when compared to placebo.\nCardiovascular diseases.\nResearch on the effects of vitamin E on cardiovascular disease has produced conflicting results. An inverse relation has been observed between coronary heart disease and the consumption of foods high in vitamin E, and also higher serum concentration of \u03b1-tocopherol. In one of the largest observational studies, almost 90,000 healthy nurses were tracked for eight years. Compared to those in the lowest fifth for reported vitamin E consumption (from food and dietary supplements), those in the highest fifth were at a 34% lower risk of major coronary disease. Diet higher in vitamin E also may be higher in other, unidentified components that promote heart health, or people choosing such diets may be making other healthy lifestyle choices. There is some supporting evidence from randomized clinical trials (RCTs). A meta-analysis on the effects of \u03b1-tocopherol supplementation in RCTs on aspects of cardiovascular health reported that when consumed without any other antioxidant nutrient, the relative risk of heart attack was reduced by 18%. The results were not consistent for all of the individual trials incorporated into the meta-analysis. For example, the Physicians' Health Study II did not show any benefit after 400 IU every other day for eight years, for heart attack, stroke, coronary mortality, or all-cause mortality. The effects of vitamin E supplementation on incidence of stroke were summarized in 2011. There were no significant benefits for vitamin E versus placebo for risk of stroke, or for subset analysis for ischaemic stroke, haemorrhagic stroke, fatal stroke, or non-fatal stroke.\nIn 2001 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration rejected proposed health claims for vitamin E and cardiovascular health. The U.S. National Institutes of Health also reviewed the literature and concluded there was not sufficient evidence to support the idea that routine use of vitamin E supplements prevents cardiovascular disease or reduces its morbidity and mortality. In 2010 the European Food Safety Authority reviewed and rejected claims that a cause and effect relationship has been established between the dietary intake of vitamin E and maintenance of normal cardiac function or of normal blood circulation.\nPregnancy.\nAntioxidant vitamins as dietary supplements have been proposed as having benefits if consumed during pregnancy. For the combination of vitamin E with vitamin C supplemented to pregnant women, a Cochrane review of 21 clinical trials concluded that the data do not support vitamin E supplementation - majority of trials \u03b1-tocopherol at 400 IU/day plus vitamin C at 1000\u00a0mg/day - as being efficacious for reducing risk of stillbirth, neonatal death, preterm birth, preeclampsia, or any other maternal or infant outcomes, either in healthy women or those considered at risk for pregnancy complications. The review identified only three small trials in which vitamin E was supplemented without co-supplementation with vitamin C. None of these trials reported any clinically meaningful information.\nTopical.\nAlthough there is widespread use of vitamin E as a topical medication, with claims for improved wound healing and reduced scar tissue, reviews have repeatedly concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support these claims.\nSide effects.\nThe U.S. Food and Nutrition Board set a Tolerable upper intake level (UL) at 1,000\u00a0mg (1,500 IU) per day derived from animal models that demonstrated bleeding at high doses. The European Food Safety Authority reviewed the same safety question and set a UL at 300\u00a0mg/day. A meta-analysis of long-term clinical trials reported a non-significant 2% increase in all-cause mortality when \u03b1-tocopherol was the only supplement used. Another meta-analysis reported a non-significant 1% increase in all-cause mortality when \u03b1-tocopherol was the only supplement. Subset analysis reported no difference between natural (plant extracted) or synthetic \u03b1-tocopherol, or whether the amount used was less than or more than 400 IU/day. There are reports of vitamin E-induced allergic contact dermatitis from use of vitamin-E derivatives such as tocopheryl linoleate and tocopherol acetate in skin care products. Incidence is low despite widespread use.\nDrug interactions.\nThe amounts of \u03b1-tocopherol, other tocopherols and tocotrienols that are components of dietary vitamin E, when consumed from foods, do not appear to cause any interactions with drugs. Consumption of \u03b1-tocopherol as a dietary supplement in amounts in excess of 300\u00a0mg/day may lead to interactions with aspirin, warfarin, tamoxifen, and cyclosporine A in ways that alter function. For aspirin and warfarin, high amounts of vitamin E may potentiate anti-blood clotting action. One small trial demonstrated that vitamin E at 400\u00a0mg/day reduced blood concentration of the anti-breast cancer drug tamoxifen. In multiple clinical trials, vitamin E lowered blood concentration of the immuno-suppressant drug, cyclosporine A. The U.S. National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements, raises a concern that co-administration of vitamin E could counter the mechanisms of anti-cancer radiation therapy and some types of chemotherapy, and so advises against its use in these patient populations. The references it cited reported instances of reduced treatment adverse effects, but also poorer cancer survival, raising the possibility of tumor protection from the oxidative damage intended by the treatments.\nSynthesis.\nNaturally sourced d-\u03b1-tocopherol can be extracted and purified from seed oils, or \u03b3-tocopherol can be extracted, purified, and methylated to create d-alpha-tocopherol. In contrast to \u03b1-tocopherol extracted from plants, which also is called d-\u03b1-tocopherol, industrial synthesis creates dl-\u03b1-tocopherol. \"It is synthesized from a mixture of toluene and 2,3,5-trimethyl-hydroquinone that reacts with isophytol to all-rac-\u03b1-tocopherol, using iron in the presence of hydrogen chloride gas as a catalyst. The reaction mixture obtained is filtered and extracted with aqueous caustic soda. Toluene is removed by evaporation and the residue (all rac-\u03b1-tocopherol) is purified by vacuum distillation.\" Specification for the ingredient is &gt;97% pure. This synthetic dl-\u03b1-tocopherol has approximately 50% of the potency of d-\u03b1-tocopherol. Manufacturers of dietary supplements and fortified foods for humans or domesticated animals convert the phenol form of the vitamin to an ester using either acetic acid or succinic acid because the esters are more chemically stable, providing for a longer shelf-life. The ester forms are de-esterified in the gut and absorbed as free \u03b1-tocopherol.\nHistory.\nDuring feeding experiments with rats Herbert McLean Evans concluded in 1922 that besides vitamins B and C, an unknown vitamin existed. Although every other nutrition was present, the rats were not fertile. This condition could be changed by additional feeding with wheat germ. It took several years until 1936 when the substance was isolated from wheat germ and the formula C29H50O2 was determined. Evans also found that the compound reacted like an alcohol and concluded that one of the oxygen atoms was part of an OH (hydroxyl) group. As noted in the introduction, the vitamin was given its name by Evans from Greek words meaning \"to bear young\" with the addition of the -ol as an alcohol.\nThe structure was determined shortly thereafter in 1938.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54110", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54110", "title": "Vitamin B6", "text": "Class of chemically related vitamins\nVitamin B6 is one of the B vitamins, and is an essential nutrient for humans. The term essential nutrient refers to a group of six chemically similar compounds, i.e., \"vitamers\", which can be interconverted in biological systems. Its active form, pyridoxal 5\u2032-phosphate, serves as a coenzyme in more than 140 enzyme reactions in amino acid, glucose, and lipid metabolism.\nPlants synthesize pyridoxine as a means of protection from the UV-B radiation found in sunlight and for the role it plays in the synthesis of chlorophyll. Animals cannot synthesize any of the various forms of the vitamin, and hence must obtain it via diet, either of plants, or of other animals. There is some absorption of the vitamin produced by intestinal bacteria, but this is not sufficient to meet dietary needs. For adult humans, recommendations from various countries' food regulatory agencies are in the range of 1.0 to 2.0 milligrams (mg) per day. These same agencies also recognize ill effects from intakes that are too high, and so set safe upper limits, ranging from as low as 12\u00a0mg/day to as high as 100\u00a0mg/day depending on the country. Beef, pork, fowl and fish are generally good sources; dairy, eggs, mollusks and crustaceans also contain vitamin B6, but at lower levels. There is enough in a wide variety of plant foods so that a vegetarian or vegan diet does not put consumers at risk for deficiency.\nDietary deficiency is rare. Classic clinical symptoms include rash and inflammation around the mouth and eyes, plus neurological effects that include drowsiness and peripheral neuropathy affecting sensory and motor nerves in the hands and feet. In addition to dietary shortfall, deficiency can be the result of anti-vitamin drugs. There are also rare genetic defects that can trigger vitamin B6 deficiency-dependent epileptic seizures in infants. These are responsive to pyridoxal 5'-phosphate therapy.\nDefinition.\nVitamin B6 is a water-soluble vitamin, one of the B vitamins. The vitamin actually comprises a group of six chemically related compounds, i.e., vitamers, that all contain a pyridine ring as their core. These are pyridoxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and their respective phosphorylated derivatives pyridoxine 5'-phosphate, pyridoxal 5'-phosphate and pyridoxamine 5'-phosphate. Pyridoxal 5'-phosphate has the highest biological activity, but the others are convertible to that form. Vitamin B6 serves as a co-factor in more than 140 cellular reactions, mostly related to amino acid biosynthesis and catabolism, but is also involved in fatty acid biosynthesis and other physiological functions.\nForms.\nBecause of its chemical stability, pyridoxine hydrochloride is the form most commonly given as vitamin B6 dietary supplement. Absorbed pyridoxine (PN) is converted to pyridoxamine 5'-phosphate (PMP) by the enzyme pyridoxal kinase, with PMP further converted to pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP), the metabolically active form, by the enzymes pyridoxamine-phosphate transaminase or pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase, the latter of which also catalyzes the conversion of pyridoxine 5\u2032-phosphate (PNP) to PLP. Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase is dependent on flavin mononucleotide (FMN) as a cofactor produced from riboflavin (vitamin B2). For degradation, in a non-reversible reaction, PLP is catabolized to 4-pyridoxic acid, which is excreted in urine.\nSynthesis.\nBiosynthesis.\nTwo pathways for PLP are currently known: one requires deoxyxylulose 5-phosphate (DXP), while the other does not, hence they are known as DXP-dependent and DXP-independent. These pathways have been studied extensively in \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Bacillus subtilis\", respectively. Despite the disparity in the starting compounds and the different number of steps required, the two pathways possess many commonalities. The DXP-dependent pathway:\nCommercial synthesis.\nThe starting material is either the amino acid alanine, or propionic acid converted into alanine via halogenation and amination. Then, the procedure accomplishes the conversion of the amino acid into pyridoxine through the formation of an oxazole intermediate followed by a Diels\u2013Alder reaction, with the entire process referred to as the \"oxazole method\". The product used in dietary supplements and food fortification is pyridoxine hydrochloride, the chemically stable hydrochloride salt of pyridoxine. Pyridoxine is converted in the liver into the metabolically active coenzyme form pyridoxal 5'-phosphate. At present, while the industry mainly utilizes the oxazole method, there is research exploring means of using less toxic and dangerous reagents in the process. Fermentative bacterial biosynthesis methods are also being explored, but are not yet scaled up for commercial production.\nFunctions.\nPLP is involved in many aspects of macronutrient metabolism, neurotransmitter synthesis, histamine synthesis, hemoglobin synthesis and function, and gene expression. PLP generally serves as a coenzyme (cofactor) for many reactions including decarboxylation, transamination, racemization, elimination, replacement, and beta-group interconversion.\nNeurotransmitters.\nPLP is a cofactor in the biosynthesis of five important neurotransmitters: serotonin, dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and gamma-aminobutyric acid.\nGlucose metabolism.\nPLP is a required coenzyme of glycogen phosphorylase, the enzyme necessary for glycogenolysis. Glycogen serves as a carbohydrate storage molecule, primarily found in muscle, liver and brain. Its breakdown frees up glucose for energy. PLP also catalyzes transamination reactions that are essential for providing amino acids as a substrate for gluconeogenesis, the biosynthesis of glucose.\nLipid metabolism.\nPLP is an essential component of enzymes that facilitate the biosynthesis of sphingolipids. Particularly, the synthesis of ceramide requires PLP. In this reaction, serine is decarboxylated and combined with palmitoyl-CoA to form sphinganine, which is combined with a fatty acyl-CoA to form dihydroceramide. This compound is then further desaturated to form ceramide. In addition, the breakdown of sphingolipids is also dependent on vitamin B6 because sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase, the enzyme responsible for breaking down sphingosine-1-phosphate, is also PLP-dependent.\nHemoglobin synthesis and function.\nPLP aids in the synthesis of hemoglobin, by serving as a coenzyme for the enzyme aminolevulinic acid synthase. It also binds to two sites on hemoglobin to enhance the oxygen binding of hemoglobin.\nGene expression.\nPLP has been implicated in increasing or decreasing the expression of certain genes. Increased intracellular levels of the vitamin lead to a decrease in the transcription of glucocorticoids. Vitamin B6 deficiency leads to the increased gene expression of albumin mRNA. Also, PLP influences expression of glycoprotein IIb by interacting with various transcription factors; the result is inhibition of platelet aggregation.\nIn plants.\nPlant synthesis of vitamin B6 contributes to protection from sunlight. Ultraviolet-B radiation (UV-B) from sunlight stimulates plant growth, but in high amounts can increase production of tissue-damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e., oxidants. Using \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" (common name: thale cress), researchers demonstrated that UV-B exposure increased pyridoxine biosynthesis, but in a mutant variety, pyridoxine biosynthesis capacity was not inducible, and as a consequence, ROS levels, lipid peroxidation, and cell proteins associated with tissue damage were all elevated. Biosynthesis of chlorophyll depends on aminolevulinic acid synthase, a PLP-dependent enzyme that uses succinyl-CoA and glycine to generate aminolevulinic acid, a chlorophyll precursor. In addition, plant mutants with severely limited capacity to synthesize vitamin B6 have stunted root growth, because synthesis of plant hormones such as auxin require the vitamin as an enzyme cofactor.\nMedical uses.\nIsoniazid is an antibiotic used for the treatment of tuberculosis. A common side effect is numbness in the hands and feet, also known as peripheral neuropathy. Co-treatment with vitamin B6 alleviates the numbness.\nOverconsumption of seeds from \"Ginkgo biloba\" can deplete vitamin B6, because the ginkgotoxin is an anti-vitamin (vitamin antagonist). Symptoms include vomiting and generalized convulsions. Ginkgo seed poisoning can be treated with vitamin B6.\nDietary recommendations.\nFrom regulatory agency to regulatory agency there is a wide range between what is considered Tolerable upper intake levels (ULs). The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) adult UL for vitamin B6 is set at 12\u00a0mg/day versus 100\u00a0mg/day for the United States. \nThe US National Academy of Medicine updated Dietary Reference Intakes for many vitamins in 1998. Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs), expressed as milligrams per day, increase with age from 1.2 to 1.5\u00a0mg/day for women and from 1.3 to 1.7\u00a0mg/day for men. The RDA for pregnancy is 1.9\u00a0mg/day, for lactation, 2.0\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 1\u201313 years the RDA increases with age from 0.5 to 1.0\u00a0mg/day. As for safety, ULs for vitamins and minerals are identified when evidence is sufficient. In the case of vitamin B6 the US-established adult UL was set at 100\u00a0mg/day.\nThe EFSA refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA. For women and men ages 15 and older the PRI is set at 1.6 and 1.7\u00a0mg/day, respectively; for pregnancy 1.8\u00a0mg/day, for lactation 1.7\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 1\u201314 years the PRIs increase with age from 0.6 to 1.4\u00a0mg/day. The EFSA also reviewed the safety question and in 2023 set an upper limit for vitamin B6 of 12\u00a0mg/day for adults, with lower amounts ranging from 2.2 to 10.7 mg/day for infants and children, depending on age. This replaced the adult UL set in 2008 at 25\u00a0mg/day.\nThe Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare updated its vitamin and mineral recommendations in 2015. The adult RDAs are at 1.2\u00a0mg/day for women 1.4\u00a0mg/day for men. The RDA for pregnancy is 1.4\u00a0mg/day, for lactation is 1.5\u00a0mg/day. For children ages 1\u201317 years the RDA increases with age from 0.5 to 1.5\u00a0mg/day. The adult UL was set at 40\u201345\u00a0mg/day for women and 50\u201360\u00a0mg/day for men, with the lower values in those ranges for adults over 70 years of age.\nSafety.\nAdverse effects have been documented from vitamin B6 dietary supplements, but never from food sources. Even though it is a water-soluble vitamin and is excreted in the urine, doses of pyridoxine in excess of the dietary upper limit (UL) over long periods cause painful and ultimately irreversible neurological problems. The primary symptoms are pain and numbness of the extremities. In severe cases, motor neuropathy may occur with \"slowing of motor conduction velocities, prolonged F wave latencies, and prolonged sensory latencies in both lower extremities\", causing difficulty in walking. Sensory neuropathy typically develops at doses of pyridoxine in excess of 1,000\u00a0mg per day. As noted above, in 2023 the European Food Safety Commission set an adult UL at 12\u00a0mg/day. While Australia has set an upper limit of 50\u00a0mg/day, the Therapeutic Goods Administration requires a label warning about peripheral neuropathy if the daily dose is predicted to exceed 10\u00a0mg/day.\nLabeling.\nFor US food and dietary supplement labeling purposes the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value. For vitamin B6 labeling purposes 100% of the Daily Value was 2.0\u00a0mg, but as of May 27, 2016, it was revised to 1.7\u00a0mg to bring it into agreement with the adult RDA. A table of the old and new adult daily values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.\nSources.\nBacteria residing in the large intestine are known to synthesize B-vitamins, including B6, but the amounts are not sufficient to meet host requirements, in part because the vitamins are competitively taken up by non-synthesizing bacteria.\nVitamin B6 is found in a wide variety of foods. In general, meat, fish and fowl are good sources, but dairy foods and eggs are not (table). Crustaceans and mollusks contain about 0.1\u00a0mg/100 grams. Fruit (apples, oranges, pears) contain less than 0.1\u00a0mg/100g.\nBioavailability from a mixed diet (containing animal- and plant-sourced foods) is estimated at being 75% \u2013 higher for PLP from meat, fish and fowl, lower from plants, as those are mostly in the form of pyridoxine glucoside, which has approximately half the bioavailability of animal-sourced B6 because removal of the glucoside by intestinal cells is not 100% efficient. Given lower amounts and lower bioavailability of the vitamin from plants there was a concern that a vegetarian or vegan diet could cause a vitamin deficiency state. However, the results from a population-based survey conducted in the U.S. demonstrated that despite a lower vitamin intake, serum PLP was not significantly different between meat-eaters and vegetarians, suggesting that a vegetarian diet does not pose a risk for vitamin B6 deficiency.\nCooking, storage, and processing losses vary, and in some foods may be more than 50% depending on the form of vitamin present in the food. Plant foods lose less during processing, as they contain pyridoxine, which is more stable than the pyridoxal or pyridoxamine forms found in animal-sourced foods. For example, milk can lose 30\u201370% of its vitamin B6 content when dried. The vitamin is found in the germ and aleurone layer of grains, so there is more in grains from which these layers have not been removed, for example more in whole wheat bread than in white wheat bread, and more in brown rice than in white rice.\nMost values shown in the table are rounded to nearest tenth of a milligram:\nFortification.\nAs of 2024, eighteen countries require food fortification of wheat flour, maize flour or rice with vitamin B6 as pyridoxine hydrochloride. Most of these are in southeast Africa or Central America. The amounts stipulated range from 3.0 to 6.5\u00a0mg/kg. An additional six countries, including India, have a voluntary fortification program. India stipulates 2.0\u00a0mg/kg.\nDietary supplements.\nIn the US, multi-vitamin/mineral products typically contain 2 to 4\u00a0mg of vitamin B6 per daily serving as pyridoxine hydrochloride. However, many US dietary supplement companies also market a B6-only dietary supplement with 100\u00a0mg per daily serving. While the US National Academy of Medicine set an adult safety UL at 100\u00a0mg/day in 1998, in 2023 the European Food Safety Authority set its UL at 12\u00a0mg/day.\nHealth claims.\nThe Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare (MHLW) set up the 'Foods for Specified Health Uses' (; FOSHU) regulatory system in 1991 to individually approve the statements made on food labels concerning the effects of foods on the human body. The regulatory range of FOSHU was later broadened to allow for the certification of capsules and tablets. In 2001, MHLW enacted a new regulatory system, 'Foods with Health Claims' (; FHC), which consists of the existing FOSHU system and the newly established 'Foods with Nutrient Function Claims' (; FNFC), under which claims were approved for any product containing a specified amount per serving of 12 vitamins, including vitamin B6, and two minerals. To make a health claim based on a food's vitamin B6 content, the amount per serving must be in the range of 0.3\u201325\u00a0mg. The allowed claim is: \"Vitamin B6 is a nutrient that helps produce energy from protein and helps maintain healthy skin and mucous membranes.\"\nIn 2010, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) published a review of proposed health claims for vitamin B6, disallowing claims for bone, teeth, hair skin and nails, and allowing claims that the vitamin provided for normal homocysteine metabolism, normal energy-yielding metabolism, normal psychological function, reduced tiredness and fatigue, and provided for normal cysteine synthesis.\nThe US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has several processes for permitting health claims on food and dietary supplement labels. There are no FDA-approved Health Claims or Qualified Health Claims for vitamin B6. Structure/Function Claims can be made without FDA review or approval as long as there is some credible supporting science. Examples for this vitamin are \"Helps support nervous system function\" and \"Supports healthy homocysteine metabolism.\"\nAbsorption, metabolism and excretion.\nVitamin B6 is absorbed in the jejunum of the small intestine by passive diffusion. Even extremely large amounts are well absorbed. Absorption of the phosphate forms involves their dephosphorylation catalyzed by the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. Most of the vitamin is taken up by the liver. There, the dephosphorylated vitamins are converted to the phosphorylated PLP, PNP and PMP, with the two latter converted to PLP. In the liver, PLP is bound to proteins, primarily albumin. The PLP-albumin complex is what is released by the liver to circulate in plasma. Protein-binding capacity is the limiting factor for vitamin storage. Total body stores, the majority in muscle, with a lesser amount in liver, have been estimated to be in the range of 61 to 167\u00a0mg.\nEnzymatic processes utilize PLP as a phosphate-donating cofactor. PLP is restored via a salvage pathway that requires three key enzymes, pyridoxal kinase, pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase, and phosphatases. Inborn errors in the salvage enzymes are known to cause inadequate levels of PLP in the cell, particularly in neuronal cells. The resulting PLP deficiency is known to cause or implicated in several pathologies, most notably infant epileptic seizures.\nThe half-life of vitamin B6 varies according to different sources: one source suggests that the half-life of \"pyridoxine\" is up to 20 days, while another source indicates half-life of \"vitamin B6\" is in range of 25 to 33 days. After considering the different sources, it can be concluded that the half-life of vitamin B6 is typically measured in several weeks.\nThe end-product of vitamin B6 catabolism is 4-pyridoxic acid, which makes up about half of the B6 compounds in urine. 4-Pyridoxic acid is formed by the action of aldehyde oxidase in the liver. Amounts excreted increase within 1\u20132 weeks with vitamin supplementation and decrease as rapidly after supplementation ceases. Other vitamin forms excreted in the urine include pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine, and their phosphates. When large doses of pyridoxine are given orally, the proportion of these other forms increases. A small amount of vitamin B6 is also excreted in the feces. This may be a combination of unabsorbed vitamin and what was synthesized by large intestine microbiota.\nDeficiency.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe classic clinical syndrome for vitamin B6 deficiency is a seborrheic dermatitis-like eruption, atrophic glossitis with ulceration, angular cheilitis, conjunctivitis, intertrigo, abnormal electroencephalograms, microcytic anemia (due to impaired heme synthesis), and neurological symptoms of somnolence, confusion, depression, and neuropathy (due to impaired sphingosine synthesis).\nIn infants, a deficiency in vitamin B6 can lead to irritability, abnormally acute hearing, and convulsive seizures.\nLess severe cases present with metabolic disease associated with insufficient activity of the coenzyme pyridoxal 5' phosphate (PLP). The most prominent of the lesions is due to impaired tryptophan\u2013niacin conversion. This can be detected based on urinary excretion of xanthurenic acid after an oral tryptophan load. Vitamin B6 deficiency can also result in impaired transsulfuration of methionine to cysteine. The PLP-dependent transaminases and glycogen phosphorylase provide the vitamin with its role in gluconeogenesis, so deprivation of vitamin B6 results in impaired glucose tolerance.\nDiagnosis.\nThe assessment of vitamin B6 status is essential, as the clinical signs and symptoms in less severe cases are not specific. The three biochemical tests most widely used are plasma PLP concentrations, the activation coefficient for the erythrocyte enzyme aspartate aminotransferase, and the urinary excretion of vitamin B6 degradation products, specifically urinary PA. Of these, plasma PLP is probably the best single measure, because it reflects tissue stores. Plasma PLP of less than 10\u00a0nmol/L is indicative of vitamin B6 deficiency. A PLP concentration greater than 20\u00a0nmol/L has been chosen as a level of adequacy for establishing Estimated Average Requirements and Recommended Daily Allowances in the USA. Urinary PA is also an indicator of vitamin B6 deficiency; levels of less than 3.0\u00a0mmol/day is suggestive of vitamin B6 deficiency. Other methods of measurement, including UV spectrometric, spectrofluorimetric, mass spectrometric, thin-layer and high-performance liquid chromatographic, electrophoretic, electrochemical, and enzymatic, have been developed.\nThe classic clinical symptoms for vitamin B6 deficiency are rare, even in developing countries. A handful of cases were seen between 1952 and 1953, particularly in the United States, having occurred in a small percentage of infants who were fed a formula lacking in pyridoxine.\nCauses.\nA deficiency of vitamin B6 alone is relatively uncommon and often occurs in association with other vitamins of the B complex. Evidence exists for decreased levels of vitamin B6 in women with type 1 diabetes and in patients with systemic inflammation, liver disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and those infected with HIV. Use of oral contraceptives and treatment with certain anticonvulsants, isoniazid, cycloserine, penicillamine, and hydrocortisone negatively impact vitamin B6 status. Hemodialysis reduces vitamin B6 plasma levels. Overconsumption of \"Ginkgo biloba\" seeds can also deplete vitamin B6.\nGenetic defects.\nGenetically confirmed diagnoses of diseases affecting vitamin B6 metabolism (ALDH7A1 deficiency, pyridoxine-5'-phosphate oxidase deficiency, PLP binding protein deficiency, hyperprolinaemia type II and hypophosphatasia) can trigger vitamin B6 deficiency-dependent epileptic seizures in infants. These are responsive to pyridoxal 5'-phosphate therapy.\nHistory.\nAn overview of the history was published in 2012. In 1934, the Hungarian physician Paul Gy\u00f6rgy discovered a substance that was able to cure a skin disease in rats (dermatitis acrodynia). He named this substance vitamin B6, as numbering of the B vitamins was chronological, and pantothenic acid had been assigned vitamin B5 in 1931. In 1938, Richard Kuhn was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on carotenoids and vitamins, specifically B2 and B6. Also in 1938, Samuel Lepkovsky isolated vitamin B6 from rice bran. A year later, Stanton A. Harris and Karl August Folkers determined the structure of pyridoxine and reported success in chemical synthesis, and then in 1942 Esmond Emerson Snell developed a microbiological growth assay that led to the characterization of pyridoxamine, the aminated product of pyridoxine, and pyridoxal, the formyl derivative of pyridoxine. Further studies showed that pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and pyridoxine have largely equal activity in animals and owe their vitamin activity to the ability of the organism to convert them into the enzymatically active form pyridoxal-5-phosphate.\nFollowing a recommendation of IUPAC-IUB in 1973, vitamin B6 is the official name for all 2-methyl,3-hydroxy,5-hydroxymethylpyridine derivatives exhibiting the biological activity of pyridoxine. Because these related compounds have the same effect, the word \"pyridoxine\" should not be used as a synonym for vitamin B6.\nResearch.\nObservational studies suggested an inverse correlation between a higher intake of vitamin B6 and all cancers, with the strongest evidence for gastrointestinal cancers. However, evidence from a review of randomized clinical trials did not support a protective effect. The authors noted that high B6 intake may be an indicator of higher consumption of other dietary protective micronutrients. A review and two observational trials reporting lung cancer risk reported that serum vitamin B6 was lower in people with lung cancer compared to people without lung cancer, but did not incorporate any intervention or prevention trials.\nAccording to a prospective cohort study the long-term use of vitamin B6 from individual supplement sources at greater than 20\u00a0mg per day, which is more than ten times the adult male RDA of 1.7\u00a0mg/day, was associated with an increased risk for lung cancer among men. Smoking further elevated this risk. However, a more recent review of this study suggested that a causal relationship between supplemental vitamin B6 and an increased lung cancer risk cannot be confirmed yet.\nFor coronary heart disease, a meta-analysis reported lower relative risk for a 0.5\u00a0mg/day increment in dietary vitamin B6 intake. As of 2021, there were no published reviews of randomized clinical trials for coronary heart disease or cardiovascular disease. In reviews of observational and intervention trials, neither higher vitamin B6 concentrations nor treatment showed any significant benefit on cognition and dementia risk. Low dietary vitamin B6 correlated with a higher risk of depression in women but not in men. When treatment trials were reviewed, no meaningful treatment effect for depression was reported, but a subset of trials in pre-menopausal women suggested a benefit, with a recommendation that more research was needed. The results of several trials with children diagnosed as having autism spectrum disorder (ASD) treated with high dose vitamin B6 and magnesium did not result in treatment effect on the severity of symptoms of ASD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54111", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54111", "title": "Vitamin H", "text": ""}
{"id": "54112", "revid": "34997143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54112", "title": "Vitamin M", "text": ""}
{"id": "54114", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54114", "title": "Vitamin A", "text": "Essential nutrient\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin that is an essential nutrient. The term \"vitamin A\" encompasses a group of chemically related organic compounds that includes retinol, retinyl esters, and several provitamin (precursor) carotenoids, most notably \u03b2-carotene (\"beta\"-carotene). Vitamin A has multiple functions: growth during embryo development, maintaining the immune system, and healthy vision. For aiding vision specifically, it combines with the protein opsin to form rhodopsin, the light-absorbing molecule necessary for both low-light (scotopic vision) and color vision.\nVitamin A occurs as two principal forms in foods: A) retinoids, found in animal-sourced foods, either as retinol or bound to a fatty acid to become a retinyl ester, and B) the carotenoids \u03b1-carotene (\"alpha\"-carotene), \u03b2-carotene, \u03b3-carotene (\"gamma\"-carotene), and the xanthophyll beta-cryptoxanthin (all of which contain \u03b2-ionone rings) that function as provitamin A in herbivore and omnivore animals which possess the enzymes that cleave and convert provitamin carotenoids to retinol. Some carnivore species lack this enzyme. The other carotenoids do not have retinoid activity.\nDietary retinol is absorbed from the digestive tract via passive diffusion. Unlike retinol, \u03b2-carotene is taken up by enterocytes by the membrane transporter protein scavenger receptor B1 (SCARB1), which is upregulated in times of vitamin A deficiency (VAD). Retinol is stored in lipid droplets in the liver. A high capacity for long-term storage of retinol means that well-nourished humans can go months on a vitamin A-deficient diet, while maintaining blood levels in the normal range. Only when the liver stores are nearly depleted will signs and symptoms of deficiency show. Retinol is reversibly converted to retinal, then irreversibly to retinoic acid, which activates hundreds of genes.\nVitamin A deficiency is common in developing countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia. Deficiency can occur at any age but is most common in pre-school age children and pregnant women, the latter due to a need to transfer retinol to the fetus. Vitamin A deficiency is estimated to affect approximately one-third of children under the age of five around the world, resulting in hundreds of thousands of cases of blindness and deaths from childhood diseases because of immune system failure. Reversible night blindness is an early indicator of low vitamin A status. Plasma retinol is used as a biomarker to confirm vitamin A deficiency. Breast milk retinol can indicate a deficiency in nursing mothers. Neither of these measures indicates the status of liver reserves.\nThe European Union and various countries have set recommendations for dietary intake, and upper limits for safe intake. Vitamin A toxicity also referred to as hypervitaminosis A, occurs when there is too much vitamin A accumulating in the body. Symptoms may include nervous system effects, liver abnormalities, fatigue, muscle weakness, bone and skin changes, and others. The adverse effects of both acute and chronic toxicity are reversed after consumption of high dose supplements is stopped.\nDefinition.\nVitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin, a category that also includes vitamins D, E and K. The vitamin encompasses several chemically related naturally occurring compounds or metabolites, i.e., vitamers, that all contain a \u03b2-ionone ring. The primary dietary form is retinol, which may have a fatty acid molecule attached, creating a retinyl ester, when stored in the liver. Retinol \u2013 the transport and storage form of vitamin A \u2013 is interconvertible with retinal, catalyzed to retinal by retinol dehydrogenases and back to retinol by retinaldehyde reductases.\nretinal + NADH + H+ \u21cc retinol + NAD+\nretinol + NAD+ \u21cc retinal + NADH + H+\nRetinal (also known as retinaldehyde) can be irreversibly converted to \"all-trans\"-retinoic acid by the action of retinal dehydrogenase\nretinal + NAD+ + H2O \u2192 retinoic acid + NADH + H+\nRetinoic acid is actively transported into the cell nucleus by CRABp2 where it regulates thousands of genes by binding directly to gene targets via retinoic acid receptors.\nIn addition to retinol, retinal and retinoic acid, there are plant-, fungi- or bacteria-sourced carotenoids which can be metabolized to retinol, and are thus vitamin A vitamers.\nThere are also what are referred to as 2nd, 3rd and 4th generation retinoids which are not considered vitamin A vitamers because they cannot be converted to retinol, retinal or \"all-trans\"-retinoic acid. Some are prescription drugs, oral or topical, for various indications. Examples are etretinate, acitretin, adapalene, bexarotene, tazarotene and trifarotene.\nAbsorption, metabolism and excretion.\nRetinyl esters from animal-sourced foods (or synthesized for dietary supplements for humans and domesticated animals) are acted upon by retinyl ester hydrolases in the lumen of the small intestine to release free retinol. Retinol enters enterocytes by passive diffusion. Absorption efficiency is in the range of 70 to 90%. Humans are at risk for acute or chronic vitamin A toxicity because there are no mechanisms to suppress absorption or excrete the excess in urine. Within the cell, retinol is there bound to retinol binding protein 2 (RBP2). It is then enzymatically re-esterified by the action of lecithin retinol acyltransferase and incorporated into chylomicrons that are secreted into the lymphatic system.\nUnlike retinol, \u03b2-carotene is taken up by enterocytes by the membrane transporter protein scavenger receptor B1 (SCARB1). The protein is upregulated in times of vitamin A deficiency. If vitamin A status is in the normal range, SCARB1 is downregulated, reducing absorption. Also downregulated is the enzyme beta-carotene 15,15'-dioxygenase (formerly known as beta-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase) coded for by the BCMO1 gene, responsible for symmetrically cleaving \u03b2-carotene into retinal. Absorbed \u03b2-carotene is either incorporated as such into chylomicrons or first converted to retinal and then retinol, bound to RBP2. After a meal, roughly two-thirds of the chylomicrons are taken up by the liver with the remainder delivered to peripheral tissues. Peripheral tissues also can convert chylomicron \u03b2-carotene to retinol.\nThe capacity to store retinol in the liver means that well-nourished humans can go months on a vitamin A deficient diet without manifesting signs and symptoms of deficiency. Two liver cell types are responsible for storage and release: hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). Hepatocytes take up the lipid-rich chylomicrons, bind retinol to retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4), and transfer the retinol-RBP4 to HSCs for storage in lipid droplets as retinyl esters. Mobilization reverses the process: retinyl ester hydrolase releases free retinol which is transferred to hepatocytes, bound to RBP4, and put into blood circulation. Other than either after a meal or when consumption of large amounts exceeds liver storage capacity, more than 95% of retinol in circulation is bound to RBP4.\nCarnivores.\nStrict carnivores manage vitamin A differently than omnivores and herbivores. Carnivores are more tolerant of high intakes of retinol because those species have the ability to excrete retinol and retinyl esters in urine. Carnivores also have the ability to store more in the liver, due to a higher ratio of liver HSCs to hepatocytes compared to omnivores and herbivores. For humans, liver content can range from 20 to 30 \u03bcg/gram wet weight. Notoriously, polar bear liver is acutely toxic to humans because content has been reported in range of 2,215 to 10,400 \u03bcg/g wet weight. As noted, in humans, retinol circulates bound to RBP4. Carnivores maintain R-RBP4 within a tight range while also having retinyl esters in circulation. Bound retinol is delivered to cells while the esters are excreted in the urine. In general, carnivore species are poor converters of ionone-containing carotenoids, and pure carnivores such as felidae (cats) lack the cleaving enzyme entirely. They must have retinol or retinyl esters in their diet.\nHerbivores.\nHerbivores consume ionone-containing carotenoids and convert those to retinal. Some species, including cattle and horses, have measurable amounts of \u03b2-carotene circulating in the blood, and stored in body fat, creating yellow fat cells. Most species have white fat and no \u03b2-carotene in circulation.\nActivation and excretion.\nIn the liver and peripheral tissues of humans, retinol is reversibly converted to retinal by the action of alcohol dehydrogenases, which are also responsible for the conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde. Retinal is irreversibly oxidized to retinoic acid (RA) by the action of aldehyde dehydrogenases. RA regulates the activation or deactivation of genes. The oxidative degradation of RA is induced by RA \u2013 its presence triggers its removal, making for a short-acting gene transcription signal. This deactivation is mediated by a cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme system, specifically enzymes CYP26A1, CYP26B1 and CYP26C1. CYP26A1 is the predominant form in the human liver; all other human adult tissues contained higher levels of CYP26B1. CYP26C1 is expressed mainly during embryonic development. All three convert retinoic acid into 4-oxo-RA, 4-OH-RA and 18-OH-RA. Glucuronic acid forms water-soluble glucuronide conjugates with the oxidized metabolites, which are then excreted in urine and feces.\nMetabolic functions.\nOther than for vision, the metabolic functions of vitamin A are mediated by \"all-trans\"-retinoic acid (RA). The formation of RA from retinal is irreversible. To prevent accumulation of RA it is oxidized and eliminated fairly quickly, i.e., has a short half-life. Three cytochromes catalyze the oxidation of retinoic acid. The genes for Cyp26A1, Cyp26B1 and Cyp26C1 are induced by high levels of RA, providing a self-regulating feedback loop.\nVision and eye health.\nVitamin A status involves eye health via two separate functions. Retinal is an essential factor in rod cells and cone cells in the retina responding to light exposure by sending nerve signals to the brain. An early sign of vitamin A deficiency is night blindness. Vitamin A in the form of retinoic acid is essential to normal epithelial cell functions. Severe vitamin A deficiency, common in infants and young children in southeast Asia causes xerophthalmia characterized by dryness of the conjunctival epithelium and cornea. Untreated, xerophthalmia progresses to corneal ulceration and blindness.\nVision.\nThe role of vitamin A in the visual cycle is specifically related to the retinal compound. Retinol is converted by the enzyme RPE65 within the retinal pigment epithelium into 11-\"cis\"-retinal. Within the eye, 11-\"cis\"-retinal is bound to the protein opsin to form rhodopsin in rod cells and iodopsin in cone cells. As light enters the eye, the 11-\"cis\"-retinal is isomerized to the \"all-trans\" form. The \"all-trans\"-retinal dissociates from the opsin in a series of steps called photo-bleaching. This isomerization induces a nervous signal along the optic nerve to the visual center of the brain. After separating from opsin, the \"all-trans\"-retinal is recycled and converted back to the 11-\"cis\"-retinal form by a series of enzymatic reactions, which then completes the cycle by binding to opsin to reform rhodopsin in the retina. In addition, some of the \"all-trans\"-retinal may be converted to \"all-trans\"-retinol form and then transported with an interphotoreceptor retinol-binding protein to the retinal pigmented epithelial cells. Further esterification into \"all-trans\"-retinyl esters allow for storage of \"all-trans\"-retinol within the pigment epithelial cells to be reused when needed. It is for this reason that a deficiency in vitamin A will inhibit the reformation of rhodopsin, and will lead to one of the first symptoms, night blindness.\nNight blindness.\nVitamin A deficiency-caused night blindness is a reversible difficulty for the eyes to adjust to dim light. It is common in young children who have a diet inadequate in retinol and \u03b2-carotene. A process called dark adaptation typically causes an increase in photopigment amounts in response to low levels of illumination. This increases light sensitivity by up to 100,000 times compared to normal daylight conditions. Significant improvement in night vision takes place within ten minutes, but the process can take up to two hours to reach maximal effect. People expecting to work in a dark environment wore red-tinted goggles or were in a red light environment to not reverse the adaptation because red light does not deplete rhodopsin versus what occurs with yellow or green light.\nXerophthalmia and childhood blindness.\nXerophthalmia, caused by a severe vitamin A deficiency, is described by pathologic dryness of the conjunctival epithelium and cornea. The conjunctiva becomes dry, thick, and wrinkled. Indicative is the appearance of Bitot's spots, which are clumps of keratin debris that build up inside the conjunctiva. If untreated, xerophthalmia can lead to dry eye syndrome, corneal ulceration and ultimately to blindness as a result of cornea and retina damage. Although xerophthalmia is an eye-related issue, prevention (and reversal) are functions of retinoic acid having been synthesized from retinal rather than the 11-\"cis\"-retinal to rhodopsin cycle.\nThroughout southeast Asia, estimates are that more than half of children under the age of six years have subclinical vitamin A deficiency and night blindness, with progression to xerophthalmia being the leading cause of preventable childhood blindness. Estimates are that each year there are 350,000 cases of childhood blindness due to vitamin A deficiency. The causes are vitamin A deficiency during pregnancy, followed by low transfer of vitamin A during lactation and infant/child diets low in vitamin A or \u03b2-carotene. The prevalence of pre-school age children who are blind due to vitamin A deficiency is lower than expected from incidence of new cases only because childhood vitamin A deficiency significantly increases all-cause mortality.\nAccording to a 2017 Cochrane review, vitamin A deficiency, using serum retinol less than 0.70\u00a0\u03bcmol/L as a criterion, is a major public health problem affecting an estimated 190 million children under five years of age in low- and middle-income countries, primarily in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia. In lieu of or in combination with food fortification programs, many countries have implemented public health programs in which children are periodically given very large oral doses of synthetic vitamin A, usually retinyl palmitate, as a means of preventing and treating vitamin A deficiency. Doses were 50,000 to 100,000 IU (International units) for children aged 6 to 11 months and 100,000 to 200,000 IU for children aged 12 months to five years, the latter typically every four to six months. In addition to a 24% reduction in all-cause mortality, eye-related results were reported. Prevalence of Bitot's spots at follow-up were reduced by 58%, night blindness by 68%, xerophthalmia by 69%.\nGene regulation.\nRA regulates gene transcription by binding to nuclear receptors known as retinoic acid receptors (RARs; RAR\u03b1, RAR\u03b2, RAR\u03b3) which are bound to DNA as heterodimers with retinoid \"X\" receptors (RXRs; RXR\u03b1, RXR\u03b2, RXR\u03b3). RARs and RXRs must dimerize before they can bind to the DNA. Expression of more than 500 genes is responsive to retinoic acid. RAR-RXR heterodimers recognize retinoic acid response elements on DNA. Upon binding retinoic acid, the receptors undergo a conformational change that causes co-repressors to dissociate from the receptors. Coactivators can then bind to the receptor complex, which may help to loosen the chromatin structure from the histones or may interact with the transcriptional machinery. This response upregulates or downregulates the expression of target genes, including the genes that encode for the receptors themselves. To deactivate retinoic acid receptor signaling, three cytochromes (Cyp26A1, Cyp26B1 Cyp26C1) catalyze the oxidation of RA. The genes for these proteins are induced by high concentrations of RA, thus providing a regulatory feedback mechanism.\nEmbryology.\nIn vertebrates and invertebrate chordates, RA has a pivotal role during development. Altering levels of endogenous RA signaling during early embryology, either too low or too high, leads to birth defects, including congenital vascular and cardiovascular defects. Of note, fetal alcohol spectrum disorder encompasses congenital anomalies, including craniofacial, auditory, and ocular defects, neurobehavioral anomalies and mental disabilities caused by maternal consumption of alcohol during pregnancy. It is proposed that in the embryo there is competition between acetaldehyde, an ethanol metabolite, and retinaldehyde (retinal) for aldehyde dehydrogenase activity, resulting in a retinoic acid deficiency, and attributing the congenital birth defects to the loss of RA activated gene activation. In support of this theory, ethanol-induced developmental defects can be ameliorated by increasing the levels of retinol or retinal. As for the risks of too much RA during embryogenesis, the prescription drugs tretinoin (\"all-trans\"-retinoic acid) and isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid), used orally or topically for acne treatment, are labeled with boxed warnings for pregnant women or women who may become pregnant, as they are known human teratogens.\nImmune functions.\nVitamin A deficiency has been linked to compromised resistance to infectious diseases. In countries where early childhood vitamin A deficiency is common, vitamin A supplementation public health programs initiated in the 1980s were shown to reduce the incidence of diarrhea and measles, and all-cause mortality. Vitamin A deficiency also increases the risk of immune system over-reaction, leading to chronic inflammation in the intestinal system, stronger allergic reactions and autoimmune diseases.\nLymphocytes and monocytes are types of white blood cells of the immune system. Lymphocytes include natural killer cells, which function in innate immunity, T cells for adaptive cellular immunity and B cells for antibody-driven adaptive humoral immunity. Monocytes differentiate into macrophages and dendritic cells. Some lymphocytes migrate to the thymus where they differentiate into several types of T cells, in some instances referred to as \"killer\" or \"helper\" T cells and further differentiate after leaving the thymus. Each subtype has functions driven by the types of cytokines secreted and organs to which the cells preferentially migrate, also described as trafficking or homing.\nRetinoic acid (RA) triggers receptors in bone marrow, resulting in generation of new white blood cells. RA regulates proliferation and differentiation of white blood cells, the directed movement of T cells to the intestinal system, and to the up- and down-regulation of lymphocyte function. If RA is adequate, T helper cell subtype Th1 is suppressed and subtypes Th2, Th17 and iTreg (for regulatory) are induced. Dendritic cells located in intestinal tissue have enzymes that convert retinal to \"all-trans\"-retinoic acid, to be taken up by retinoic acid receptors on lymphocytes. The process triggers gene expression that leads to T cell types Th2, Th17 and iTreg moving to and taking up residence in mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer's patches, respectively outside and on the inner wall of the small intestine. The net effect is a down-regulation of immune activity, seen as tolerance of food allergens, and tolerance of resident bacteria and other organisms in the microbiome of the large intestine. In a vitamin A deficient state, innate immunity is compromised and pro-inflammatory Th1 cells predominate.\nMeasles prevention.\n\"Vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is a major public health problem in low- and middle-income countries, affecting 190 million children under five years of age and leading to many adverse health consequences, including death.\" Vitamin A deficiency is rare in the United States. A meta-analysis of clinical trials conducted in countries where VAD is prevalent concluded that when children were supplemented with vitamin A, there was a 50% reduction in incidence of contracting measles. Vitamin A supplementation is not thought to reduce the risk of death from measles. Young children given high doses of vitamin A from supplements or cod liver oil can accumulate to toxic levels and this can lead to hypervitaminosis A and liver damage. In the 2025 Southwest United States measles outbreak, centered in West Texas, some families continued to refuse vaccines and instead opted for giving vitamin A supplements or vitamins A- and D-containing cod liver oil to their children after Robert F. Kennedy Jr., promoted vitamin A as prevention and treatment. Multiple children hospitalized for measles at Covenant Children's Hospital in Lubbock also showed signs of liver damage, a symptom of vitamin A toxicity.\nSkin.\nDeficiencies in vitamin A have been linked to an increased susceptibility to skin infection and inflammation. Vitamin A appears to modulate the innate immune response and maintains homeostasis of epithelial tissues and mucosa through its metabolite, retinoic acid (RA). As part of the innate immune system, toll-like receptors in skin cells respond to pathogens and cell damage by inducing a pro-inflammatory immune response which includes increased RA production. The epithelium of the skin encounters bacteria, fungi and viruses. Keratinocytes of the epidermal layer of the skin produce and secrete antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Production of AMPs resistin and cathelicidin, are promoted by RA.\nUnits of measurement.\nAs some carotenoids can be converted into vitamin A, attempts have been made to determine how much of them in the diet is equivalent to a particular amount of retinol, so that comparisons can be made of the benefit of different foods. The situation can be confusing because the accepted equivalences have changed over time.\nFor many years, a system of equivalencies in which an international unit (IU) was equal to 0.3 \u03bcg of retinol (~1\u00a0nmol), 0.6 \u03bcg of \u03b2-carotene, or 1.2 \u03bcg of other provitamin-A carotenoids was used. This relationship was alternatively expressed by the retinol equivalent (RE): one RE corresponded to 1 \u03bcg retinol, to 2 \u03bcg \u03b2-carotene dissolved in oil, to 6 \u03bcg \u03b2-carotene in foods, and to 12 \u03bcg of either \u03b1-carotene, \u03b3-carotene, or \u03b2-cryptoxanthin in food.\nNewer research has shown that the absorption of provitamin-A carotenoids is only half as much as previously thought. As a result, in 2001 the US Institute of Medicine recommended a new unit, the retinol activity equivalent (RAE). Each \u03bcg RAE corresponds to 1 \u03bcg retinol, 2 \u03bcg of \u03b2-carotene in oil, 12 \u03bcg of \"dietary\" \u03b2-carotene, or 24 \u03bcg of the three other dietary provitamin-A carotenoids.\nAnimal models have shown that at the enterocyte cell wall, \u03b2-carotene is taken up by the membrane transporter protein scavenger receptor class B, type 1 (SCARB1). Absorbed \u03b2-carotene is converted to retinal and then retinol. The first step of the conversion process consists of one molecule of \u03b2-carotene cleaved by the enzyme\n\u03b2-carotene-15, 15'-monooxygenase, which in humans and other mammalian species is encoded by the BCM01 gene, into two molecules of retinal. When plasma retinol is in the normal range, gene expression for SCARB1 and BC01 are suppressed, creating a feedback loop that suppresses \u03b2-carotene absorption and conversion. Absorption suppression is not complete, as receptor 36 is not downregulated.\nDietary recommendations.\nThe US National Academy of Medicine updated Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) in 2001 for vitamin A, which included Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs). For infants up to 12 months, there was not sufficient information to establish an RDA, so Adequate Intake (AI) is shown instead. As for safety, tolerable upper intake levels (ULs) were also established. For ULs, carotenoids are not added when calculating total vitamin A intake for safety assessments.\nThe European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR. AI and UL are defined the same as in the United States. For women and men of ages 15 and older, the PRIs are set respectively at 650 and 750 \u03bcg\u00a0RE/day. PRI for pregnancy is 700 \u03bcg\u00a0RE/day, for lactation 1300/day. For children of ages 1\u201314 years, the PRIs increase with age from 250 to 600 \u03bcg\u00a0RE/day. These PRIs are similar to the US RDAs. The EFSA reviewed the same safety question as the United States, and set ULs at 800 for ages 1\u20133, 1100 for ages 4\u20136, 1500 for ages 7\u201310, 2000 for ages 11\u201314, 2600 for ages 15\u201317 and 3000 \u03bcg/day for ages 18 and older for preformed vitamin A, i.e., not including dietary contributions from carotenoids.\nSafety.\nVitamin A toxicity (hypervitaminosis A) occurs when too much vitamin A accumulates in the body. It comes from consumption of preformed vitamin A but not of carotenoids, as conversion of the latter to retinol is suppressed by the presence of adequate retinol.\nRetinol safety.\nThere are historical reports of acute hypervitaminosis from Arctic explorers consuming bearded seal or polar bear liver, both very rich sources of stored retinol, and there are also case reports of acute hypervitaminosis from consuming fish liver, but otherwise there is no risk from consuming too much via commonly consumed foods. Only consumption of retinol-containing dietary supplements can result in acute or chronic toxicity. Acute toxicity occurs after a single or short-term doses of greater than 150,000 \u03bcg. Symptoms include blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, dizziness and headache within 8 to 24 hours. For infants ages 0\u20136 months given an oral dose to prevent development of vitamin A deficiency, bulging skull fontanel was evident after 24 hours, usually resolved by 72 hours. Chronic toxicity may occur with long-term consumption of vitamin A at doses of 25,000\u201333,000 IU/day for several months. Excessive consumption of alcohol can lead to chronic toxicity at lower intakes. Symptoms may include nervous system effects, liver abnormalities, fatigue, muscle weakness, bone and skin changes and others. The adverse effects of both acute and chronic toxicity are reversed after consumption is stopped.\nIn 2001, for the purpose of determining ULs for adults, the US Institute of Medicine considered three primary adverse effects and settled on two: teratogenicity, i.e., causing birth defects, and liver abnormalities. Reduced bone mineral density was considered, but dismissed because the human evidence was contradictory. During pregnancy, especially during the first trimester, consumption of retinol in amounts exceeding 4,500 \u03bcg/day increased the risk of birth defects, but not below that amount, thus setting a \"No-Observed Adverse-Effect Level\" (NOAEL). Given the quality of the clinical trial evidence, the NOAEL was divided by an uncertainty factor of 1.5 to set the UL for women of reproductive age at 3,000 \u03bcg/day of preformed vitamin A. For all other adults, liver abnormalities were detected at intakes above 14,000 \u03bcg/day. Given the weak quality of the clinical evidence, an uncertainty factor of 5 was used, and with rounding, the UL was set at 3,000 \u03bcg/day.\nFor children, ULs were extrapolated from the adult value, adjusted for relative body weight. For infants, several case studies reported adverse effects that include bulging fontanels, increased intracranial pressure, loss of appetite, hyperirritability and skin peeling after chronic ingestion of the order of 6,000 or more \u03bcg/day. Given the small database, an uncertainty factor of 10 divided into the \"Lowest-Observed-Adverse-Effect Level\" (LOAEL) led to a UL of 600 \u03bcg/day.\n\u03b2-carotene safety.\nNo adverse effects other than carotenemia have been reported for consumption of \u03b2-carotene rich foods. Supplementation with \u03b2-carotene does not cause hypervitaminosis A. Two large clinical trials (ATBC and CARET) were conducted in tobacco smokers to see if years of \u03b2-carotene supplementation at 20 or 30\u00a0mg/day in oil-filled capsules would reduce the risk of lung cancer. These trials were implemented because observational studies had reported a lower incidence of lung cancer in tobacco smokers who had diets higher in \u03b2-carotene. Unexpectedly, high-dose \u03b2-carotene or retinol supplementation resulted in a higher incidence of lung cancer and of total mortality due to cardiac mortality. Taking this and other evidence into consideration, the U.S. Institute of Medicine decided not to set a Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for \u03b2-carotene. The European Food Safety Authority, acting for the European Union, also decided not to set a UL for \u03b2-carotene.\nCarotenosis.\nCarotenoderma, also referred to as carotenemia, is a benign and reversible medical condition where an excess of dietary carotenoids results in orange discoloration of the outermost skin layer. It is associated with a high blood \u03b2-carotene value. This can occur after a month or two of consumption of \u03b2-carotene rich foods, such as carrots, carrot juice, tangerine juice, mangos, or in Africa, red palm oil. \u03b2-carotene dietary supplements can have the same effect. The discoloration extends to palms and soles of feet, but not to the white of the eye, which helps distinguish the condition from jaundice. Consumption of greater than 30\u00a0mg/day for a prolonged period has been confirmed as leading to carotenemia.\nU.S. labeling.\nFor U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value (%DV). For vitamin A labeling purposes, 100% of the Daily Value was set at 5,000 IU, but it was revised to 900 \u03bcg RAE on 27 May 2016. A table of the old and new adult daily values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.\nSources.\nVitamin A is found in many foods. Vitamin A in food exists either as preformed retinol \u2013 an active form of vitamin A \u2013 found in animal liver, dairy and egg products, and some fortified foods, or as provitamin A carotenoids, which are plant pigments digested into vitamin A after consuming carotenoid-rich plant foods, typically in red, orange, or yellow colors. Carotenoid pigments may be masked by chlorophylls in dark green leaf vegetables, such as spinach. The relatively low bioavailability of plant-food carotenoids results partly from binding to proteins \u2013 chopping, homogenizing or cooking disrupts the plant proteins, increasing provitamin A carotenoid bioavailability.\nVegetarian and vegan diets can provide sufficient vitamin A in the form of provitamin A carotenoids if the diet contains carrots, carrot juice, sweet potatoes, green leafy vegetables such as spinach and kale, and other carotenoid-rich foods. In the U.S., the average daily intake of \u03b2-carotene is in the range 2\u20137\u00a0mg.\nSome manufactured foods and dietary supplements are sources of vitamin A or \u03b2-carotene.\nFortification.\nSome countries require or recommend fortification of foods. As of January 2022, 37 countries, mostly in Sub-Saharan Africa, require food fortification of cooking oil, rice, wheat flour or maize (corn) flour with vitamin A, usually as retinyl palmitate or retinyl acetate. Examples include Pakistan, oil, 11.7\u00a0mg/kg and Nigeria, oil, 6\u00a0mg/kg; wheat and maize flour, 2\u00a0mg/kg. An additional 12 countries, mostly in southeast Asia, have a voluntary fortification program. For example, the government of India recommends 7.95\u00a0mg/kg in oil and 0.626\u00a0mg/kg for wheat flour and rice. However, compliance in countries with voluntary fortification is lower than countries with mandatory fortification. No countries in Europe or North America fortify foods with vitamin A.\nOther means of fortifying foods via genetic engineering have been explored. Research on rice began in 1982. The first field trials of golden rice cultivars were conducted in 2004. The result was \"Golden Rice\", a variety of \"Oryza sativa\" rice produced through genetic engineering to biosynthesize \u03b2-carotene, a precursor of retinol, in the edible parts of rice. In May 2018, regulatory agencies in the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand had concluded that Golden Rice met food safety standards. In July 2021, the Philippines became the first country to officially issue the biosafety permit for commercially propagating Golden Rice. However, in April 2023, the Supreme Court of the Philippines issued a Writ of Kalikasan ordering the Department of Agriculture to stop the commercial distribution of genetically modified rice in the country.\nVitamin A supplementation (VAS).\nDelivery of oral high-dose supplements remains the principal strategy for minimizing deficiency. As of 2017, more than 80 countries worldwide are implementing universal VAS programs targeted to children 6\u201359 months of age through semi-annual national campaigns. Doses in these programs are one dose of 50,000 or 100,000 IU for children aged 6 to 11 months and 100,000 to 200,000 IU for children aged 12 months to five years, every four to six months.\nDeficiency.\nPrimary causes.\nVitamin A deficiency is common in developing countries, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia. Deficiency can occur at any age, but is most common in pre-school-age children and pregnant women, the latter due to a need to transfer retinol to the fetus. The causes are low intake of retinol-containing, animal-sourced foods and low intake of carotene-containing, plant-sourced foods. Vitamin A deficiency is estimated to affect approximately one third of children under the age of five around the world, possibly leading to the deaths of 670,000 children under five annually.\nBetween 250,000 and 500,000 children in developing countries become blind each year owing to vitamin A deficiency. Vitamin A deficiency is \"the leading cause of preventable childhood blindness\", according to UNICEF. It also increases the risk of death from common childhood conditions, such as diarrhea. UNICEF regards addressing vitamin A deficiency as critical to reducing child mortality, the fourth of the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals.\nDuring diagnosis, night blindness and dry eyes are signs of vitamin A deficiency that can be recognized without requiring biochemical tests. Plasma retinol is used to confirm vitamin A status. A plasma concentration of about 2.0 \u03bcmol/L is normal; less than 0.70 \u03bcmol/L (equivalent to 20 \u03bcg/dL) indicates moderate vitamin A deficiency, and less than 0.35 \u03bcmol/L (10 \u03bcg/dL) indicates severe vitamin A deficiency. Breast milk retinol of less than 8 \u03bcg/gram milk fat is considered insufficient. One weakness of these measures is that they are not good indicators of liver vitamin A stores as retinyl esters in hepatic stellate cells. The amount of vitamin A leaving the liver, bound to retinol binding protein (RBP), is under tight control as long as there are sufficient liver reserves. Only when liver content of vitamin A drops below approximately 20 \u03bcg/gram will concentration in the blood decline.\nSecondary causes.\nThere are causes for deficiency other than low dietary intake of vitamin A as retinol or carotenes. Adequate dietary protein and caloric energy are needed for a normal rate of synthesis of RBP, without which, retinol cannot be mobilized to leave the liver. Systemic infections can cause transient decreases in RBP synthesis even if protein-calorie malnutrition is absent. Chronic alcohol consumption reduces liver vitamin A storage. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), characterized by the accumulation of fat in the liver, is the hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome. Liver damage from NAFLD reduces liver storage capacity for retinol and reduces the ability to mobilize liver stores to maintain normal circulating concentration.\nVitamin A appears to be involved in the pathogenesis of anemia by diverse biological mechanisms, such as the enhancement of growth and differentiation of erythrocyte progenitor cells, potentiation of immunity to infection, and mobilization of iron stores from tissues.\nAnimal requirements.\nAll vertebrate and chordate species require vitamin A, either as dietary carotenoids or preformed retinol from consuming other animals. Deficiencies have been reported in laboratory-raised and pet dogs, cats, birds, reptiles and amphibians, also commercially raised chickens and turkeys. Herbivore species such as horses, cattle and sheep can get sufficient \u03b2-carotene from green pasture to be healthy, but the content in pasture grass dry due to drought and long-stored hay can be too low, leading to vitamin A deficiency. Omnivore and carnivore species, especially those toward the top of the food chain, can accrue large amounts of retinyl esters in their livers, or else excrete retinyl esters in urine as a means of dealing with surplus. Before the era of synthetic retinol, cod liver oil, high in vitamins A and D, was a commonly consumed dietary supplement. Invertebrates cannot synthesize carotenoids or retinol, and thus must accrue these essential nutrients from consumption of algae, plants or animals.\nMedical uses.\nIn 2022, vitamin A was the 346th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 50,000 prescriptions.\nPreventing and treating vitamin A deficiency.\nRecognition of its prevalence and consequences has led to governments and non-government organizations promoting vitamin A fortification of foods and creating programs that administer large bolus-size oral doses of vitamin A to young children every four to six months. In 2008, the World Health Organization estimated that vitamin A supplementation over a decade in 40 countries averted 1.25 million deaths due to vitamin A deficiency. A Cochrane review reported that vitamin A supplementation is associated with a clinically meaningful reduction in morbidity and mortality in children ages six month to five years of age. All-cause mortality was reduced by 14%, and incidence of diarrhea by 12%. However, a Cochrane review by the same group concluded there was insufficient evidence to recommend blanket vitamin A supplementation for infants one to six months of age, as it did not reduce infant mortality or morbidity.\nAcne.\nTopical retinoic acid and retinol.\nRetinoic acids tretinoin (\"all-trans\"-retinoic acid) and isotretinoin (13-\"cis\"-retinoic acid) are prescription medications used to treat moderate to severe cystic acne and acne not responsive to other treatments. Tretinoin is usually applied as a skin cream to the face after cleansing to remove make-up and skin oils, while isotretinoin is taken orally. Tretinoin and isotretinoin act by binding to two nuclear receptor families within keratinocytes: the retinoic acid receptors (RAR) and the retinoid X receptors (RXR). These events contribute to the normalization of follicular keratinization and decreased cohesiveness of keratinocytes, resulting in reduced follicular occlusion and microcomedone formation. The retinoid-receptor complex competes for coactivator proteins of AP-1, a key transcription factor involved in inflammation. Retinoic acid products also reduce sebum secretion, a nutrient source for bacteria, from facial pores.\nThese drugs, when applied topically, are US-designated Pregnancy Category C (animal reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect on the fetus), and should not be used by pregnant women or women who are anticipating becoming pregnant. Many countries established a physician- and patient- education pregnancy prevention policy.\nTrifarotene is a prescription retinoid for the topical treatment acne vulgaris. It functions as a retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-\u03b3 agonist.\nNon-prescription topical products that have health claims for reducing facial acne, combating skin dark spots and reducing wrinkles and lines associated with aging often contain retinyl palmitate. The hypothesis is that this is absorbed and de-esterified to free retinol, then converted to retinaldehyde and further metabolized to \"all-trans\"-retinoic acid, whence it will have the same effects as prescription products with fewer side effects. There is some \"ex vivo\" evidence with human skin that esterified retinol is absorbed and then converted to retinol. In addition to esterified retinol, some of these products contain hydroxypinacolone retinoate, identified as esterified 9-\"cis\"-retinoic acid.\nOral isotretinoin.\nOral isotretinoin (retinoic acid isomer) is recommended for treating treatment resistant acne, acne that can lead to scarring, and acne that is associated with psychosocial distress. It is approved by the FDA for treating severe acne vulgaris that is resistant to other treatment options. Isotretinoin is a known teratogen, with an estimated 20\u201335% risk of physical birth defects to infants that are exposed to isotretinoin \"in utero\", including numerous congenital defects such as craniofacial defects, cardiovascular and neurological malformations or thymic disorders. Neurocognitive impairments in the absence of any physical defects has been established to be 30\u201360%. For these reasons, physician- and patient-education programs were initiated, recommending that for women of child-bearing age, contraception be initiated a month before starting oral (or topical) isotretinoin, and continue for a month after treatment ended. In the US, isotretinoin was released to the market in 1982 as a revolutionary treatment for severe and refractory acne vulgaris. It was shown that a dose of 0.5\u20131.0\u00a0mg/kg body weight/day is enough to produce a reduction in sebum excretion by 90% within a month or two, but the recommended treatment duration is 4 to 6 months.\nThe mechanism by which orally consumed retinoic acid (RA), as \"all-trans\"-tretinoin or 13-\"cis\"-isotretinoin improves facial skin health is thought to be by switching on genes and differentiating keratinocytes (immature skin cells) into mature epidermal cells. RA reduces the size and secretion of the sebaceous glands, and by doing so reduces bacterial numbers in both the ducts and skin surface. It reduces inflammation via inhibition of chemotactic responses of monocytes and neutrophils.\nOther dermatological conditions.\nIn addition to the approved use for treating acne vulgaris, researchers have investigated off-label applications for dermatological conditions, such as rosacea, psoriasis, and other conditions. Rosacea was reported as responding favorably to doses lower than used for acne. Isotretinoin in combination with ultraviolet light was shown affective for treating psoriasis. Isotretinoin in combination with injected interferon-alpha showed some potential for treating genital warts. Isotretinoin in combination with topical fluorouracil or injected interferon-alpha showed some potential for treating precancerous skin lesions and skin cancer.\nImmune function.\nVitamin A plays an important role in the body's immune function, both the adaptive response, and to help the body fight off infection. The anti-inflammatory effects of vitamin A also contribute to repairing mucosal cells that can be damaged by an infection. For these reasons, there have been quite a few studies looking at the potential role that Vitamin A supplementation may play in improving an immune response or to helping the body fight off an infection. The evidence supporting vitamin A supplementation for children under the age of 7 years to prevent upper respiratory tract infections is weak, and the weak evidence from low-quality clinical trials does not support vitamin A as being effective or having a benefit. More research is needed to consider different doses, the ages and populations of people who may potentially benefit, and the length of treatment.\nSynthesis.\nBiosynthesis.\nCarotenoid synthesis takes place in plants, certain fungi, and bacteria. Structurally carotenes are tetraterpenes, meaning that they are synthesized biochemically from four 10-carbon terpene units, which in turn were formed from eight 5-carbon isoprene units. Intermediate steps are the creation of a 40-carbon phytoene molecule, conversion to lycopene via desaturation, and then creation of ionone rings at both ends of the molecule. \u03b2-carotene has a \u03b2-ionone ring at both ends, meaning that the molecule can be divided symmetrically to yield two retinol molecules. \u03b1-Carotene has a \u03b2-ionone ring at one end and an \u0190-ionone ring at the other, so it has half the retinol conversion capacity.\nIn most animal species, retinol is synthesized from the breakdown of the plant-formed provitamin, \u03b2-carotene. First, the enzyme beta-carotene 15,15'-dioxygenase (BCO-1) cleaves \u03b2-carotene at the central double bond, creating an epoxide. This epoxide is then attacked by water creating two hydroxyl groups in the center of the structure. The cleavage occurs when these alcohols are oxidized to the aldehydes using NAD+. The resultant retinal is then quickly reduced to retinol by the enzyme retinol dehydrogenase. Omnivore species such as dogs, wolves, coyotes and foxes in general are low producers of BCO-1. The enzyme is lacking in felids (cats), meaning that vitamin A requirements are met from the retinyl ester content of prey animals.\nIndustrial synthesis.\n\u03b2-carotene can be extracted from fungus \"Blakeslea trispora\", marine algae \"Dunaliella salina\" or genetically modified yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\", starting with xylose as a substrate. Chemical synthesis uses either a method developed by BASF or a Grignard reaction utilized by Hoffman-La Roche.\nThe world market for synthetic retinol is primarily for animal feed, leaving approximately 13% for a combination of food, prescription medication and dietary supplement use. Industrial methods for the production of retinol rely on chemical synthesis. The first industrialized synthesis of retinol was achieved by the company Hoffmann-La Roche in 1947. In the following decades, eight other companies developed their own processes. \u03b2-ionone, synthesized from acetone, is the essential starting point for all industrial syntheses. Each process involves elongating the unsaturated carbon chain. Pure retinol is extremely sensitive to oxidization and is prepared and transported at low temperatures and oxygen-free atmospheres. When prepared as a dietary supplement or food additive, retinol is stabilized as the ester derivatives retinyl acetate or retinyl palmitate. Prior to 1999, three companies, Roche, BASF and Rhone-Poulenc controlled 96% of global vitamin A sales. In 2001, the European Commission imposed total fines of 855.22 million euros on these and five other companies for their participation in eight distinct market-sharing and price-fixing cartels that dated back to 1989. Roche sold its vitamin division to DSM in 2003. DSM and BASF have the major share of industrial production. A biosynthesis alternative utilizes genetically engineered yeast species \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" to synthesize retinal and retinol, using xylose as a starting substrate. This was accomplished by having the yeast first synthesize \u03b2-carotene and then the cleaving enzyme \u03b2-carotene 15,15'-dioxygenase to yield retinal.\nResearch.\nBrain.\nAnimal research (on mice), which is pre-clinical, also found Retinoid acid, the bioactive metabolite of vitamin A, to have an effect on brain areas responsible for memory and learning.\nCancer.\nMeta-analyses of intervention and observational trials for various types of cancer report mixed results. Supplementation with \u03b2-carotene did not appear to decrease the risk of cancer overall, nor specific cancers including: pancreatic, colorectal, prostate, breast, melanoma, or skin cancer generally. High-dose \u03b2-carotene supplementation unexpectedly resulted in a higher incidence of lung cancer and of total mortality in people who were cigarette smokers.\nFor dietary retinol, no effects were observed for high dietary intake and breast cancer survival, risk of liver cancer, risk of bladder cancer or risk of colorectal cancer, although the last review did report lower risk for higher \u03b2-carotene consumption. In contrast, an inverse association was reported between retinol intake and relative risk of esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, lung cancer, melanoma, and cervical cancer. For lung cancer, an inverse association was also seen for \u03b2-carotene intake, separate from the retinol results. When high dietary intake was compared to low dietary intake, the decreases in relative risk were in the range of 15 to 20%. For gastric cancer, a meta-analysis of prevention trials reported a 29% decrease in relative risk from retinol supplementation at 1500 \u03bcg/day\nFetal alcohol spectrum disorder.\nFetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), formerly referred to as fetal alcohol syndrome, presents as craniofacial malformations, neurobehavioral disorders and mental disabilities, all attributed to exposing human embryos to alcohol during fetal development. The risk of FASD depends on the amount consumed, the frequency of consumption, and the points in pregnancy at which the alcohol is consumed. Ethanol is a known teratogen, i.e., causes birth defects. Ethanol is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase enzymes into acetaldehyde. The subsequent oxidation of acetaldehyde into acetate is performed by aldehyde dehydrogenase enzymes. Given that retinoic acid (RA) regulates numerous embryonic and differentiation processes, one of the proposed mechanisms for the teratogenic effects of ethanol is a competition for the enzymes required for the biosynthesis of RA from vitamin A. Animal research demonstrates that in the embryo, the competition takes place between acetaldehyde and retinaldehyde for aldehyde dehydrogenase activity. In this model, acetaldehyde inhibits the production of retinoic acid by retinaldehyde dehydrogenase. Ethanol-induced developmental defects can be ameliorated by increasing the levels of retinol, retinaldehyde, or retinaldehyde dehydrogenase. Thus, animal research supports the reduction of retinoic acid activity as an etiological trigger in the induction of FASD.\nMalaria.\nMalaria and vitamin A deficiency are both common among young children in sub-Saharan Africa. Vitamin A supplementation to children in regions where vitamin A deficiency is common has repeatedly been shown to reduce overall mortality rates, especially from measles and diarrhea. For malaria, clinical trial results are mixed, either showing that vitamin A treatment did not reduce the incidence of probable malarial fever, or else did not affect incidence, but did reduce slide-confirmed parasite density and reduced the number of fever episodes. The question was raised as to whether malaria causes vitamin A deficiency, or vitamin A deficiency contributes to the severity of malaria, or both. Researchers proposed several mechanisms by which malaria (and other infections) could contribute to vitamin A deficiency, including a fever-induced reduction in synthesis of retinal-binding protein (RBP) responsible for transporting retinol from liver to plasma and tissues, but reported finding no evidence for a transient depression or restoration of plasma RBP or retinol after a malarial infection was eliminated.\nHistory.\nIn 1912, Frederick Gowland Hopkins demonstrated that unknown accessory factors found in milk, other than carbohydrates, proteins, and fats were necessary for growth in rats. Hopkins received a Nobel Prize for this discovery in 1929. By 1913, one of these substances was independently discovered by Elmer McCollum and Marguerite Davis at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, and Lafayette Mendel and Thomas Burr Osborne at Yale University. McCollum and Davis ultimately received credit because they submitted their paper three weeks before Mendel and Osborne. Both papers appeared in the same issue of the \"Journal of Biological Chemistry\" in 1913. The \"accessory factors\" were termed \"fat soluble\" in 1918, and later \"vitamin A\" in 1920. In 1919, Harry Steenbock (University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison) proposed a relationship between yellow plant pigments (\u03b2-carotene) and vitamin A. In 1931, Swiss chemist Paul Karrer described the chemical structure of vitamin A. Retinoic acid and retinol were first synthesized in 1946 and 1947 by two Dutch chemists, David Adriaan van Dorp and Jozef Ferdinand Arens.\nDuring World War II, German bombers would attack at night to evade British defenses. In order to keep the 1939 invention of a new on-board Airborne Intercept Radar system secret from Germany, the British Ministry of Information told newspapers an unproven claim that the nighttime defensive success of Royal Air Force pilots was due to a high dietary intake of carrots rich in \u03b2-carotene, successfully convincing many people.\nIn 1967, George Wald shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for his work on chemical visual processes in the eye. Wald had demonstrated in 1935 that photoreceptor cells in the eye contain rhodopsin, a chromophore composed of the protein opsin and 11-\"cis\"-retinal. When struck by light, 11-\"cis\"-retinal undergoes photoisomerization to \"all-trans\"-retinal and via signal transduction cascade send a nerve signal to the brain. The \"all-trans\"-retinal is reduced to \"all-trans\"-retinol and travels back to the retinal pigment epithelium to be recycled to 11-\"cis\"-retinal and reconjugated to opsin. Wald's work was the culmination of nearly 60 years of research. In 1877, Franz Christian Boll identified a light-sensitive pigment in the outer segments of rod cells of the retina that faded/bleached when exposed to light, but was restored after light exposure ceased. He suggested that this substance, by a photochemical process, conveyed the impression of light to the brain. The research was taken up by Wilhelm K\u00fchne, who named the pigment rhodopsin, also known as \"visual purple.\" K\u00fchne confirmed that rhodopsin is extremely sensitive to light, and thus enables vision in low-light conditions, and that it was this chemical decomposition that stimulated nerve impulses to the brain. Research stalled until after identification of \"fat-soluble vitamin A\" as a dietary substance found in milkfat but not lard, would reverse night blindness and xerophthalmia. In 1925, Fridericia and Holm demonstrated that vitamin A deficient rats were unable to regenerate rhodopsin after being moved from a light to a dark room.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54115", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54115", "title": "Retinol", "text": "Chemical compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRetinol, also called vitamin A1, is a fat-soluble vitamin in the vitamin A family that is found in food and used as a dietary supplement. Retinol or other forms of vitamin A are needed for vision, cellular development, maintenance of skin and mucous membranes, immune function and reproductive development. Dietary sources include fish, dairy products, and meat. As a supplement it is used to treat and prevent vitamin A deficiency, especially that which results in xerophthalmia. It is taken by mouth or by injection into a muscle. As an ingredient in skin-care products, it is used to reduce wrinkles and other effects of skin aging.\nRetinol at normal doses is well tolerated. High doses may cause enlargement of the liver, dry skin, and hypervitaminosis A. High doses during pregnancy may harm the fetus. The body converts retinol to retinal and retinoic acid, through which it acts. \nRetinol was discovered in 1909, isolated in 1931, and first made in 1947. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. Retinol is available as a generic medication and over the counter. In 2021, vitamin A was the 298th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 500,000 prescriptions.\nMedical uses.\nRetinol is used to treat vitamin A deficiency.\nThree approaches may be used when populations have low vitamin A levels:\nRetinol is also used to reduce the risk of complications in measles patients.\nSide effects.\nThe Recommended Daily Intake (RDA) for preformed supplemental vitamin A for adult men and women is 900 and 700 Retinol Activity Units(RAE)/day, respectively, or about 3,000 IU and 2,300 IU. In pregnancy, the vitamin A RDA is 750\u2013770 RAE/day (about 2,500\u20132,550 IU). During lactation, the RDA increases to 1,200\u20131,300 RAE/day (about 4,000\u20134,300 IU, with differences depending on age). \nRetinol Activity Units can only be converted to IU (International Units) when the source of the vitamin A is known. The IU values listed above do not apply to food sources of vitamin A.\nToo much vitamin A in retinoid form can be harmful. The body converts the dimerized form, carotene, into vitamin A as it is needed, so high levels of carotene are not toxic, whereas the ester (animal) forms are. The livers of certain animals, especially those adapted to polar environments, such as polar bears and seals, often contain amounts of vitamin A that would be toxic to humans. Thus, vitamin A toxicity is typically reported in Arctic explorers and people taking large doses of synthetic vitamin A. The first documented death possibly caused by vitamin A poisoning was that of Xavier Mertz, a Swiss scientist, who died in January 1913 on an Antarctic expedition that had lost its food supplies and fell to eating its sled dogs. Mertz may have consumed lethal amounts of vitamin A by eating the dogs' livers.\nVitamin A acute toxicity occurs when a person ingests vitamin A in large amounts more than the daily recommended value in the threshold of 25,000 IU/kg or more. Often, the patient consumes about 3\u20134 times the RDA's specification. Toxicity of vitamin A is believed to be associated with the methods of increasing vitamin A in the body, such as food modification, fortification, and supplementation, all of which are used to combat vitamin A deficiency. Toxicity is classified into two categories: acute and chronic. The former occurs a few hours or days after ingestion of a large amount of vitamin A. Chronic toxicity takes place when about 4,000 IU/kg or more of vitamin A is consumed for a long time. Symptoms of both include nausea, blurred vision, fatigue, weight loss, and menstrual abnormalities.\nExcess vitamin A is suspected to be a contributor to osteoporosis. This seems to happen at much lower doses than those required to induce acute intoxication. Only preformed vitamin A can cause these problems because the conversion of carotenoids or retinyl esters into vitamin A is downregulated when physiological requirements are met; but excessive uptake of carotenoids can cause carotenosis.\nExcess preformed vitamin A during early pregnancy is associated with a significant increase in birth defects. These defects may be severe, even life-threatening. Even twice the daily recommended amount can cause severe birth defects. The FDA recommends that pregnant women get their vitamin A from foods containing beta carotene and that they ensure that they consume no more than 5,000 IU of preformed vitamin A (if any) per day. Although vitamin A is necessary for fetal development, most women carry sufficient stores of vitamin A in their liver cells, so over-supplementation should be strictly avoided.\nA review of all randomized controlled trials in the scientific literature by the Cochrane Collaboration published in \"JAMA\" in 2007 found that supplementation with beta carotene or vitamin A \"increased\" mortality by 5% and 16%, respectively. This effect has been attributed to the role of retinol and retinoic acid in increasing circulating cholesterol and triglycerides as well as promoting cancer incidence.\nStudies emerging from developing countries India, Bangladesh, and Indonesia strongly suggest that, in populations in which vitamin A deficiency is common and maternal mortality is high, dosing expectant mothers with retinol can greatly reduce maternal mortality. Similarly, dosing newborn infants with 50,000 IU (15\u00a0mg) of vitamin A within two days of birth can significantly reduce neonatal mortality.\nBiological roles.\nRetinol or other forms of vitamin A are needed for eyesight, maintenance of the skin, and human development. Other than for vision, which requires 11-cis retinal, the active compound is retinoic acid, synthesized from retinal, in turn synthesized from retinol. The differing biological roles of retinoic acid depend on its stereochemistry and whether it is present in the all-trans, 9-cis, or 13-cis forms.\nEmbryology.\nRetinoic acid via the retinoic acid receptor influences the process of cell differentiation and, hence, the growth and development of embryos. During development, there is a concentration gradient of retinoic acid along the anterior-posterior (head-tail) axis. Cells in the embryo respond to retinoic acid differently depending on the amount present. For example, in vertebrates, the hindbrain transiently forms eight rhombomeres and each rhombomere has a specific pattern of genes being expressed. If retinoic acid is not present the last four rhombomeres do not develop. Instead, rhombomeres 1\u20134 grow to cover the same amount of space as all eight would normally occupy. Retinoic acid has its effects by turning on a differential pattern of Homeobox (Hox) genes that encode different homeodomain transcription factors which in turn can turn on cell type-specific genes. Deletion of the Homeobox (Hox-1) gene from rhombomere 4 makes the neurons growing in that region behave like neurons from rhombomere 2. Retinoic acid is not required for patterning of the retina as originally proposed, but retinoic acid synthesized in the retina is secreted into the surrounding mesenchyme where it is required to prevent overgrowth of perioptic mesenchyme which can cause microphthalmia, defects in the cornea and eyelid, and rotation of the optic cup.\nStem cell biology.\nSynthetic retinoic acid is used in differentiation of stem cells to more committed fates, echoing retinoic acid's importance in natural embryonic developmental pathways. It is thought to initiate differentiation into several different cell lineages through activation of the Retinoic acid receptor. It has numerous applications in the experimental induction of stem cell differentiation; amongst these is the differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to posterior foregut lineages.\nVision.\nRetinol is an essential compound in the cycle of light-activated chemical reactions called the \"visual cycle\" that underlies vertebrate vision. Retinol is converted by the protein RPE65 within the pigment epithelium of the retina into 11-\"cis\"-retinal. This molecule is then transported into the retina's photoreceptor cells (the rod or cone cells in mammals) where it binds to an opsin protein and acts as a light-activated molecular switch. When 11-\"cis\"-retinal absorbs light it isomerizes into all-\"trans\"-retinal. The change in the shape of the molecule in turn changes the configuration of the opsin in a cascade that leads to the neuronal firing, which signals the detection of light. The opsin then splits into the protein component (such metarhodopsin) and the cofactor all-\"trans\"-retinal. The regeneration of active opsin requires conversion of all-\"trans\"-retinal back to 11-\"cis\"-retinal via retinol. The regeneration of 11-\"cis\"-retinal occurs in vertebrates via the conversion of all-\"trans\"-retinol to 11-\"cis\"-retinol in a sequence of chemical transformations that occurs primarily in the pigment epithelial cells.\nWithout adequate amounts of retinol, regeneration of rhodopsin is incomplete and night blindness occurs. Night blindness, the inability to see well in dim light, is associated with a deficiency of vitamin A, a class of compounds that includes retinol and retinal. In the early stages of vitamin A deficiency, the more light-sensitive and abundant rods, which have rhodopsin, have impaired sensitivity, and the cone cells are less affected. The cones are less abundant than rods and come in three types, each contains its own type of iodopsin, the opsins of the cones. The cones mediate color vision, and vision in bright light (day vision).\nGlycoprotein synthesis.\nGlycoprotein synthesis requires adequate vitamin A status. In severe vitamin A deficiency, lack of glycoproteins may lead to corneal ulcers or liquefaction.\nImmune system.\nVitamin A is involved in maintaining a number of immune cell types from both the innate and acquired immune systems. These include the lymphocytes (B-cells, T-cells, and natural killer cells), as well as many myelocytes (neutrophils, macrophages, and myeloid dendritic cells). Vitamin A maintains immune barriers in the gut through its activity as retinoic acid.\nSkin.\nDeficiencies in vitamin A have been linked to an increased susceptibility to skin infection and inflammation. Vitamin A appears to modulate the innate immune response and maintains homeostasis of epithelial tissues and mucosa through its metabolite, retinoic acid (RA). As part of the innate immune system, toll-like receptors in skin cells respond to pathogens and cell damage by inducing a pro-inflammatory immune response which includes increased RA production. The epithelium of the skin encounters bacteria, fungi and viruses. Keratinocytes of the epidermal layer of the skin produce and secrete antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Production of AMPs resistin and cathelicidin, are promoted by RA. Another way that vitamin A helps maintain a healthy skin and hair follicle microbiome, especially on the face, is by reduction of sebum secretion, which is a nutrient source for bacteria. Retinol has been the subject of clinical studies related to its ability to reduce the appearance of fine lines on the face and neck.\nRed blood cells.\nVitamin A may be needed for normal red blood cell formation; deficiency causes abnormalities in iron metabolism. Vitamin A is needed to produce the red blood cells from stem cells through retinoid differentiation.\nUnits of measurement.\nWhen referring to dietary allowances or nutritional science, retinol is usually measured in international units (IU). IU refers to biological activity and therefore is unique to each individual compound, however, 1 IU of retinol is equivalent to approximately 0.3 micrograms (300 nanograms).\nNutrition.\nThis vitamin plays an essential role in vision, particularly night vision, normal bone and tooth development, reproduction, and the health of skin and mucous membranes (the mucus-secreting layer that lines body regions such as the respiratory tract). While Vitamin A is often considered to be an antioxidant that prevents cancers, it does not have antioxidant activity and is shown to promote the development of many cancers.\nThere are two sources of dietary vitamin A. Retinyl ester or retinol forms, which are immediately available to the body or carotene precursors, also known as provitamins, which must be converted to active forms by the body. These are obtained from fruits and vegetables containing yellow, orange and dark green pigments, known as carotenoids, the most well-known being \u03b2-carotene. For this reason, amounts of vitamin A are measured in Retinol Equivalents (RE). One RE is equivalent to 0.001\u00a0mg of retinol, or 0.006\u00a0mg of \u03b2-carotene, or 3.3 International Units of vitamin A.\nVitamin A is fat-soluble and is stored in the liver and fat tissue. When required by a particular part of the body, the liver releases some vitamin A, which is carried by the blood and delivered to the target cells and tissues.\nDietary intake.\nThe Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) Recommended Daily Amount (RDA) for vitamin A for a 25-year-old male is 900 micrograms/day, or 3000 IU. National Health Service daily recommended values are slightly lower at 700 micrograms for men and 600 micrograms for women.\nDuring the absorption process in the intestines, retinol is incorporated into chylomicrons as the ester form, and it is these particles that mediate transport to the liver. Liver cells store vitamin A as the ester, and when retinol is needed in other tissues, it is de-esterifed and released into the blood as the alcohol. Retinol then attaches to a serum carrier, retinol binding protein, for transport to target tissues. A binding protein inside cells, cellular retinoic acid binding protein, serves to store and move retinoic acid intracellularly.\nDeficiency.\nVitamin A deficiency is common in developing countries but rarely seen in developed countries. Approximately 250,000 to 500,000 malnourished children in the developing world go blind each year from a deficiency of vitamin A. Vitamin A deficiency in expecting mothers increases the mortality rate of children shortly after childbirth. Night blindness is one of the first signs of vitamin A deficiency. Vitamin A deficiency contributes to blindness by depleting the necessary form needed for rhodopsin.\nSources.\nRetinoids are found naturally only in foods of animal origin. Each of the following contains at least 0.15\u00a0mg of retinoids per :\nChemistry.\nMany different geometric isomers of retinol, retinal and retinoic acid are possible as a result of either a \"trans\" or \"cis\" configuration of four of the five double bonds found in the polyene chain. The \"cis\" isomers are less stable and can readily convert to the all-\"trans\" configuration (as seen in the structure of all-\"trans\"-retinol shown at the top of this page). Nevertheless, some \"cis\" isomers are found naturally and carry out essential functions. For example, the 11-\"cis\"-retinal isomer is the chromophore of rhodopsin, the vertebrate photoreceptor molecule. Rhodopsin is composed of the 11-cis-retinal covalently linked via a Schiff base to the opsin protein (either rod opsin or blue, red, or green cone opsins). The process of vision relies on the light-induced isomerisation of the chromophore from 11-\"cis\" to all-\"trans\" resulting in a change of the conformation and activation of the photoreceptor molecule.\nMany of the non-visual functions of vitamin A are mediated by retinoic acid, which regulates gene expression by activating nuclear retinoic acid receptors. The non-visual functions of vitamin A are essential in the immunological function, reproduction, and embryonic development of vertebrates as evidenced by the impaired growth, susceptibility to infection, and birth defects observed in populations receiving suboptimal vitamin A in their diet.\nSynthesis.\nBiosynthesis.\nRetinol is synthesized from the breakdown of \u03b2-carotene. First, the \u03b2-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase cleaves \u03b2-carotene at the central double bond, creating an epoxide. This epoxide is then attacked by water creating two hydroxyl groups in the center of the structure. The cleavage occurs when these alcohols are oxidized to the aldehydes using NADH. This compound is called retinal. Retinal is then reduced to retinol by the enzyme retinol dehydrogenase. Retinol dehydrogenase is an enzyme that is dependent on NADH.\nIndustrial synthesis.\nRetinol is made industrially via total synthesis using either a method developed by BASF or a Grignard reaction utilized by Hoffman-La Roche. The two major suppliers, DSM and BASF, are believed to use total synthesis.\nThe world market for synthetic retinol is primarily for animal feed, leaving approximately 13% for a combination of food, prescription medication, and dietary supplement use. The first industrialized synthesis of retinol was achieved by the company Hoffmann-La Roche in 1947. In the following decades, eight other companies developed their own processes. \u03b2-Ionone, synthesized from acetone, is the essential starting point for all industrial syntheses. Each process involves elongating the unsaturated carbon chain. Pure retinol is extremely sensitive to oxidization and is prepared and transported at low temperatures and oxygen-free atmospheres. When prepared as a dietary supplement or food additive, retinol is stabilized as the ester derivatives retinyl acetate or retinyl palmitate. Before 1999, three companies, Roche, BASF, and Rhone-Poulenc controlled 96% of global vitamin A sales. In 2001, the European Commission imposed total fines of 855.22 Euros on these and five other companies for their participation in eight distinct market-sharing and price-fixing cartels that dated back to 1989. Roche sold its vitamin division to DSM in 2003. DSM and BASF have the major share of industrial production.\nHistory.\nIn 1912, Frederick Gowland Hopkins demonstrated that unknown accessory factors found in milk, other than carbohydrates, proteins, and fats were necessary for growth in rats. Hopkins received a Nobel Prize for this discovery in 1929. One year later, Elmer McCollum, a biochemist at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, and colleague Marguerite Davis identified a fat-soluble nutrient in butterfat and cod liver oil. Their work confirmed that of Thomas Burr Osborne and Lafayette Mendel, at Yale, also in 1913, which suggested a fat-soluble nutrient in butterfat. The \"accessory factors\" were termed \"fat-soluble\" in 1918 and later \"vitamin A\" in 1920. In 1931, Swiss chemist Paul Karrer described the chemical structure of vitamin A. Retinoic acid and retinol were first synthesized in 1946 and 1947 by two Dutch chemists, David Adriaan van Dorp and Jozef Ferdinand Arens.\nIn 1967, George Wald was a co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine \"...\"for their discoveries concerning the primary physiological and chemical visual processes in the eye.\" Photoreceptor cells in the eye contain a chromophore composed of the protein opsin and 11-cis retinal. When struck by light, 11-cis retinal undergoes photoisomerization to all-trans retinal and via signal transduction cascade sends a nerve signal to the brain. The all-trans retinal is reduced to all-trans retinol and travels back to the retinal pigment epithelium to be recycled to 11-cis retinal and conjugated to opsin.\nAlthough vitamin A was not confirmed as an essential nutrient and a chemical structure described until the 20th century, written observations of conditions created by deficiency of this nutrient appeared much earlier in history. Sommer classified historical accounts related to vitamin A and/or manifestations of deficiency as follows: \"ancient\" accounts; 18th- to 19th-century clinical descriptions (and their purported etiologic associations); early 20th-century laboratory animal experiments, and clinical and epidemiologic observations that identified the existence of this unique nutrient and manifestations of its deficiency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54116", "revid": "9610086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54116", "title": "Fortune-telling", "text": "Practice of predicting information about a person's life\nFortune-telling is the spiritual practice of predicting information about a person's life. The scope of fortune telling is in principle identical with the practice of divination. The difference is that divination is the term used for predictions considered part of a religious ritual, invoking deities or spirits, while the term fortune telling implies a less serious or formal setting, even one of popular culture, where belief in occult workings behind the prediction is less prominent than the concept of suggestion, spiritual or practical advisory or affirmation.\nHistorically, Pliny the Elder describes use of the crystal ball in the 1st century CE by soothsayers (\"crystallum orbis\", later written in Medieval Latin by scribes as \"orbuculum\"). Contemporary Western images of fortune telling grow out of folkloristic reception of Renaissance magic, specifically associated with Romani people. During the 19th and 20th century, methods of divination from non-Western cultures, such as the I Ching, were also adopted as methods of fortune telling in Western popular culture.\nAn example of divination or fortune telling as purely an item of pop culture, with little or no vestiges of belief in the occult, would be the \"Magic 8 Ball\" sold as a toy by Mattel, or Paul the Octopus, an octopus at the Sea Life Aquarium at Oberhausen used to predict the outcome of matches played by the Germany national football team. There is opposition to fortune telling in Christianity, Islam, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00edsm and Judaism based on scriptural prohibitions against divination. Terms for one who claims to see into the future include \"fortune teller\", \"crystal-gazer\", \"spaewife\", \"seer\", \"soothsayer\", \"sibyl\", \"clairvoyant\", and \"prophet\"; related terms which might include this among other abilities are \"oracle\", \"augur\", and \"visionary\". Fortune telling is dismissed by skeptics as being based on pseudoscience, magical thinking and superstition.\nMethods.\nCommon methods used for fortune telling in Europe and the Americas include astromancy, horary astrology, pendulum reading, spirit board reading, tasseography (reading tea leaves in a cup), cartomancy (fortune telling with cards), tarot card reading, crystallomancy (reading of a crystal sphere), and chiromancy (palmistry, reading of the palms). The last three have traditional associations in the popular mind with the Roma and Sinti people.\nAnother form of fortune telling, sometimes called \"reading\" or \"spiritual consultation\", does not rely on specific devices or methods, but rather the practitioner gives the client advice and predictions which are said to have come from spirits or in visions:\nSociology.\nWestern fortune tellers typically attempt predictions on matters such as future romantic, financial, and childbearing prospects. Many fortune tellers will also give \"character readings\". These may use numerology, graphology, palmistry (if the subject is present), and astrology. \nIn contemporary Western culture, it appears that women consult fortune tellers more than men. Some women have maintained long relationships with their personal readers. Telephone consultations with psychics grew in popularity through the 1990s, and by the 2010s additional contact methods such as email and videoconferencing also became available, but none of these have completely replaced traditional in-person methods of consultation.\nChildren's fortune-telling games.\nChildren's fortune-telling games are informal activities that mimic traditional divination practices, often serving as a form of play rather than serious attempts to predict the future. These games are prevalent in various cultures and have been documented in folklore studies. They are often played with simple objects like folded paper or pencils like MASH and Cootie Catchers.\nAs a business.\nDiscussing the role of fortune telling in society, Ronald H. Isaacs, an American rabbi and author, opined, \"Since time immemorial humans have longed to learn that which the future holds for them. Thus, in ancient civilization, and even today with fortune telling as a true profession, humankind continues to be curious about its future, both out of sheer curiosity as well as out of desire to better prepare for it.\" Although soothsayers were viewed as prized advisers in ancient and premodern civilizations such as the Assyrians, they lost respect and reverence during the Age of Enlightenment in the 17th and 18th centuries.\nWith the rise of commercialism, \"the sale of occult practices [adapted to survive] in the larger society,\" according to sociologists Danny L. and Lin Jorgensen. Ken Feingold, writer of \"Interactive Art as Divination as a Vending Machine,\" stated that with the invention of money, fortune telling became \"a private service, a commodity within the marketplace\".\nAs J. Peder Zane wrote in \"The New York Times\" in 1994, referring to the Psychic Friends Network, \"Whether it's 3 P.M. or 3 A.M., there's Dionne Warwick and her psychic friends selling advice on love, money and success. In a nation where the power of crystals and the likelihood that angels hover nearby prompt more contemplation than ridicule, it may not be surprising that one million people a year call Ms. Warwick's friends.\"\nClientele.\nIn 1994, the psychic counsellor Rosanna Rogers of Cleveland, Ohio, explained to J. Peder Zane that a wide variety of people consulted her: \"Couch potatoes aren't the only people seeking the counsel of psychics and astrologers. Clairvoyants have a booming business advising Philadelphia bankers, Hollywood lawyers and CEO's of Fortune 500 companies... If people knew how many people, especially the very rich and powerful ones, went to psychics, their jaws would drop through the floor.\" Rogers \"claims to have 4,000 names in her rolodex.\"\nJanet Lee, also known as the Greenwich psychic, claims that her clientele often included Wall Street brokers who were looking for any advantage they could get. Her usual fee was around $150 for a session but some clients would pay between $2,000 and $9,000 per month to have her available 24 hours a day to consult.\nTypical clients.\nIn 1982, Danny Jorgensen, a professor of Religious Studies at the University of South Florida offered a spiritual explanation for the popularity of fortune telling. He said that people visit psychics or fortune tellers to gain self-understanding, and knowledge which will lead to personal power or success in some aspect of life.\nIn 1995, Ken Feingold offered a different explanation for why people seek out fortune tellers:We desire to know other people's actions and to resolve our own conflicts regarding decisions to be made and our participation in social groups and economies. ... Divination seems to have emerged from our knowing the inevitability of death. The idea is clear\u2014we know that our time is limited and that we want things in our lives to happen in accord with our wishes. Realizing that our wishes have little power, we have sought technologies for gaining knowledge of the future... gain power over our own [lives].Ultimately, the reasons a person consults a diviner or fortune teller depend on cultural and personal expectations.\nServices.\nTraditional fortune tellers vary in methodology, generally using techniques long established in their cultures and thus meeting the cultural expectations of their clientele.\nIn the United States and Canada, among clients of European ancestry, palmistry is popular and, as with astrology and tarot card reading, advice is generally given about specific problems besetting the client.\nNon-religious spiritual guidance may also be offered. An American clairvoyant by the name of Catherine Adams has written, \"My philosophy is to teach and practice spiritual freedom, which means you have your own spiritual guidance, which I can help you get in touch with.\"\nIn the African American community, where many people practice a form of folk magic called hoodoo or rootworking, a fortune-telling session or \"reading\" for a client may be followed by practical guidance in spell-casting and Christian prayer, through a process called \"magical coaching\".\nIn addition to sharing and explaining their visions, fortune tellers can also act like counselors by discussing and offering advice about their clients' problems. They want their clients to exercise their own willpower.\nFull-time careers.\nSome fortune tellers support themselves entirely on their divination business; others hold down one or more jobs, and their second jobs may or may not relate to the occupation of divining. In 1982, Danny L., and Lin Jorgensen found that \"while there is considerable variation among [these secondary] occupations, [part-time fortune tellers] are over-represented in human service fields: counseling, social work, teaching, health care.\" The same authors, making a limited survey of North American diviners, found that the majority of fortune tellers are married with children, and a few claim graduate degrees. \"They attend movies, watch television, work at regular jobs, shop at K-Mart, sometimes eat at McDonald's, and go to the hospital when they are seriously ill.\"\nLegality.\nIn 1982, the sociologists Danny L., and Lin Jorgensen found that, \"when it is reasonable, [fortune tellers] comply with local laws and purchase a business license.\" However, in the United States, a variety of local and state laws restrict fortune telling, require the licensing or bonding of fortune tellers, or make necessary the use of terminology that avoids the term \"fortune teller\" in favor of terms such as \"spiritual advisor\" or \"psychic consultant.\" There are also laws that outright forbid the practice in certain districts.\nFor instance, fortune telling is a class B misdemeanor in the state of New York. Under New York State law, S 165.35:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLawmakers who wrote this statute acknowledged that fortune tellers do not restrict themselves to \"a show or exhibition solely for the purpose of entertainment or amusement\" and that people will continue to seek out fortune tellers even though fortune tellers operate in violation of the law. In the states of Minnesota, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, all forms of fortune-telling are illegal.\nIn Australia, fortune-telling is illegal in South Australia and the Northern Territory.\nSaudi Arabia also bans the practice outright, considering fortune telling to be sorcery and thus contrary to Islamic teaching and jurisprudence. It has been punishable by death.\nIn the United Kingdom, there was The Fraudulent Mediums Act 1951 which prohibited a person from claiming to be a fortune teller in order to make money for another reason than the purpose of entertainment. This act was repealed in 2008, and replaced by The Consumer Protection Act.\nCritical analysis.\nFortune telling is easily dismissed by critics as magical thinking and superstition.\nSkeptic Bergen Evans suggested that fortune telling is the result of a \"na\u00efve selection of something that have happened from a mass of things that haven't, the clever interpretation of ambiguities, or a brazen announcement of the inevitable.\" Other skeptics claim that fortune telling is nothing more than cold reading.\nA large amount of fraud has been proven in the practice of fortune telling.\nFortune telling and how it works raises many critical questions. For example, fortune-telling occurs through various methods such as psychic readings and tarot cards. Similarly, these methods are largely based on random phenomena. For example, astrologers believe that the movement of stars in the sky can have implications on one's life. In the case of tarot cards, people believe that images displayed on the cards have significant meanings on their lives. However, there is a lack of evidence to support why such things, such as the stars, would have any implications on our lives.\nAdditionally, fortune-telling readings and predictions made by horoscopes, for example, are often general enough to apply to anyone. In cold reading, for example, readers often begin by stating general descriptions and continuing to make specifics based on the reactions they receive from the person whose life they are predicting. The tendency for people to deem general descriptions as being representative to themselves has been termed the Barnum effect and has been studied by psychologists for many years.\nNonetheless, even with a lack of evidence supporting the various methods of fortune-telling and the many frauds that have occurred by psychic readers, amongst others, fortune-telling continues to become popular around the world. There are many reasons for the appealing nature of fortune-telling such as that people often experience stress when there is uncertainty and thus seek to gain deeper insight into their lives.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54117", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54117", "title": "Folate", "text": "Vitamin B9; nutrient essential for DNA synthesis\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\n | vaccine = Vaccine description\n | combo = Combination of\n | mab = Monoclonal antibody\n | #default =\n |inactivated |killed = Inactivated\n |attenuated = Attenuated\n |live = Live bacteria\n |viral = Viral vector\n |toxoid = Toxoid\n |subunit = Subunit\n |protein |protein subunit = Protein subunit\n |peptide |peptide subunit = Peptide subunit\n |polysaccharide = Polysaccharide\n |vlp = Virus-like particles\n |conjugate = Conjugate\n |recombinant = Recombinant vector\n |dna = DNA\n |rna = RNA\n |mrna = mRNA\n |heterologous = Heterologous\n | mab = Whole antibody\n | fab = Fab fragment\n | f(ab')2 = F(ab')2 fragment\n | fab' = Fab' fragment\n | scfv = Single-chain variable fragment\n | discfv = Di-single-chain variable fragment\n | sdab = Single domain antibody\n | 3funct = Trifunctional antibody\n | clfab = Chemically linked Fab\n | bite = Bi-specific T-cell engager\n |AAN= |BAN= |JAN= |USAN= }} |Wills factor, FA, \"N\"-(4-{[(2-amino-4-oxo-1,4-dihydropteridin-6-yl)methyl]amino}benzoyl)--glutamic acid, pteroyl-L-glutamic acid, folacin, vitamin B9; formerly, vitamin Bc and vitamin M\n |INN_EMA=\n | _EMA_use_INN={{ParameterUseFirst\n |1=\n |3=Folic acid\n |licence_US=\n |DailyMedID=Folic acid\n |licence_CA=\n |legal_AU=S4\n |legal_BR=\n |legal_CA=\n |legal_DE=\n |legal_NZ=\n |legal_UK=\n |legal_US=Rx-only\n |legal_EU=\n |legal_UN=\n |legal_AU_comment=/\u00a0S2\n |legal_BR_comment=\n |legal_CA_comment=\n |legal_DE_comment=\n |legal_NZ_comment=\n |legal_UK_comment=\n |legal_US_comment=/\u00a0OTC\n |legal_EU_comment=\n |legal_UN_comment=\n |legal_status=\n | label71 = Bioavailability\n | data71 = 50\u2013100%\n | label72 = Protein binding\n | data72 = \n | label73 = Metabolism\n | data73 = {{#if:50\u2013100%Urine\n | Liver\n | label74 = Metabolites\n | data74 = \n | label75 = Onset of action\n | data75 = \n | data76 = \n | label77 = Duration of action\n | data77 = \n | label78 = Excretion\n | data78 = Urine\n | data81 = {{#switch:{{lc:}} |mab|combo|vaccine= |#default={{#if:(2\"S\")-2-[[4-[(2-Amino-4-oxo-1\"H\"-pteridin-6-yl)methylamino]benzoyl]amino]pentanedioic acid\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCurrent versions from the [[International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology]]'s \"Recommendations on Biochemical &amp; Organic Nomenclature, Symbols &amp; Terminology etc.\" https:// section \"Pterins, Riboflavins, etc.\" formerly hosted by [[Queen Mary College]] (all archived by [[archive.org]]):\n[[Category:Folates| ]]\n[[Category:B vitamins]]\n[[Category:Dicarboxylic acids]]\n[[Category:World Health Organization essential medicines]]\n[[Category:Wikipedia medicine articles ready to translate]]"}
{"id": "54118", "revid": "50456468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54118", "title": "Biotin", "text": "Chemical compound and essential nutrient\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nBiotin (also known as vitamin B7) is one of the B vitamins \u2013 a group of essential dietary micronutrients. Present in every living cell, it is involved as a cofactor for enzymes in numerous metabolic processes, both in humans and in other organisms, primarily related to the biochemistry of fats, carbohydrates, and amino acids.\nWhen isolated, biotin is a white, needle-like crystalline solid. Biotin is obtained from foods, particularly meats and liver, and is sold as a dietary supplement.\nThe name \"biotin\", borrowed from the German , derives from the Ancient Greek word (; 'life') and the suffix \"-in\" (a suffix used in chemistry usually to indicate 'forming').\nChemical description.\nBiotin is classified as a heterocyclic compound, with a sulfur-containing tetrahydrothiophene ring fused to a ureido group. A C5-carboxylic acid side chain is appended to the former ring. The ureido ring, containing the \u2212N\u2212CO\u2212N\u2212 group, serves as the carbon dioxide carrier in carboxylation reactions. Biotin is a coenzyme for five carboxylase enzymes, which are involved in the catabolism of amino acids and fatty acids, synthesis of fatty acids, and gluconeogenesis. Biotinylation of histone proteins in nuclear chromatin plays a role in chromatin stability and gene expression.\nDietary recommendations.\nThe US National Academy of Medicine updated Dietary Reference Intakes for many vitamins in 1998. At that time there was insufficient information to establish estimated average requirement or recommended dietary allowance, terms that exist for most vitamins. In instances such as this, the academy sets adequate intakes (AIs) with the understanding that at some later date, when the physiological effects of biotin are better understood, AIs will be replaced by more exact information. The biotin AIs for both males and females are: \nAustralia and New Zealand set AIs similar to the US.\nThe European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) also identifies AIs, setting values at 40\u00a0\u03bcg/day for adults, pregnancy at 40\u00a0\u03bcg/day, and breastfeeding at 45\u00a0\u03bcg/day. For children ages 1\u201317 years, the AIs increase with age from 20 to 35\u00a0\u03bcg/day.\nSafety.\nThe US National Academy of Medicine estimates upper limits for vitamins and minerals when evidence for a true limit is sufficient. For biotin, however, there is no upper limit because the adverse effects of high biotin intake have not been determined. The EFSA also reviewed safety and reached the same conclusion as in the United States.\nLabeling regulations.\nFor US food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of daily value. For biotin labeling purposes, 100% of the daily value was 300\u00a0\u03bcg/day, but as of May 27, 2016, it was revised to 30\u00a0\u03bcg/day to agree with the adequate intake. Compliance with the updated labeling regulations was required by January 1, 2020, for manufacturers with US$10\u00a0million or more in annual food sales, and by January 1, 2021, for manufacturers with lower volume food sales. A table of the old and new adult daily values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.\nFood sources.\nBiotin is stable at room temperature and is not destroyed by cooking. The dietary biotin intake in Western populations has been estimated to be in the range of 35 to 70 \u03bcg/day. Nursing infants ingest about 6 \u03bcg/day. Biotin is available in dietary supplements, individually or as an ingredient in multivitamins.\nAccording to the Global Fortification Data Exchange, biotin deficiency is so rare that no countries require that foods be fortified.\nPhysiology.\nBiotin is a water-soluble B vitamin. Consumption of large amounts as a dietary supplement results in absorption, followed by excretion into urine as biotin. Consumption of biotin as part of a normal diet results in urinary excretion of biotin and biotin metabolites.\nAbsorption.\nBiotin in food is bound to proteins. Digestive enzymes reduce the proteins to biotin-bound peptides. The intestinal enzyme biotinidase, found in pancreatic secretions and in the brush border membranes of all three parts of the small intestine, frees biotin, which is then absorbed from the small intestine. When consumed as a biotin dietary supplement, absorption is nonsaturable, meaning that even very high amounts are absorbed effectively. Transport across the jejunum is faster than across the ileum.\nThe large intestine microbiota synthesizes amounts of biotin estimated to be similar to the amount taken in the diet, and a significant portion of this biotin exists in the free (protein-unbound) form and, thus, is available for absorption. How much is absorbed in humans is unknown, although a review did report that human colon epithelial cells in vitro demonstrated an ability to uptake biotin.\nOnce absorbed, sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT) mediates biotin uptake into the liver. SMVT also binds pantothenic acid, so high intakes of either of these vitamins can interfere with the transport of the other.\nMetabolism and excretion.\nBiotin catabolism occurs via two pathways. In one, the valeric acid sidechain is cleaved, resulting in bisnorbiotin. In the other path, the sulfur is oxidized, resulting in biotin sulfoxide. Urine content is proportionally about half biotin, plus bisnorbiotin, biotin sulfoxide, and small amounts of other metabolites.\nFactors that affect biotin requirements.\nChronic alcohol use is associated with a significant reduction in plasma biotin. Intestinal biotin uptake also appears to be sensitive to the effect of the anti-epilepsy drugs carbamazepine and primidone. Relatively low levels of biotin have also been reported in the urine or plasma of patients who have had a partial gastrectomy or have other causes of achlorhydria, as well as burn patients, elderly individuals, and athletes. Pregnancy and lactation may be associated with an increased demand for biotin. In pregnancy, this may be due to a possible acceleration of biotin catabolism, whereas, in lactation, the higher demand has yet to be elucidated. Recent studies have shown marginal biotin deficiency can be present in human gestation, as evidenced by increased urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, decreased urinary excretion of biotin and bisnorbiotin, and decreased plasma concentration of biotin.\nBiosynthesis.\nBiotin, synthesized in plants, is essential to plant growth and development. Bacteria also synthesize biotin, and it is thought that bacteria resident in the large intestine may synthesize biotin that is absorbed and utilized by the host organism.\nBiosynthesis starts from two precursors, alanine and pimeloyl-CoA. These form 7-keto-8-aminopelargonic acid (KAPA). KAPA is transported from plant peroxisomes to mitochondria where it is converted to 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid (DAPA) with the help of the enzyme, BioA. The enzyme dethiobiotin synthetase catalyzes the formation of the ureido ring via a DAPA carbamate activated with ATP, creating dethiobiotin with the help of the enzyme, BioD, which is then converted into biotin which is catalyzed by BioB. The last step is catalyzed by biotin synthase, a radical SAM enzyme. The sulfur is donated by an unusual [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin. Depending on the species of bacteria, Biotin can be synthesized via multiple pathways.\nCofactor biochemistry.\nThe enzyme holocarboxylase synthetase covalently attaches biotin to five human carboxylase enzymes:\nFor the first two, biotin serves as a cofactor responsible for the transfer of bicarbonate to acetyl-CoA, converting it to malonyl-CoA for fatty acid synthesis. PC participates in gluconeogenesis. MCC catalyzes a step in leucine metabolism. PCC catalyzes a step in the metabolism of propionyl-CoA. Metabolic degradation of the biotinylated carboxylases leads to the formation of biocytin. This compound is further degraded by biotinidase to release biotin, which is then reutilized by holocarboxylase synthetase.\nBiotinylation of histone proteins in nuclear chromatin is a posttranslational modification that plays a role in chromatin stability and gene expression.\nDeficiency.\nPrimary biotin deficiency, meaning deficiency due to too little biotin in the diet, is rare because biotin is contained in many foods. Subclinical deficiency can cause mild symptoms, such as hair thinning, brittle fingernails, or skin rash, typically on the face.\nAside from inadequate dietary intake (rare), biotin deficiency can be caused by a genetic disorder that affects biotin metabolism. The most common among these is biotinidase deficiency. Low activity of this enzyme causes a failure to recycle biotin from biocytin. Rarer are carboxylase and biotin transporter deficiencies. Neonatal screening for biotinidase deficiency started in the United States in 1984, with many countries now also testing for this genetic disorder at birth. Treatment is a lifelong dietary supplement with biotin. If biotinidase deficiency goes untreated, it can be fatal.\nDiagnosis.\nLow serum and urine biotin are not sensitive indicators of inadequate biotin intake. However, serum testing can be useful for confirmation of consumption of biotin-containing dietary supplements, and whether a period of refraining from supplement use is long enough to eliminate the potential for interfering with drug tests. Indirect measures depend on the biotin requirement for carboxylases. 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA is an intermediate step in the catabolism of the amino acid leucine. Without biotin, the pathway diverts to 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid. Urinary excretion of this compound is an early and sensitive indicator of biotin deficiency.\nDeficiency as a result of metabolic disorders.\nBiotinidase deficiency is a deficiency of the enzyme that recycles biotin, due to an inherited genetic mutation. Biotinidase catalyzes the cleavage of biotin from biocytin and biotinyl-peptides (the proteolytic degradation products of each holocarboxylase) and thereby recycles biotin. It is also important in freeing biotin from dietary protein-bound biotin. Neonatal screening for biotinidase deficiency started in the United States in 1984, which as of 2017 was reported as required in more than 30 countries.\nProfound biotinidase deficiency, defined as less than 10% of normal serum enzyme activity, which has been reported as 7.1 nmol/min/mL, has an incidence of 1 in 40,000 to 1 in 60,000, but with rates as high as 1 in 10,000 in countries with high incidence of consanguineous marriages (second cousin or closer). Partial biotinidase deficiency is defined as 10% to 30% of normal serum activity. Incidence data stems from government-mandated newborn screening. For profound deficiency, treatment is oral dosing with 5 to 20\u00a0mg per day. Seizures are reported as resolving in hours to days, with other symptoms resolving within weeks. Treatment of partial biotinidase deficiency is also recommended even though some untreated people never manifest symptoms. Lifelong treatment with supplemental biotin is recommended for both profound and partial biotinidase deficiency.\nInherited metabolic disorders characterized by deficient activities of biotin-dependent carboxylases are termed multiple carboxylase deficiency. These include deficiencies in the enzymes holocarboxylase synthetase. Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency prevents the body's cells from using biotin effectively and thus interferes with multiple carboxylase reactions. There can also be a genetic defect affecting the sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter protein.\nBiochemical and clinical manifestations of any of these metabolic disorders can include ketolactic acidosis, organic aciduria, hyperammonemia, rash, hypotonia, seizures, developmental delay, alopecia and coma.\nUse in biotechnology.\nChemically modified versions of biotin are widely used throughout the biotechnology industry to isolate proteins and non-protein compounds for biochemical assays. Because egg-derived avidin binds strongly to biotin with a dissociation constant \"K\"d \u2248 10\u221215\u00a0M, biotinylated compounds of interest can be isolated from a sample by exploiting this highly stable interaction. First, the chemically modified biotin reagents are bound to the targeted compounds in a solution via a process called biotinylation. The choice of which chemical modification to use is responsible for the biotin reagent binding to a specific protein. Second, the sample is incubated with avidin bound to beads, then rinsed, removing all unbound proteins, while leaving only the biotinylated protein bound to avidin. Last, the biotinylated protein can be eluted from the beads with excess free biotin. The process can also utilize bacteria-derived streptavidin bound to beads, but because it has a higher dissociation constant than avidin, very harsh conditions are needed to elute the biotinylated protein from the beads, which often will denature the protein of interest.\nInterference with medical laboratory results.\nWhen people are ingesting high levels of biotin in dietary supplements, a consequence can be clinically significant interference with diagnostic blood tests that use biotin-streptavidin technology. This methodology is commonly used to measure levels of hormones such as thyroid hormones, and other analytes such as 25-hydroxyvitamin D. Biotin interference can produce both falsely normal and falsely abnormal results. In the US, biotin as a non-prescription dietary supplement is sold in amounts of 1 to 10\u00a0mg per serving, with claims for supporting hair and nail health, and as 300\u00a0mg per day as a possibly effective treatment for multiple sclerosis (see \u00a7 Research). Overconsumption of 5\u00a0mg/day or higher causes elevated concentration in plasma that interferes with biotin-streptavidin immunoassays in an unpredictable manner. Healthcare professionals are advised to instruct patients to stop taking biotin supplements for 48 h or even up to weeks before the test, depending on the specific test, dose, and frequency of biotin uptake. Guidance for laboratory staff is proposed to detect and manage biotin interference.\nHistory.\nIn 1916, W. G. Bateman observed that a diet high in raw egg whites caused toxic symptoms in dogs, cats, rabbits, and humans. By 1927, scientists such as Margarete Boas and Helen Parsons had performed experiments demonstrating the symptoms associated with \"egg-white injury.\" They had found that rats fed large amounts of egg whites as their only protein source exhibited neurological dysfunction, hair loss, dermatitis, and eventually, death.\nIn 1936, Fritz K\u00f6gl and Benno T\u00f6nnis documented isolating a yeast growth factor in a journal article titled \".\" (Representation of crystallized biotin from egg yolk). The name \"biotin\" derives from the Greek word ('to live') and the suffix \"-in\" (a general chemical suffix used in organic chemistry). Other research groups, working independently, had isolated the same compound under different names. Hungarian scientist Paul Gyorgy began investigating the factor responsible for egg-white injury in 1933 and in 1939, was successful in identifying what he called \"Vitamin H\" (the H represents , German for 'hair and skin'). Further chemical characterization of vitamin H revealed that it was water-soluble and present in high amounts in the liver. After experiments performed with yeast and \"Rhizobium trifolii\", West and Wilson isolated a compound they called co-enzyme R. By 1940, it was recognized that all three compounds were identical and were collectively given the name: biotin. Gyorgy continued his work on biotin and in 1941 published a paper demonstrating that egg-white injury was caused by the binding of biotin by avidin. Unlike for many vitamins, there is insufficient information to establish a recommended dietary allowance, so dietary guidelines identify an \"adequate intake\" based on best available science with the understanding that at some later date this will be replaced by more exact information.\nUsing \"E. coli\", a biosynthesis pathway was proposed by Rolfe and Eisenberg in 1968. The initial step was described as a condensation of pimelyl-CoA and alanine to form 7-oxo-8-aminopelargonic acid. From there, they described a three-step process, the last being introducing a sulfur atom to form the tetrahydrothiophene ring.\nResearch.\nMultiple sclerosis.\nHigh-dose biotin (300\u00a0mg/day = 10,000 times adequate intake) has been used in clinical trials for treatment of multiple sclerosis, a demyelinating autoimmune disease. The hypothesis is that biotin may promote remyelination of the myelin sheath of nerve cells, slowing or even reversing neurodegeneration. The proposed mechanisms are that biotin activates acetyl-CoA carboxylase, a key rate-limiting enzyme during the synthesis of myelin, and by reducing axonal hypoxia through enhanced energy production. Clinical trial results are mixed; a 2019 review concluded that a further investigation of the association between multiple sclerosis symptoms and biotin should be undertaken, whereas two 2020 reviews of a larger number of clinical trials reported no consistent evidence for benefits, and some evidence for increased disease activity and higher risk of relapse.\nHair, nails, skin.\nIn the United States, biotin is promoted as a dietary supplement for strengthening hair and fingernails, though scientific data supporting these outcomes in humans are very weak. A review of the fingernails literature reported brittle nail improvement as evidence from two pre-1990 clinical trials that had administered an oral dietary supplement of 2.5\u00a0mg/day for several months, without a placebo control comparison group. There is no more recent clinical trial literature. A review of biotin as a treatment for hair loss identified case studies of infants and young children with genetic defect biotin deficiency having improved hair growth after supplementation, but went on to report that \"there have been no randomized, controlled trials to prove the efficacy of supplementation with biotin in normal, healthy individuals.\" Biotin is also incorporated into topical hair and skin products with similar claims.\nThe Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 states that the US Food and Drug Administration must allow on the product label what are described as \"Structure:Function\" (S:F) health claims that ingredient(s) are essential for health. For example: Biotin helps maintain healthy skin, hair, and nails. If a S:F claim is made, the label must include the disclaimer \"This statement has not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease.\"\nAnimals.\nIn cattle, biotin is necessary for hoof health. Lameness due to hoof problems is common, with herd prevalence estimated at 10 to 35%. Consequences of lameness include less food consumption, lower milk production, and increased veterinary treatment costs. Results after 4\u20136 months from supplementing biotin at 20\u00a0mg/day into daily diet reduces the risk of lameness. A review of controlled trials reported that supplementation at 20\u00a0mg/day increased milk yield by 4.8%. The discussion speculated that this could be an indirect consequence of improved hoof health or a direct effect on milk production.\nFor horses, conditions such as chronic laminitis, cracked hooves, or dry, brittle feet incapable of holding shoes are a common problem. Biotin is a popular nutritional supplement. There are recommendations that horses need 15 to 25\u00a0mg/day. Studies report biotin improves the growth of new hoof horn rather than improving the status of existing hoof, so months of supplementation are needed for the hoof wall to be completely replaced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54119", "revid": "32462239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54119", "title": "Black American", "text": ""}
{"id": "54120", "revid": "13916673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54120", "title": "Half-duplex", "text": "Communication flowing in both directions, but not simultaneously"}
{"id": "54122", "revid": "6479630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54122", "title": "Full-duplex", "text": ""}
{"id": "54123", "revid": "1318069571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54123", "title": "Timeline of ancient Greece", "text": "This is a timeline of ancient Greece from its emergence around 800 BC to its subjection to the Roman Empire in 146 BC.\nFor earlier times, see Greek Dark Ages, Aegean civilizations and Mycenaean Greece. For later times see Roman Greece, Byzantine Empire and Ottoman Greece.\nFor modern Greece after 1820, see Timeline of modern Greek history.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54124", "revid": "24496035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54124", "title": "Rhyolite", "text": "Igneous, volcanic rock, of felsic (silica-rich) composition\nRhyolite ( ) is the most silica-rich of volcanic rocks. It is generally glassy or fine-grained (aphanitic) in texture, but may be porphyritic, containing larger mineral crystals (phenocrysts) in an otherwise fine-grained groundmass. The mineral assemblage is predominantly quartz, sanidine, and plagioclase. It is the extrusive equivalent of granite.\nIts high silica content makes rhyolitic magma extremely viscous. This favors explosive eruptions over effusive eruptions, so this type of magma is more often erupted as pyroclastic rock than as lava flows. Rhyolitic ash-flow tuffs are among the most voluminous of continental igneous rock formations.\nRhyolitic tuff has been used extensively for construction. Obsidian, which is rhyolitic volcanic glass, has been used for tools from prehistoric times to the present day because it can be shaped to an extremely sharp edge. Rhyolitic pumice finds use as an abrasive, in concrete, and as a soil amendment.\nDescription.\nRhyolite is an extrusive igneous rock, formed from magma rich in silica that is extruded from a volcanic vent to cool quickly on the surface rather than slowly in the subsurface. It is generally light in color due to its low content of mafic minerals, and it is typically very fine-grained (aphanitic) or glassy.\nAn extrusive igneous rock is classified as rhyolite when quartz constitutes 20% to 60% by volume of its total content of quartz, alkali feldspar, and plagioclase (QAPF) and alkali feldspar makes up 35% to 90% of its total feldspar content. Feldspathoids are not present. This makes rhyolite the extrusive equivalent of granite. However, while the IUGS recommends classifying volcanic rocks on the basis of their mineral composition whenever possible, volcanic rocks are often glassy or so fine-grained that mineral identification is impractical. The rock must then be classified chemically based on its content of silica and alkali metal oxides (K2O plus Na2O). Rhyolite is high in silica and total alkali metal oxides, placing it in the R field of the TAS diagram.\nThe alkali feldspar in rhyolites is sanidine or, less commonly, orthoclase. It is rarely anorthoclase. These feldspar minerals sometimes are present as phenocrysts. The plagioclase is usually sodium-rich (oligoclase or andesine). Cristobalite and trydimite are sometimes present along with the quartz. Biotite, augite, fayalite, and hornblende are common accessory minerals.\nGeology.\nDue to their high content of silica and low iron and magnesium contents, rhyolitic magmas form highly viscous lavas. As a result, many eruptions of rhyolite are highly explosive, and rhyolite occurs more frequently as pyroclastic rock than as lava flows. Rhyolitic ash flow tuffs are the only volcanic product with volumes rivaling those of flood basalts. Rhyolites also occur as breccias or in lava domes, volcanic plugs, and dikes. Rhyolitic lavas erupt at a relatively low temperature of , significantly cooler than basaltic lavas, which typically erupt at temperatures of .\nRhyolites that cool too quickly to grow crystals form a natural glass or vitrophyre, also called obsidian. Slower cooling forms microscopic crystals in the lava and results in textures such as flow foliations, spherulitic, nodular, and lithophysal structures. Some rhyolite is highly vesicular pumice.\nPeralkaline rhyolites (rhyolites unusually rich in alkali metals) include comendite and pantellerite. Peralkalinity has significant effects on lava flow morphology and mineralogy, such that peralkaline rhyolites can be 10\u201330 times more fluid than typical calc-alkaline rhyolites. As a result of their increased fluidity, they are able to form small-scale flow folds, lava tubes and thin dikes. Peralkaline rhyolites erupt at relatively high temperatures of more than . They comprise bimodal shield volcanoes at hotspots and rifts (e.g. Rainbow Range, Ilgachuz Range and Level Mountain in British Columbia, Canada).\nEruptions of rhyolite lava are relatively rare compared to eruptions of less felsic lavas. Only four eruptions of rhyolite have been recorded since the start of the 20th century: at the St. Andrew Strait volcano in Papua New Guinea and Novarupta volcano in Alaska as well as at Chait\u00e9n and Cord\u00f3n Caulle volcanoes in southern Chile. The eruption of Novarupta in 1912 was the largest volcanic eruption of the 20th century, and began with explosive volcanism that later transitioned to effusive volcanism and the formation of a rhyolite dome in the vent.\nPetrogenesis.\nRhyolite magmas can be produced by igneous differentiation of a more mafic (silica-poor) magma, through fractional crystallization or by assimilation of melted crustal rock (anatexis). Associations of andesites, dacites, and rhyolites in similar tectonic settings and with similar chemistry suggests that the rhyolite members were formed by differentiation of mantle-derived basaltic magmas at shallow depths. In other cases, the rhyolite appears to be a product of melting of crustal sedimentary rock. Water vapor plays an important role in lowering the melting point of silicic rock, and some rhyolitic magmas may have a water content as high as 7\u20138 weight percent.\nHigh-silica rhyolite (HSR), with a silica content of 75 to 77\u00b78% , forms a distinctive subgroup within the rhyolites. HSRs are the most evolved of all igneous rocks, with a composition very close to the water-saturated granite eutectic and with extreme enrichment in most incompatible elements. However, they are highly depleted in strontium, barium, and europium. They are interpreted as products of repeated melting and freezing of granite in the subsurface. HSRs typically erupt in large caldera eruptions.\nOccurrence.\nRhyolite is common along convergent plate boundaries, where a slab of oceanic lithosphere is being subducted into the Earth's mantle beneath overriding oceanic or continental lithosphere. It can sometimes be the predominant igneous rock type in these settings. Rhyolite is more common when the overriding lithosphere is continental rather than oceanic. The thicker continental crust gives the rising magma more opportunity to differentiate and assimilate crustal rock.\nRhyolite has been found on islands far from land, but such oceanic occurrences are rare. The tholeiitic magmas erupted at volcanic ocean islands, such as Iceland, can sometimes differentiate all the way to rhyolite, and about 8% of the volcanic rock in Iceland is rhyolite. However, this is unusual, and the Hawaiian Islands (for example) have no known occurrences of rhyolite. The alkaline magmas of volcanic ocean islands will very occasionally differentiate all the way to peralkaline rhyolites, but differentiation usually ends with trachyte.\nSmall volumes of rhyolite are sometimes erupted in association with flood basalts, late in their history and where central volcanic complexes develop.\nName.\nThe name rhyolite was introduced into geology in 1860 by the German traveler and geologist Ferdinand von Richthofen from the Greek word \"rh\u00fdax\" (\"a stream of lava\") and the rock name suffix \"-lite\".\nUses.\nIn North American pre-historic times, rhyolite was quarried extensively in what is now eastern Pennsylvania. Among the leading quarries was the Carbaugh Run Rhyolite Quarry Site in Adams County. Rhyolite was mined there starting 11,500 years ago. Tons of rhyolite were traded across the Delmarva Peninsula, because the rhyolite kept a sharp point when knapped and was used to make spear points and arrowheads.\nObsidian is usually of rhyolitic composition, and it has been used for tools since prehistoric times. Obsidian scalpels have been investigated for use in delicate surgery. Pumice, also typically of rhyolitic composition, finds important uses as an abrasive, in concrete, and as a soil amendment. Rhyolitic tuff was used extensively for construction in ancient Rome and has been used in construction in modern Europe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54125", "revid": "1318054507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54125", "title": "Breccia", "text": "Rock composed of angular fragments\nBreccia ( or , ; ) is a rock composed of large angular broken fragments of minerals or rocks cemented together by a fine-grained matrix.\nThe word has its origins in the Italian language, in which it means \"rubble\". A breccia may have a variety of different origins, as indicated by the named types including sedimentary breccia, fault or tectonic breccia, igneous breccia, impact breccia, and hydrothermal breccia.\nA megabreccia is a breccia composed of very large rock fragments, sometimes kilometers across, which can be formed by landslides, impact events, or caldera collapse.\nTypes.\nBreccia is composed of coarse rock fragments held together by cement or a fine-grained matrix. Like conglomerate, breccia contains at least 30 percent of gravel-sized particles (particles over 2mm in size), but it is distinguished from conglomerate because the rock fragments have sharp edges that have not been worn down. These indicate that the gravel was deposited very close to its source area, since otherwise the edges would have been rounded during transport. Most of the rounding of rock fragments takes place within the first few kilometers of transport, though complete rounding of pebbles of very hard rock may take up to of river transport.\nA \"megabreccia\" is a breccia containing very large rock fragments, from at least a meter in size to greater than 400 meters. In some cases, the clasts are so large that the brecciated nature of the rock is not obvious. Megabreccias can be formed by landslides, impact events, or caldera collapse.\nBreccias are further classified by their mechanism of formation.\nSedimentary.\nSedimentary breccia is breccia formed by sedimentary processes. For example, scree deposited at the base of a cliff may become cemented to form a talus breccia without ever experiencing transport that might round the rock fragments.\nThick sequences of sedimentary (colluvial) breccia are generally formed next to fault scarps in grabens.\nSedimentary breccia may be formed by submarine debris flows. Turbidites occur as fine-grained peripheral deposits to sedimentary breccia flows.\nIn a karst terrain, a collapse breccia may form due to collapse of rock into a sinkhole or in cave development. Collapse breccias also form by dissolution of underlying evaporite beds.\nFault.\nFault or tectonic breccia results from the grinding action of two fault blocks as they slide past each other. Subsequent cementation of these broken fragments may occur by means of the introduction of mineral matter in groundwater.\nIgneous.\nIgneous clastic rocks can be divided into two classes:\nVolcanic.\nVolcanic pyroclastic rocks are formed by explosive eruption of lava and any rocks which are entrained within the eruptive column. This may include rocks plucked off the wall of the magma conduit, or physically picked up by the ensuing pyroclastic surge. Lavas, especially rhyolite and dacite flows, tend to form clastic volcanic rocks by a process known as \"autobrecciation\". This occurs when the thick, nearly solid lava breaks up into blocks and these blocks are then reincorporated into the lava flow again and mixed in with the remaining liquid magma. The resulting breccia is uniform in rock type and chemical composition.\nCaldera collapse leads to the formation of megabreccias, which are sometimes mistaken for outcrops of the caldera floor. These are instead blocks of precaldera rock, often coming from the unstable oversteepened rim of the caldera. They are distinguished from \"mesobreccias\" whose clasts are less than a meter in size and which form layers in the caldera floor. Some clasts of caldera megabreccias can be over a kilometer in length.\nWithin the volcanic conduits of explosive volcanoes the volcanic breccia environment merges into the intrusive breccia environment. There the upwelling lava tends to solidify during quiescent intervals only to be shattered by ensuing eruptions. This produces an \"alloclastic\" volcanic breccia.\nIntrusive.\nClastic rocks are also commonly found in shallow subvolcanic intrusions such as porphyry stocks, granites and kimberlite pipes, where they are transitional with volcanic breccias. Intrusive rocks can become brecciated in appearance by multiple stages of intrusion, especially if fresh magma is intruded into partly consolidated or solidified magma. This may be seen in many granite intrusions where later aplite veins form a late-stage stockwork through earlier phases of the granite mass. When particularly intense, the rock may appear as a chaotic breccia.\nClastic rocks in mafic and ultramafic intrusions have been found and form via several processes:\nImpact.\nImpact breccias are thought to be diagnostic of an impact event such as an asteroid or comet striking the Earth and are normally found at impact craters. Impact breccia, a type of impactite, forms during the process of impact cratering when large meteorites or comets impact with the Earth or other rocky planets or asteroids. Breccia of this type may be present on or beneath the floor of the crater, in the rim, or in the ejecta expelled beyond the crater.\nImpact breccia may be identified by its occurrence in or around a known impact crater, and/or an association with other products of impact cratering such as shatter cones, impact glass, shocked minerals, and chemical and isotopic evidence of contamination with extraterrestrial material (e.g., iridium and osmium anomalies). An example of an impact breccia is the Neugrund breccia, which was formed in the Neugrund impact.\nHydrothermal.\nHydrothermal breccias usually form at shallow crustal levels (&lt;1\u00a0km) between 150 and 350\u00a0\u00b0C, when seismic or volcanic activity causes a void to open along a fault deep underground. The void draws in hot water, and as pressure in the cavity drops, the water violently boils. In addition, the sudden opening of a cavity causes rock at the sides of the fault to destabilise and implode inwards, and the broken rock gets caught up in a churning mixture of rock, steam and boiling water. Rock fragments collide with each other and the sides of the void, and the angular fragments become more rounded. Volatile gases are lost to the steam phase as boiling continues, in particular carbon dioxide. As a result, the chemistry of the fluids changes and ore minerals rapidly precipitate. Breccia-hosted ore deposits are quite common.\nThe morphology of breccias associated with ore deposits varies from tabular sheeted veins and clastic dikes associated with overpressured sedimentary strata, to large-scale intrusive diatreme breccias (breccia pipes), or even some synsedimentary diatremes formed solely by the overpressure of pore fluid within sedimentary basins. Hydrothermal breccias are usually formed by hydrofracturing of rocks by highly pressured hydrothermal fluids. They are typical of the epithermal ore environment and are intimately associated with intrusive-related ore deposits such as skarns, greisens and porphyry-related mineralisation. Epithermal deposits are mined for copper, silver and gold.\nIn the mesothermal regime, at much greater depths, fluids under lithostatic pressure can be released during seismic activity associated with mountain building. The pressurised fluids ascend towards shallower crustal levels that are under lower hydrostatic pressure. On their journey, high-pressure fluids crack rock by hydrofracturing, forming an angular \"in situ\" breccia. Rounding of rock fragments is less common in the mesothermal regime, as the formational event is brief. If boiling occurs, methane and hydrogen sulfide may be lost to the steam phase, and ore may precipitate. Mesothermal deposits are often mined for gold.\nOrnamental uses.\nFor thousands of years, the striking visual appearance of breccias has made them a popular sculptural and architectural material. Breccia was used for column bases in the Minoan palace of Knossos on Crete in about 1800 BC. Breccia was used on a limited scale by the ancient Egyptians; one of the best-known examples is the statue of the goddess Tawaret in the British Museum. Breccia was regarded by the Romans as an especially precious stone and was often used in high-profile public buildings. Many types of marble are brecciated, such as Breccia Oniciata.\nIn ancient Japanese culture, 'sazare ishi' (\u7d30\u77f3) were considered auspicious rocks, representing prayers for the emperor's long reign and are as such mentioned in the Japanese National anthem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54128", "revid": "50132161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54128", "title": "Kart racing", "text": "Motorsport using go-karts\nKart racing or karting is a motorsport discipline using open-wheel, four-wheeled vehicles known as go-karts or shifter karts. They are usually raced on scaled-down circuits, although some professional kart races are also held on full-size motorsport circuits. Karting is commonly perceived as the stepping stone to the higher ranks of motorsports. Most modern Formula One drivers, including Ayrton Senna, Michael Schumacher, Fernando Alonso, Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen, Lewis Hamilton, Sebastian Vettel, Nico Rosberg, and Max Verstappen, have begun their racing careers in karting.\nKarts vary widely in speed, and some (known as superkarts) can reach speeds exceeding , while recreational go-karts intended for the general public may be limited to lower speeds.\nHistory.\nAmerican Art Ingels is generally accepted to be the father of karting. A veteran hot rodder and a race car builder at Kurtis Kraft, he built the first kart in Southern California in 1956. Early karting events were held in the Rose Bowl Stadium car park. Instantly popular, Karting rapidly spread to other countries, and currently has a large following in Europe.\nThe first kart manufacturer was an American company, Go Kart Manufacturing Co. (1957). In 1959, McCulloch was the first company to produce engines for karts. Its first engine, the McCulloch MC-10, was an adapted chainsaw two-stroke engine. Later, in the 1960s, motorcycle engines were also adapted for kart use, before dedicated manufacturers, especially in Italy (IAME), started to build engines for the sport.\nFirst ever Karting World Championship was held in 1964. First ever Karting European Championship was held in 1972.\nComponents.\nChassis.\nThe chassis are made of chromoly tubing. There is no suspension, so chassis have to be flexible enough to work as a suspension and stiff enough not to break or give way on a turn. Kart chassis are classified in the United States as \"Open\", \"Caged\", \"Straight\" or \"Offset\". All Commission Internationale de Karting\u2013, F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de l'Automobile\u2013, or CIK-FIA-approved chassis are \"Straight\" and \"Open\".\nThe stiffness of the chassis enables different handling characteristics for different circumstances. Typically, for dry conditions, a stiffer chassis is preferable, while in wet or other poor traction conditions, a more flexible chassis may work better. Temperature of the track can also affect handling and may prompt additional chassis adjustments. The best chassis allow for stiffening bars at the rear, front and side to be added or removed according to race conditions.\nBraking is achieved by a disc brake mounted on the rear axle. Front disc brakes are used in most shifter kart classes and are increasingly popular in other classes; however, certain classes do not allow them. Shifter karts have dual master cylinders, one for the front and one for the rear, and are adjustable to allow for front/rear bias changes.\nProfessionally raced karts typically weigh , complete without driver. Avanti, Tony Kart, Trulli, Birel, CRG, Gillard, Intrepid, Remo Racing, Kosmic, Zanardi or FA Kart and EKS are a few well-known examples of the many European manufacturers of race-quality chassis. Emmick, Coyote, Bandit, Shadow, MGM, Titan, PRC and Margay are American companies producing kart chassis.\nEngines.\nRacing karts mostly use small two-stroke or four-stroke engines; however, as of 2022, there has been small-scale adoption of electric motors in racing karts.\nTransmission.\nPurpose of transmission: There are three reasons for having a transmission in the automotive power train or drive train. The transmission can:\nKarts do not have a differential. The lack of a differential means that one rear tire must slide while cornering. This is achieved by designing the chassis so that the inside rear tire lifts up slightly when the kart turns the corner. This allows the tire to lose some of its grip and slide or lift off the ground completely.\nPower is transmitted from the engine to the rear axle by a chain. Both engine and axle sprockets are removable. Their ratio must be adapted to the track configuration to obtain the most performance from the engine.\nIn the early days, karts were direct drive, requiring push starts. The inconvenience of that configuration led to the centrifugal clutch for the club level classes. Dry centrifugal clutches are now used in many categories; Rotax Max is one example. They have become the norm as the top international classes have switched to 125\u00a0cc clutch-equipped engines as of January 2007.\nTires.\nWheels and tires are much smaller than those used on a normal car. Wheels are made of magnesium alloy, aluminum, or composite materials. Tires can support cornering forces in excess of 2 g (20\u00a0m/s\u00b2), depending on chassis, engine, and motor setup. Some car tire manufacturers, such as MG Bridgestone, Dunlop, and Maxxis make tires for karts. There are also specific kart tire manufacturers, which include MG, Vega, MOJO, LeCont, Cobra, Hoosier and Burris.\nSimilarly to other motorsports, kart tires have different types for use appropriate to track conditions:\nData acquisition.\nAs in other motor sports, several data acquisition systems have been developed for kart racing. These systems allow the driver to monitor from a display fixed on the steering wheel some parameters such as RPM, timing of laps (including sectors), number of laps, best lap, cooling system temperature, exhaust gas temperature and sometimes speed or even gear for shifter karts.\nSome of those systems are able to record (logging) laps data from the sensors, allowing replay of an entire running session or/and direct download to a personal computer equipped with a data analysis software. More sophisticated systems allow for more information such as lateral and longitudinal acceleration (g-force), throttle position, steering wheel position and brake pressure.\nRacing.\nKart racing is generally accepted as the most economical form of motorsport available on four wheels. As a free-time activity, it can be performed by almost anybody, and as a motorsport in itself, it is one of the sports regulated by FIA (under the name of CIK), permitting licensed racing for anyone from the age of 8 onward.\nIn the United States, there is not as much FIA involvement; instead, many organizations regulate racing, such as the IKF (International Kart Federation), WKA (World Karting Association), KART (Karters of America Racing Triad), USPKS (United States Pro Karting Series) SKUSA (SuperKartsUSA).\nIn the UK, the Motor Sports Association (MSA) regulates most \"owner driver\" Karting. Some associations, such as NatSKA (National Schools Karting Association), organize race meetings throughout the country under the authority of the MSA.\nVarious four-stroke \"hire kart\" series such as EPEC (European Prokart Endurance Championship) or BRKC (British Rental Kart Championship) fall outside the governance of the MSA. Billed as the UK's first national karting \"league\", the Elite Karting League also falls outside of MSA governance.\nIn Australia, kart racing is administered by one of the following Karting bodies:\nRacing classes start at age 7 or 8 (5 in the United States with \"Kid Karts\") and generally run in 3-year age groupings or weight divisions until \"senior\" status is reached at age 15 or 16, depending on the series.\nRacing formats.\nTypically, race formats are one of the following:\nSprint.\nSprint racing takes place on dedicated kart circuits resembling small road courses, with left and right turns, hairpins, chicanes, and short and long straightaways. Tracks range from 1/4-mile (400 metres) to over 1 mile (1,600 metres) in length.\nThe sprint format is a series of short-duration races, normally for a small number of laps, that qualify for a final which last 20 minutes or more, with a variety of point scoring calculations to determine the event's overall winner. Typical duration does not normally exceed 25 minutes. Here, speed and successful passing is of the most importance. It normally occurs in the format of qualifying, one to three heats and a final race for trophy positions.\nSprint Racing in the United States and Canada are held at three primary levels, club racing (local races at purpose-built tracks), regional racing - like the https://, the https://, the Florida-based https://, https:// in the Midwest, and the https:// in the Northeast. National level karting takes place across North America in dedicated national series like the https:// , the https://, https:// and the https://. The SKUSA Pro Tour championship is one of the most coveted, and the https:// event held in Las Vegas annually is one of the largest kart races in the world, attracting drivers from every continent. The SKUSA SuperNats event has been run continuously for 25 years, and a SuperNats win is considered a legendary win in karting circles.\nThe FIA championships, including the Karting World Championship, SKUSA SuperNats and all SKUSA Pro Tour, USPKS and ROK Cup USA Nationals take place in this format.\nSprint racing can be held at a dedicated purpose-built track (most of which also rent club karts for family fun), and sprint races are also held at kart tracks that exist at many major auto sports complexes like Daytona International Speedway, Charlotte Motor Speedway, Pittsburgh International Race Complex, NOLA Motorsports Park in New Orleans, Homestead-Miami Speedway, and Road America. Sprint races are also held at temporary kart circuits that can be built in parking areas at large stadiums and casinos throughout the United States. Additionally, there are street races where races take place on city streets on temporary circuits like some of the IndyCar races.\nEndurance.\nEndurance races last for an extended period, ranging from 30 minutes up to 24 hours or more, for one or more drivers. In general, consistency, reliability, and pit strategy is of greater importance than all out speed.\nCalled \"enduro\" racing in the United States, most WKA and IKF sanctioned events typically last 30 minutes (sprint enduro) or 45 minutes (laydown enduro) and are run continuously without pit stops. Enduro events are held on full-size road racing circuits that are usually between 1.5 and 4 miles in length.\nAs well as the famous 24 Hours of Le Mans race for automobiles there is also a 24-hours event for karts which takes place at the kart circuit Alain Prost at Le Mans, France. This race has taken place since 1986 and its winners list include four-time Champ Car champion S\u00e9bastien Bourdais (in 1996).\nEndurance racing is also considered a more affordable way of getting into karting. In South Africa, the 24 Hours of Karting Festival race is held annually and lasts 24 hours with multiple classes participating. This event is hosted by the Prokart SSS Club near Johannesburg. The most popular class runs the Honda GX390 four-stroke engine, which is both affordable and durable, keeping running costs to a minimum. The Prokart Super Single Series, also known as Prokart SSS, has been running for more than 20 years and has proven to be a very popular entry platform for drivers of all ages who want to get into karting. Many clubs worldwide have taken on four-stroke endurance karting for this reason, since two-stroke karting can be very expensive.\nSpeedway.\nSpeedway racing takes place on asphalt or clay oval tracks which are normally between 1/10-mile and 1/4-mile long. Tracks primarily consist of two straights and four left-turn corners, few tracks are symmetric and often the shape parallels that of an egg or a tri-oval.\n\"Offset\" kart chassis have been developed for precise handling and adjustability in left-turn-only racing competition taking place on oval and tri-oval tracks. Depending on the track material, different tires are used on the kart.\nSpeedway kart races range in length from 4 laps for a trophy dash, to 20 laps for a main event.\nThe two chief racing formats used in dirt speedway karting are heat races and timed laps qualification:\nRacing categories.\nThere are many different classes in kart. One of the fastest growing in the United States is Lo206. The general classes are 125cc Shifter, 100cc tag, 125cc tag and then the X30 equivalents of these karts.\nInternational.\nThe CIK-FIA sanctions international championships in OK, OKJ, KZ1, KZ2 and Superkart. These are regarded as the top-level classes of karting and are also raced in national championships worldwide. The World Championship is decided here. In May 2019 it held the international under-15 championship. The driver who finished first overall was Vlad Sputzki (Russia) followed by Daniel Smith (England) and then followed by Maximilien Blank (Australia)\nCIK-FIA categories:\nNon CIK-FIA categories:\nThe Kart World Championship (or KWC) as opposed to the FIA's \"Karting World Championship\" uses 4-stroke rental karts and travels to a different country each year.\nNational.\nIn the UK, the most celebrated karting series is the National karting series, also known as Super One. There are three types of Super One championships:\nOther UK National Championships include:\nBirel BirelART series UK: Cadet 60cc, Junior 100cc, Senior Light 125cc, Senior Heavy 125cc, British Indoor Karting Championship (BIKC)\nThe BRKC is the UK's rental karting National championship, and the UK's official feeder series to the rental Kart World Championship.\nNatSKA is a budget karting association set up for schools and youth groups in the UK, with 13 classes.\nIn the United States, Dirt oval classes (which often use Briggs &amp; Stratton industrial engines) are prominent in the Southeast and Midwest. In the West, European style sprint racing is much more common. In particular, 125cc shifter karts using Honda CR125 power units have gained tremendous popularity in recent years.\nIn Australia, classes include Cadet (previously called Midget),Junior KA4, Junior KA3, X30, KZ2, Senior KA3, Senior TAG (Restricted and Unrestricted). Most classes run a light and heavy category.\nMany people race worldwide in Spec series such as X30 125cc (a TaG class).\nRacing licences.\nAs in other disciplines in motorsports, a license is required to drive a racing kart in competition. The licenses, issued by governing bodies, are provided by clubs or associations. Basic insurance coverage is usually included in the licence annual fee. In some countries, such as France, regulations require the drivers to pass a medical exam each year.\nLicense classes differ between countries according to age groups or levels. Most of the time a Practice License can be easily obtained, while a Racing License might require a capability assessment.\nDriver equipment.\nFor their safety, kart drivers are required to wear proper equipment:\nRib protector, racing balaclava and neck brace, although highly recommended, are optional in most countries. None of the above need to be made of fire retardant material. Superkart drivers are required to wear leather overalls, similar to those used in motorcycling.\nCost.\nSince its introduction as a World Championship discipline in 1964, the cost of competitive karting has spiralled; in 2023, Fabio Marangon of \"Vroomkart\" described the sport as \"Formula 5\". Under Mohammed Ben Sulayem, the FIA introduced the OK-N and OKN-Junior categories to reduce costs for competitors. Arrive-and-drive championships gained prevalence through the early 21st century, led by Club100 in the United Kingdom, and the format was given World Cup\u2013status in 2025.\nAs a learning tool.\nDrivers can start at the age of 6 in the Motorsport UK Bambino Championship, and even from the age of 5 in the Bambino Kart Club Championship. Many Formula One drivers grew up racing karts, most prominent among them being World Drivers' Champions Ayrton Senna, Michael Schumacher, Alain Prost, Fernando Alonso, Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen, Jenson Button, Lewis Hamilton, Sebastian Vettel, and Max Verstappen. Many NASCAR drivers also got their start in racing from karts, such as Darrell Waltrip, Danica Patrick, Ricky Rudd, Juan Pablo Montoya, Tony Stewart, and Jeff Gordon. \nIn August 2009, in anticipation to a possible return to F1 with Ferrari, Formula One world champion Michael Schumacher did some preparation driving a kart in Lonato, Italy. Schumacher also raced at the SKUSA SuperNationals, an event taking place each year in Las Vegas, along with F1 drivers S\u00e9bastien Buemi and Nelson Piquet Jr. Felipe Massa also used karting in September 2009 to test his condition in Brazil, two months after his Hungarian Grand Prix accident during qualifying.\nSee also.\nRelated:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGoverning Bodies:"}
{"id": "54132", "revid": "46101651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54132", "title": "Olof Palme", "text": "Swedish Prime Minister (1969\u201376, 1982\u201386)\nSven Olof Joachim Palme (; ; 30 January 1927 \u2013 28 February 1986) was a Swedish politician and statesman who served as Prime Minister of Sweden from 1969 to 1976 and 1982 to 1986. Palme led the Swedish Social Democratic Party from 1969 until his assassination in 1986.\nA longtime prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Prime Minister Tage Erlander, he became Prime Minister of Sweden and Chairman of the Social Democratic Party in 1969. He left office after failing to form a government after the 1976 general election, which ended 40 years of unbroken rule by the Social Democratic Party. While he served as a Leader of the Opposition, he also served as special mediator of the United Nations in the Iran\u2013Iraq War, and was President of the Nordic Council in 1979. He faced a second defeat in 1979, but he returned as prime minister after electoral victories in 1982 and 1985, and served until his death.\nPalme was a pivotal and polarizing figure domestically as well as in international politics from the 1960s onward. He was steadfast in his non-alignment policy towards the superpowers, accompanied by support for numerous liberation movements following decolonization including, most controversially, economic and vocal support for a number of Third World governments. He was the first Western head of government to visit Cuba after its revolution, giving a speech in Santiago praising contemporary Cuban revolutionaries.\nFrequently a critic of Soviet and American foreign policy, he expressed his resistance to imperialist ambitions and authoritarian regimes, including those of Francisco Franco of Spain, Augusto Pinochet of Chile, Leonid Brezhnev of the Soviet Union, Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar of Portugal, Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k of Czechoslovakia, and most notably John Vorster and P. W. Botha of South Africa, denouncing apartheid as a \"particularly gruesome system\". His 1972 condemnation of American bombings in Hanoi, comparing the bombings to a number of historical crimes including the bombing of Guernica, the massacres of Oradour-sur-glane, Babi Yar, Katyn, Lidice and Sharpeville and the extermination of Jews and other groups at Treblinka, resulted in a temporary freeze in Sweden\u2013United States relations.\nPalme's assassination on a Stockholm street on 28 February 1986 was the first murder of a national leader in Sweden since Gustav III in 1792, and had a great impact across Scandinavia. Local convict and addict Christer Pettersson was originally convicted of the murder in Stockholm District Court but was unanimously acquitted by the Svea Court of Appeal. \nOn 10 June 2020, Swedish prosecutors held a press conference to announce that there was \"reasonable evidence\" that Stig Engstr\u00f6m had killed Palme. As Engstr\u00f6m had killed himself in 2000, the authorities announced that the investigation into Palme's death was to be closed. The 2020 conclusion has faced widespread criticism from lawyers, police officers and journalists, decrying the evidence as only circumstantial, and \u2013 by the prosecutors' own admission \u2013 too weak to ensure a trial had the suspect been alive. The true identity of his assassin remains unknown.\nEarly life.\nSven Olof Joachim Palme was born on 30 January 1927 into an upper class, conservative Lutheran family in the \u00d6stermalm district of Stockholm. The progenitor of the Palme family was skipper Palme Lydert of Ystad of either Dutch or German ancestry. His sons adopted the surname Palme. Many of the early Palmes were vicars and judges in Scania. One branch of the family, of which Olof Palme was part, and which became more affluent, relocated to Kalmar; that branch is related to several other prominent Swedish families such as the Kreugers, von Sydows and the Wallenbergs. His father, Gunnar Palme (1886\u20131934), was a businessman, son of Sven Theodore Palme (1854\u20131934) and Swedish-speaking Finnish Baroness Hanna Maria von Born-Sarvilahti (1861\u20131959). Through her, Olof Palme claimed ancestry from King Johan III of Sweden, his father King Gustav Vasa of Sweden and King Frederick I of Denmark and Norway. His mother, Elisabeth von Knieriem (1890\u20131972), of the Knieriem family who originated from Quedlinburg, descended from Baltic German burghers and clergy and had arrived in Sweden from Russia as a refugee in 1915. Elisabeth's great-great-great grandfather Johann Melchior von Knieriem (1758\u20131817) had been ennobled by the Emperor Alexander I of Russia in 1814. The von Knieriem family does not count as members of any of the Baltic knighthoods. Palme's father died when he was seven years old. Despite his background, his political orientation came to be influenced by Social Democratic attitudes. His travels in the Third World, as well as the United States, where he saw deep economic inequality and racial segregation, helped to develop these views.\nA sickly child, Olof Palme received his education from private tutors. Even as a child he gained knowledge of two foreign languages \u2014 German and English. He studied at Sigtunaskolan Humanistiska L\u00e4roverket, one of Sweden's few residential high schools, and passed the university entrance examination with high marks at the age of 17. He was called up into the Army in January 1945 and did his compulsory military service at Svea Artillery Regiment between 1945 and 1947, becoming in 1956 a reserve officer with the rank of Captain in the Artillery. After he was discharged from military service in March 1947, he enrolled at Stockholm University.\nOn a scholarship, he studied at Kenyon College, a small liberal arts school in central Ohio from 1947 to 1948, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree;\nextensive academic credit from Sweden enabled him to finish at Kenyon in such a short time.\n Inspired by radical debate in the student community, he wrote a critical essay on Friedrich Hayek's \"The Road to Serfdom\". Palme wrote his senior honour thesis on the United Auto Workers union, led at the time by Walter Reuther. After graduation, he traveled throughout the country and eventually ended up in Detroit, where his hero Reuther agreed to an interview which lasted several hours. In later years, Palme regularly remarked during his many subsequent American visits, that the United States had made him a socialist, a remark that often has caused confusion. Within the context of his American experience, it was not that Palme was repelled by what he found in America, but rather that he was inspired by it.\nAfter hitchhiking through the U.S. and Mexico, he returned to Sweden to study law at Stockholm University. In 1949 he became a member of the Swedish Social Democratic Party. During his time at university, Palme became involved in student politics, working with the Swedish National Union of Students. In 1951, he became a member of the social democratic student association in Stockholm, although it is asserted he did not attend their political meetings at the time. The following year he was elected President of the Swedish National Union of Students. As a student politician, he concentrated on international affairs and travelled across Europe.\nPalme attributed his becoming a social democrat to three major influences:\nIn 1956, Palme married children's psychologist Lisbeth Beck-Friis, and together they had three sons: Joakim, M\u00e5rten, and Mattias Palme.\nPalme was an atheist.\nEarly political career.\nIn 1953, Palme was recruited by social democratic prime minister Tage Erlander to work as his personal secretary, becoming the first of Erlander's large personal staff, a group of young aides such as Ingvar Carlsson and Bengt K. \u00c5. Johansson, a group that became known as \"the boys\". From 1955 he was a board member of the Swedish Social Democratic Youth League and lectured at the Youth League College Bommersvik. He also was a member of the Worker's Educational Association.\nIn 1957 he was elected as a member of parliament (Swedish: \"riksdagsledamot\") represented J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping County in the directly elected Second Chamber (\"Andra kammaren\") of the Riksdag. In the early 1960s Palme became a member of the Agency for International Assistance (NIB) and was in charge of inquiries into assistance to the developing countries and educational aid. In 1963, he became a member of the Cabinet as minister without portfolio in the Cabinet Office, and retained his duties as a close political adviser to Prime Minister Tage Erlander. In 1965, he became Minister of Communications. One issue of special interest to him was the further development of radio and television, while ensuring their independence from commercial interests. In 1967 he became Minister of Education and Ecclesiastical Affairs, and the following year, he became Minister for Education and was the target of strong criticism from left-wing students protesting against the government's plans for university reform. The protests culminated with the occupation of the Student Union Building in Stockholm; Palme came there and tried to comfort the students, urging them to use democratic methods for the pursuit of their cause. On 21 February 1968, Palme participated in a protest in Stockholm against U.S. involvement in the war in Vietnam together with the North Vietnamese ambassador to the Soviet Union, Nguy\u1ec5n Th\u1ecd Ch\u00e2n. The protest was organized by the Swedish Committee for Vietnam and Palme and Nguyen were both invited as speakers. As a result of this, the U.S. recalled its Ambassador from Sweden and Palme was fiercely criticised by the opposition for his participation in the protest.\nWhen party leader Tage Erlander stepped down in 1969, Palme was elected as the new leader by the Social Democratic party congress and asked by king Gustaf VI Adolf to form a government and succeed Erlander as Prime Minister. Prior to the selection of Palme, President of Finland Urho Kekkonen asked Erlander who his successor would be, and Erlander gave evasive answers. Kekkonen then asked if it would be Palme, to which Erlander responded, \"Never, he is far too intelligent for a Prime Minister\". Palme was later asked when Erlander first hinted to him that he wanted him to succeed him. Palme stated, \"It never happened.\"\nPalme was very popular among the left, but harshly detested by liberals and conservatives. This was due in part to his international activities, especially those directed against the US foreign policy, and in part to his aggressive and outspoken debating style.\nPremierships (1969\u201376, 1982\u201386).\nDomestic policy.\nAs leader of a new generation of Swedish Social Democrats, Palme was often described as a \"revolutionary reformist\" and self-identified as a progressive. Domestically, his leftist views, especially the drive to expand labour union influence over business ownership, engendered a great deal of hostility from the organized business community.\nDuring the tenure of Palme, several major reforms in the Swedish constitution were carried out, such as orchestrating a switch from bicameralism to unicameralism in 1971 and in 1975 replacing the 1809 Instrument of Government (at the time the oldest political constitution in the world after that of the United States) with a new one officially establishing parliamentary democracy rather than \"de jure\" monarchic autocracy, abolishing the Cabinet meetings chaired by the King and stripping the monarchy of all formal political powers.\nHis reforms on the labour market included establishing a law which increased job security. In the Swedish 1973 general election, the Socialist-Communist and the Liberal-Conservative blocs got 175 places each in the Riksdag. The Palme cabinet continued to govern the country, but several times they had to draw lots to decide on some issues, although most important issues were decided through a consensus agreement. Tax rates also rose from being fairly low even by Western European standards to the highest levels in the Western world.\nUnder Palme's premiership tenure, matters concerned with child care centers, social security, protection of the elderly, accident safety, and housing problems received special attention. Under Palme the public health system in Sweden became efficient, with the infant mortality rate standing at 12 per 1,000 live births. An ambitious redistributive programme was carried out, with special help provided to the disabled, immigrants, the low paid, single-parent families, and the old. The Swedish welfare state was significantly expanded from a position already one of the most far-reaching in the world during his time in office. As noted by Isabela Mares, during the first half of the Seventies \"the level of benefits provided by every subsystem of the welfare state improved significantly.\" Various policy changes increased the basic old-age pension replacement rate from 42% of the average wage in 1969 to 57%, while a health care reform carried out in 1974 integrated all health services and increased the minimum replacement rate from 64% to 90% of earnings. In 1974, supplementary unemployment assistance was established, providing benefits to those workers ineligible for existing benefits. In 1971, eligibility for invalidity pensions was extended with greater opportunities for employees over the age of 60. In 1974, universal dental insurance was introduced, and former maternity benefits were replaced by a parental allowance. In 1974, housing allowances for families with children were raised and these allowances were extended to other low-income groups. Childcare centres were also expanded under Palme, and separate taxation of husband and wife introduced. Under Palme, over half of the Swedish economy was under state ownership, and the influence of the state had grown massively. Access to pensions for older workers in poor health was liberalised in 1970, and a disability pension was introduced for older unemployed workers in 1972.\nThe Palme cabinet was also active in the field of education, introducing such reforms as a system of loans and benefits for students, regional universities, and preschool for all children. Under a law of 1970, in the upper secondary school system \"gymnasium,\" \"fackskola\" and vocational \"yrkesskola\" were integrated to form one school with 3 sectors (arts and social science, technical and natural sciences, economic and commercial). In 1975, a law was passed that established free admission to universities. A number of reforms were also carried out to enhance workers' rights. An employment protection Act of 1974 introduced rules regarding consultation with unions, notice periods, and grounds for dismissal, together with priority rules for dismissals and re-employment in case of redundancies. That same year, work-environment improvement grants were introduced and made available to modernising firms \"conditional upon the presence of union-appointed 'safety stewards' to review the introduction of new technology with regard to the health and safety of workers\". In 1976, an Act on co-determination at work was introduced that allowed unions to be consulted at various levels within companies before major changes were enforced that would affect employees, while management had to negotiate with labour for joint rights in all matters concerning organisation of work, hiring and firing, and key decisions affecting the workplace.\nPalme's last government, elected during a time when Sweden's economy was in difficult shape, sought to pursue a \"third way,\" designed to stimulate investment, production, and employment, having ruled out classical Keynesian policies as a result of the growing burden of foreign debt, together with the big balance of payments and budget deficits. This involved \"equality of sacrifice,\" whereby wage restraint would be accompanied by increases in welfare provision and more progressive taxation. For instance, taxes on wealth, gifts, and inheritance were increased, while tax benefits to shareholders were either reduced or eliminated. In addition, various welfare cuts carried out before Olof's return to office were rescinded. The previous system of indexing pensions and other benefits was restored, the grant-in-aid scheme for municipal child care facilities was re-established, unemployment insurance was restored in full, and the so-called \"no benefit days\" for those drawing sickness benefits were cancelled. Increases were also made to both food subsidies and child allowances, while the employee investment funds (which represented a radical form of profit-sharing) were introduced.\nIn 1968, Palme was a driving force behind the release of the documentary \"Dom kallar oss mods\" (\"They Call Us Misfits\"). The controversial film, depicting two social outcasts, was scheduled to be released in an edited form but Palme thought the material was too socially important to be cut.\nAn outspoken supporter of gender equality, Palme sparked interest for women's rights issues by attending a World Women's Conference in Mexico. He also made a feminist speech called \"The Emancipation of Man\" at a meeting of the Woman's National Democratic Club on 8 June 1970; this speech was later published in 1972.\nAs a forerunner in green politics, Palme was a firm believer in nuclear power as a necessary form of energy, at least for a transitional period to curb the influence of fossil fuel. His intervention in Sweden's 1980 referendum on the future of nuclear power is often pinpointed by opponents of nuclear power as saving it. As of 2011, nuclear power remains one of the most important sources of clean energy in Sweden, much attributed to Palme's actions. Palme advocated for nuclear energy to move away from fossil fuels in his speech during the Stockholm Conference in 1972.\nForeign policy.\nSoviet\u2013Swedish bilateral relations were tested during Palme's second period as prime minister in the 1980s, in particular, owing to reports of incursions by Soviet submarines into Swedish territorial waters.\nOn the international scene, Palme was a widely recognised political figure because of his:\nAll of this ensured that Palme had many opponents as well as many friends abroad.\nIn June 1972 at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment he described the environmental damage caused by the Vietnam War (including use of Agent Orange and other Rainbow Herbicides to deforst whole areas of the country) as ecocide and called for it to become an international crime.\nOn 23 December 1972, Palme (then Prime Minister) made a speech on Swedish national radio where he compared the ongoing U.S. bombings of Hanoi to historical atrocities, namely the bombing of Guernica, the massacres of Oradour-sur-Glane, Babi Yar, Katyn, Lidice and Sharpeville, and the extermination of Jews and other groups at Treblinka. The US government called the comparison a \"gross insult\" and once again decided to freeze its diplomatic relations with Sweden (this time the freeze lasted for over a year).\nAssassination and aftermath.\nPolitical violence was little-known in Sweden at the time, and Palme often went about without a bodyguard. Close to midnight on 28 February 1986, he was walking home from a cinema with his wife Lisbeth Palme in the central Stockholm street Sveav\u00e4gen when he was shot in the back at close range. A second shot grazed Lisbeth's back. He was pronounced dead on arrival at the Sabbatsberg Hospital at 00:06 CET. Lisbeth survived without serious injuries.\nDeputy Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson immediately assumed the duties of Prime Minister, a post he retained until 1991 (and then again in 1994\u20131996). He also took over the leadership of the Social Democratic Party, which he held until 1996. Two years later, Christer Pettersson (d. 2004), a murderer, small-time criminal and drug addict, was convicted of Palme's murder, but his conviction was overturned. Another suspect, Victor Gunnarsson, emigrated to the United States, where he was the victim of an unrelated murder in 1993. The assassination remained unsolved. \nA third and fourth suspect popularly referred to as \"The Skandia Man\" and \"GH\", after their working place at the Skandia\u00a0building next to the crime scene, and police investigation number (\"H\" representing the eighth letter, i.e. \"Suspect Profile No. 8\"), took their own lives in 2000 and 2008 respectively. Both fitted the suspect profile vaguely, and owned firearms. GH was a long-time suspect partly because he had self-described financial motives, and owned the only registered .357 Magnum in the Stockholm\u00a0vicinity not tested and ruled out by authorities, which as yet has not been recovered.\nOn 18 March 2020, Swedish investigators met in Pretoria with members of South African intelligence agencies to discuss the case. The South Africans handed over their file from 1986 to their Swedish colleagues. G\u00f6ran Bj\u00f6rkdahl, a Swedish diplomat, had done independent research on Palme's assassination. Major General Chris Thirion, who headed the military intelligence of South Africa during the final years of apartheid rule, had told Bj\u00f6rkdahl in 2015 that he believed South Africa was behind Palme's murder. Swedish investigators announced that they would reveal new information and close the case on 10 June 2020. Earlier remarks by lead investigator Krister Petersson that \"there might not be a prosecution\" have led commentators to believe that the suspect is dead.\nOn 10 June 2020, Swedish prosecutors stated publicly that they knew who had killed Palme and named Stig Engstr\u00f6m, also known as \"Skandia Man\", as the assassin. Engstr\u00f6m was one of about twenty people who had claimed to witness the assassination and was later identified as a potential suspect by Swedish writers Lars Larsson and Thomas Pettersson. Given that Engstr\u00f6m had committed suicide in 2000, the authorities also announced that the investigation into Palme's death was to be closed.\nSome politicians and journalists in Turkey relate the assassination of Palme to PKK since he was the first in Europe to designate PKK as a terrorist organisation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54133", "revid": "35107032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54133", "title": "Munchen", "text": ""}
{"id": "54134", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54134", "title": "B-2", "text": ""}
{"id": "54136", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54136", "title": "Lesbos Prefecture", "text": "Lesbos Prefecture () was one of the prefectures of Greece. It comprised three main islands: Lesbos itself, Lemnos, and the smaller island of Agios Efstratios. Its capital was the town of Mytilene, on Lesbos. In 2011 the prefecture was abolished and the territory was divided between the regional units of Lesbos and Lemnos.\nProvinces.\n\"Note:\" Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece."}
{"id": "54137", "revid": "15239805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54137", "title": "Methane clathrate", "text": "Methane-water lattice compound\nMethane clathrate (CH4\u00b75.75H2O) or (4CH4\u00b723H2O), also called methane hydrate, hydromethane, methane ice, fire ice, natural gas hydrate, or gas hydrate, is a solid clathrate compound (more specifically, a clathrate hydrate) in which a large amount of methane is trapped within a crystal structure of water, forming a solid similar to ice. Originally thought to occur only in the outer regions of the Solar System, where temperatures are low and water ice is common, significant deposits of methane clathrate have been found under sediments on the ocean floors of the Earth (around 1100m below the sea level). Methane hydrate is formed when hydrogen-bonded water and methane gas come into contact at high pressures and low temperatures in oceans.\nMethane clathrates are common constituents of the shallow marine geosphere and they occur in deep sedimentary structures and form outcrops on the ocean floor. Methane hydrates are believed to form by the precipitation or crystallisation of methane migrating from deep along geological faults. Precipitation occurs when the methane comes in contact with water within the sea bed subject to temperature and pressure. In 2008, research on Antarctic Vostok Station and EPICA Dome C ice cores revealed that methane clathrates were also present in deep Antarctic ice cores and record a history of atmospheric methane concentrations, dating to 800,000 years ago. The ice-core methane clathrate record is a primary source of data for global warming research, along with oxygen and carbon dioxide.\nMethane clathrates used to be considered as a potential source of abrupt climate change, following the clathrate gun hypothesis. In this scenario, heating causes catastrophic melting and breakdown of primarily undersea hydrates, leading to a massive release of methane and accelerating warming. Current research shows that hydrates react very slowly to warming, and that it's very difficult for methane to reach the atmosphere after dissociation. Some active seeps instead act as a minor carbon sink, because with the majority of methane dissolved underwater and encouraging methanotroph communities, the area around the seep also becomes more suitable for phytoplankton. As the result, methane hydrates are no longer considered one of the tipping points in the climate system, and according to the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, no \"detectable\" impact on the global temperatures will occur in this century through this mechanism. Over several millennia, a more substantial response may still be seen.\nGeneral.\nMethane hydrates were discovered in Russia in the 1960s, and studies for extracting gas from it emerged at the beginning of the 21st century.\nStructure and composition.\nThe nominal methane clathrate hydrate composition is (CH4)4(H2O)23, or 1 mole of methane for every 5.75 moles of water, corresponding to 13.4% methane by mass, although the actual composition is dependent on how many methane molecules fit into the various cage structures of the water lattice. The observed density is around 0.9 g/cm3, which means that methane hydrate will float to the surface of the sea or of a lake unless it is bound in place by being formed in or anchored to sediment. One litre of fully saturated methane clathrate solid would therefore contain about 120 grams of methane (or around 169 litres of methane gas at 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 1 atm), or one cubic metre of methane clathrate releases about 160 cubic metres of gas.\nMethane forms a \"structure-I\" hydrate with two dodecahedral (20 vertices, thus 20 water molecules) and six tetradecahedral (24 water molecules) water cages per unit cell. (Due to sharing of each water molecule between four cages, there are 46 water molecules and eight methane molecules per unit cell.) This compares with a hydration number of 20 for methane in aqueous solution. A methane clathrate MAS NMR spectrum recorded at 275 K and 3.1 MPa shows a peak for each cage type and a separate peak for gas phase methane. In 2003, a clay-methane hydrate intercalate was synthesized in which a methane hydrate complex was introduced at the interlayer of a sodium-rich montmorillonite clay. The upper temperature stability of this phase is similar to that of structure-I hydrate.\nNatural deposits.\nMethane clathrates are restricted to the shallow lithosphere (i.e. &lt;\u00a02,000\u00a0m depth). Furthermore, necessary conditions are found only in either continental sedimentary rocks in polar regions where average surface temperatures are less than 0\u00a0\u00b0C; or in oceanic sediment at water depths greater than 300\u00a0m where the bottom water temperature is around 2\u00a0\u00b0C. In addition, deep fresh water lakes may host gas hydrates as well, e.g. the fresh water Lake Baikal, Siberia. Continental deposits have been located in Siberia and Alaska in sandstone and siltstone beds at less than 800\u00a0m depth. Oceanic deposits seem to be widespread in the continental shelf (see Fig.) and can occur within the sediments at depth or close to the sediment\u2013water interface. They may cap even larger deposits of gaseous methane.\nOceanic.\nMethane hydrate can occur in various forms like massive, dispersed within pore spaces, nodules, veins/fractures/faults, and layered horizons. Generally, it is found unstable at standard pressure and temperature conditions, and 1 m3 of methane hydrate upon dissociation yields about 164 m3 of methane and 0.87 m3 of freshwater. There are two distinct types of oceanic deposits. The most common is dominated (&gt; 99%) by methane contained in a structure I clathrate and generally found at depth in the sediment. Here, the methane is isotopically light (\u03b413C &lt; \u221260\u2030), which indicates that it is derived from the microbial reduction of CO2. The clathrates in these deep deposits are thought to have formed in situ from the microbially produced methane since the \u03b413C values of clathrate and surrounding dissolved methane are similar. However, it is also thought that freshwater used in the pressurization of oil and gas wells in permafrost and along the continental shelves worldwide combines with natural methane to form clathrate at depth and pressure since methane hydrates are more stable in freshwater than in saltwater. Local variations may be widespread since the act of forming hydrate, which extracts pure water from saline formation waters, can often lead to local and potentially significant increases in formation water salinity. Hydrates normally exclude the salt in the pore fluid from which it forms. Thus, they exhibit high electric resistivity like ice, and sediments containing hydrates have higher resistivity than sediments without gas hydrates (Judge [67]).\nThese deposits are located within a mid-depth zone around 300\u2013500 m thick in the sediments (the gas hydrate stability zone, or GHSZ) where they coexist with methane dissolved in the fresh, not salt, pore-waters. Above this zone methane is only present in its dissolved form at concentrations that decrease towards the sediment surface. Below it, methane is gaseous. At Blake Ridge on the Atlantic continental rise, the GHSZ started at 190\u00a0m depth and continued to 450\u00a0m, where it reached equilibrium with the gaseous phase. Measurements indicated that methane occupied by volume in the GHSZ, and ~12% in the gaseous zone.\nIn the less common second type found near the sediment surface, some samples have a higher proportion of longer-chain hydrocarbons (&lt; 99% methane) contained in a structure II clathrate. Carbon from this type of clathrate is isotopically heavier (\u03b413C is \u221229 to \u221257 \u2030) and is thought to have migrated upwards from deep sediments, where methane was formed by thermal decomposition of organic matter. Examples of this type of deposit have been found in the Gulf of Mexico and the Caspian Sea.\nSome deposits have characteristics intermediate between the microbially and thermally sourced types and are considered formed from a mixture of the two.\nThe methane in gas hydrates is dominantly generated by microbial consortia degrading organic matter in low oxygen environments, with the methane itself produced by methanogenic archaea. Organic matter in the uppermost few centimeters of sediments is first attacked by aerobic bacteria, generating CO2, which escapes from the sediments into the water column. Below this region of aerobic activity, anaerobic processes take over, including, successively with depth, the microbial reduction of nitrite/nitrate, metal oxides, and then sulfates are reduced to sulfides. Finally, methanogenesis becomes a dominant pathway for organic carbon remineralization.\nIf the sedimentation rate is low (about 1\u00a0cm/yr), the organic carbon content is low (about 1%), and oxygen is abundant, aerobic bacteria can use up all the organic matter in the sediments faster than oxygen is depleted, so lower-energy electron acceptors are not used. But where sedimentation rates and the organic carbon content are high, which is typically the case on continental shelves and beneath western boundary current upwelling zones, the pore water in the sediments becomes anoxic at depths of only a few centimeters or less. In such organic-rich marine sediments, sulfate becomes the most important terminal electron acceptor due to its high concentration in seawater. However, it too is depleted by a depth of centimeters to meters. Below this, methane is produced. This production of methane is a rather complicated process, requiring a highly reducing environment (Eh ) and a pH between 6 and 8, as well as a complex syntrophic, consortia of different varieties of archaea and bacteria. However, it is only archaea that actually emit methane.\nIn some regions (e.g., Gulf of Mexico, Joetsu Basin) methane in clathrates may be at least partially derive from thermal degradation of organic matter (e.g. petroleum generation), with oil even forming an exotic component within the hydrate itself that can be recovered when the hydrate is disassociated. The methane in clathrates typically has a biogenic isotopic signature and highly variable \u03b413C (), with an approximate average of about \u221265\u2030. Below the zone of solid clathrates, large volumes of methane may form bubbles of free gas in the sediments.\nThe presence of clathrates at a given site can often be determined by observation of a \"bottom simulating reflector\" (BSR), which is a seismic reflection at the sediment to clathrate stability zone interface caused by the unequal densities of normal sediments and those laced with clathrates.\nGas hydrate pingos have been discovered in the Arctic oceans Barents sea. Methane is bubbling from these dome-like structures, with some of these gas flares extending close to the sea surface.\nReservoir size.\nThe size of the oceanic methane clathrate reservoir is poorly known, and estimates of its size decreased by roughly an order of magnitude per decade since it was first recognized that clathrates could exist in the oceans during the 1960s and 1970s. The highest estimates (e.g. 3\u00d71018 m3) were based on the assumption that fully dense clathrates could litter the entire floor of the deep ocean. Improvements in our understanding of clathrate chemistry and sedimentology have revealed that hydrates form in only a narrow range of depths (continental shelves), at only some locations in the range of depths where they could occur (10-30% of the Gas hydrate stability zone), and typically are found at low concentrations ( by volume) at sites where they do occur. Recent estimates constrained by direct sampling suggest the global inventory occupies between . This estimate, corresponding to 500\u20132500 gigatonnes carbon (Gt\u00a0C), is smaller than the 5000 Gt\u00a0C estimated for all other geo-organic fuel reserves but substantially larger than the ~230 Gt\u00a0C estimated for other natural gas sources. The permafrost reservoir has been estimated at about 400\u00a0Gt\u00a0C in the Arctic, but no estimates have been made of possible Antarctic reservoirs. These are large amounts. In comparison, the total carbon in the atmosphere is around 800\u00a0gigatons (see ).\nThese modern estimates are notably smaller than the (2\u00d71016 m3) proposed by previous researchers as a reason to consider clathrates to be a geo-organic fuel resource (MacDonald 1990, Kvenvolden 1998). Lower abundances of clathrates do not rule out their economic potential, but a lower total volume and apparently low concentration at most sites does suggest that only a limited percentage of clathrates deposits may provide an economically viable resource.\nContinental.\nMethane clathrates in continental rocks are trapped in beds of sandstone or siltstone at depths of less than 800\u00a0m. Sampling indicates they are formed from a mix of thermally and microbially derived gas from which the heavier hydrocarbons were later selectively removed. These occur in Alaska, Siberia, and Northern Canada.\nIn 2008, Canadian and Japanese researchers extracted a constant stream of natural gas from a test project at the Mallik gas hydrate site in the Mackenzie River delta. This was the second such drilling at Mallik: the first took place in 2002 and used heat to release methane. In the 2008 experiment, researchers were able to extract gas by lowering the pressure, without heating, requiring significantly less energy. The Mallik gas hydrate field was first discovered by Imperial Oil in 1971\u20131972.\nCommercial use.\nEconomic deposits of hydrate are termed natural gas hydrate (NGH) and store 164 m3 of methane, 0.8 m3 water in 1 m3 hydrate. Most NGH is found beneath the seafloor (95%) where it exists in thermodynamic equilibrium. The sedimentary methane hydrate reservoir probably contains 2\u201310 times the currently known reserves of conventional natural gas, as of 2013[ [update]]. This represents a potentially important future source of hydrocarbon fuel. However, in the majority of sites deposits are thought to be too dispersed for economic extraction. Other problems facing commercial exploitation are detection of viable reserves and development of the technology for extracting methane gas from the hydrate deposits.\nIn August 2006, China announced plans to spend 800 million yuan (US$100 million) over the next 10 years to study natural gas hydrates. A potentially economic reserve in the Gulf of Mexico may contain approximately of gas. Bj\u00f8rn Kvamme and Arne Graue at the Institute for Physics and technology at the University of Bergen have developed a method for injecting CO2 into hydrates and reversing the process; thereby extracting CH4 by direct exchange. The University of Bergen's method is being field tested by ConocoPhillips and state-owned Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC), and partially funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. The project has already reached injection phase and was analyzing resulting data by March 12, 2012.\nOn March 12, 2013, JOGMEC researchers announced that they had successfully extracted natural gas from frozen methane hydrate. In order to extract the gas, specialized equipment was used to drill into and depressurize the hydrate deposits, causing the methane to separate from the ice. The gas was then collected and piped to surface where it was ignited to prove its presence. According to an industry spokesperson, \"It [was] the world's first offshore experiment producing gas from methane hydrate\". Previously, gas had been extracted from onshore deposits, but never from offshore deposits which are much more common. The hydrate field from which the gas was extracted is located from central Japan in the Nankai Trough, under the sea. A spokesperson for JOGMEC remarked \"Japan could finally have an energy source to call its own\". Marine geologist Mikio Satoh remarked \"Now we know that extraction is possible. The next step is to see how far Japan can get costs down to make the technology economically viable.\" Japan estimates that there are at least 1.1 trillion cubic meters of methane trapped in the Nankai Trough, enough to meet the country's needs for more than ten years.\nBoth Japan and China announced in May 2017 a breakthrough for mining methane clathrates, when they extracted methane from hydrates in the South China Sea. China described the result as a breakthrough; Praveen Linga from the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the National University of Singapore agreed \"Compared with the results we have seen from Japanese research, the Chinese scientists have managed to extract much more gas in their efforts\". Industry consensus is that commercial-scale production remains years away.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nExperts caution that environmental impacts are still being investigated and that methane\u2014a greenhouse gas with around 81.2 times as much global warming potential over a 20-year period (GWP20) as carbon dioxide\u2014could potentially escape into the atmosphere if something goes wrong. As methane has a much shorter atmospheric lifetime than carbon dioxide, its GWP is much less over longer time periods, with a GWP-100 of 27.9 and a GWP-500 of 7.95.7SM-24\nHydrates in natural gas processing.\nRoutine operations.\nMethane clathrates (hydrates) are also commonly formed during natural gas production operations, when liquid water is condensed in the presence of methane at high pressure. It is known that larger hydrocarbon molecules like ethane and propane can also form hydrates, although longer molecules (butanes, pentanes) cannot fit into the water cage structure and tend to destabilise the formation of hydrates.\nOnce formed, hydrates can block pipeline and processing equipment. They are generally then removed by reducing the pressure, heating them, or dissolving them by chemical means (methanol is commonly used). Care must be taken to ensure that the removal of the hydrates is carefully controlled, because of the potential for the hydrate to undergo a phase transition from the solid hydrate to release water and gaseous methane at a high rate when the pressure is reduced. The rapid release of methane gas in a closed system can result in a rapid increase in pressure.\nIt is generally preferable to prevent hydrates from forming or blocking equipment. This is commonly achieved by removing water, or by the addition of ethylene glycol (MEG) or methanol, which act to depress the temperature at which hydrates will form. In recent years, development of other forms of hydrate inhibitors have been developed, like Kinetic Hydrate Inhibitors (increasing the required sub-cooling which hydrates require to form, at the expense of increased hydrate formation rate) and anti-agglomerates, which do not prevent hydrates forming, but do prevent them sticking together to block equipment.\nEffect of hydrate phase transition during deep water drilling.\nWhen drilling in oil- and gas-bearing formations submerged in deep water, the reservoir gas may flow into the well bore and form gas hydrates owing to the low temperatures and high pressures found during deep water drilling. The gas hydrates may then flow upward with drilling mud or other discharged fluids. When the hydrates rise, the pressure in the annulus decreases and the hydrates dissociate into gas and water. The rapid gas expansion ejects fluid from the well, reducing the pressure further, which leads to more hydrate dissociation and further fluid ejection. The resulting violent expulsion of fluid from the annulus is one potential cause or contributor to the \"kick\". (Kicks, which can cause blowouts, typically do not involve hydrates: see ).\nMeasures which reduce the risk of hydrate formation include:\nBlowout recovery.\nAt sufficient depths, methane complexes directly with water to form methane hydrates, as was observed during the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010. BP engineers developed and deployed a subsea oil recovery system over oil spilling from a deepwater oil well below sea level to capture escaping oil. This involved placing a dome over the largest of the well leaks and piping it to a storage vessel on the surface. This option had the potential to collect some 85% of the leaking oil but was previously untested at such depths. BP deployed the system on May 7\u20138, but it failed due to a buildup of methane clathrate inside the dome; with its low density of approximately 0.9\u00a0g/cm3 the methane hydrates accumulated in the dome, adding buoyancy and obstructing flow.\nNatural gas hydrates for gas storage and transportation.\nSince methane clathrates are stable at a higher temperature than liquefied natural gas (LNG) (\u221220\u00a0\u00b0C vs \u2212162\u00a0\u00b0C), there is some interest in converting natural gas into clathrates (Solidified Natural Gas or SNG) rather than liquifying it when transporting it by seagoing vessels. A significant advantage would be that the production of natural gas hydrate (NGH) from natural gas at the terminal would require a smaller refrigeration plant and less energy than LNG would. Offsetting this, for 100 tonnes of methane transported, 750 tonnes of methane hydrate would have to be transported; since this would require a ship of 7.5 times greater displacement, or require more ships, it is unlikely to prove economically feasible.. Recently, methane hydrate has received considerable interest for large scale stationary storage application due to the very mild storage conditions with the inclusion of tetrahydrofuran (THF) as a co-guest. With the inclusion of tetrahydrofuran, though there is a slight reduction in the gas storage capacity, the hydrates have been demonstrated to be stable for several months in a recent study at \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C and atmospheric pressure. A recent study has demonstrated that SNG can be formed directly with seawater instead of pure water in combination with THF.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "54138", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54138", "title": "September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack/Timeline May 2002", "text": ""}
{"id": "54139", "revid": "49360422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54139", "title": "Bureau of Land Management", "text": "Agency within the US Department of the Interior\nThe Bureau of Land Management (BLM) is an agency within the United States Department of the Interior responsible for administering U.S. federal lands. Headquartered in Washington, D.C., the BLM oversees more than of land, or one-eighth of the United States's total landmass.\nThe Bureau was created by Congress during the presidency of Harry S Truman in 1946 by combining two existing agencies: the United States General Land Office and the Grazing Service. The agency manages the federal government's nearly of subsurface mineral estate located beneath federal, state and private lands severed from their surface rights by the Homestead Act of 1862. Most BLM public lands are located in these 12 western states: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington and Wyoming.\nThe mission of the BLM is \"to sustain the health, diversity, and productivity of the public lands for the use and enjoyment of present and future generations.\" Originally BLM holdings were described as \"land nobody wanted\" because homesteaders had passed them by. All the same, ranchers hold nearly 18,000 permits and leases for livestock grazing on of BLM public lands. The agency manages 221 wilderness areas, 29 national monuments and some 636 other protected areas as part of the National Conservation Lands (formerly known as the National Landscape Conservation System), totaling about . In addition the National Conservation Lands include nearly 2,400 miles of Wild and Scenic Rivers, and nearly 6,000 miles of National Scenic and Historic Trails. There are more than 63,000 oil and gas wells on BLM public lands. Total energy leases generated approximately $5.4 billion in 2013, an amount divided among the Treasury, the states, and Native American groups.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe BLM's roots go back to the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787. These laws provided for the survey and settlement of the lands that the original Thirteen Colonies ceded to the federal government after the American Revolution. As additional lands were acquired by the United States from Spain, France and other countries, the United States Congress directed that they be explored, surveyed, and made available for settlement.\nDuring the Revolutionary War, military bounty land was promised to soldiers who fought for the colonies. After the war, the Treaty of Paris of 1783, signed by the United States, the UK, France, and Spain, ceded territory to the United States. In the 1780s, other states relinquished their own claims to land in modern-day Ohio. By this time, the United States needed revenue to function and land was sold as a source of income for the government.\nIn order to sell the land, surveys needed to be conducted. The Land Ordinance of 1785 instructed a geographer to oversee this work as undertaken by a group of surveyors. The first years of surveying were completed by trial and error; once the territory of Ohio had been surveyed, a modern public land survey system had been developed. In 1812, Congress established the United States General Land Office as part of the Department of the Treasury to oversee the disposition of these federal lands. By the early 1800s, promised bounty land claims were finally fulfilled.\nIn the 19th century, other bounty land and homestead laws were enacted to dispose of federal land. Several different types of patents existed. These include cash entry, credit, homestead, Indian, military warrants, mineral certificates, private land claims, railroads, state selections, swamps, town sites, and town lots. A system of local land offices spread throughout the territories, patenting land that was surveyed via the corresponding Office of the Surveyor General of a particular territory. This pattern gradually spread across the entire United States. The laws that spurred this system with the exception of the General Mining Law of 1872 and the Desert Land Act of 1877 have since been repealed or superseded.\nIn the early 20th century, Congress took additional steps toward recognizing the value of the assets on public lands and directed the Executive Branch to manage activities on the remaining public lands. The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 allowed leasing, exploration, and production of selected commodities, such as coal, oil, gas, and sodium to take place on public lands. The Taylor Grazing Act of 1934 established the United States Grazing Service to manage the public rangelands by establishment of advisory boards that set grazing fees. The Oregon and California Revested Lands Sustained Yield Management Act of 1937, commonly referred as the O&amp;C Act, required sustained yield management of the timberlands in western Oregon.\nEstablishment and early history.\nIn 1946, the Grazing Service was merged with the United States General Land Office to form the Bureau of Land Management within the Department of the Interior. It took several years for this new agency to integrate and reorganize. In the end, the Bureau of Land Management became less focused on land disposal and more focused on the long term management and preservation of the land. The agency achieved its current form by combining offices in the western states and creating a corresponding office for lands both east of and alongside the Mississippi River. As a matter of course, the BLM's emphasis fell on activities in the western states as most of the mining, land sales, and federally owned areas are located west of the Mississippi.\nBLM personnel on the ground have typically been oriented toward local interests, while bureau management in Washington are led by presidential guidance. By means of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, Congress created a more unified bureau mission and recognized the value of the remaining public lands by declaring that these lands would remain in public ownership. The law directed that these lands be managed with a view toward \"multiple use\" defined as \"management of the public lands and their various resource values so that they are utilized in the combination that will best meet the present and future needs of the American people.\"\nSince the Reagan administration in the 1980s, Republicans have often given priority to local control and to grazing, mining and petroleum production, while Democrats have more often emphasized environmental concerns even when granting mining and drilling leases. In September 1996, then President Bill Clinton used his authority under the Antiquities Act to establish the Grand Staircase\u2013Escalante National Monument in southern Utah, the first of now 20 national monuments established on BLM lands and managed by the agency. The establishment of Grand Staircase\u2013Escalante foreshadowed later creation of the BLM's National Landscape Conservation System in 2000. Use of the Antiquities Act authority, to the extent it effectively scuttled a coal mine to have been operated by Andalex Resources, delighted recreation and conservation enthusiasts but set up larger confrontations with state and local authorities.\nFirst Trump administration.\nUnder the Trump administration, the BLM offered millions of acres of available Federal lands for 10-year leases for commercial development, potentially in oil and gas and mining, with the stated goal of \"promoting American energy security\". The BLM holds quarterly oil and gas lease sales. According to a June 18, 2018 article in \"The Atlantic\", under the tenure of then-United States Secretary of the Interior, Ryan Zinke \"practically gave away hundreds of thousands of acres of open land across the West, leasing it to energy companies for pennies on the dollar.\" \"The Salt Lake Tribune\" reported that in March 2019, the price per acre for leases near the Golden Spike National Historical Park, in Utah were \"$1.50 an acre for the next two years\". By September 11, 2018, the Department of Interior was offering 2.9 million acres to be leased to commercial operations including drilling for oil and gas and mining in New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, and other states where public land is not protected by a national park or monument designation. The BLM's May 30, 2019 statement proposed an additional 183,668 acres on \"lands managed by the Canyon Country, Color Country, Green River, and West Desert districts\" that would be listed for the quarterly oil and gas lease sale on September 10, 2019. In their May 2019, September lease offerings, the BLM said that they had \"245 million acres of public land located primarily in 12 Western states, including Alaska\" and across the United States another \"700 million acres of sub-surface mineral estate\" is under their management. The statement also said that these \"diverse activities authorized on these lands generated $96 billion in sales of goods and services throughout the American economy in fiscal year 2017\" while supporting over 468,000 jobs\".\nOn August 4, 2020, President Trump signed the Great American Outdoors Act into law, committing up to $1.9 billion from energy development revenues to the National Parks and Public Land Legacy Restoration Fund each year for five years for needed maintenance for critical facilities and infrastructure in national parks, forests, wildlife refuges, recreation areas and American Indian schools. The Act also committed $900 million a year in royalties from offshore oil and natural gas to permanently fund the Land and Water Conservation Fund investments in conservation and recreation opportunities across the country.\nAlso in August 2020, the BLM headquarters was relocated to Grand Junction, Colorado, by an order signed by Interior Secretary David Bernhardt. The relocation was praised by Republican Western politicians but criticized by Democrats as a move to weaken the agency through the loss of experienced staffers, who opted to stay in Washington, D.C. Some ranchers were concerned about the isolation of Grand Junction compared to other Western cities, having limited flights and road access. After the announcement, 87% of D.C.-based employees left, prompting former lead career BLM official Steve Ellis to state \"the bureau lost a tremendous amount of expertise...[of] very seasoned people.\"\nBiden administration.\nOn September 17, 2021, Secretary Deb Haaland announced that the headquarters would be moved back to Washington, D.C.\nUnder the Biden administration, the BLM was working on a pilot project called \"outcomes-based grazing\", to see if cattle grazing can help achieve conservation, agency director Tracy Stone-Manning said in an interview published in April 2022.\nIn June 2022, the BLM finalized two acquisitions in Colorado and Wyoming, acquiring over 40,000 acres of previously inaccessible land. The acquisition in Wyoming for 35,670 acres is the agency's largest ever purchase in the state.\nIn August 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act became effective.\nIn 2024 the Department of the Interior begun to advance a new rule according to which the Bureau of Land Management can distribute restoration leases and mitigation leases exactly in the same way as it distributes new leases for oil and gas drilling. The designed land will be used for nature conservation including use of indigenous knowledge. This policy was repealed in September 2025 under the second Trump administration.\nSecond Trump administration.\nIn February 2025, three weeks after the beginning of his second presidency, president Trump \nnominated Kathleen Sgamma, a petroleum industry lobbyist who contributed to Project 2025, to lead the BLM. Sgamma had previously served as president of the Western Energy Alliance, an association of independent oil and natural gas companies with interests on public lands. \nSgamma withdrew her nomination on April 10, just as her confirmation hearing was about to begin. \nPermits and leases generally cover a 10-year period and are renewable if the BLM determines that the terms and conditions of the expiring permit or lease are being met. The federal grazing fee is adjusted annually and is calculated using a formula originally set by Congress in the Public Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978. \nUnder this formula, the grazing fee cannot fall below $1.35 per animal unit month (AUM), nor can any fee increase or decrease exceed 25 percent of the previous year's level. The grazing fee for 2014 was set at $1.35 per AUM, the same level as for 2013. \nOver time there has been a gradual decrease in the amount of grazing that takes place on BLM-managed land. Grazing on public lands has declined from 18.2 million AUMs in 1954 to 7.9 million AUMs in 2013.\nIn 2010 BLM had on record a total of 290,000 mining claims under the General Mining Law of 1872. The BLM issues permits for oil and gas, coal, strategic minerals, and renewable energy resources such as wind, geothermal and solar to be developed on public lands. The total mining claims on lands owned by the BLM by 2019 decreased while the number of rejected claims increased. Among the over 3.8 million mining claims overseen by BLM just over 10% of claims were still active, of which Nevada had the most at 203,705 and California had 49,259.\nNational Landscape Conservation System.\nEstablished in 2000, the National Landscape Conservation System is overseen by the BLM. The National Landscape Conservation System lands constitute just about 12% of the lands managed by the BLM. Congress passed Title II of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11) to make the system a permanent part of the public lands protection system in the United States. By designating these areas for conservation, the law directed the BLM to ensure these places are protected for future generations, similar to national parks and wildlife refuges.\nLaw enforcement and security.\nThe BLM, through its Office of Law Enforcement and Security, functions as a federal law enforcement agency of the United States Government. BLM law enforcement rangers and special agents receive their training through Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC). Full-time staffing for these positions approaches 300.\nUniformed rangers enforce laws and regulations governing BLM lands and resources. As part of that mission, these BLM rangers carry firearms and defensive equipment, make arrests, execute search warrants, complete reports and testify in court. They seek to establish a regular and recurring presence on a vast amount of public lands, roads and recreation sites. They focus on the protection of natural and cultural resources, other BLM employees and visitors. Given the many locations of BLM public lands, these rangers use canines, helicopters, snowmobiles, dirt bikes and boats to perform their duties.\nBy contrast BLM special agents are criminal investigators who plan and conduct investigations concerning possible violations of criminal and administrative provisions of the BLM and other statutes under the United States Code. Special agents are normally plain clothes officers who carry concealed firearms and other defensive equipment, make arrests, carry out complex criminal investigations, present cases for prosecution to local United States Attorneys and prepare investigative reports. Criminal investigators occasionally conduct internal and civil claim investigations.\nThe current sidearm is the SIG Sauer P320 chambered in 9mm which is replacing the SIG Sauer P226/P229 both chambered in .40 S&amp;W.\nWild horse and burro program.\nThe BLM manages free-roaming horses and burros on public lands in ten western states. Though they are feral, the agency is obligated to protect them under the Wild and Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 (WFRHBA). As the horses have few natural predators, populations have grown substantially. WFRHBA as enacted provides for the removal of excess animals; the killing of lame, old, or sick animals; the private placement or adoption of excess animals; and even the killing of healthy animals if range management required it. The killing of healthy or unhealthy horses has almost never occurred. Pursuant to the Public Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978, the BLM has established 179 \"herd management areas\" (HMAs) covering acres where feral horses can be found on federal lands.\nIn 1973, BLM began a pilot project on the Pryor Mountains Wild Horse Range known as the Adopt-A-Horse initiative. The program took advantage of provisions in the WFRHBA to allow private \"qualified\" individuals to \"adopt\" as many horses as they wanted if they could show that they could provide adequate care for the animals. At the time, title to the horses remained permanently with the federal government. The pilot project was so successful that BLM allowed it to go nationwide in 1976. The Adopt-a-Horse program quickly became the primary method of removing excess feral horses from BLM land given the lack of other viable methods. The BLM also uses limited amounts of contraceptives in the herd, in the form of PZP vaccinations; advocates say that additional use of these vaccines would help to diminish the excess number of horses currently under BLM management.\nDespite the early successes of the adoption program, the BLM has struggled to maintain acceptable herd levels, as without natural predators, herd sizes can double every four years. As of 2014, there were more than 49,000 horses and burros on BLM-managed land, exceeding the BLM's estimated \"appropriate management level\" (AML) by almost 22,500.\nThe Bureau of Land Management has implemented several programs and has developed partnerships as part of their management plan for preserving wild burros and horses in the United States. There are several herds of horses and burros roaming free on 26.9 million acres of range spread out in ten western states. It is essential to maintain a balance that keeps herd management land and animal population healthy. Some programs and partnerships include the Mustang Heritage Foundation, U.S. Border Patrol, Idaho 4H, Napa Mustang Days and Little Book Cliffs Darting Team. These partnerships help with adoption and animal population as well as education and raising awareness about wild horses and burros.\nRenewable energy.\nIn 2009, BLM opened Renewable Energy Coordination Offices in order to approve and oversee wind, solar, biomass, and geothermal projects on BLM-managed lands. The offices were located in the four states where energy companies had shown the greatest interest in renewable energy development: Arizona, California, Nevada, and Wyoming.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
