{"id": "56778", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56778", "title": "Azeotrope", "text": "Mixture of liquids whose proportions do not change when distilled\nAn azeotrope () or a constant heating point mixture is a mixture of two or more liquids whose proportions cannot be changed by simple distillation. This happens because when an azeotrope is boiled, the vapour has the same proportions of constituents as the unboiled mixture. Knowing an azeotrope's behavior is important for distillation.\nEach azeotrope has a characteristic boiling point. The boiling point of an azeotrope is either less than the boiling point temperatures of any of its constituents (a positive azeotrope), or greater than the boiling point of any of its constituents (a negative azeotrope). For both positive and negative azeotropes, it is not possible to separate the components by fractional distillation and azeotropic distillation is usually used instead.\nFor technical applications, the pressure-temperature-composition behavior of a mixture is the most important, but other important thermophysical properties are also strongly influenced by azeotropy, including the surface tension and transport properties.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"azeotrope\" is derived from the Greek words \u03b6\u03ad\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd (boil) and \u03c4\u03c1\u03cc\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2 (turning) with the prefix \u03b1- (no) to give the overall meaning, \"no change on boiling\". The term was coined in 1911 by English chemist John Wade and Richard William Merriman. Because their composition is unchanged by distillation, azeotropes are also called (especially in older texts) \"constant boiling point mixtures\".\nTypes.\nPositive azeotropes.\nA solution that shows greater positive deviation from Raoult's law forms a minimum boiling azeotrope at a specific composition. In general, a positive azeotrope boils at a lower temperature than any other ratio of its constituents. Positive azeotropes are also called \"minimum boiling mixtures\" or \"pressure maximum azeotropes\". A well-known example of a positive azeotrope is an ethanol\u2013water mixture (obtained by fermentation of sugars) consisting of 95.63% ethanol and 4.37% water (by mass), which boils at 78.2\u00a0\u00b0C. Ethanol boils at 78.4\u00a0\u00b0C, water boils at 100\u00a0\u00b0C, but the azeotrope boils at 78.2\u00a0\u00b0C, which is lower than either of its constituents. Indeed, 78.2\u00a0\u00b0C is the minimum temperature at which any ethanol/water solution can boil at atmospheric pressure. Once this composition has been achieved, the liquid and vapour have the same composition, and no further separation occurs.\nThe boiling and recondensation of a mixture of two solvents are changes of chemical state; as such, they are best illustrated with a phase diagram. If the pressure is held constant, the two variable parameters are the temperature and the composition.\nThe adjacent diagram shows a positive azeotrope of hypothetical constituents, X and Y. The bottom trace illustrates the boiling temperature of various compositions. Below the bottom trace, only the liquid phase is in equilibrium. The top trace illustrates the vapor composition above the liquid at a given temperature. Above the top trace, only the vapor is in equilibrium. Between the two traces, liquid and vapor phases exist simultaneously in equilibrium: for example, heating a 25% X : 75% Y mixture to temperature AB would generate vapor of composition B over liquid of composition A. The azeotrope is the point on the diagram where the two curves touch. The horizontal and vertical steps show the path of repeated distillations. Point A is the boiling point of a nonazeotropic mixture. The vapor that separates at that temperature has composition B. The shape of the curves requires that the vapor at B be richer in constituent X than the liquid at point A. The vapor is physically separated from the VLE (vapor-liquid equilibrium) system and is cooled to point C, where it condenses. The resulting liquid (point C) is now richer in X than it was at point A. If the collected liquid is boiled again, it progresses to point D, and so on. The stepwise progression shows how repeated distillation can never produce a distillate that is richer in constituent X than the azeotrope. Note that starting to the right of the azeotrope point results in the same stepwise process closing in on the azeotrope point from the other direction.\nNegative azeotropes.\nA solution that shows large negative deviation from Raoult's law forms a maximum boiling azeotrope at a specific composition. Nitric acid and water is an example of this class of azeotrope. This azeotrope has an approximate composition of 68% nitric acid and 32% water by mass, with a boiling point of . In general, a negative azeotrope boils at a higher temperature than any other ratio of its constituents. Negative azeotropes are also called \"maximum boiling mixtures\" or \"pressure minimum azeotropes\". An example of a negative azeotrope is hydrochloric acid at a concentration of 20.2% and 79.8% water (by mass). Hydrogen chloride boils at \u221285\u00a0\u00b0C and water at 100\u00a0\u00b0C, but the azeotrope boils at 110\u00a0\u00b0C, which is higher than either of its constituents. The maximum boiling point of any hydrochloric acid solution is 110\u00a0\u00b0C. Other examples:\nThe adjacent diagram shows a negative azeotrope of ideal constituents, X and Y. Again the bottom trace illustrates the boiling temperature at various compositions, and again, below the bottom trace the mixture must be entirely liquid phase. The top trace again illustrates the condensation temperature of various compositions, and again, above the top trace the mixture must be entirely vapor phase. The point, A, shown here is a boiling point with a composition chosen very near to the azeotrope. The vapor is collected at the same temperature at point B. That vapor is cooled, condensed, and collected at point C. Because this example is a negative azeotrope rather than a positive one, the distillate is farther from the azeotrope than the original liquid mixture at point A was. So the distillate is poorer in constituent X and richer in constituent Y than the original mixture. Because this process has removed a greater fraction of Y from the liquid than it had originally, the residue must be poorer in Y and richer in X after distillation than before.\nIf the point, A had been chosen to the right of the azeotrope rather than to the left, the distillate at point C would be farther to the right than A, which is to say that the distillate would be richer in X and poorer in Y than the original mixture. So in this case too, the distillate moves away from the azeotrope and the residue moves toward it. This is characteristic of negative azeotropes. No amount of distillation, however, can make either the distillate or the residue arrive on the opposite side of the azeotrope from the original mixture. This is characteristic of all azeotropes.\nDouble azeotropes.\nAlso more complex azeotropes exist, which comprise both a minimum-boiling and a maximum-boiling point. Such a system is called a double azeotrope, and will have two azeotropic compositions and boiling points. An example is water and \"N\"-methylethylenediamine as well as benzene and hexafluorobenzene.\nComplex systems.\nSome azeotropes fit into neither the positive nor negative categories. The best known of these is the ternary azeotrope formed by 30% acetone, 47% chloroform, and 23% methanol, which boils at 57.5\u00a0\u00b0C. Each pair of these constituents forms a binary azeotrope, but chloroform/methanol and acetone/methanol both form positive azeotropes while chloroform/acetone forms a negative azeotrope. The resulting ternary azeotrope is neither positive nor negative. Its boiling point falls between the boiling points of acetone and chloroform, so it is neither a maximum nor a minimum boiling point. This type of system is called a saddle azeotrope. Only systems of three or more constituents can form saddle azeotropes.\nMiscibility and zeotropy.\nIf the constituents of a mixture are completely miscible in all proportions with each other, the type of azeotrope is called a \"homogeneous azeotrope\". Homogeneous azeotropes can be of the low-boiling or high-boiling azeotropic type. For example, any amount of ethanol can be mixed with any amount of water to form a homogeneous solution.\nIf the components of a mixture are not completely miscible, an azeotrope can be found inside the miscibility gap. This type of azeotrope is called a \"heterogeneous azeotrope\" or heteroazeotrope. A heteroazeotropic distillation will have two liquid phases. Heterogeneous azeotropes are only known in combination with temperature-minimum azeotropic behavior. For example, if equal volumes of chloroform (water solubility 0.8 g/100 ml at 20\u00a0\u00b0C) and water are shaken together and then left to stand, the liquid will separate into two layers. Analysis of the layers shows that the top layer is mostly water with a small amount of chloroform dissolved in it, and the bottom layer is mostly chloroform with a small amount of water dissolved in it. If the two layers are heated together, the system of layers will boil at 53.3\u00a0\u00b0C, which is lower than either the boiling point of chloroform (61.2\u00a0\u00b0C) or the boiling point of water (100\u00a0\u00b0C). The vapor will consist of 97.0% chloroform and 3.0% water regardless of how much of each liquid layer is present provided both layers are indeed present. If the vapor is re-condensed, the layers will reform in the condensate, and will do so in a fixed ratio, which in this case is 4.4% of the volume in the top layer and 95.6% in the bottom layer.\nCombinations of solvents that do not form an azeotrope when mixed in any proportion are said to be zeotropic. Azeotropes are useful in separating zeotropic mixtures. An example is zeotropic acetic acid and water. It is very difficult to separate out pure acetic acid (boiling point: 118.1\u00a0\u00b0C): progressive distillations produce drier solutions, but each further distillation becomes less effective at removing the remaining water. Distilling the solution to dry acetic acid is therefore economically impractical. But ethyl acetate forms an azeotrope with water that boils at 70.4\u00a0\u00b0C. By adding ethyl acetate as an entrainer, it is possible to distill away the azeotrope and leave nearly pure acetic acid as the residue.\nNumber of constituents.\nAzeotropes consisting of two constituents are called \"binary azeotropes\" such as diethyl ether (33%) / halothane (66%) a mixture once commonly used in anesthesia. Azeotropes consisting of three constituents are called \"ternary azeotropes\", e.g. acetone / methanol / chloroform. Azeotropes of more than three constituents are also known.\nCondition of existence.\nThe condition relates activity coefficients in liquid phase to total pressure and the vapour pressures of pure components.\nAzeotropes can form only when a mixture deviates from Raoult's law, the equality of compositions in liquid phase and vapor phases, in vapour-liquid equilibrium and Dalton's law the equality of pressures for total pressure being equal to the sum of the partial pressures in real mixtures.\nIn other words: Raoult's law predicts the vapor pressures of ideal mixtures as a function of composition ratio. More simply: per Raoult's law molecules of the constituents stick to each other to the same degree as they do to themselves. For example, if the constituents are X and Y, then X sticks to Y with roughly equal energy as X does with X and Y does with Y. A positive deviation from Raoult's law results when the constituents have a disaffinity for each other \u2013 that is X sticks to X and Y to Y better than X sticks to Y. Because this results in the mixture having less total affinity of the molecules than the pure constituents, they more readily escape from the stuck-together phase, which is to say the liquid phase, and into the vapor phase. When X sticks to Y more aggressively than X does to X and Y does to Y, the result is a negative deviation from Raoult's law. In this case because the molecules in the mixture are sticking together more than in the pure constituents, they are more reluctant to escape the stuck-together liquid phase.\nWhen the deviation is great enough to cause a local maxima or minima in the vapor pressure versus mole fraction graph (i.e. formula_1 for some mole fraction of X in the solution), It is a mathematical consequence of the Gibbs\u2013Duhem equation that at that point, the vapor above the solution will have the same composition as that of the liquid, resulting in an azeotrope.\nThe adjacent diagram illustrates total vapor pressure of three hypothetical mixtures of constituents, X, and Y. The temperature throughout the plot is assumed to be constant. The center trace is a straight line, which is what Raoult's law predicts for an ideal mixture. In general solely mixtures of chemically similar solvents, such as \"n\"-hexane with \"n\"-heptane, form nearly ideal mixtures that come close to obeying Raoult's law. The top trace illustrates a nonideal mixture that has a positive deviation from Raoult's law, where the total combined vapor pressure of constituents, X and Y, is greater than what is predicted by Raoult's law. The top trace deviates sufficiently that there is a point on the curve where its tangent is horizontal. Whenever a mixture has a positive deviation and has a point at which the tangent is horizontal, the composition at that point is a positive azeotrope. At that point the total vapor pressure is at a maximum. Likewise the bottom trace illustrates a nonideal mixture that has a negative deviation from Raoult's law, and at the composition where tangent to the trace is horizontal there is a negative azeotrope. This is also the point where total vapor pressure is minimum.\nSeparation.\nIf the two solvents can form a negative azeotrope, then distillation of any mixture of those constituents will result in the residue being closer to the composition at the azeotrope than the original mixture. \nFor example, if a hydrochloric acid solution contains less than 20.2% hydrogen chloride, boiling the mixture will leave behind a solution that is richer in hydrogen chloride than the original. If the solution initially contains more than 20.2% hydrogen chloride, then boiling will leave behind a solution that is poorer in hydrogen chloride than the original. Boiling of any hydrochloric acid solution long enough will cause the solution left behind to approach the azeotropic ratio. On the other hand, if two solvents can form a positive azeotrope, then distillation of any mixture of those constituents will result in the residue away from the composition at the azeotrope than the original mixture. For example, if a 50/50 mixture of ethanol and water is distilled once, the distillate will be 80% ethanol and 20% water, which is closer to the azeotropic mixture than the original, which means the solution left behind will be poorer in ethanol. Distilling the 80/20% mixture produces a distillate that is 87% ethanol and 13% water. Further repeated distillations will produce mixtures that are progressively closer to the azeotropic ratio of 95.5/4.5%. No numbers of distillations will ever result in a distillate that exceeds the azeotropic ratio. Likewise, when distilling a mixture of ethanol and water that is richer in ethanol than the azeotrope, the distillate (contrary to intuition) will be poorer in ethanol than the original but still richer than the azeotrope.\nDistillation is one of the primary tools that chemists and chemical engineers use to separate mixtures into their constituents. Because distillation cannot separate the constituents of an azeotrope, the separation of azeotropic mixtures (also called \"azeotrope breaking\") is a topic of considerable interest. Indeed, this difficulty led some early investigators to believe that azeotropes were actually compounds of their constituents. But there are two reasons for believing that this is not the case. One is that the molar ratio of the constituents of an azeotrope is not generally the ratio of small integers. For example, the azeotrope formed by water and acetonitrile contains 2.253 moles (or 9/4 with a relative error of just 2%) of acetonitrile for each mole of water. A more compelling reason for believing that azeotropes are not compounds is, as discussed in the last section, that the composition of an azeotrope can be affected by pressure. Contrast that with a true compound, carbon dioxide for example, which is two moles of oxygen for each mole of carbon no matter what pressure the gas is observed at. That azeotropic composition can be affected by pressure suggests a means by which such a mixture can be separated.\nPressure swing distillation.\nA hypothetical azeotrope of constituents X and Y is shown in the adjacent diagram. Two sets of curves on a phase diagram one at an arbitrarily chosen low pressure and another at an arbitrarily chosen, but higher, pressure. The composition of the azeotrope is substantially different between the high- and low-pressure plots: higher in X for the high-pressure system. The goal is to separate X in as high a concentration as possible starting from point A. At the low pressure, it is possible by progressive distillation to reach a distillate at the point, B, which is on the same side of the azeotrope as A. Successive distillation steps near the azeotropic composition exhibit very little difference in boiling temperature. If this distillate is now exposed to the high pressure, it boils at point C. From C, by progressive distillation it is possible to reach a distillate at the point D, which is on the same side of the high-pressure azeotrope as C. If that distillate is then exposed again to the low pressure, it boils at point E, which is on the opposite side of the low-pressure azeotrope to A. So, by means of the pressure swing, it is possible to cross over the low-pressure azeotrope.\nWhen the solution is boiled at point E, the distillate is poorer in X than the residue at point E. This means that the residue is richer in X than the distillate at point E. Indeed, progressive distillation can produce a residue as rich in X as is required.\nIn summary:\nA mixture of 5% water with 95% tetrahydrofuran is an example of an azeotrope that can be economically separated using a pressure swing: a swing in this case between 1 atm and 8 atm. By contrast the composition of the water to ethanol azeotrope discussed earlier is not affected enough by pressure to be easily separated using pressure swings and instead, an entrainer may be added that either modifies the azeotropic composition and exhibits immiscibility with one of the components, or extractive distillation may be used.\nAzeotropic distillation.\nOther methods of separation involve introducing an additional agent, called an \"entrainer\", that will affect the volatility of one of the azeotrope constituents more than another. When an entrainer is added to a binary azeotrope to form a ternary azeotrope, and the resulting mixture distilled, the method is called azeotropic distillation. The best known example is adding benzene or cyclohexane to the water/ethanol azeotrope. With cyclohexane as the entrainer, the ternary azeotrope is 7% water, 17% ethanol, and 76% cyclohexane, and boils at 62.1\u00a0\u00b0C. Just enough cyclohexane is added to the water/ethanol azeotrope to engage all of the water into the ternary azeotrope. When the mixture is then boiled, the azeotrope vaporizes leaving a residue composed almost entirely of the excess ethanol.\nChemical action separation.\nAnother type of entrainer is one that has a strong chemical affinity for one of the constituents. Using again the example of the water/ethanol azeotrope, the liquid can be shaken with calcium oxide, which reacts strongly with water to form the nonvolatile compound, calcium hydroxide. Nearly all of the calcium hydroxide can be separated by filtration and the filtrate redistilled to obtain 100% pure ethanol. A more extreme example is the azeotrope of 1.2% water with 98.8% diethyl ether. Ether holds the last bit of water so tenaciously that only a very powerful desiccant such as sodium metal added to the liquid phase can result in completely dry ether. Anhydrous calcium chloride is used as a desiccant for drying a wide variety of solvents since it is inexpensive and does not react with most nonaqueous solvents except simple primary alcohols. Chloroform is an example of a solvent that can be effectively dried using calcium chloride.\nDistillation using a dissolved salt.\nWhen a salt is dissolved in a solvent, it always has the effect of raising the boiling point of that solvent \u2013 that is it decreases the volatility of the solvent. When the salt is readily soluble in one constituent of a mixture but not in another, the volatility of the constituent in which it is soluble is decreased and the other constituent is unaffected. In this way, for example, it is possible to break the water/ethanol azeotrope by dissolving potassium acetate in it and distilling the result.\nExtractive distillation.\nExtractive distillation is similar to azeotropic distillation, except in this case the entrainer is less volatile than any of the azeotrope's constituents. For example, the azeotrope of 20% acetone with 80% chloroform can be broken by adding water and distilling the result. The water forms a separate layer in which the acetone preferentially dissolves. The result is that the distillate is richer in chloroform than the original azeotrope.\nPervaporation and other membrane methods.\nThe pervaporation method uses a membrane that is more permeable to the one constituent than to another to separate the constituents of an azeotrope as it passes from liquid to vapor phase. The membrane is rigged to lie between the liquid and vapor phases. Another membrane method is vapor permeation, where the constituents pass through the membrane entirely in the vapor phase. In all membrane methods, the membrane separates the fluid passing through it into a permeate (that which passes through) and a retentate (that which is left behind). When the membrane is chosen so that is it more permeable to one constituent than another, then the permeate will be richer in that first constituent than the retentate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56781", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56781", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "56782", "revid": "110252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56782", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "56783", "revid": "110252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56783", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "56784", "revid": "110252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56784", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "56785", "revid": "110252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56785", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "56786", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56786", "title": "U.S. Virgin Islands/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "56788", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56788", "title": "Vietnam/Transnational Issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "56789", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56789", "title": "Vietnam/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "56791", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56791", "title": "Vietnam/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "56792", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56792", "title": "Vietnam/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "56793", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56793", "title": "Vietnam/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "56794", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56794", "title": "Venezuela/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "56795", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56795", "title": "Venezuela/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "56796", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56796", "title": "Venezuela/Media", "text": ""}
{"id": "56797", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56797", "title": "Venezuela/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "56798", "revid": "39494265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56798", "title": "Venezuela/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "56799", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56799", "title": "Venezuela/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "56800", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56800", "title": "Venezuela/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "56801", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56801", "title": "Venezuela/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "56802", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56802", "title": "Canadian Football League", "text": "Professional Canadian football league\nThe Canadian Football League (CFL; , LCF) is a professional Canadian football league in Canada. It comprises nine teams divided into two divisions, with four teams in the East Division and five in the West Division. The CFL is the highest professional level of Canadian football in the world. The league is headquartered in Toronto.\nThe CFL was officially established on January 19, 1958, upon the merger between the Interprovincial Rugby Football Union or \"Big Four\" (founded in 1907) and the Western Interprovincial Football Union (WIFU) (founded in March 1936). The Big Four was renamed the Eastern Football Conference in 1960, while the WIFU was renamed the Western Football Conference in 1961.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], the league features a 21-week regular season in which each team plays 18 games with 3 bye weeks. The season traditionally runs from mid-June to early November. Following the regular season, six teams compete in the playoffs, which culminate in the Grey Cup championship game in late November. The Grey Cup is one of Canada's largest annual sports and television events.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nRugby football began to be played in Canada in the 1860s. Many of the first Canadian football teams played under the auspices of the Canadian Rugby Football Union (CRFU), founded in June 1880, then reorganized in February 1884. The CRFU was reorganized as the Canadian Rugby Union (CRU) in 1891, and served as an umbrella organization for several provincial and regional unions. The Grey Cup was donated by Governor General the Earl Grey in 1909 to the team winning the \"Senior Amateur Football Championship of Canada\". By that time, the sport as played in Canada had diverged markedly from its rugby origins with the introduction of the Burnside rules, and started to become more similar to the American game.\nFor much of the early part of the 20th century, the game was contested by intraprovincial leagues, or unions. In 1907, several of the stronger senior clubs in Ontario and Quebec formed the Interprovincial Rugby Football Union (IRFU or more commonly known as the \"Big Four\"). It took almost 30 years for an elite interprovincial western union to emerge, when in 1936 the stronger senior clubs in Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan formed the Western Interprovincial Football Union (WIFU). From the 1930s to the 1950s, the Big Four and WIFU gradually evolved from amateur to professional leagues, and amateur teams were no longer competitive for the Grey Cup. Apart from the World War II years, an amateur team last won the Grey Cup in 1936.\nBy the end of World War II, the WIFU's play was at the same level as that of the Big Four. Within a few years after the return of peace, both interprovincial unions had turned openly professional. However, while the Big Four champion got an automatic berth to the Grey Cup final, until 1954 the WIFU's champion had to play in a semi-final against the champion of the Ontario Rugby Football Union (ORFU)\u2013by then, the only amateur union still competing for the Grey Cup. The ORFU withdrew from Grey Cup competition after the 1953 season, and the WIFU champion was given an automatic berth in the Grey Cup final. For this reason, 1954 is reckoned as the start of the modern era of Canadian football, in which the Grey Cup has been exclusively contested by professional teams. Since 1965, Canada's top university football teams, competing in what is now U Sports, have competed for the Vanier Cup.\nMerger.\nIn 1956, the Montreal Alouettes threatened to leave the Big Four and join the rival WIFU. As a result, the Big Four and WIFU formed a new umbrella organization, the Canadian Football Council (CFC) to modernize the operations and management of the professional game. In 1958, the CFC formally left the CRU and reorganized as the Canadian Football League (CFL). As part of an agreement between the CRU and CFL, the CFL took possession of the Grey Cup, and the amateurs were officially locked out of Grey Cup play, formalizing the championship structure that had been in place since 1954. The CRU remained the governing body for amateur play in Canada, eventually adopting the name Football Canada. Initially, the two unions remained autonomous, and there was no intersectional play between eastern (Big Four) and western (WIFU) teams except at the Grey Cup final. This situation was roughly analogous to how Major League Baseball operated for almost all of the 20th century.\nThe Big Four was renamed the Eastern Football Conference in 1960, while the WIFU was renamed the Western Football Conference in 1961. Also in 1961, limited intersectional play was introduced. Because the West played 16 games by this time while the East still only played 14, this arrangement oddly allowed both the four-team Eastern Conference and the five-team Western Conference to play three games per intraconference opponent and one game per interconference opponent. It was not until 1974 that the East expanded its schedule to 16 games, just like the West. In 1981, the two conferences agreed to a full merger, becoming the East and West Divisions of the CFL. With the merger came a fully balanced and interlocking schedule of 16 games per season (with all nine teams playing each other twice, once at home and once on the road). Since 1986 (with the exception of 2021), the CFL's regular season schedule has been 18 games.\nThe separate histories of the Big Four and the WIFU accounted for the fact that two teams had basically the same name: the Big Four's Ottawa \"Rough Riders\" were often called the \"Eastern Riders\", while the WIFU's Saskatchewan \"Roughriders\" were called the \"Western Riders\" or \"Green Riders\". Other team names had traditional origins. With rowing a national craze in the late 19th century, the Argonaut Rowing Club of Toronto formed a rugby team for its members' off-season participation. The football team name Toronto Argonauts still remains even though it and the rowing club have long since gone their separate ways. After World War II, the Hamilton Tigers absorbed the upstart war-era Flying Wildcats and called the team the Hamilton Tiger-Cats.\nThe league remained stable with nine franchises\u2014the BC Lions, Calgary Stampeders, Edmonton Eskimos, Saskatchewan Roughriders, Winnipeg Blue Bombers, Hamilton Tiger-Cats, Toronto Argonauts, Ottawa Rough Riders and Montreal Alouettes\u2014from its 1958 inception until 1981. After the 1981 season, the Alouettes folded and were replaced the next year by a new franchise named the Concordes.\nIn 1986 the Concordes were renamed the Alouettes to attract more fan support, but the team folded the next year. The loss of the Montreal franchise forced the league to move its easternmost Western team, Winnipeg, into the East Division from 1987 to 1994.\nUnited States expansion.\nIn 1993, the league admitted its first United States-based franchise, the Sacramento Gold Miners. After modest success, the league then expanded further in the U.S. in 1994 with the Las Vegas Posse, Baltimore Stallions, and Shreveport Pirates. For the 1995 campaign, the American teams were split off into their own South Division, and two more teams, the Birmingham Barracudas and Memphis Mad Dogs, were added; at the same time, the Posse folded and the Gold Miners relocated to become the San Antonio Texans. In 1995, the Stallions became the only non-Canadian team to win the Grey Cup.\nDespite all American teams having the advantage of not being bound to the CFL's minimum Canadian player quotas, only the Stallions proved to be an on-field and off-field success. The establishment of the National Football League's (NFL) Baltimore Ravens, worsening financial problems among the league's core Canadian teams, and the inconsistent performance of the other American teams prompted the CFL to abandon its American experiment and retrench its Canadian operations. The Stallions organization was used as the basis for a revival of the Montreal Alouettes.\nPost-U.S. expansion era.\nThe CFL returned to an all-Canadian format in 1996 with nine teams; the league conducted a dispersal draft to distribute players from the disbanded American-based teams; however, the Ottawa Rough Riders, in existence since 1876, folded after the 1996 season (another dispersal draft was conducted the next year to distribute the former Rough Rider players among the remaining eight teams). Toronto and recently revived Montreal also were struggling; Montreal's woes were solved by moving to Percival Molson Memorial Stadium, a much smaller venue than the cavernous Olympic Stadium. The Winnipeg team again moved to the East Division from 1997 to 2001 to make up for the loss of Ottawa.\nIn 1997, the NFL provided a US$ interest-free loan to the financially struggling CFL. In return, the NFL was granted access to CFL players entering a defined two-month window in the option year of their contract. This was later written into the CFL's collective bargaining agreement with its players. The CFL's finances have since stabilized and they eventually repaid the loan. The CFL\u2013NFL agreement expired in 2006. Both leagues attempted to reach a new agreement, but the CFL broke off negotiations in November 2007 after Canadian telecommunications firm Rogers Communications paid $78\u00a0million to host seven Bills games in Toronto over five seasons (the last Bills Toronto Series game was played during the 2013 NFL season).\nIn 2002, the league expanded back to nine teams with the creation of the Ottawa Renegades. After four seasons of financial losses, the Renegades were suspended indefinitely before the 2006 season; their players were absorbed by the remaining teams in a dispersal draft. Winnipeg was moved to the East Division again in 2006, a situation that continued until 2013.\nIn 2005, the league set an all-time attendance record with a total attendance of more than 2.3\u00a0million. In June 2006 the league announced the launch of CFL Broadband, an internet streaming service designed to provide fans with another media platform, in addition to TSN and CBC broadcasts, to watch games live.\nMark Cohon era (2007\u20132015).\nWith Mark Cohon as commissioner of the league the CFL entered a period of stability and growth. New television deals, two new collective bargaining agreements, the 100th Grey Cup celebration, and widespread stadium renovation and rebuilding highlighted this era. The 100th anniversary of the Grey Cup had the highest ever television ratings for a championship game in English Canada.\nDuring the 2000s the CFL had the third highest per-game attendance of any North American sports league and the seventh highest per-game attendance of any sports league worldwide. A 2006 survey conducted at the University of Lethbridge confirmed that the CFL was the second most popular sports league in Canada, with the following of 19% of the total adult Canadian population compared to 30% for the NHL. The NFL had 11% following, with a total of 26% following at least one of the pro football leagues. In other words, approximately 80% of Canadian football fans follow the CFL, and about 55% follow the NFL. With the absence of Ottawa from 2006 to 2013, league attendance hovered around the 2\u00a0million mark. It stood at 2,029,875 in 2012 for a single game average of 28,193. The 2007 season was a recent high point with average game attendance of 29,167, the best since 1983.\nDuring Mark Cohon's time in office many of the teams either undertook major renovations to their existing stadiums, or constructed brand new stadiums. The Montreal Alouettes were the first to undertake this project, adding 5,000 seats to Percival Molson Memorial Stadium in time for the 2010 CFL season. The Edmonton Eskimos and Calgary Stampeders also renovated their respective stadiums and facilities for the 2010 season. In 2011, the BC Lions played under a new, retractable roof in BC Place after spending one and a half seasons at Empire Field. In 2013, the Winnipeg Blue Bombers moved to Investors Group Field, now known as Princess Auto Stadium, an entirely new stadium at the University of Manitoba. The Hamilton Tiger-Cats began using their new stadium, Tim Hortons Field, after spending 2013 at University of Guelph's stadium and the first half of the 2014 season at McMaster University's football field following the demolition of the iconic Ivor Wynne Stadium.\nIn 2014 the Ottawa Redblacks kicked off their inaugural season (having been awarded a franchise in 2008), becoming the third Ottawa franchise in CFL history. The new Ottawa franchise returned the league to a nine-team structure, with five teams in the West Division and four in the East; the Winnipeg Blue Bombers moved back to the West Division. The expansion Ottawa Redblacks played at the massively renovated Frank Clair Stadium, now branded as TD Place Stadium.\nIn Mark Cohon's last year as commissioner he negotiated a new five-year collective bargaining agreement (from 2014 through the 2018 season) between the CFL and the Canadian Football League Players' Association (CFLPA).\nJeffrey Orridge era (2015\u20132017).\nThe Toronto Argonauts entered a period of transition off the field, with new ownership and a new stadium. The Argonauts were sold by politician/businessman David Braley to Bell Media and MLSE chairman Larry Tanenbaum. At the start of the 2016 season the Argos moved to BMO Field after more than twenty seasons at the Rogers Centre (formerly called the SkyDome from 1989 to 2005). Construction on the New Mosaic Stadium for the Saskatchewan Roughriders was completed in October 2016 and the first game was played in the 2017 season.\nIn 2015, Michael Sam signed a two-year contract with Montreal Alouettes of the CFL, becoming the first openly gay player in the league's history. Sam left the team the day before the first preseason game, citing personal reasons. As reported by Fox Sports, Sam returned to Montreal to continue his professional football career. He left again on August 14, this time permanently, again citing personal reasons.\nImmediately following the 2015 season Jeffrey Orridge announced a re-branding for the CFL, including a new logo, motto, uniforms for all nine teams and website. After not having a drug enforcement policy in effect for the 2015 season the league and the CFLPA agreed to a new drug policy. In 2017, the Board of Governors and Jeffrey Orridge agreed to part ways, effective June 30, 2017; Orridge cited \"differing views on the future of the league\" between him and the Board of Governors for the departure, with both sides stating the decision was mutual and amicable. His last day as commissioner was June 15, 2017. Jim Lawson, the CFL's Chair of the Board of Governors, took over the duties of interim Commissioner until a suitable replacement was found.\nRandy Ambrosie era (2017\u20132025).\nOn July 5, 2017, Randy Ambrosie succeeded Orridge as CFL commissioner. Having spent nine seasons as a player with the Calgary Stampeders, Toronto Argonauts and Edmonton Eskimos from 1985 to 1993, Ambrosie is the first commissioner to have played in the league since Larry Smith left the position in 1997.\nOn September 12, 2018, it was announced that Buffalo, New York\u2013based New Era Cap Company would become the official apparel supplier of the CFL beginning in 2019, replacing Adidas.\nIn October 2018, the CFL began focusing marketing internationally again after the unsuccessful expansion into the United States during the 1990s, with Ambrosie's plan being called \"CFL 2.0\". Ambrosie partnered with the Professional American Football League of Mexico (LFA) for player development, as part of the league's plan to expand globally. Ambrosie also later announced a special edition of the CFL Combine to be held in 2019 in Mexico for Mexican players, which was held on January 13, 2019. Ambroise said he wished the combine in Mexico to become annual, and that a combine could be held in Europe. On January 14, 2019, the league held a draft of LFA and Mexican university players where wide receiver Diego Viamontes was the first pick, selected by the Edmonton Eskimos. The CFL announced in February 2019 that German and French football players from the German Football League and the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration fran\u00e7aise de football am\u00e9ricain would participate in the CFL national combine. Throughout early 2019, Ambrosie actively travelled Europe forming partnerships between the CFL and top-level European American football leagues and associations, specifically Germany (GFL), Austria (AFL), France (FFFA), the Nordic countries (NL, VL, SS and NAFL) and Italy (IFL). By January 2020 football leagues from 13 countries had signed partnerships with the CFL, these partnerships included mutual exchanging of players and coaches with leagues like the Mexican LFA holding reserved roster spots for Canadians with up to 25 playing in the league's 2020 season. In February 2020, the CFL expanded its global alliance system, welcoming the Japanese X-League, generally regarded the third-best professional gridiron league in the world. This coincided with the CFL announcing that its global combine in 2020 with new rules, including two designated active-roster international players and three practice-squad international players with as many as 45 global players in the league.\nThe league took over operations of the Montreal Alouettes prior to the 2019 season after Robert C. Wetenhall, the league's last non-Canadian owner, surrendered the franchise to the league in May. The Alouettes found new ownership in January 2020 in Crawford Steel executives Sid Spiegel and Gary Stern, whose holding company S and S Sportsco would oversee the team.\nOn August 17, 2020, the CFL cancelled its 2020 season after coronavirus-related social distancing mandates and travel restrictions imposed in most of Canada prevented the league from selling tickets and the league was unable to secure a bailout from the federal government to cover any losses. It was the first cancelled season in the league's history, and the first year without a Grey Cup championship since the canceled 1916\u20131919 seasons. The league returned in 2021, playing a shortened 14-game schedule which began that August, with the season concluding with the Grey Cup game in December for the first time since 1972. On March 10, 2021, the then-on hiatus XFL entered into talks with the CFL over the possibility of a future collaboration; these discussions were called off four months later with nothing coming of them.\nOn August 29, 2022, Gary Stern of the Montreal Alouettes stepped away from day-to-day operations with the club and resigned from his role with the Canadian Football League's board of governors, effective immediately. On February 14, 2023, the ownership of the Alouettes was transferred back to the CFL. Mario Cecchini was appointed as the interim president while the league sought to finalize a sale to new ownership. On March 10, Quebec media mogul and former Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois leader Pierre Karl P\u00e9ladeau purchased the team. On April 11, 2024, the Winnipeg Blue Bombers announced league record revenue of $50.5 million and operating profit of $5.7 million.\nOn October 26, 2024, Ambrosie announced his intention to retire from the commissioner's role in 2025, once a successor is found. Ambrosie had allegedly lost a vote of confidence among the league's owners the day prior, a report that neither the league nor Ambrosie would confirm nor deny.\nStewart Johnston era (2025\u2013present).\nOn April 2, 2025, TSN president Stewart Johnston was announced as Ambrosie's successor, officially assuming the role on April 24, 2025.\nOn September 22, 2025, the CFL announced future rule changes to be implemented over the next two seasons, particularly to the playing surface and the scoring of a rouge. These changes include moving the goal posts from the goal line to the back of the end zone, shortening the end zone from 20 to 15 yards and the field from 110 to 100 yards, implementing a new 35-second play clock that will automatically begin as soon as the previous play is whistled dead, having team benches on opposite sides of the field, and scoring a rouge only if the ball isn't advanced out of the end zone. The field changes are scheduled to occur in 2027, while all other rules will begin in 2026. The changes were met with criticism from some, notably from Canadian quarterback Nathan Rourke who called them \"garbage\", while some feared the rules will make the sport too \"American\" and look similar to the NFL.\nTeams.\nLions \nStampeders \nElks \nRoughriders \nBlue Bombers \nTiger-Cats \nArgonauts \nRedblacks \nAlouettes \nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTimeline.\nNote: team franchise history is listed as it is recognized by the CFL in its publication \"CFL Guide &amp; Record Book (2025)\".\nSeason structure.\nSince 2022, the CFL season has included:\nPreseason.\nTeam training camps open 28 days prior to the first regular season game of the season, a camp solely devoted to first year players is allowed the three days before the main camp opens. The pre-season exhibition schedule is two weeks long with each team playing two games against teams from its own division.\nRegular season.\nThe regular season is 21 weeks long, with games beginning in early June and finishing by late October. With 18 regular season games being played, each team gets three bye weeks. The CFL's nine current teams are divided into two divisions: the East Division with four teams and the West Division, with five teams.\nFrom the 1986 season until the COVID-19 pandemic (other than during the U.S. expansion when the league had twelve and thirteen teams) each team played two games against each of the other eight teams, plus two or four additional divisional games with opponents rotating each season. This format was changed when the league resumed play in 2021 to create a greater emphasis on divisional play. Under the eighteen game format, each Eastern team played ten games within their division and eight games against Western opponents, thus playing two of the Western teams once (one at home and one on the road) and the other three Western teams twice, while playing two Eastern opponents three times and one division rival four times. Three of the Western teams played each division rival three times, two Eastern teams twice and two Eastern teams once. The remaining two Western teams played three of the Eastern opponents twice and one of the Eastern opponents once, while playing each other twice and the other Western teams three times. The CFL returned to the previous more balanced format beginning in the 2024 season.\nThe most popular featured week in the CFL season is the Labour Day Classic, played over the course of the Labour Day weekend, where the matchups feature the first half of home-and-home series between the traditional geographic rivalries of Toronto\u2013Hamilton (a rivalry which began in 1873), Edmonton\u2013Calgary (see Battle of Alberta), Winnipeg\u2013Saskatchewan, and Ottawa\u2013Montreal. In years that Ottawa or Montreal were not in the league, BC played against one of these teams. The following week's rematch of these games is a popular event as well, especially in recent years, where the rematch of the Saskatchewan\u2013Winnipeg game has been dubbed the Banjo Bowl.\nOther features of the regular season schedule are the Hall of Fame Game and the Thanksgiving Day Classic, the one or two games held on Thanksgiving where the match ups usually do not feature traditional rivalries. From 2010 to 2013, a neutral site regular season game was played in Moncton under the name Touchdown Atlantic. The neutral site games returned in 2019 and were also played in 2022, 2023, and 2024.\nThe league awards points based on regular season results (much like in most ice hockey leagues, but unlike the NFL, which strictly uses winning percentages to determine their standings; two points are awarded for a win, one for a tie and none for a loss). As of the 2021 season, in the event two or more teams in a division finish the season with the same number of points, the tie is broken based on the following criteria (in descending order), with coin tosses used if all such tie-breaker steps fail:\nPlayoffs.\nThe playoffs take place in November. After the regular season, the top team from each division has an automatic home berth in the division final, and a bye week during the division semifinal. The second-place team from each division hosts the third-place team in the division semifinal, unless a fourth-place team from one division finishes with a better record than a third place team in the other (this provision is known as the \"crossover rule\", and while it implies that it is possible for two teams in the same division to play for the Grey Cup, only five crossover teams have won a semifinal since the rule's 1996 inception, and none of them have advanced to the Grey Cup). The winners of each division's semifinal game then travel to play the first place teams in the division finals. The two division champions then face each other in the Grey Cup game, which has been held on the third Sunday of November since 2022. In 2021, the game was played in December, which was the first time this had happened since 1972.\nGrey Cup.\nThe Grey Cup is both the name of the championship of the CFL and the name of the trophy awarded to the victorious team. The Grey Cup is the second-oldest trophy in North American professional sports, after the Stanley Cup. The Grey Cup game is hosted in one of the league's member cities. In recent years, it has been hosted in a different city every year, selected two or more years in advance. The Toronto Argonauts have won the most Grey Cups with 19 wins total, most recently in 2024. In 2013, the Grey Cup was won at home for the third consecutive time (by the Saskatchewan Roughriders), which had not been done since Toronto won at home from 1945 to 1947. In 2016, the Grey Cup was won on the natural grass turf of BMO Field by the Ottawa Redblacks beating the heavily favoured Calgary Stampeders 39\u201333 in overtime; the first Grey Cup championship for any Ottawa CFL team in 40 years.\nAs the country's single largest annual sporting event, the Grey Cup has long served as an unofficial Canadian autumn festival generating national media coverage and a large amount of revenue for the host city. Many fans travel from across the country to attend the game and the week of festivities that lead up to it.\nSince 2015, the Grey Cup game's presenting sponsor is Shaw Communications.\nAwards.\nFollowing the Grey Cup game, the Grey Cup Most Valuable Player and Grey Cup Most Valuable Canadian are selected. A number of league individual player awards, such as the Most Outstanding Player and Most Outstanding Defensive Player, are awarded annually at a special ceremony in the host city during the week before the Grey Cup game; this ceremony is broadcast nationally on TSN. The Annis Stukus Trophy, also known as the Coach of the Year Award, is awarded separately at a banquet held during the off-season each February. While the CFL has not held an all-star game since 1988, an All-Star Team is selected and honoured at the league awards ceremony during Grey Cup week.\nBroadcasting.\nThe CFL Championship game, the Grey Cup, previously held the record for the largest television audience in Canadian history. Television coverage on CBC, CTV and Radio-Canada of the 1983 Grey Cup attracted a viewing audience of 8,118,000 people as Toronto edged B.C. 18\u201317, ending a 31-year championship drought for the Argonauts. At the time, this represented 33% of the Canadian population. This has since been surpassed by the 2002 and 2010 Men's Olympic Gold Medal Hockey Game.\nCanadian broadcasters.\nThe Canadian Football Network was the league's broadcaster from 1987 to 1990. Since TSN became the league's exclusive broadcast partner in 2009, Paul Graham produced coverage for all Grey Cup games until 2024.\nTSN's French-language network RDS broadcasts Montreal Alouettes games for the Quebec television market. Games are typically scheduled for Thursday to Saturday evenings during June, July and August, but switch to more Saturday and Sunday afternoon games during September and October. TSN has created a tradition of at least one Friday night game each week, branded as \"Friday Night Football\". CBC and TSN drew record television audiences for CFL broadcasts in 2005. The 2006 season was the first season in which every regular-season game was televised, as the league implemented an instant replay challenge system. In 2006, the CFL also began offering pay-per-view webcasts of every game on CFL Broadband. Until the end of the 2007 season, CBC and RDS were the exclusive television broadcasters for all playoff games, including the Grey Cup, which regularly draws a Canadian viewing audience in excess of 4\u00a0million.\nIn 2008, the CFL began a new, five-year television deal with CTVglobemedia. Valued at $16\u00a0million per-year, it gave TSN and RDS exclusive rights to all CFL games, including the playoffs and Grey Cup. In March 2013, TSN exercised an option to extend its contract through 2018. In 2015, the deal was extended for an additional three years, along with exclusive Grey Cup rights for Bell Media Radio stations.\nIn June 2024, Bell Media announced that CTV would broadcast TSN-produced 2024 season coverage on digital terrestrial television, including a late-season package of exclusive 3 p.m. ET games beginning on September 7, continuing with playoff coverage of the East Division, and concluding with a simulcast of the 111th Grey Cup; returning the CFL to over-the-air television for the first time since 2007. As of 2024, the CFL's agreement with TSN, CTV and RDS runs through the 2026 CFL season.\nForeign coverage.\nIn 2013, the CFL announced that its U.S. broadcast rights would return to the ESPN Networks for the 2013 season, with five games airing on ESPN2, and 55 airing on ESPN3. This agreement was renewed in 2014 for five years, the same length as the TSN deal (ESPN holds a stake in TSN), with a stipulation that at least 17 games would be carried on ESPN2 (or another ESPN network, such as ESPN or ESPNEWS) each season, including the Grey Cup; this gives ESPN exclusive CFL rights during this time frame. Originally ESPN3 carried all games not carried on one of the linear channels online, later ESPN moved those games to ESPN+.\nESPN has had a long relationship with the CFL; the channel broadcast its first CFL game on July 9, 1980, when the network was only 10 months old.\nOn April 27, 2023, CBS Sports Network announced a multi-year broadcasting rights deal with the league, becoming the U.S. TV rightsholder to the league; the channel broadcast 34 CFL games during the first three months of the 2023 season. CBSSN's 2024 broadcast package consisted of the majority of June, July, and August games, and the Labour Day and Thanksgiving Day Classics.\nESPN Brasil began broadcasting CFL games live in Brazil in 2015, as a result of the growth of the NFL and college football fan base in Brazil. BT Sport, which has a licensing partnership with ESPN, has also carried CFL games in Britain and Ireland since 2015.\nIn June 2019, the CFL signed a broadcast deal with MVS Comunicaciones to broadcast one game a week in Mexico on MVS TV.\nPrevious broadcasting arrangements.\nCanada.\nThe public broadcaster CBC Television, which held a monopoly on Canadian television until 1961, held Canadian professional football broadcast rights beginning the year of its debut, 1952. The private, commercial CTV network was created in 1961 in part because Toronto businessman John W. H. Bassett had won the television rights to the Eastern Football Conference, and needed an outlet to air the games. From 1962 through 1986, CBC and CTV shared CFL broadcasting rights. They split playoff games and simulcast the Grey Cup. In 1962, 1965, 1967, 1968 and 1970, CTV commentators were used for the dual network telecast, while in 1963, 1964, 1966 and 1969, the CBC's announcers were provided. From 1971 through 1986, one network's crew called the first half while the other called the other half. After the 1986 season, CTV dropped coverage of the CFL and the Grey Cup. From 1987 through 1990, the CFL operated its own syndicated network, CFN. Like CTV, CFN split playoff games with CBC. However, CFN had completely separate coverage of the Grey Cup, utilizing its own production and commentators. From 1991 to 2007, all post-season games had been exclusively on CBC; beginning in 2008, the Grey Cup and all other CFL games are exclusive to cable TV on TSN, although the cable provider reserves the right to move the game to sister network CTV (from 2008 to 2023, it had never done so, opting to broadcast that Sunday's NFL games on CTV instead.)\nUnited States.\nThe predecessor to the CFL's East Division, the IRFU, had a television contract with NBC in 1954 that provided far more coverage than the NFL's existing contract with DuMont. NBC aired games on Saturday afternoons, competing against college football broadcasts on CBS and ABC. The revenue from the contract allowed the IRFU to directly compete against the NFL for players in the late 1950s, setting up a series of CFL games in the United States beginning in 1958 and a series of interleague exhibitions beginning in 1959. Interest in the CFL in the United States faded dramatically after the debut of the American Football League in 1960.\nIn 1982, during a players' strike in the NFL, NBC broadcast CFL games in the United States in lieu of the NFL games which were cancelled; the first week of broadcasts featured the \"NFL on NBC\" broadcast teams, before a series of blowout games on the network and the resulting low ratings resulted in NBC cutting back and eventually cancelling its CFL coverage after only a few weeks. ESPN host Chris Berman became a fan of the game in the early days of ESPN, when the network first aired CFL games, and continues to cover the Canadian league on-air. The now-defunct FNN-SCORE (unrelated to the Canadian cable network formerly known as The Score [now Sportsnet 360]) carried games in the late 1980s. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, SportsChannel America carried games, using CBC Television, CFN and TSN feeds. In 1993, several SportsChannel Pacific-produced games that were part of the Sacramento Gold Miners' local package were also shown nationally.\nBeginning in 1994, with now four US-based teams in the league, ESPN reached a four-year deal with the league to produce and air two games per week and all post-season games on its fledgling ESPN2. They also put some games on the main network to fill broadcast time vacated by the 1994\u201395 Major League Baseball strike. The 1994 and 1995 Grey Cups were shown live on ESPN2 and then re-aired on ESPN the following day, leading into the network's \"Monday Night Countdown\" show. ESPN's on-air talent included a mix of the network's American football broadcasters and established CFL broadcasters from Canada. Most of the US-based teams also had deals with local carriers to show games that were not covered in the national package. Though there were no US teams in the league after 1995, ESPN2 continued showing games until 1997, albeit on a much lighter schedule.\nThe now-defunct America One network held CFL broadcast rights in the United States from 2001 to 2009 and aired a majority of the league's games. Until the 2007 season, America One syndicated CFL games to regional sports networks like Altitude, NESN, and MASN; these were discontinued in 2008, mainly because America One and the CFL were able to reach a deal only days before the season began, not allowing the network time to establish agreements with individual RSNs. The Grey Cup aired on Versus on November 22, 2008, with a replay the next day on America One. From 2006 through the 2008 season, \"Friday Night Football\" was carried exclusively on World Sport HD in the United States; however, due to the January 2009 shutdown of that channel's parent company, Voom HD Networks, America One reclaimed those rights.\nNFL Network took over the league broadcast contract in 2010. For the 2010 season, the network carried 14 games, no more than one each week. For 2011, the network increased its output to two games each week. NFL Network declined to continue its coverage after the 2011 season. It offered to pick up another package in 2019 on the condition that the league change its schedule to not directly compete with the NFL regular season, something that the CFL stated needs to be negotiated with the players' union.\nIn late July 2012, NBC Sports Network acquired rights to the CFL for the remainder of the 2012 season. The NBCSN deal included nine regular season games starting August 27 (including Labour Day Classic games) and all the playoffs. NBC Sports renewed their agreement with the CFL for the 2013 season.\nESPN regained the U.S. CFL broadcast rights in 2014, airing games until 2022.\nThe European ESPN America network carried a collection of CFL games as part of its lineup until the network shut down in 2013.\nInternet.\nThere are no blackout restrictions on radio broadcasts of CFL games, while TSN streams all games online for authenticated subscribers to participating television providers.\nThe majority of games not on ESPN television channels are streamed in the United States via the subscription service ESPN+.\nIn 2017, the league announced a partnership with Yare Media to offer subscription streaming packages in 130 international territories.\nIn 2023, the league announced the creation of CFL+, which made free, live streaming of every regular-season game available to all international viewers outside of the United States and Canada; for those in the United States, all games not being carried on CBS Sports Network were similarly available. In 2024, the league expanded functionality of CFL+ to include video on demand for up to 48 hours after the game and coverage of the league's preseason matches by combining in-stadium video feeds with local radio play-by-play and commentary.\nIn recent years, games have been available on TSN streaming platforms, starting in 2014 with the TSN GO app and TSN.ca, which required users to sign-in with a cable provider. In 2018, TSN Direct was launched, which allowed fans to stream games without a cable subscription. In 2024, TSN+ started a data enhanced feed which features an augmented livestream version of the broadcast.\nRadio.\nCFL teams have individual local broadcast contracts with terrestrial radio stations for regular season and playoff games, while TSN Radio owns the rights to the Grey Cup. In 2006, Sirius Satellite Radio gained exclusive rights for North American CFL satellite radio broadcasts and broadcast 25 CFL games per season, including the Grey Cup, through 2008. Sirius later extended its radio coverage through 2010, after which it merged with former rival XM Radio Canada to form Sirius XM Canada. The merged broadcaster continues to air CFL games, and as of 2022[ [update]], is contracted to air the CFL until the 2023 season. English language broadcasts of every CFL game air on Canada Talks, with French-language broadcasts of the Montreal Alouettes broadcast on Influence Franco.\nPlayers and compensation.\nSalary cap (2025).\nAccording to the new collective bargaining agreement, the 2025 salary cap was scheduled to be set at $5,650,000. However, on February 5, 2025, the league announced that the salary cap would grow by $412,365 to reach $6,062,365 (or $134,719 per active roster spot). The increase was driven by the revenue growth sharing model which first went into effect in 2024, but this was the first year that it impacted the salary cap. The cap excludes unlimited non-football related services payments and preseason and playoff bonus money. The minimum player salary will be set at $70,000, which remains unchanged since 2023. It was reported that the revenue growth was not determined until the last week of January and the CFL Player's Association was required to determine how they wanted the money applied, with options including increases to the salary cap, playoff bonuses, training camp stipends, and pension contributions. The timing of the announcement was questionable since the free agency negotiating window had begun three days prior with teams operating with the old salary cap figure. CFLPA executive director David Mackie stated, \"A reported $18-million boost in league revenues triggered the cap increase. The current collective bargaining agreement between the league and union, reached in 2022, contains a revenue-sharing formula.\"\nSalary cap (2024).\nAccording to the collective bargaining agreement, the 2024 salary cap was at least CA$ (or CA$ per active roster spot). This was the first season that players received revenue sharing, which was set at 25% for the 2024 season (or cap increase of 2.78% for every dollar increase). The salary cap is officially announced in late April every year as well as fines from the previous year. As was the case in 2023, the minimum player salary was set at CA$.\nCFL operations cap (2024).\nAs of the 2024 season[ [update]], CFL teams have a CA$ operations caps which limits the number of people per team drawing salaries for football operations to 11 coaches and 25 total people in total. That includes the general manager as well as scouts, video personnel, and equipment staff. For the 2025 season, the CFL Maximum Salary Expenditure Cap (SEC) is $6.062 million per team, a $412,365 increase over the minimum required increase in 2025. A schedule for the annual increases to the cap is laid out in the CBA.\nHistorical player compensation and revenue.\nThe CFLPA agreed to include a provision allowing the CFL to enforce a salary cap in the 2002 Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), but the league began enforcing it only from the 2007 season ($4.05\u00a0million per team) onward. The cap was raised to $4.2\u00a0million in the 2008 season and remained at that level for 2009. Financial penalties for teams that breach the cap are set at $1 to $1 for the first $100,000 over, $2 to $1 for $100,000 to $300,000 over, and $3 to $1 for $300,000 and above. Penalties could also include forfeited draft picks. On June 29, 2010, a new collective bargaining agreement was ratified that raised the salary cap to $4.25\u00a0million for the 2010 CFL season and continued to increase by $50,000 each season until 2013. In 2014, a new CBA was ratified and the salary cap was raised to $5\u00a0million per team, with that amount increasing again by $50,000 each year until 2018. As per the 2019 collective bargaining agreement, the 2021 salary expenditure cap is scheduled to be $5,350,000 and with the minimum team salary set at $4,750,000.90 The salary cap number was subject to increase as players now have revenue sharing of 20% from broadcast deals (outside of TSN and ESPN), but since the league did not play in 2020, the cap number will likely be static.90\nFor 2010, the minimum team salary was set at $3.9\u00a0million while the minimum player salary was set at $42,000. With the new CBA in 2014, the salary floor was raised to $4.4\u00a0million per team with increases of $50,000 per year, and the minimum salary was raised to $50,000 per year. The average salary per player in 2014 was CA$. A new collective bargaining agreement was signed in 2019 that set the minimum annual player salary at $54,000, with that number increasing to $65,000 for National and American players in 2020.33 In 2019, Mike Reilly and Bo Levi Mitchell were the highest paid players in the CFL after signing contracts in February 2019 for average yearly salaries of over $700,000. Players designated as global players (see player designations) are paid the league minimum by rule and may have a portion of their salary sent back to their original home league as part of a partnership with the CFL.\nPlayer compensation is not tied to league revenue, which remains a trade secret. Only the four publicly held teams in the league reveal their financial information, as those companies are required to do so under Canadian law. As of 2013, prior to Ottawa's rejoining the league (at which time Toronto, which is partially owned by a public company, was still fully private), estimates of the CFL's revenue varied between $150\u00a0million and CA$. As of 2019, five of the CFL's nine teams (including all three community-owned franchises) are profitable, and four operate at a loss; those four teams lose more than the five profitable teams, resulting in a net loss of approximately CA$ overall.\nPlayer designations.\nPlayers in the CFL carry nationality designations referring to their country of origin: Nationals (\"a Canadian citizen at the time of signing his first contract, was classified as a non-import prior to May 21, 2019, was physically resident in Canada for an aggregate period of five years prior to reaching the age of 18, or played football for a minimum of three years at a U Sports institution, was draft eligible in 2021 at a minimum, and has graduated with a degree at that institution\"), Americans (non-National and non-Global players, almost exclusively used for United States citizens), and Globals (any player who does not hold Canadian or American citizenship and does not qualify as a National in any other way).44 In prior versions of the CFL CBA and league rules, National players were known as non-import players and American players were known as international (2014\u20132018) and import (before 2014) players, with the criteria to qualify as a non-import player being more restrictive. Global players were introduced in 2019.44\nNational players enter the CFL through the CFL draft or free agency. Global players enter the CFL in a similar method as national players, with exclusive drafts held only for eligible players. American players are typically inducted by way of the \"negotiation list\": any team can lay unilateral claim to up to 45 players that have never played in the CFL at any given time (each team must make at least ten of those names public as of 2018), with no limit on how long a player can be held on the list and no limit on how old the player must be (thus CFL teams can claim players not yet eligible for the NFL draft). Once a player on a negotiation list expresses formal interest in joining the CFL, that team has up to ten days to offer a contract (usually a league-minimum, two-year contract) to retain the player's rights. While the full list of names league-wide were secret, held from the general public and the other teams, the negotiation lists for all teams were made publicly available on the CFL website in July 2025.\nRoster limits.\nIn 2006, the active roster limit was increased from 40 to 42, in 2014 it was again increased to 44, and in 2016 was increased to 46. An unlimited number of players may be put on a team's disabled, injured and suspended lists.\nAs of 2021, each team must abide by the National/American/Global ratio rule, which requires teams to have two quarterbacks, two Global players, and a maximum of 20 American players (excluding quarterbacks) with a minimum of 44 total active roster players and a maximum of 45.69 Each team will also have one player of any nationality on the reserve roster who receives the benefits of being on the active roster, but may not play in a game.69\nThrough the 2018 season, quarterbacks, of which a team was required to carry three on a roster, were not allowed to be counted toward the national player requirement nor the starter requirement, which put Canadian quarterbacks at a disadvantage compared to other positions in being hired by a CFL franchise. This rule was changed in 2019 whereby teams had two roster spots for quarterbacks and a third quarterback counted in the ratio. Additionally, a National quarterback would be considered one of the club's National Starting Players as long as he remains on the field at the quarterback position.72\nTeams are additionally allowed up to 10 national or international players (with a minimum of one national if there are less than seven players or two nationals if there are at least seven players total) on their practice squad roster and may expand it to 12 if the team carries the maximum allowed two global practice squad players, though they are not required to do so. Every year, the practice squad roster is temporarily increased in size to 15 following the start of the National Football League's season to accommodate for the influx of cut NFL players. Unlike players on the active roster, players on the practice squad may be signed at any time to another team's active roster without compensation to the player's original team.\nLabour representation.\nCFL players are represented by the Canadian Football League Players' Association (CFLPA). Each team elects two players to the CFLPA Board of Player Representatives, which meets once per year. Every two years, it elects an executive Board of Directors.\nDraft.\nEligible Canadian nationals (usually from U Sports football domestically or American college football) are drafted by teams in the annual CFL draft. The draft usually takes place in May and currently consists of eight rounds. The first two rounds of the draft are usually shown live on TSN. The CFL Combine (formerly known as the CFL Evaluation Camp), similar to the NFL Combine, precedes the draft. A junior player in the locale of a team may be claimed as a territorial exemption and sign with that team before beginning collegiate play (one recent example is when the BC Lions claimed Andrew Harris). Teams maintain \"negotiation lists\" of players they wish to sign as free agents, which give them exclusive negotiation rights with that player if they wish to sign in the CFL. Players can be added or removed from these lists by the team at any time, and their signing rights can be used in trades.\nIn addition to the regular draft there the supplemental draft which provides teams an opportunity to select a player in the draft in exchange for forfeiting a pick in the next year's amateur draft. The selection order is done in reverse waiver priority order. Do be more in depth, the CFL supplemental draft allows teams to acquire eligible players who were not selected in the main CFL draft. Teams bid draft picks for the upcoming season, and the team with the highest bid wins the player and forfeits their corresponding draft pick. This process is similar to a bidding war, ensuring teams can add talent that might not have been available through the regular draft.\nCommissioners.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPotential future expansion.\nPotential CFL expansion markets are the Maritimes, Quebec City, Saskatoon, Kitchener, London, and Windsor, all of which have been lobbying for Canadian Football League franchises in recent years. During the 1970s and 1980s, Harold Ballard attempted multiple times (albeit all unsuccessfully) to secure a second CFL team for Toronto (either by way of expansion or by relocating the Hamilton Tiger-Cats), under the premise that Canada's largest city could support two teams.\nMaritimes.\nSince the 1980s, the CFL has occasionally played exhibition and, later, regular-season games at various cities in the Maritimes, including Canada Games Stadium in Saint John, New Brunswick; Huskies Stadium in Halifax, Nova Scotia; and Moncton Stadium in Moncton, New Brunswick. The league conditionally approved an expansion franchise, the Atlantic Schooners, for play in the 1984 season, but the team never made it to play after plans for a stadium collapsed.\nNo city in the Maritimes has a permanent stadium that meets CFL standards. As of 2010, the largest stadium in the Maritimes is Croix-Bleue Medavie Stadium, which has 8,300 permanent seats and is expandable to 20,000 with temporary seats. A pre-season game, dubbed Touchdown Atlantic, was held in Halifax in the 2005 CFL season and regular season games were played in Moncton under the same branding in 2010, 2011, and 2013. All 20,000 seats for the 2010 Moncton game sold out in 32 hours; the 2013 game did not sell out. Former Commissioner Mark Cohon said that Moncton Stadium would require massive renovations to host a CFL team permanently. The cost of the required renovations would be the equivalent of building a brand-new stadium. In November 2015, the Halifax city council voted 9\u20137 against purchasing land that would then be used to build a 20,000-seat stadium. It was agreed that the price tag for the land was too much, but the close vote indicated municipal interest in building a near CFL sized stadium in Halifax.\nAtlantic Schooners revival.\nIn November 2017, the CFL conducted further discussions with a group in Halifax interested in securing a franchise for the city; the group made a \"very credible\" pitch to the CFL head office. According to TSN analyst Dave Naylor the group named 'Maritime Football Ltd.' consists of Anthony LeBlanc (former president and CEO of the NHL's Arizona Coyotes), Bruce Bowser (president of AMJ Campbell Van Lines) and Gary Drummond (former president of hockey operations for the Coyotes). In June 2018 the group met with the Halifax Regional Council in private about plans to bring a CFL team to Halifax, with the possibility of playing at Universit\u00e9 de Moncton while a stadium in Halifax is being built. Maritime Football Ltd. ownership group selected a site in Shannon Park, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia to develop a new stadium. The stadium was estimated to cost between $170 to $190\u00a0million, seat 24,000 and have a business model similar to the Ottawa Redblacks, who entered the league in 2014. On October 30, 2018, Halifax City Council unanimously voted in favour of proceeding with a business case analysis of a stadium in the Halifax municipality. Following this positive momentum, Maritime Football Ltd. and CFL commissioner Randy Ambrosie announced that the group would proceed with a season ticket drive to further gauge interest, and also running a team name contest in the hopes of making an announcement on the team name just prior to the 106th Grey Cup game. The target year for the proposed team to enter the league was 2021, with the team name including \"Atlantic\" in its name, but no franchise was actually awarded in this announcement. Further to the previous discussions with Moncton and New Brunswick politicians, it was also suggested that the potential new franchise could begin play in Moncton while the stadium in Halifax is built. On November 23, 2018, two days before the 106th Grey Cup, Maritime Football Ltd., since renamed Schooners Sports and Entertainment, and commissioner Ambrosie announced the new team would be called the \"Atlantic Schooners\". On March 15, 2023, TSN reporter Dave Naylor revealed that Schooner Sports and Entertainment (SSE) \"is no longer involved in pursuing a team for Atlantic Canada\".\nQuebec City.\nThere has been interest in adding a team in Quebec City. In 2003, an exhibition game was held at Telus Stadium between the Montreal Alouettes and Ottawa Renegades where Montreal won 54\u201323. In 2008, the federal government rejected a proposal that could have paved the way for a CFL franchise in Quebec City, saying Ottawa is not in the business of subsidizing professional sports. The following year in May 2009, Christina Saint Marche, a British businesswoman, announced her interest in operating a team in Quebec City\u2014stating that there would be a natural rivalry with the Montreal Alouettes. During the 2010 Grey Cup state of the league news conference, Cohon noted that the Alouettes hold the rights for the entire province of Quebec and that any expansion would have to be negotiated with them first. Another exhibition game was held at Telus Stadium on June 13, 2015, with Ottawa (whose TD Place Stadium was in use by the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup) hosting Montreal.\nSaskatoon.\nSaskatoon last hosted top-level Canadian football in 1935 when the Regina Roughriders left the Saskatchewan Rugby Football Union to form the WIFU. The Saskatoon Hilltops (along with another Saskatchewan-based team, the Moose Jaw Millers) eventually suspended operations due to World War II; the Hilltops remained an amateur team when they returned in 1947 (they have since played in the Canadian Junior Football League). Saskatoon last won a provincial title in 1921. By the time they resumed play after the war, the Roughriders had been the dominant team in the province for two decades.\nIn early 2012, management at Credit Union Centre publicly expressed its desire to bring a CFL team to Saskatoon. However, the Regina-based Saskatchewan Roughriders have long branded themselves as a province-wide team, and claimed that the population of Saskatchewan is too small to support two teams. In any event, Saskatoon also lacks a suitable outdoor stadium. Its largest, Griffiths Stadium, home of the University of Saskatchewan's Huskies, seats only 6,171 spectators. The Gordie Howe Bowl, which has hosted CFL exhibitions in the past, has even fewer seats (it seats 3,950 people). It is unlikely that the CFL will expand to Saskatoon in the near future unless approval from the Roughriders and the other ownership groups is obtained first.\nMexico.\nWhile not openly being considered for franchise expansion, Mexico was suggested by Commissioner Randy Ambrosie as a possible location for neutral site regular season games (similar to the NFL's Mexico Series) as early as 2019, as well as potentially partnering with the LFA for player development, as part of the league's plan to expand globally. Ambrosie also later announced a special edition of the CFL Combine to be held in 2019 in Mexico for Mexican players, and in 2019, the league held a draft of LFA and Mexican university players. In March 2019, Commissioner Randy Ambrosie told the media that after the LFA combine, multiple parties inquired about purchasing a franchise for Mexico. Ambrosie reiterated that the league had no intention to expand internationally at this time.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56803", "revid": "42224048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56803", "title": "Mercury(II) fulminate", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nMercury(II) fulminate is a primary explosive with the chemical formula . When recrystallized from water it exists as the hemihydrate . The anyhydrous form is obtained by recrystallization from ethanol. It is highly sensitive to friction, heat and shock and is mainly used as a trigger for other explosives in percussion caps and detonators. Mercury(II) cyanate, though its chemical formula is identical, has a different atomic arrangement, making the cyanate and fulminate anionic isomers.\nFirst used as a priming composition in small copper caps beginning in the 1820s, mercury fulminate quickly replaced flints as a means to ignite black powder charges in muzzle-loading firearms. Later, during the late 19th century and most of the 20th century, mercury fulminate became widely used in primers for self-contained rifle and pistol ammunition; it was the only practical detonator for firing projectiles until the early 20th century. \nMercury fulminate has the distinct advantage over potassium chlorate of being non-corrosive, but it is known to attack aluminum and magnesium strongly, and brass, bronze, copper, and zinc slowly when dry; when wet it immediately reacts with aluminum and magnesium and strongly attacks brass, bronze, copper and zinc. Today, mercury fulminate has been replaced in primers by more efficient chemical substances. These are non-corrosive, less toxic, and more stable over time; they include lead azide, lead styphnate, and tetrazene derivatives. In addition, none of these compounds requires mercury for manufacture, supplies of which can be unreliable in wartime. \nPreparation.\nMercury(II) fulminate is prepared by dissolving mercury in nitric acid and adding ethanol to the solution. Edward Charles Howard is credited with first preparing it in 1800. However, Johann Kunckel had discovered the compound more than a century before in the 17th century. The crystal structure of this compound was determined only in 2007.\nSilver fulminate can be prepared in a similar way, but this salt is even more unstable than mercury fulminate; it can explode even under water and is impossible to accumulate in large amounts because it detonates under its own weight.\nAnother preparation method is through reaction of the sodium salt of nitromethane with an aqueous solution of mercury(II) chloride () at to form a white precipitate of mercuric nitromethanate. This is digested with warm, dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) to produce mercury(II) fulminate.\nIntermediates.\nThe oxidation and nitration of ethanol with nitric acid proceeds through a multitude of intermediate compounds before reaching mercury fulminate; acetaldehyde (), nitrosoacetaldehyde (, isonitrosoacetaldehyde (), isonitrosoacetic acid (), nitroisonitrosoacetic acid (), formonitrolic acid (), and fulminic acid () are first formed. The last reacts with mercury to produce the fulminate.\nDecomposition.\nThe thermal decomposition of mercury(II) fulminate can begin at temperatures as low as , though it proceeds at a much higher rate with increasing temperature.\nIt may be decomposed with relative safety by reaction with ten times its weight of 20% sodium thiosulfate solution. This may evolve some toxic cyanogen gas.\nA possible reaction for the decomposition of mercury(II) fulminate yields carbon dioxide gas, nitrogen gas, and a combination of relatively stable mercury salts.\n\n\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56804", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56804", "title": "Vanuatu/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "56805", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56805", "title": "Vanuatu/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "56806", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56806", "title": "Vanuatu/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "56807", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56807", "title": "Vanuatu/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "56808", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56808", "title": "Vanuatu/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "56809", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56809", "title": "Vanuatu/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "56810", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56810", "title": "Vanuatu/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "56811", "revid": "15951005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56811", "title": "Compound bows", "text": ""}
{"id": "56816", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56816", "title": "Function codomain", "text": ""}
{"id": "56817", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56817", "title": "Quarterstaff", "text": "Type of polearm\nA quarterstaff (plural quarterstaffs or quarterstaves), also short staff or simply staff is a traditional European polearm, which was especially prominent in England during the Early Modern period.\nThe term is generally accepted to refer to a shaft of hardwood from long, sometimes with a metal tip, ferrule, or spike at one or both ends.\nThe term \"short staff\" compares this to the \"long staff\" based on the pike with a length in excess of . The height of the staff should be around the same as the user plus their hand set upright on their head (approximately ).\nEtymology.\nThe name \"quarterstaff\" is first attested in the mid-16th century.\nThe \"quarter\" possibly refers to the means of production, the staff being made from quartersawn hardwood (as opposed to a staff of lower quality made from conventionally sawn lumber or from a tree branch). English longbows were traditionally made from staves of yew or ash that were split into quarters. If the longbow was not in use, the 'quarter stave' could also be used as a weapon in the form of a staff. \nThe possibility that the name derives from the way the staff is held, the right hand grasping it one-quarter of the distance from the lower end, is suggested in Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica. While this interpretation may have given rise to such positions in 19th-century manuals, it probably arose by popular etymology. The Oxford English Dictionary, in support of its explanation of the \"quarter\" in origin referring to the way the staff was made, points to an early attestation of the term, dated to 1590,\n\"Plodding through Aldersgate, all armed as I was, with a quarter Ashe staffe on my shoulder.\" \nGeorge Silver, an English fencer who wrote two books (1599, 1605) including lengthy sections on staff fighting does not use the term \"quarterstaff\", but instead calls it a \"short staff\" (as opposed to the \"long staff\"). Joseph Swetnam, writing in 1615, distinguishes between the \"quarterstaff\" of in length and the \"long staff\" of .\nHistory.\nThe oldest surviving English work giving technical information on staff combat dates from the 15th century \u2013 it is a brief listing of \"strokes of the 2-hand staff\", which shares terminology with the preceding \"strokes of the 2-hand sword\" in the same manuscript.\nGeorge Silver (1599) explains techniques of short-staff combat and states that the use of other polearms and the two-handed sword are based on the same method. Later authors on the subject included Joseph Swetnam, Zachary Wylde, and Donald McBane. Silver, Swetnam, and Wylde all agreed that the staff was among the best, if not the very best, of all hand weapons.\nDuring the 16th century quarterstaves were favoured as weapons by the London Masters of Defence.\nRichard Peeke, in 1625, and Zachary Wylde, in 1711, refer to the quarterstaff as a national English weapon.\nBy the 18th century the weapon became popularly associated with gladiatorial prize playing.\nA modified version of quarterstaff fencing, employing bamboo or ash staves and protective equipment adapted from fencing, boxing, and cricket was revived as a sport in some London fencing schools and at the Aldershot Military Training School during the later 19th century. Works on this style were published by Thomas McCarthy and by Allanson-Winn and Phillips-Wolley.\nAn informal tradition (or sporadic series of revivals) based on the late 19th century style persisted in England throughout the early to mid 20th century, being particularly associated with military and fencing exhibitions and with the Boy Scout movement. The quarterstaff is also one of the main disciplines of stage combat taught by the Society of American Fight Directors, the British Academy of Stage and Screen Combat, and the British Academy of Dramatic Combat.\nHistorical practice.\nPaulus Hector Mair in his martial arts compendium of the mid-16th century, details techniques of fighting with the staff in the German school of fencing of the Renaissance.\nThere is some variation as to the proper way to hold a quarterstaff. According to the 16th to 18th century writings of Silver, Swetnam and Wylde, the quarterstaff is held with the back hand at the butt end of the staff and the other hand about above it. According to the 14th to 16th century writings of Johannes Liechtenauer and Paulus Hector Mair, the quarterstaff is held with the back hand a hand's breadth from the butt end of the staff, and the other hand up to the middle of the staff. This is likely because of the transition of techniques from quarterstaves to polearms in Mair's compendium.\nOf these the low guard is considered the central guard. Blows were primarily delivered downwards either directly or at angles. Parries of blows to the legs were done either by lifting the leg away from the line of attack or by thrusting one end of the staff into the ground and releasing the foremost hand which was in danger of being struck. Thrusts (called \"darts\" by Wylde) were often performed with the release of the forward hand and a step with the forward leg like a fencing lunge, stretching forward the back hand as far as possible. Longer thrusts were delivered with a full step forward with the back leg accompanying the back hand. It was recommended that when delivering a blow that at the end of it the back leg and foot should be compassed about so as to fall roughly into a line with the front foot and the point of the weapon. The same circling round of the back leg was applied to parries also. Singularly among the three authors, Swetnam recommends preference of thrusting over striking. Silver and Wylde describe striking and thrusting as equally valid attacks.\nThe position with one hand held at the quarter and the other at the middle of the staff is not found in these early modern manuals, but it is described in the quarterstaff manuals published in the late 19th century, e.g. McCarthy (1883): \"both hands should be apart, and the same distance from each end\".\nThe quarterstaff is also mentioned in England's legend of Robin Hood. In ballads and tales of the famed yeoman, the quarterstaff is often mentioned. For example, in \"Robin Hood and the Tinker\" and several other tales, the quarterstaff is the weapon in hand as the two engage in a duel, as the Tinker was apparently sent to bring Robin Hood to justice at the hands of the Sheriff of Nottingham. This implies that the quarterstaff was in use before and during the 16th to 18th centuries, as the tale of Robin Hood is mostly written of during that time frame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56818", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56818", "title": "Famous Scots", "text": ""}
{"id": "56819", "revid": "25820411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56819", "title": "Mumbai, India", "text": ""}
{"id": "56822", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56822", "title": "Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire", "text": ""}
{"id": "56823", "revid": "44326637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56823", "title": "Abuja", "text": "Capital of the Federal Republic of Nigeria\nAbuja ( , ) is the capital city of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, strategically situated at the geographic midpoint of the country within the Federal Capital Territory (FCT). As the seat of the Federal Government of Nigeria, it hosts key national institutions, landmarks, and buildings spread across its over 50 districts. It replaced Lagos (the most populous city in Nigeria) as the capital on 12 December 1991.\nAbuja's geography is defined by Aso Rock, a 400 metres monolith left by water erosion. The Presidential Complex, National Assembly, Supreme Court, and much of the city extend to the south of the rock. Zuma Rock, a 725 metres monolith, lies just north of the city on the expressway to Kaduna.\nAt the 2006 census, the city of Abuja had a population of 776,298 and 179,674 households making it one of the ten most populous cities in Nigeria (eighth place in 2006). According to the United Nations, Abuja grew by 139.7% between 2000 and 2010, making it the fastest-growing city in the world. As of 2015[ [update]], the city is experiencing an annual growth of at least 35%, retaining its position as the fastest-growing city on the African continent and one of the fastest-growing in the world.\nMajor religious sites include the Nigerian National Mosque and the Nigerian National Christian Centre. The city is served by the Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport. Abuja is known for being one of the few purpose-built capital cities in Africa, as well as being one of the wealthiest.\nAbuja is Nigeria's administrative and political capital. It is also a key capital on the African continent due to Nigeria's geopolitical influence in regional affairs. Abuja is also a conference centre and hosts various meetings annually, such as the 2003 Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting and the 2014 World Economic Forum (Africa) meetings. Abuja joined the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities in 2016.\nHistory.\nAbuja was in the early 20th century the name of the nearby town now called Suleja.\nThe indigenous inhabitants of Abuja are the Abawa (Ganagana), Basa, Gwandara, Gbagyi (Gwari) having the majority population in the region. Other groups in the area include Egburra, Nupe and Koro.\nThe Gwandara speaking people in Federal Capital Territory are mostly found in AMAC and Bwari Area Council. Some of their villages/settlements are Wuse, Asokoro now relocated to Sabon Wuse, Aso in Niger and other neighbouring states. Others are Karshi, Kurudu, Nyanya, Idu, Gwagwa, Jiwa, Sheretti, Karmo, Takunshara, Burum, Dutse Alhaji, Zuba, Kuje, Kwoi, Karonmagaji, Ija, Kanwu, and Sherre.\n In light of the ethnic and religious divisions of Nigeria, plans had been devised since Nigeria's independence to have its capital in a place deemed neutral to all major ethnic parties, and also near all the regions of Nigeria. The location was eventually designated in the centre of the country in the early 1970s as it signified neutrality and national unity. \nAnother impetus for Abuja came because of Lagos' population boom that made that city overcrowded and conditions squalid. As Lagos was already undergoing rapid economic development, the Nigerian government felt the need to expand the economy towards the inner part of the country, and hence decided to move its capital to Abuja. The logic used was similar to the way Brazil planned its capital, Bras\u00edlia.\nThe Federal Military Government of Nigeria promulgated Decree No. 6 on 4 February 1976, which initiated the removal of the Federal Capital from Lagos to Abuja. The initial work for Abuja's planning and implementation was carried out by the Military Government of General Murtala Mohammed and Olusegun Obasanjo. However, the foundation of Abuja was under the Administration of Shehu Shagari in 1979. Construction started in 1979 but, due to economic and political instability, the initial stages of the city were not complete until the late 1980s.\nThe move of Nigeria's Capital to Abuja was controversial, and the biggest opposition to it was led by Obafemi Awolowo. Awolowo, as a politician and a representative of the Yoruba people, defended their claims against the move of the Capital from Lagos. During the hotly-contested campaign for the presidency, he vowed to hire the American Walt Disney Company to convert the new site (Abuja) into an amusement park if he was elected. However, after his election as president, Alhaji Shehu Shagari laid the first foundation for Abuja's infrastructure and pushed for its early completion. His first journey outside of Lagos after his election was to Abuja, where he visited contractors and workers on site to urge a speedy completion of the project. On his return, he confided in Alhaji Abubakar Koko his disappointment with the slow progress of work. Shehu Shagari rescheduled the planned relocation to Abuja from 1986 to 1992 which later proved difficult.\nThe International Planning Associates (IPA) was commissioned in June 1977, by the Federal Capital Development Authority (FCDA) to produce the Abuja Master Plan and its regional grid. According to the terms of reference, the master planning process was to include a review of relevant data, selection of a capital city site, preparation of regional and city plans and the accompanying design and development standards manual.\nIPA did not exist before the with an internationally reputable firm to design the master plan. IPA was formed by a consortium of three American firms which won the worldwide competitive bidding. The firms were Planning Research Corporation (PRC), Wallace, McHarg, Roberts and Todd, and Archisystems (a division of the Hughes Organisation). After winning the bid, and completing the project, the firms were disbanded.\nThe final report was submitted to the pioneer Executive Secretary of FCDA, Alhaji Abubakar Koko, on 15 February 1979. In the preface to the master plan, the following declaration was made by IPA:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The master plan for Abuja the new Capital City of Nigeria represents the culmination of 18 months' work by the Federal Capital Development Authority (FCDA) board, and several advisory panel consultants. Without the unstinting efforts of these experts, the momentum now exhibited at the beginning of the actual implementation of the new capital could not have been achieved. The plan itself represents a milestone in the process of building the new capital city. It is a necessary element in the monumental effort about to be undertaken by the Nigerian people.\"\nThe master plan for Abuja defined the general structure and major design elements of the city that are now visible. More detailed design of the central areas of the capital, particularly its monumental core, was accomplished by Japanese architect Kenzo Tange, with his team of city planners at Kenzo Tange and Urtec company. Most countries relocated their embassies to Abuja, and many maintain their former embassies as consulates in Lagos, the commercial capital of Nigeria. Abuja is the headquarters of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the regional headquarters of OPEC. Abuja and the FCT have experienced huge population growth; it has been reported that some areas around Abuja have been growing at 20% to 30% per year. Squatter settlements and towns have spread rapidly in and outside the city limits. Tens of thousands of people have been evicted since former FCT minister Nasir Ahmad el-Rufai started a demolition campaign in 2003.\nAbuja is a planned city built mainly in the 1980s based on a master plan by International Planning Associates (IPA), a consortium of three American planning and architecture firms made up of Wallace, Roberts, McHarg &amp; Todd (WRMT \u2013 a group of architects) as the lead, Archi systems International (a subsidiary of the Howard Hughes Corporation), and Planning Research Corporation. The Central Business District of Abuja was designed by Japanese architect Kenzo Tange.\nAdministration.\nThe Abuja Municipal Area Council (AMAC) is the local government authority responsible for administering the city of Abuja. It operates under the oversight of the Federal Capital Territory Administration (FCTA), which governs the entire Federal Capital Territory (FCT). The AMAC's chairman is responsible for leading the council's activities and representing the interests of the municipality's residents. The Minister of the FCT, Nyesom Wike, heads the FCTA while AMAC's chairman is Christopher Zaka Maikalangu.\nPhases.\nFor ease and co-ordination of developmental efforts, the city was divided into 'Phases' by its planners, with the city's development taking a concentric form with Phase 1, which consists of the city's inner districts-Central Area, Maitama, Asokoro, Wuse, Wuse II, Garki, Garki II, Guzape and Guzape II-at its core spreading out from the foot of Aso Rock, while Phase 5, consisting of the newly created Kyami District covering the vicinity of the Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport and the permanent campus of the University of Abuja, over 40 kilometres west of Aso Rock. Each Phase is separated from the other by an expressway (some still under construction); for example, Phases 1 and 2 are separated from each other by the Nnamdi Azikiwe expressway, while the entirety of the city proper (Phases 1\u20135) is enclosed by the Murtala Muhammed (Outer Northern-ONEX and Outer Southern-OSEX) expressways as well as the Federal A2 highway which traverses the Federal Capital Territory on its way to Kaduna (north-bound) and Lokoja (south-bound). Thus, there is an integration of the city's road network with the Federal highway network, providing access to the immediate outlying countryside and the surrounding states of the country i.e. Niger State to the west, Kaduna State to the north, Nasarawa State to the east and Kogi State to the south.\nAbuja is organised into phases, which are further divided into districts.\nPhase 1.\nAsokoro District.\nAsokoro, the doyen of the districts, houses all of the state's lodges/guesthouses. The ECOWAS secretariat is a focal point of interest. Asokoro is to the east of the Garki District and south of the Central District. It is one of the most exclusive districts of Abuja and houses virtually all of the federal cabinet ministers as well as most of the diplomatic community in the city; in addition, the Presidential Palace (commonly referred to as Aso Rock) is in Asokoro District. By virtue of this fact, Asokoro is the most secure area of the city.\nCentral Business District.\nAbuja's Central District, also called Central Area, is a strip of land stretching from Aso Rock in the east to the National Stadium and the Old City gate in the West. It is like the city's spinal cord, dividing it into the northern sector with Maitama and Wuse, and the southern sector with Garki and Asokoro. While each district has its own demarcated commercial and residential sectors, the Central District is the city's principal Business Zone, where practically all parastatals and multinational corporations have their offices. An attractive area in the Central District is the region known as the Three Arms Zone, so-called because it houses the administrative offices of the executive, legislative, and judicial arms of the federal government. A few of the other sites worth seeing in the area are the federal secretariats alongside Shehu Shagari Way, Aso Hill, the Abuja Plant Nursery, Eagle Square (which has important historic significance, as it was in this grounds that the present democratic dispensation had its origin on 29 May 1999) and in which all subsequent Presidential Inauguration ceremonies have taken place. The Tomb of the Unknown Soldier is situated across Shehu Shagari Way, facing Eagle Square. This section is usually closed to traffic during the annual Armed Forces Remembrance Day ceremonies, that is observed on 15 January. The National Mosque and National Christian Centre are opposite each other on either side of Independence Avenue. A well-known government office is the Ministry of Defense, colloquially nicknamed \"Ship House\". Also located here is the yet-to-be-completed National Square, Millennium tower and Nigeria Cultural Centre multi-functional complex.\nGarki District.\nThe Garki District is the area in the southwest corner of the city, having the Central District to the north and the Asokoro District to the east. The district is subdivided into units called \"Areas\". Garki uses a distinctive naming convention of \"Area\" to refer to parts of Garki. These are designated as Areas 1 to 11. Garki II is used to differentiate the area from Garki Area 2. Visitors may find this system confusing.\nGarki is presently the principal business and administrative district of Abuja. Numerous buildings of interest are in this area. Some of them include the General Post Office, Abuja International Conference Centre along the busy Herbert Macaulay Way, Nicon Luxury Hotel (formally known as Abuja Sofitel Hotel and Le Meridian), Agura Hotel and Old Federal Secretariat Complex Buildings (Area 1). A new five-star hotel, Hawthorn Suites Abuja, is in Garki.\nArea 2 is mainly used for residential purposes, although a zoological garden, as well as a small shopping centre, are to be found here as well. Several banks and other commercial offices are located along Moshood Abiola Way in Area 7. The headquarters of the Nigerian Armed Forces \u2013 Army, Airforce and Navy \u2013 is located on Muhammadu Buhari Way in the Garki District.\nThe tallest building in this district is the Radio House located in the Area 11 sector, which houses the Federal Ministry of Information and Communications, the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN) and Voice of Nigeria (VON). The Nigerian Television Authority (NTA) stations and corporate headquarters are also in Garki. The Federal Capital Development Authority (FCDA) which oversees and runs the Administration of the Federal Capital Territory has its offices in Garki.\nThe Office of the Minister of the Federal Capital Territory is in Area 11. This is the location of the Federal Capital Development Authority and other administrative buildings. A popular sub-neighbourhood here is found in the vicinity of Gimbiya Street because it has the unique characteristic of being a purely administrative zone on weekdays while transforming purely into an entertainment zone on weeknights and weekends.\nOther places of note include the Cyprian Ekwensi Arts &amp; Culture Centre and The Nigerian Police Mobile Force CID (Criminal Investigation Department) headquarters in Area 10. The Abuja Municipal Area Council, which is the local government administration has its headquarters in Area 10. The new United States Embassy is in the Diplomatic Zone which adjoins Garki.\nMaitama District.\nMaitama District is to the north of the city, with the Wuse and Central Districts lying to its southwest and southeast, respectively. This area is home to the top-bracket sections of society and business and has the reputation of being very exclusive and very expensive. Interesting buildings include the Transcorp Hilton Abuja, Nigerian Communications Commission Headquarters (NCC), National Universities Commission (NUC), Soil Conservation Complex, and Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC). The British High Commission is located along Aguiyi Ironsi Way, in Maitama.\nAlso, the Maitama District Hospital is another notable building in Maitama. Maitama District is home to many of the European and Asian embassies.\nMaitama II.\nMaitama II District Cadastral Zone A10 is a new district created by the FCT administration of Muhammed Bello in 2018. Maitama 2 as it is unofficially called was created from Mpape Hills, a suburb bothering the Bwari and Maitama Districts of the FCT. Maitama II has a high net worth of individuals especially legislators as allottees, which makes it a destination for real estate investors who desire to secure the future today.\nIt is not very clear what the government plans for the district as not much has been said by government agents, but cadastral zoning A indicates the government has good plans for Maitama 2 to correct some errors in Maitama District.\nIt was learned that plots of land were revoked from allottees of Mpape district to create the new Maitama II District, although a compensation plan is underway to relocate the revoked allottees to another district the government intends to create. Fortunately, some developers of the Mpape district who have building plan approval and have started building maintain their plots and allocations and are covered in the Maitama II District layout. It is not clear though if a fresh allocation bearing Maitama II District has been issued to this set of allottees.\nNotable landmarks of the Maitama 2 district are Jubilation Avenue, Mount Pleasant Haven and Hilltop Estate.\nThe district infrastructure is in top gear as the Federal Government had in the 2018 and 2019 budgets allocated about N1.3b for the engineering design of the district. Villages around the district are living in fear of demolition at any time with the information reaching them that government will commence the infrastructure project of Maitama II District.\nWuse District.\nWuse District is the northwestern part of the city, with the Maitama District to its north and the Central District to its south. The District is numbered Zones 1\u20136. The Wuse Market is Abuja's principal market. The second most important post office in the city is here. This district houses the Sheraton Hotel and Towers (Zone 4), Grand Ibro International Hotel, the Federal Road Safety Corps Headquarters (Zone 3), Nigerian Customs Services Headquarters, Federal Civil Service Commission (Zone 3), National Agency for Food and Drugs Administration (NAFDAC) (Zone 7), Wuse General Hospital, and the Nigerian Tourism Development Corporation. Just as Garki District has Garki II, Wuse has Wuse II. This is distinct from Wuse Zone 2. Like other inner Abuja districts such as Asokoro or Garki, there are very few large housing estates. Instead, office buildings, mansions and apartment blocks are prominent features of the area.\nPhase 2.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhase 3.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhase 4.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere are five suburban districts: Nyanya Karu, Gwagwalada Kubwa, and Jikwoyi. Along the Airport Road (Now Umaru Musa Yar'Adua Express Way) are clusters of satellite settlements, namely Lugbe, Chika, Kuchigworo and Pyakassa. Other satellite settlements are Idu (the main industrial zone), Mpape, Karimu, Gwagwa, Dei-Dei (housing the International Livestock market and also International Building materials market).\nCityscape.\nConstruction of the Millennium Tower started in 2005 and was halted in 2017 after funds ran out. This structure looms above the city and is the tallest artificial structure in Abuja. The tower is part of a huge cultural development complex called the Nigeria National Complex including the Nigeria Cultural Centre, a structure dedicated to the art and culture of Nigeria. The Cultural Centre and the Millennium Tower have been designed by the Italian architect Manfredi Nicoletti.\nLandmarks include the Millennium Tower, the Central Bank of Nigeria headquarters, the Nigerian Presidential Complex, the Ship House, the National Stadium, which was the main venue of the 2003 All Africa Games and some games, including the final, of the 2009 FIFA Under-17 World Cup, National Mosque, the National Church, Aso Rock and Zuma Rock.\nParks and open areas.\nAbuja is home to several parks and green areas, with the largest one being Millennium Park. Millennium Park was designed by architect Manfredi Nicoletti and was officially opened by the United Kingdom's Queen Elizabeth II (the former Queen of Nigeria) in December 2003. Another open area park is located in Lifecamp Gwarimpa; near the residence of the Minister of the Federal Capital Territory. The park is located on a slightly raised hilltop which contains sports facilities like Basketball and Badminton courts another park is the city park, which is located in Wuse 2 and is home to numerous outdoor and indoor attractions such as a 4D cinema, Astro-turf, lawn tennis court, paintball arena and a variety of restaurants. The National Children's Park and Zoo host a number of animals and recreation spots.\nBush Bars.\nAbuja has a variety of informal spaces known as \"Bush Bars\" that usually, though not always, include a covered area with tables and chairs where people can sit and have drinks (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) and sometimes there are snacks such as suya, grilled catfish, pounded yam, egusi soup and other small items available for purchase. They are located all over Abuja.\nGeography.\nThe elevation is .\nClimate.\nAbuja under K\u00f6ppen climate classification features a tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Aw\"). The FCT experiences three weather conditions annually. This includes a warm, humid rainy season and a blistering dry season. In between the two, there is a brief interlude of harmattan occasioned by the northeast trade wind, with the main feature of dust haze and cloudless skies.\nThe rainy season begins from April and ends in October, when daytime temperatures reach to and nighttime lows hover around to . In the dry season, daytime temperatures can soar as high as and overnight temperatures can dip to . Even the coolest nights can be followed by daytime temperatures well above . The medium altitude and undulating terrain of the FCT act as a moderating influence on the weather of the territory. The city's inland location causes the diurnal temperature variation to be much larger than coastal cities with similar climates such as Lagos.\nRainfall in the FCT reflects the territory's location on the windward side of the Jos Plateau and the zone of rising air masses with the city receiving frequent rainfall during the rainy season from April to October every year.\nThe effects of climate change have been observed in Abuja, according to a study conducted by the Nigerian Meteorological Agency and Atmospheric Science Group of Imo State University. Between 1993 and 2013, the average maximum temperature trended downward, but the average minimum and mean temperatures trended upwards. There was a downward trend for rainfall in Abuja, based on data collected between 1986 and 2016. The drought occurrence probability for Abuja increased by 15.4% between 1975 and 2014.\nVegetation.\nThe FCT falls within the Guinean forest-savanna mosaic zone of the West African sub-region. Patches of rain forest, however, occur in the Gwagwa plains, especially in the rugged terrain to the southeastern parts of the territory, where a landscape of gullies and rough terrain is found. These areas of the Federal Capital Territory (FCT) form one of the few surviving occurrences of the mature forest vegetation in Nigeria.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2006 census, the city of Abuja had a population of 776,298, making it than the eighth most populous city in Nigeria. United Nations figures showed that Abuja grew by 139.7% between 2000 and 2010, making it the fastest-growing city in the world. As of 2015[ [update]], the city is experiencing an annual growth of at least 35%, retaining its position as the fastest-growing city on the African continent and one of the fastest-growing in the world.\nConurbation.\nAbuja has witnessed a huge influx of people into the city; the growth has led to the emergence of satellite towns, such as Karu Urban Area, Suleja, Gwagwalada, Lugbe, Kuje and smaller settlements towards which the planned city is sprawling. The urban agglomeration centred upon Abuja had a population estimated at 3,770,000 in 2022. The city has a large and growing immigrant community consisting mainly of nationals from the ECOWAS sub-region. The city has been undergoing a rapid pace of physical development over the last fifteen years.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nReal estate.\nReal estate is a major driver of the Abuja economy. This correlates with the considerable growth and investment the city has seen as it has developed. The sources of this investment have been both foreign and local. The real estate sector continues to have a positive impact on the city, as it is a major avenue for employment.\nAnnual trade fair.\nThe Abuja International Trade Fair (AITF) has been held annually since 2005, under the auspices of the Abuja Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ACCI). ACCI has also sought to link businesses to enhance trade with East Africa.\nPostal system.\nAbuja is served by the Nigerian Postal Service (NIPOST) which maintains postal codes, street names and zones.\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nNnamdi Azikiwe International Airport is the main airport serving Abuja and the surrounding capital region. It was named after Nigeria's first president, Nnamdi Azikiwe. The airport has international and domestic terminals.\nHighways.\nAbuja is also linked to Nasarawa, Plateau, Benue and Northeast Nigeria by the A234 Federal Highway, which starts from the city as the Goodluck Jonathan expressway, some portions of which are still under construction. A direct highway link to Minna in Niger State is still under construction. The A2 expressway links Abuja with Kaduna in the north and Lokoja in the south. There are also other highway links with the outlying region, such as that linking the suburb of Dutse Alhaji with the Lower Usuma and Gurara Dams, which supply water to the city.\nRail.\nAbuja is on the route of the planned Lagos\u2013Kano Standard Gauge Railway, which has been completed between Abuja and Kaduna. Trains for Kaduna depart from the Idu Railway Station in Abuja. There is a car park at the train station for passengers travelling to the city centre.\nAbuja light rail opened in 2018 and became the first rapid transit in the country and in Western Africa. Abuja's light rail system was shut down in 2020 due to the COVID-19 epidemic. Traffic resumed on 29 May 2024.\nEducation.\nAbuja is also known as one of the states in Nigeria that provides quality post-secondary education. It is speedily becoming an attraction for students due to the growing presence of both public and private universities.\nNatural resources.\nAbuja is one of the cities that are endowed with natural resources in Nigeria, and these resources serve as raw materials for pharmaceutical, food processing, medicinal and other processing companies, and they are also useful for commercial purposes, and as sources of food. Among these materials include:\nMineral Raw Materials.\nSource:\nHonorary citizens.\nPeople awarded the Honorary citizenship of Abuja are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56824", "revid": "44356317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56824", "title": "Accra", "text": "Capital and the largest city of Ghana\nAccra (; or \"Gaga\"; ; Ewe: G\u025b; ) is the capital and largest city of Ghana, located on the southern coast at the Gulf of Guinea, which is part of the Atlantic Ocean. As of 2021 census, the Accra Metropolitan District, , had a population of 284,124, and the larger Greater Accra Region, , had a population of 5.46 million. In common usage, the name \"Accra\" often refers to the territory of the Accra Metropolitan District as it existed before 2008, when it covered . This territory has since been split into 13 local government districts: 12 independent municipal districts (total area: 179.0\u00a0km2) and the reduced Accra Metropolitan District (20.4\u00a0km2), which is the only district within the capital to be granted city status. This territory of 199.4\u00a0km2 contained 1,782,150 inhabitants at the 2021 census, and serves as the capital of Ghana, while the district under the jurisdiction of the Accra Metropolitan Assembly proper (20.4\u00a0km2) is distinguished from the rest of the capital as the \"City of Accra\".\nFormed from the merger of distinct settlements around British Fort James, Dutch Fort Cr\u00eavecoeur (Ussher Fort), and Danish Fort Christiansborg as Jamestown, Usshertown, and Christiansborg respectively, Accra served as the capital of the British Gold Coast between 1877 and 1957 and has since transitioned into a modern metropolis. The capital's architecture reflects this history, ranging from 19th-century colonial architecture to modern skyscrapers and apartment blocks.\nAccra is the Greater Accra Region's economic and administrative hub, and serves as the anchor of the larger Greater Accra Metropolitan Area (GAMA), which is inhabited by about 4\u00a0million people, making it the thirteenth-largest metropolitan area in Africa. In 2020, the Globalization and World Cities Research Network think tank designated Accra as a \"Gamma \u2212\" level global city, indicating a growing level of international influence and connectedness.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Accra\" is derived from the Akan word \"Nkran\" meaning \"ants\", a reference to the numerous anthills seen in the countryside around Accra. The name specifically refers to soldier ants, and was applied to both the town and people by the Twi speakers.\nThe name of Accra in the local Ga language is \"Ga\" or \"Gaga\", the same name as that of the Ga people and a cognate with \"Nkran\". The word is sometimes rendered with the nasalised vowels as \"G\u00e3\" or \"G\u00e3g\u00e3\". Historian Carl Christian Reindorf confirmed this etymology, proposing a link between the martial qualities and migratory behaviour of the local ants and those of the Ga people. The link between the ethnonym and ants was explicitly reflected in the recognition of anthills as sacred places. Often ringed by sacred fences (\"aklabatsa\"), the tall red mounds dotting Accra's hinterland were seen as microcosms of human community and as nodal points between the known world and the world of the dead.\nThe Gas used the reference to the invasive species of dark-red swarming ants to connote the military prowess of the Gas and their ancient conquest of Guang speakers residing in the Accra Plains.\nThe name \"Ga\" is actually a cognate of the name \"Akan\", one of a few words in which corresponds to in Akan. \"Ga\" also gave its name to the Ga districts surrounding Accra.\nThe spelling \"Accra\" was given to \"Nkran\" by Europeans. An earlier spelling used by the Danes was \"Akra.\"\nHistory.\nAccra Kingdom.\nThe main Ga group known as the Tumgwa Were led by Ayi Kushie arrived by sea. Due to the large number of the Ga immigrants, the indigenous Lartehs relocated to the Akuapem ridge. By the late 15th century, the kingdom of Accra ruled the area from the capital at Ayawaso.\nInitially, Accra was not the most prominent trading centre; the trading hubs were the ports at Ada and Prampram, along with the inland centres of Dodowa and Akuse. An early Portuguese fort was destroyed by the local inhabitants in 1576; trader afterwards was conducted on the beaches. The Dutch later built the nearby Fort Cr\u00e8vec\u0153ur while the British and the Swedes built James Fort and Christiansborg castles, respectively, in the mid-17th century.\nBy 1646 the kingdom was a regional power, bolstered by European trade. Nevertheless, it depended on the goodwill of the rising Akwamu Kingdom, which controlled the trade routes in the interior. A dispute in 1646 escalated to war when Accra invaded Larteh. At the same time, Accra was weakened by a civil war.\nAkwamu.\nIn 1677 Akwamuhene Ansa Sasraku, using the circumcision of a visiting Akwamu prince as pretext, attacked Accra. He sacked Ayawaso and beheaded the king, Okai Koi. The king's son, Ofori, retreated to 'Small Accra', the town that had grown up under the walls of Fort Cr\u00e8vec\u0153ur. Ansa Sasraku's attempts to finish off the Accrans were defeated by the guns of the Danish Fort Christianborg. Ofori and his people survived for a few years, until the Akwamu fomented a rebellion amongst the Danish garrison, and the fort was turned over to the Portuguese. Ansa Sasraku returned in 1681, burning Osu town and Small Accra and chasing Ofori to exile in Fetu. As Akwamu continued to expand, strips of land east and west were added to the Accra province. When Akwamu was defeated by the Akyem in 1730, however, Accra regained its independence.\nBritish power increases.\nBritain gradually acquired the interests of all other countries beginning in 1851, when Denmark sold Christiansborg (which they had acquired from the Swedes) and their other forts to the British. The Netherlands was the last to sell out, in 1871. In 1873, after decades of tension between the British and Ashantis, the British captured Kumasi, destroying portions of the city. The British then captured Accra in 1874, and in 1877, at the end of the second Anglo-Asante War, Accra replaced Cape Coast as the capital of the British Gold Coast. This decision was made because Accra had a drier climate relative to Cape Coast. Until this time, the settlement of Accra was confined between Ussher Fort to the east and the Korle Lagoon to the west.\nAs the newly established Gold Coast's administrative functions were moved to Accra (1877), an influx of British colonial administrators and European settlers grew around the Christiansborg (modern Osu, Ministries, Ridge, Labone, and Cantonments) began, and the city began to expand to accommodate the new residents. Victoriaborg was formed in the late 19th century as an exclusively European residential neighbourhood, located to the east of the city limits of the time. The boundaries of Accra were further stretched in 1908, after a bubonic plague epidemic. This expansion entailed the creation of a native-only neighbourhood, intended to accommodate members of the native population as a means of relieving congestion problems in the overcrowded city centre. Adabraka was thus established to the north of the city.\nOne of the most influential decisions in the history of the city was that of building the Accra-Kumasi railway in 1908. This was to connect Accra, the country's foremost port at that time, with Ghana's main cocoa-producing regions. In 1923, the railway was completed, and by 1924, cocoa was Ghana's largest export.\nThe colonial era heavily influenced the shape that Accra took during this period. For example, the segregation of European and African neighbourhoods was mandated by law until 1923, and all new buildings were required to be built out of stone or concrete. Despite these regulations, European settlers in the Gold Coast were very hesitant to invest any large amount of money into the city to maintain its infrastructure or improve public works. This did not change until the governorship of Sir Frederick Gordon Guggisberg during which period the three separate settlements (Osu, La and Jamestown) merged to become modern Accra. Guggisberg's administration laid out the present grid networked neighbourhoods of Tudu, Adabraka and Asylum Down.\nAmong the achievements of Guggisberg was the building of a bridge across the Korle Lagoon in 1923, which increased settlement at Korle Bu, Korle Gonno and Chokor, to the west of the lagoon. Guggisberg also oversaw the building of a major hospital (Korle-Bu) and secondary school (Achimota). Such improvements led to an increase in Accra's population due to the migration of rural dwellers into the city, and the immigration of increasing numbers of British businessmen and administrators.\nAfter World War II.\nIn the years following World War II, the neighbourhoods of Ridge and Cantonments were planned as low-density developments for Europeans, while many rural migrants settled in neighbourhoods which had not yet been incorporated into Accra's municipal boundary, such as Nima and surrounding areas. Thus, the development of these neighbourhoods was unregulated by the government, creating a crowded and jumbled shanty-town landscape.\nAnother area of Accra that took shape at this time was the central business district (CBD). More administrative buildings were built on High Street, forming a massive judicial/administrative complex. Additionally, the expansion of the economy led to many more commercial buildings being built in the CBD.\nIn 1944, Accra's city planner Maxwell Fry devised a town plan, which was revised in 1958 by B.D.W. Treavallion and Alan Flood. Although the Fry/Trevallion plan was never followed through, it illustrated the British vision of how Accra should develop.\nIn 1948, Ghana remained a colony of Great Britain following World War II. The chief of Osu Alata, Nii Kobina Bonney III, had set up a boycott of European goods across the country due to the rise of prices for essential commodities. At the same time, veterans of the war were fighting for their benefits and promised pay. Unarmed ex-servicemen organized a march on Christiansborg Castle, Accra, on 28 February 1948. Their plan was to hand a petition to the colonial governor demanding they receive their pay and benefits. Before reaching the castle, the veterans were fired upon, after being ordered by the colonial police chief to disperse. Three of the leaders of the demonstration were killed, including Sergeant Nii Adjetey, who now has a memorial in Accra, leading to the 1948 Accra riots.\nFry/Treavallion plan.\nIn the Fry/Treavallion plan, a reorganization of the CBD was called for, as well as the development of the coastal region of the city. To reorganize the CBD, the planners decided to superimpose a tight street grid north of Fort Ussher.\nTo the east of this newly organized CBD, the planners hoped to preserve a broad, open space for a restaurant, country club, and polo and cricket fields. Additionally, the British planners intended to build large numbers of public squares, fountains, and ornamental pools and statues throughout the city, as well as a vast Parliament Complex in the city centre. Lastly, the Fry/Treavallion plan included plans to make the coastal region an extension of the exclusive European neighbourhood of Victoriaborg, and to create a recreational preserve for the elite. However, the British Gold Coast ended before the Fry/Treavallion plan was enacted.\nNkrumah Plan.\nAfter Kwame Nkrumah became Ghana's first Prime Minister in 1957, he created his own plan for Accra's development. Nkrumah proposed creating spaces to inspire pride and nationalism in his people and people throughout Africa.\nRather than creating ornamental fountains and a large Parliament complex, Nkrumah decided to build landmarks such as Independence Square, the State House, and the Organisation of African Unity building, and to refurbish Christianborg Castle. Nkrumah decided to leave the Atlantic coastal region undeveloped so as to not detract attention from the Community Centre or Independence Square, lending both spaces symbolic significance. The Nkrumah plan did not emphasize order nearly as much as the Fry/Treavallion plan did; whereas the British plan strove to lessen crowding in the commercial district and help relieve the overcrowding of neighbourhoods bordering the CBD, the Nkrumah plan allowed for continued compression of commercial establishments into the CBD, as well as increased migration into Jamestown.\nThe modern city is centered on the original British, Danish, and Dutch forts and their surrounding communities: Jamestown near the British James Fort, Osu near the Danish fort of Christiansborg (now Osu Castle), and Ussherstown near the Dutch Ussher fort.\nTourist attractions include the National Museum of Ghana, the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences, the National Archives of Ghana and Ghana's central library, the National Theatre, the Accra Centre for National Culture, and Jamestown Lighthouse.\nThe Parliament, Supreme Court of Ghana, Black Star Square and the Bank of Ghana are also located in Accra.\nThe city is also a transportation hub, home to the Kotoka International Airport, and railway links to Tema, Sekondi-Takoradi and Kumasi. Accra has become a location for national and international business conferences, such as the BarCamp Ghana series, organised by GhanaThink Foundation.\nGeography.\nOwing to its location in the Dahomey Gap, where the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean coast runs parallel to the prevailing moist monsoonal winds, Accra features a very marginal tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Aw\") that borders on a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\"). The average annual rainfall is about , which falls primarily during Ghana's two rainy seasons. The chief rainy season begins in April and ends in mid-July, whilst a weaker second rainy season occurs in October. Rain usually falls in brief but intense storms and causes localised flooding in which drainage channels are obstructed.\nVery little variation in temperature occurs throughout the year. The mean monthly temperature ranges from in August (the coolest) to in March (the hottest), with an annual average of . The \"cooler\" months, which are summer months, tend to be more humid than the warmer months, which are winter and spring months. As a result, during the warmer months and particularly during the windy harmattan season, the city experiences a breezy \"dry heat\" that feels less warm than the \"cooler\" but more humid rainy season.\nAs a coastal city, Accra is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and sea level rise, with population growth putting increasing pressure on the coastal areas. Drainage infrastructure is particularly at risk, which has profound implications for people's livelihoods, especially in informal settlements. Inadequate planning regulation and law enforcement, as well as perceived corruption in government processes, lack of communication across government departments and lack of concern or government co-ordination with respect to building codes are major impediments to progressing the development of Accra's drainage infrastructure, according to the Climate &amp; Development Knowledge Network.\nAs Accra is close to the equator, the daylight hours are practically uniform throughout the year. Relative humidity is generally high, varying from 65% in the midafternoon to 95% at night. The predominant wind direction in Accra is from the WSW to NNE sectors. Wind speeds normally range between 8 and 16\u00a0km/h. High wind gusts occur with thunderstorms, which generally pass in squalls along the coast.\nThe maximum wind speed record in Accra is . Strong winds associated with thunderstorm activity often cause property damage by removing roofing material. Several areas of Accra experience microclimatic effects. Low-profile drainage basins with a north\u2013south orientation are not as well ventilated as those oriented east\u2013west.\nAir is often trapped in pockets over the city, and an insulating effect can give rise to a local increase in air temperature of several degrees. This occurs most notably in the Accra Newtown sports complex areas.\nAdministration.\nThe administration of Accra occurs at two levels. Strategic initiatives, such as the urban transportation project, are coordinated between district authorities, while local administration is carried out by local government authorities, which are responsible for most local services, such as local planning, local roads and refuse collection within their area of jurisdiction.\nThe former territory of the Accra Metropolitan District, , as it existed before 2008, is now divided into 13 separate local government districts, all governed as municipal assemblies with their own town hall and a municipal executive appointed by the president of the republic. Each municipal assembly is responsible for most local services, such as local planning and refuse collection. The reduced Accra Metropolitan District (also referred to as City of Accra), , once comprised the entirety of Accra until the Ledzokuku, Krowor, La Dadekotopon, Ablekuma North, Ablekuma Central, Ablekuma West, Ayawaso East, Ayawaso North, Ayawaso Central, Ayawaso West, Okaikwei North, and Korley Kottey districts were carved out as separate municipal districts between 2008 and 2019.\nDistricts.\nAccra Metropolitan District (City of Accra)\nThe Accra Metropolitan District is one of the 13 local government districts that contains the historic centre and the primary central business district (CBD) of Accra. To promote efficiency in the administrative machinery and also meet the ever-pressing demands for amenities and essential services, the district is divided into the Ashiedu Keteke, Okaikoi South, and Ablekuma South sub-metropolitan districts.\nThe Accra Metropolitan Assembly, which governs the City of Accra within the boundaries of the Accra Metropolitan District, is led by a Metropolitan Chief Executive who is appointed by the President of the Republic of Ghana. The Mayor of Accra is Mohammed Adjei Sowah, who was appointed by President Nana Akufo-Addo and approved unanimously by the AMA on 23 March 2017.\nThe Ablekuma South sub-metropolitan district covers an area of and is bordered by the Ablekuma Central and Ablekuma North Municipal Assemblies, and the Ashiedu Keteke sub-metropolitan district. It includes 5 electoral areas: Korle Gonno, Korlebu, Chorkor, Mamprobi, and New Mamprobi.\nCommunities within the Okaikoi South sub-metropolitan district include Darkuman, New Fadama, Kaneshie, Bubiashie, and Avenor. The sub-metro has 8 electoral areas namely Awudome, Goten, Kaatsean, Mukose, Bubuashie, Bubui, Avenor and Kaneshie.\nThe Ashiedu Keteke sub-metropolitan district covers the Central Business District (CBD) and as such the hub of major commercial activities within the Metropolis. Major markets include Makola, Agbogbloshie, and Kwasiodwaso. There are 8 electoral areas namely Ngleshie, Mudor, Kinka, Nmlitsagonno, Amamomo, Korle Wonkon, and Korle Dudor.\nLedzekuku Municipal District\nThe Ledzekuku Municipal District, with its administrative capital at Teshie, covers an estimated area of .\nKrowor Municipal District\nThe Krowor Municipal District was carved out of the Ledzokuku-Krowor Municipal District in 2018. Its administrative capital is Nungua.\nLa Dadekotopon Municipal District\nThe La Dadekotopon Municipal District, with its administrative capital at La, was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District in 2012. The Kotoka International Airport, Airport City, Accra Mall, and the US Embassy are located within the district, which covers an area of . Other communities within this district include Cantonments, Labone, and Burma Camp.\nAblekuma North Municipal District\nThe Ablekuma North Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District in 2018 with an administrative capital at Darkuman Kokompe.\nAblekuma Central Municipal District\nThe Ablekuma Central Municipal District covers a total land area of . Its administrative capital is Lartebiokorshie.\nAblekuma West Municipal District\nThe Ablekuma West Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District in 2018 and its administrative capital is Dansoman.\nAyawaso East Municipal District\nThe Ayawaso East Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District in 2018 and its administrative capital is Nima.\nAyawaso North Municipal District\nThe Ayawaso North Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District in 2018 and its administrative capital is Accra Newtown.\nAyawaso Central Municipal District\nThe Ayawaso Central Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District with an administrative capital being Kokomlemle.\nAyawaso West Municipal District\nThe Ayawaso West Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District and its administrative capital is Dzorwulu.\nOkaikwei North Municipal District\nKorley Kottey Municipal District\nThe Korley Klottey Municipal District was carved out of the Accra Metropolitan District in 2019 and covers an area of Some of the communities within the district include Osu, Ringway Estates, Asylum Down, North Ridge, West Ridge, Ministries, Gold Coast City, North Adabraka, and Tudu. There are 9 electoral areas namely Osu Doku, Ringway Estates, Kinkawe, Osu Alata, Asylum Down, North Adabraka, Tudu, Odorna/Sahara, and Official Town.\nCityscape.\nAccra Central.\nThe Ring Road, extending from the Korle Lagoon in the west, north to Kwame Nkrumah Circle, following east to the juncture of Independence Avenue, and continuing on to Osu, forms a ring around the oldest districts of Accra, and separates central Accra from the outlying suburbs.\nCentral Accra includes the CBD, which consists of the historic districts of Usshertown, Tudu, Victoriaborg, West Ridge, and East Ridge, as well as the historic residential districts of Jamestown, Adabraka, Asylum Down, North Ridge and Christiansborg/Osu.\nAlthough satellite business districts such as the Airport City have been established across the city, Central Accra remains the administrative and cultural centre of Accra, hosting government ministries, hotels, businesses, and financial institutions.\nCentral Accra's principal attractions include the Kwame Nkrumah Mausoleum, the National Museum, Independence Square, the National Theatre, and the Ohene Djan Stadium.\nAccra North.\nNorthern Accra is a residential and business district. The area contains the \"37\" Military Hospital, The Flagstaff House, several foreign embassies, Achimota School, Achimota Golf Park, and the University of Ghana's Legon campus, which serves as Accra's northern boundary.\nGeographically, the areas north of Ring Road West and Central, east of Winneba/Graphic Road, west of Liberation Road, and the districts just north and south of the Kwame Nkrumah motorway are regarded as Northern Accra. Some areas North of Accra include, Ashongnman, Madina, Haatso, North and West Legon and others.\nAccra East.\nEastern Accra is largely residential and geographically north of Ring Road East, stretching as far north as Kwame Nkrumah Motorway; the district is bordered to the west by Liberation Road.\nAccra West.\nWestern Accra is largely a residential and business area. Whilst geographically less expansive than the northern and eastern reaches of the city as a result of the large saltponds of Tettegu and Aplaku, it nonetheless boasts one of Accra's most important landmarks, the Korle Bu Teaching Hospital.\nGeographically, the areas west of Ring Road West, extending as far west as the saltponds and south of Graphic Road, are considered Accra West.\nDemographics.\nThe period between 1960 and 1970 saw rapid industrialization and expansion in Accra's manufacturing and commercial sectors. This contributed to high rural-urban migration to the city, and consequently a high population growth rate. The stagnation of the Ghanaian economy during the 1970s slowed the growth of Accra's population, as shown by the falling growth rate of the 1970\u20131984 intercensal years. Later, however, the decline in agriculture in rural communities in Ghana and rising industrialization in urban regions, coupled with the late-1980s boom in the service sector, once again propelled immigration to Accra. The primacy of the Accra Metropolitan Area as the Greater Accra region's administrative, educational, industrial and commercial centre continues to be the major force for its population growth, with immigration contributing to over 35% of the Accra's population growth.\nDistribution and density.\nThe gross density of population for the Accra Metropolitan Area in 2000 was 10.03 persons per hectare, compared to 6.23 per hectare in 1970. The highest densities were recorded in the Accra Metropolitan Assembly, with an overall average of 69.3 persons per hectare. At the community level, densities exceeding 250 persons per hectare occurred mostly in the immigrant and depressed areas in the oldest parts of Accra, such as Accra New Town, Nima, Jamestown and Usshertown. In higher-income areas, densities ranged between 17.5 and 40 persons per hectare.\nPopulation distribution by age and gender.\nAccra's population is a very youthful one, with 56% of the population being under 24 years of age. This predominance of young people is not expected to decline in the foreseeable future. Fifty-one percent (51%) of the population are females, and the remaining 49% males. This gives a males-to-females ratio of 1:1.04. The greater number of females is a reflection of the nationwide trend, where the estimated ratio of males to females is 1:1.03.\nMigration.\nDecentralization is expected to reduce the migration rates in Accra. An assessment of the extent of migration to Accra, based on present locality and gender, reveals that 45% of residents in Accra are African immigrants from countries across the African continent.\nHousing.\nParts of Central Accra comprise a mixture of very low-density development with under-used service infrastructure on the one hand, high-density development and overstretched infrastructure services on the other. The growth of Accra has led to the neglect of some of the old settlements, whilst efforts are being made to provide the newly developing suburban areas with services and infrastructure to cater for the needs of the middle-income earners. Peripheral residential development in Accra barely has sufficient infrastructure to support it. There are also large numbers of uncompleted houses, interspersed with pockets of undeveloped land, which are often subject of litigation, due to the inability of organisations and individuals who own them to complete or develop them due to lack of funds. Housing can be grouped into three broad categories: the low-income, middle-income and high-income areas. The low-income housing areas comprise Osu, Jamestown, Adedenkpo, Chorkor, La, Teshie, Nungua, Sukura, Kwashieman, Odorkor, Bubiashie, Abeka, Nima, Maamobi and Chorkor. Altogether, these areas accommodate about 58% of Accra's total population. Most of Accra's informal businesses are located in low-income areas.\nAlmost all low-income areas are built up with little room for expansion. This is particularly so in the areas of the inner city. The middle-income areas of Accra are predominantly populated by Ghanaian citizens and business, administrative and professional families. Much of the housing in these areas has been provided by state, parastatal and private sector organisations and individuals. The middle-income areas include Dansoman Estates, North Kaneshie Estates, Asylum Down, Kanda Estates, Abelempke, Achimota, Adenta and Tesano. Usually, these areas, unlike the low-income areas, are planned developments, but are in need of infrastructure services. Building materials and general housing conditions are of better quality. The middle-income group comprises 32% of the city's population of which are Ghanaian citizens make up. The high-income areas provide housing for the remaining 10% of the population of which Ghanaian citizens also make up. They include areas like North Ridge and West Ridge, Ringway Estates, north Labone Estates, Airport Residential Area, Roman Ridge, East Legon.\nThese areas are all planned and have well-developed infrastructure with spacious and landscaped ground in sharp contrast with, particularly, the low-income areas. Buildings are usually built with sandcrete blocks, and have walls and roofed with aluminium, or asbestos roofing sheets. There are also high-income peripheral areas like Haatso, Kwabenya, Pokuase, Adenta, Taifa, Mallam, where development of engineering infrastructure is not yet complete. These areas developed ahead of infrastructure, however the Achimota-Ofankor controlled-access highway was scheduled to open in May 2012, dual carriageway road construction was also due to be completed in 2012. In total, 84.4% of all houses in the Accra Metropolitan Area have their outside walls made up of cement. Similarly, houses found within Accra have 99.2% of their floor materials made up of cement.\nEconomy.\nIn 2008, the World Bank estimated that Accra's economy only constituted around US$3\u00a0billion of Ghana's total gross domestic product (GDP). The economically active population of Accra is estimated to be 823,327.\nAccra is a centre for manufacturing, marketing, finance, insurance, and transportation. Its financial sector incorporates a central bank, nine commercial banks (with 81 branches), four development banks (with 19 branches), four merchant banks (with seven branches), three discount houses, one home finance mortgage bank, multiple building societies, Ghana Stock Exchange, foreign exchange bureaus, finance houses, insurance companies, insurance brokerage firms, two savings and loans companies, and numerous real estate developers, with industrial sites and residential developments. The road network in the Accra Metropolitan Area totals in length.\nThere are over 50,506 identified residential properties in Accra, and about 4,054 commercial/industrial/mixed properties, with a total rateable value of GH\u00a213,849,014. There are also supermarkets, 36 facilities for both on\u2013street and off-street parking, and shopping malls, as well as several facilities for sports and recreation.\nSectors of the economy.\nThe sectors of Accra's economy consist of the primary, secondary (manufacturing, electricity, gas, water, construction) and tertiary sectors (supermarkets, shopping malls, hotel, restaurant, transportation, storage, communication, financial intermediation, real estate service, public administration, education, health and other social services). The tertiary service sector is the city's largest, employing about 531,670 people. The second-largest, the secondary sector, employs 22.34% of the labour force, or around 183,934 people. 12.2% of the city's workforce are reportedly unemployed, totalling around 114,198 people.\nPrimary sector.\nAccra's smallest economic sector, the primary sector, employs approximately 91,556 people. The predominant economic activities are fishery and urban agriculture, with fishery accounting for 78% of production labour. Urban agriculture in Accra centres on the growth of vegetables, several crops and poultry. The fishery industry is the most important sub-sector, with 10% of the catch being exported and the rest consumed locally. The industry is characterised by extreme seasonableness, operating primarily between June and September. Although most deep-water Atlantic fishing around Accra takes place in the June\u2013September period, fishery operations take place close to the shore throughout the year, and there are clear indications of the depletion of fish stocks in the near future. Fishing operations are most prominent at the Jamestown, La, Teshie, Nungua and Chorkor fishing shores.\nEducation.\nPre-school.\nPre-school comprises nursery and kindergarten. In 2001, there were 7,923 children (3,893 girls and 4,030 boys) in pre-schools in Accra. In 2010, the enrolment rate at Pre-school was 98%. Pre-schools are regulated by the Ministry of Employment and Social Welfare, and are mostly privately owned and operated. In 2001, there were 62 government-owned pre-schools in the Accra metropolis.\nPrimary school.\nPrimary school enrolment of girls is higher than that of boys. In 2010, the enrollment rate at primary school level was 95%.\nJunior high school (JHS).\nThe Junior High School is part of Ghana's basic education program. Its nationwide implementation began on 29 September 1987.\nIn the 2001/2002 academic year, 61,080 pupils had enrolled in Accra, representing 57.17% of the 129,467 school-age 12\u2013to-14-year-olds. In 2010, the enrolment rate at Junior high school level was 95%. The ratio of girls is also higher at this level.\nSenior high school (SHS).\nThe transition rate between junior high and senior high school increased from 30 per cent in 1990 to 50 per cent in 2001. The number of students grew by 23,102 between 1990 and 2005, an increase of about 2,310 a year, since 2010 the senior high school enrolment rate has been 95%.\nGhana International School (GIS), a private non-profit A-Level school founded in 1955 for children from ages 3\u201318, is located in Accra's Cantonments. Abelemkpe is the home of Lincoln Community School, a private, non-profit International Baccalaureate (IB) school for students aged 3\u201318, established in 1968. Some other International Baccalaureate Schools in Accra include Al-Rayan International School (ARIS), Association International School (AIS), and American International School (AIS). These schools were established in 2003, 1963, and 2006, respectively.\nA number of notable public secondary schools lie on the outskirts of Accra: Achimota School, commonly referred to as \"Motown\", which was founded in 1924 and opened in 1927; the Accra Academy, known as \"Accra Aca\"; the Presbyterian Boys' Secondary School in Legon, commonly known as \"Presec\"; Wesley Grammar School\u00a0\u2013 WESS-G Dansoman, St. Mary's Senior High School, commonly referred to as \"Merriez\", is a well-known girls' boarding school in Ghana; St. Thomas Aquinas Senior High School, commonly known as \"Quinas\"; Accra High School commonly known as \"Ahisco\"; West Africa Secondary School, commonly known as \"WASS\"; the Accra Girls' Senior High School, commonly known as \"Agiss\"; Kaneshie Secondary Technical School (\"Kateco\"); the Armed Forces Secondary Technical; and St. John's Grammar School; among others.\nUniversities.\nThe University of Ghana is located north of the city centre at Legon. A number of other public and private universities and tertiary institutions have since been founded in Accra, some of which are listed below.\nHealthcare.\nHospitals.\nSee List of hospitals in the Greater Accra Region.\nEnvironment.\nWater.\nAs a growing city, Accra has a water supply and scarcity challenge. Water access uses a patchwork of different delivery processes.\nPollution.\nAccra as a rapidly growing city, with lots of vehicles and other urban pollution sources, has also an increasing amount of air pollution and plastic pollution. Accra's urban ecosystem has been a site of dumping by international waste networks, with the Agbogbloshie suburb known for its highly toxic e-waste recycling sites, and the Kantamanto Market as handling an overwhelming flow of used fast fashion from other parts of the world. Both sites are sources of pollution and trash for other parts of the urban ecosystem.\nAir pollution varies seasonally, but the average measure PM2.5 average concentration of 49.5 \u03bcg/m3. Live monitoring of air pollution is done at three sites in the city of Accra. A 2021 review by the Environmental Protection Agency in Ghana found that the levels were well exceeding both national and international standards for health.\nPlastic management is also an increasing challenge. Use of plastic water bottles water sachets and other packaging for food safety, as well as the use of plastic during events like COVID-19 have significantly increased plastic pollution. The beaches around Accra have significant plastic pollution, and surrounding fisheries are heavily impacted by plastics. Multiple non-profit organizations have been formed to collect the plastic and an increasingly growing network of recyclers and informal waste recovery networks. However, activists and researchers largely attribute the issue to upstream use of plastics.\nDecongestion Exercises.\nThere's been numerous Decongestion exercises carried out by successive mayors in the city to help solve hawking menace, flood issues and ensure road safety in the city despite the challenge of lack of adherence.https:// \nGreen spaces.\nRapidly growing population and construction within the city has been resulting in a reduction in Urban green space. A 2021 study of low income communities in the city found increasing concern and desire among these communities for urban green spaces for recreation and health. A 2018 study of greenspaces in the city, found the ones that do exist are important for mammal biodiversity in the city.\nTransportation.\nAccra is on the Atlantic coast but it has not served as a port city since the 1950s. Instead, the Port of Tema, about 29\u00a0km to the east along the Atlantic coast, was developed for deepwater shipping to and from Ghana as it can accommodate larger ships; the port opened in 1961. Tema is part of the metropolitan area of Accra.\nTransport within Accra includes roads and rails, and an international airport\nRapid transit.\nPublic transports exist between Accra and major cities such as Kumasi; Tamale, Mim, Ahafo; Cape Coast, Sunyani; Takoradi; Tema; Ho; Wa; Bolgatanga; Elubo; Aflao, Techiman;\nIn 2003, the Metro Mass Transit Service, was inaugurated in Accra as a more comfortable and cheaper alternative to the trotro.\nAccra is served by the Aayalolo bus system, which was inaugurated in November 2016. It was initially planned as a bus rapid transit with dedicated lanes, but because these lanes were not provided it was renamed Quality Bus System (QBS).\nAn agreement was signed in 2019 to build a five line, , automated, elevated light railway metro system called Accra Skytrain. As of 2021 construction has not commenced on the $2.6 billion project. The government said in February 2021 it intends to proceed with the project which will developed under a build-own-operate concession by private South African firm.\nAccra is connected by railway line to Kumasi and Takoradi.\nThere is a suburban railway line from Accra Central Station to Tema.\nAviation.\nAccra is served by Kotoka International Airport, which has both civil and military uses. Located from downtown Accra, the airport handles all of the city's scheduled passenger services. There are plans to build a second airport to relieve the aviation pressure on the Kotoka International Airport. This new airport will be located at Prampram in Accra and will be constructed by China Airport Civil Construction. This plan was still under review in 2020, as additional runways at Kotoka are in consideration as an alternative to a new international airport.\nTaxis.\nAccra has an extensive taxi network and numerous taxi ranks, but most taxis lack a meter system, so price negotiation is required between the passenger and driver. Metered taxis do operate in the city, but tend to be more expensive. Taxis in Ghana are painted in two colours: the four bumpers fenders are yellow/orange, and the rest of the car is in a colour of the operator's choice. These taxis usually function on a shared ride model, where several passengers share one vehicle and the fare is calculated based on the distance traveled. Recently, modern taxi services such as Uber, Taxify, and https:// have joined the market, providing a more advanced and comfortable alternative. Some taxi drivers might charge extra for luggage or late-night trips while some also offer fixed prices and allow for advance bookings, offering a more reliable and secure option.\nTro tros and buses.\nBy far the most common form of transport in Accra, \"tro tros\" (minibuses or cargo vans modified for passenger transport) is the third biggest, and second most efficient and cost-effective way of getting around the city. The buses are typically minibuses or vans. Some of the most popular models used as tro tros are Nissan Urvan 15-seaters and Mercedes Benz Sprinter or D 309 vans. Trotros are typically decorated with decals such as flags of various countries or (local and international) soccer teams, popular sayings, proverbs (in English or local languages) or Bible verses. Trotros pick up and offload passengers at designated bus stops along their regular routes. Tro tros will also usually offload at undesignated locations along the route, by passenger request. Most routes commence and terminate at large urban transport terminals such as the Neoplan station or the Achimota Transport Terminal.\nSport.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Accra. The most famous football clubs in the city are Accra Great Olympics F.C. and Accra Hearts of Oak, whose main rival is Asante Kotoko of Kumasi. The Accra Sports Stadium is home to Accra Great Olympics and the Hearts of Oak, and a host venue of the Black Stars, the national football team of Ghana. In 2008, the Accra Sports Stadium hosted nine matches in the 2008 African Cup of Nations.\nAnother notable club is Accra Lions FC, which also plays in the Accra Sports Stadium.\nAccra is home to the Right to Dream Academy, which gives young Ghanaians a chance at a career in professional football. Many of the academy's alumni, including Chicago Fire's David Accam, Helsingborg's Ema Boateng, Halmstad's King Gyan and Manchester City's Godsway Donyoh and Enock Kwakwa, as well as Ghana national team players, Brimah Razak, Harrison Afful, John Boye, Jonathan Mensah, Mohamed Awal, Yaw Frimpong, Mohammed Rabiu, Paul de Vries, Seidu Bancey, Mahatma Otoo, Asamoah Gyan, Latif Mohammed, Yahaya Mohamed, Theophilus Annorbaah, Michael Essien, Yussif Raman Chibsah, Kwadwo Asamoah, Joshua Otoo, Nuru Sulley, David Addy, Jerry Akaminko, Daniel Opare and Foli Adade, were also born in Accra.\nBoxing is also popular, with many former world champions coming out of Ghana, including Azumah Nelson, Joshua Clottey, and Ike Quartey.\nAccra hosted the 2023 African Games.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Church of the Province of West Africa (Anglican Communion), Presbyterian Church of Ghana, Evangelical Presbyterian Church, Ghana (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Ghana Baptist Convention (Baptist World Alliance), Lighthouse Chapel International, Church of Pentecost, Assemblies of God, Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Accra (Catholic Church). There are also Muslim mosques.\nNotable places of worship in the city include the Holy Trinity Cathedral, Wesley Methodist Cathedral, Ebenezer Presbyterian Church, Osu, Holy Spirit Cathedral, the Ghana National Mosque, the Madina Mosque, and the Accra Ghana Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nCulture.\nTourism in Ghana accounted for 1,087,000 international tourist arrivals in 2011.\nAccra is the Greater Accra region's tourist hub, sporting a wide variety of hotels, monuments, museums and nightclubs. The city has three five-star hotels: the Labadi Beach Hotel, the La Palm Royal Beach Hotel and the Movenpick Ambassador Hotel. The Golden Tulip Hotel and Novotel Accra, located in Accra's central business district, are both ranked four stars. There are numerous three-star hotels, including the Hotel Wangara, Hotel Shangri-La and Erata Hotel, as well as many budget hotels. The Accra International Conference Centre and other meeting facilities provide venues for conference tourism.\nThe Du Bois Centre houses a research library and gallery of manuscripts, as well as the graves of its namesake, the scholar W.E.B. Du Bois, and his wife Shirley Graham Du Bois.The Kwame Nkrumah Mausoleum is the resting place of Ghana's first President, Kwame Nkrumah, who oversaw the Gold Coast's independence from Britain and was a leading exponent of Pan-Africanism.\nThe National Theatre in Accra, home of the National Symphony Orchestra Ghana\nAccra furthermore hosts the National Museum, National Theatre, with its distinctive modern Chinese architecture.\nThe city's foremost historical site is the Jamestown area, which contains the Ussher Fort and James Fort, and Osu Castle (also known as Christiansborg), built by Danish settlers in the 17th century.\nOther sites of note include the Jubilee House (the office of the Government of Ghana and the President of Ghana), the Parliament House of Ghana, the Ghana-India Kofi Annan Centre of Excellence in ICT, the Black Star Square, Accra Sports Stadium, and the Accra Centre for National Culture. The Accra-based African Fashion Foundation supports the African fashion industry, especially the fashion industry in Ghana.\nAccra has an Atlantic beachfront and the most popular of the city's beaches is Labadi Beach, along with Kokrobite Beach, which is located west of Accra. The beachfront area also houses the Academy of African Music and Arts.\nGhana's film industry is growing. Its first documentary addressing the impacts of climate change premiered in Accra on 14 October 2022. The Ghana Youth Film Program is a compilation film of 12 documentary short films made youth from across Ghana aged 18 to 30. It participated in the United Nations climate summit, COP27, on 9November 2022.\nTwin towns\u00a0\u2013 sister cities.\nAccra has four official sister cities, as recognised by Sister Cities International:\nUNESCO World Book.\nIn October 2022, Accra was named by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as World Book Capital for 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56825", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56825", "title": "Eating disorder", "text": "Mental illness characterized by abnormal eating habits\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAn eating disorder (ED) is a mental disorder defined by abnormal eating behaviors that adversely affect a person's physical or mental health. These behaviors may include eating too much food or too little food, as well as body image issues. Types of eating disorders include binge eating disorder, where the person suffering keeps eating large amounts in a short period of time typically while not being hungry, often leading to weight gain; anorexia nervosa, where the person has an intense fear of gaining weight, thus restricts food and/or overexercises to manage this fear; bulimia nervosa, where individuals eat a large quantity (binging) then try to rid themselves of the food (purging), in an attempt to not gain any weight; pica, where the patient eats non-food items; rumination syndrome, where the patient regurgitates undigested or minimally digested food; avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID), where people have a reduced or selective food intake due to some psychological reasons; and a group of other specified feeding or eating disorders. Anxiety disorders, depression and substance abuse are common among people with eating disorders. These disorders do not include obesity. People often experience comorbidity between an eating disorder and OCD.\nThe causes of eating disorders are not clear, although both biological and environmental factors appear to play a role. Cultural idealization of thinness is believed to contribute to some eating disorders. Individuals who have experienced sexual abuse are also more likely to develop eating disorders. Some disorders such as pica and rumination disorder occur more often in people with intellectual disabilities.\nTreatment can be effective for many eating disorders. Treatment varies by disorder and may involve counseling, dietary advice, reducing excessive exercise, and the reduction of efforts to eliminate food. Medications may be used to help with some of the associated symptoms. Hospitalization may be needed in more serious cases. About 70% of people with anorexia nervosa and 50% of people with bulimia recover within five years. Only 10% of people with eating disorders receive treatment, and of those, approximately 80% do not receive the proper care. Many are sent home weeks earlier than the recommended stay and are not provided with the necessary treatment. Recovery from binge eating disorder is less clear and estimated at 20% to 60%. Both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa increase the risk of death. \nEstimates of the prevalence of eating disorders vary widely, reflecting differences in gender, age, and culture as well as methods used for diagnosis and measurement.\nIn the developed world, anorexia nervosa affects about 0.4% and bulimia affects about 1.3% of young women in a given year. Binge eating disorder affects about 1.6% of women and 0.8% of men in a given year. According to one analysis, the percent of women who will have anorexia nervosa at some point in their lives may be up to 4%, or up to 2% for bulimia and binge eating disorders. Rates of eating disorders appear to be lower in less developed countries. anorexia nervosa and bulimia occur nearly ten times more often in females than males. The typical onset of eating disorders is in late childhood to early adulthood. Rates of other eating disorders are not clear.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nICD and DSM diagnoses.\nThese eating disorders are specified as mental disorders in standard medical manuals, including the ICD-10 and the DSM-5.\nSymptoms and long-term effects.\nSymptoms and complications vary according to the nature and severity of the eating disorder:\nAssociated physical symptoms of eating disorders include weakness, fatigue, sensitivity to cold, reduced beard growth in men, reduction in waking erections, reduced libido, weight loss and growth failure.\nFrequent vomiting, which may cause acid reflux or entry of acidic gastric material into the laryngoesophageal tract, can lead to unexplained hoarseness. As such, individuals who induce vomiting as part of their eating disorder, such as those with anorexia nervosa binge-eating/purging type, or those with purging-type bulimia nervosa, are at risk for acid reflux.\nPolycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder to affect women. Though often associated with obesity it can occur in normal weight individuals. PCOS has been associated with binge eating and bulimic behavior.\nOther possible manifestations are dry lips, burning tongue, parotid gland swelling, and temporomandibular disorders.\nPsychopathology.\nThe psychopathology of eating disorders centers around body image disturbance, such as concerns with weight and shape; self-worth being too dependent on weight and shape; fear of gaining weight even when underweight; denial of how severe the symptoms are; and a distortion in the way the body is experienced.\nThe main psychopathological features of anorexia nervosa were outlined in 1982 as problems in body perception, emotion processing and interpersonal relationships. Women with eating disorders have greater body dissatisfaction. This impairment of body perception involves vision, proprioception, interoception and tactile perception. There is an alteration in integration of signals in which body parts are experienced as dissociated from the body as a whole. Bruch once theorized that difficult early relationships were related to the cause of anorexia nervosa and how primary caregivers can contribute to the onset of the illness.\nA prominent feature of bulimia is dissatisfaction with body shape. However, this dissatisfaction is not of diagnostic significance, as it is sometimes present in individuals with no eating disorder. This highly labile feature can fluctuate depending on changes in shape and weight, the degree of control over eating, and mood. In contrast, having overvalued ideas about shape and weight in general is a necessary diagnostic feature for anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.\nPro-ana subculture.\nPro-ana refers to the promotion of behaviors related to the eating disorder anorexia nervosa. Several websites promote eating disorders, and can provide a means for individuals to communicate in order to maintain eating disorders. Members of these websites typically feel that their eating disorder is the only aspect of a chaotic life that they can control. These websites are often interactive and have discussion boards where individuals can share strategies, ideas, and experiences, such as diet and exercise plans that achieve extremely low weights. A study comparing the personal web-blogs that were pro-eating disorder with those focused on recovery found that the pro-eating disorder blogs contained language reflecting lower cognitive processing, used a more closed-minded writing style, contained less emotional expression and fewer social references, and focused more on eating-related contents than did the recovery blogs.\nCauses.\nThere is no single cause of eating disorders.\nMany people with eating disorders also have body image disturbance and a comorbid body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), leading them to an altered perception of their body. Studies have found that a high proportion of individuals diagnosed with body dysmorphic disorder also had some type of eating disorder, with 15% of individuals having either anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa. This link between body dysmorphic disorder and anorexia nervosa stems from the fact that both BDD and anorexia nervosa are characterized by a preoccupation with physical appearance and a distortion of body image. Individuals with both conditions often experience extreme distress about perceived physical flaws that may not exist or are greatly exaggerated. This obsessive focus on appearance can lead to repetitive behaviors such as mirror checking, excessive exercising, or restrictive eating in an attempt to \u2018fix\u2019 the imagined flaws.\nThere are also many other possibilities such as environmental, social and interpersonal issues that could promote and sustain these illnesses. Also, the media are oftentimes blamed for the rise in the incidence of eating disorders due to the fact that media images of idealized slim physical shape of people such as models and celebrities motivate or even force people to attempt to achieve slimness themselves. The media are accused of distorting reality, in the sense that people portrayed in the media are either naturally thin and thus unrepresentative of normality or unnaturally thin by forcing their bodies to look like the ideal image by putting excessive pressure on themselves to look a certain way. While past findings have described eating disorders as primarily psychological, environmental, and sociocultural, further studies have uncovered evidence that there is a genetic component. \nGenetics.\nNumerous studies show a genetic predisposition toward eating disorders. Twin studies have found a slight instances of genetic variance when considering the different criterion of both anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa as endophenotypes contributing to the disorders as a whole. An individual who is a first degree relative of someone who has had or currently has an eating disorder is seven to twelve times more likely to have an eating disorder themselves. Twin studies also show that at least a portion of the vulnerability to develop eating disorders can be inherited, and there is evidence to show that there is a genetic locus that shows susceptibility for developing anorexia nervosa. About 50% of eating disorder cases are attributable to genetics. Other cases are due to external reasons or developmental problems. There are also other neurobiological factors at play tied to emotional reactivity and impulsivity that could lead to binging and purging behaviors.\nEpigenetics mechanisms are means by which environmental effects alter gene expression via methods such as DNA methylation; these are independent of and do not alter the underlying DNA sequence. They are heritable, but also may occur throughout the lifespan, and are potentially reversible. Dysregulation of dopaminergic neurotransmission due to epigenetic mechanisms has been implicated in various eating disorders. Other candidate genes for epigenetic studies in eating disorders include leptin, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF).\nThere has found to be a genetic correlation between anorexia nervosa and OCD, suggesting a strong etiology. First and second relatives of probands with OCD have a greater chance of developing anorexia nervosa as genetic relatedness increases.\nPsychological.\nEating disorders are classified as Axis I disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Health Disorders (DSM-IV) published by the American Psychiatric Association. There are various other psychological issues that may factor into eating disorders, some fulfill the criteria for a separate Axis I diagnosis or a personality disorder which is coded Axis II and thus are considered comorbid to the diagnosed eating disorder. Axis II disorders are subtyped into 3 \"clusters\": A, B and C. The causality between personality disorders and eating disorders has yet to be fully established. Some people have a previous disorder which may increase their vulnerability to developing an eating disorder. Some develop them afterwards. The severity and type of eating disorder symptoms have been shown to affect comorbidity. There has been controversy over various editions of the DSM diagnostic criteria including the latest edition, DSM-5, published in 2013.\nCognitive attentional bias.\nAttentional bias may have an effect on eating disorders. Attentional bias is the preferential attention toward certain types of information in the environment while simultaneously ignoring others. Individuals with eating disorders may develop disordered schemata which focus on body size and eating, and these schemata may bias judgements, thoughts, and behaviours in a manner that is self-destructive or maladaptive. Information contained within those schemata is thought to be given the highest level of importance and overvalued among other cognitive structures. People who have eating disorders tend to pay more attention to stimuli related to food. For people struggling to recover from an eating disorder or addiction, this tendency to pay attention to certain signals while discounting others can make recovery that much more difficult.\nStudies have utilized the Stroop task to assess the probable effect of attentional bias on eating disorders. This may involve separating food and eating words from body shape and weight words. Such studies have found that anorexic subjects were slower to colour name food related words than control subjects. Other studies have noted that individuals with eating disorders have significant attentional biases associated with eating and weight stimuli.\nPersonality traits.\nThere are various childhood personality traits associated with the development of eating disorders, such as perfectionism and neuroticism. These personality traits are found to link eating disorders and OCD. During adolescence these traits may become intensified due to a variety of physiological and cultural influences such as the hormonal changes associated with puberty, stress related to the approaching demands of maturity and socio-cultural influences and perceived expectations, especially in areas that concern body image. Eating disorders have been associated with a fragile sense of self and with disordered mentalization. Many personality traits have a genetic component and are highly heritable. Maladaptive levels of certain traits may be acquired as a result of anoxic or traumatic brain injury, neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease, neurotoxicity such as lead exposure, bacterial infection such as Lyme disease or parasitic infection such as Toxoplasma gondii as well as hormonal influences. While studies are still continuing via the use of various imaging techniques such as fMRI; these traits have been shown to originate in various regions of the brain such as the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex. Disorders in the prefrontal cortex and the executive functioning system have been shown to affect eating behavior.\nCeliac disease.\nPeople with gastrointestinal disorders may be more risk of developing disordered eating practices than the general population, principally restrictive eating disturbances. An association of anorexia nervosa with celiac disease has been found. The role that gastrointestinal symptoms play in the development of eating disorders seems rather complex. Some authors report that unresolved symptoms prior to gastrointestinal disease diagnosis may create a food aversion in these persons, causing alterations to their eating patterns. Other authors report that greater symptoms throughout their diagnosis led to greater risk. It has been documented that some people with celiac disease, irritable bowel syndrome or inflammatory bowel disease who are not conscious about the importance of strictly following their diet, choose to consume their trigger foods to promote weight loss. On the other hand, individuals with good dietary management may develop anxiety, food aversion and eating disorders because of concerns around cross contamination of their foods. Some authors suggest that medical professionals should evaluate the presence of an unrecognized celiac disease in all people with eating disorder, especially if they present any gastrointestinal symptom (such as decreased appetite, abdominal pain, bloating, distension, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation), weight loss, or growth failure; and also routinely ask celiac patients about weight or body shape concerns, dieting or vomiting for weight control, to evaluate the possible presence of eating disorders, specially in women.\nEnvironmental influences.\nChild maltreatment.\nChild abuse which encompasses physical, psychological, and sexual abuse, as well as neglect, has been shown to approximately triple the risk of an eating disorder. Sexual abuse appears to double the risk of bulimia; however, the association is less clear for anorexia nervosa. The risk for individuals developing eating disorders increases if the individual grew up in an invalidating environment where displays of emotions were often punished. Abuse that has also occurred in childhood produces intolerable difficult emotions that cannot be expressed in a healthy manner. Eating disorders come in as an escape coping mechanism, as a means to control and avoid overwhelming negative emotions and feelings. Those who report physical or sexual maltreatment as a child are at an increased risk of developing an eating disorder.\nSocial isolation.\nSocial isolation has been shown to have a deleterious effect on an individual's physical and emotional well-being. Those that are socially isolated have a higher mortality rate in general as compared to individuals that have established social relationships. This effect on mortality is markedly increased in those with pre-existing medical or psychiatric conditions, and has been especially noted in cases of coronary heart disease. \"The magnitude of risk associated with social isolation is comparable with that of cigarette smoking and other major biomedical and psychosocial risk factors.\" (Brummett \"et al.\")\nSocial isolation can be inherently stressful, depressing and anxiety-provoking. In an attempt to ameliorate these distressful feelings an individual may engage in emotional eating in which food serves as a source of comfort. The loneliness of social isolation and the inherent stressors thus associated have been implicated as triggering factors in binge eating as well.\nWaller, Kennerley and Ohanian (2007) argued that both bingeing\u2013vomiting and restriction are emotion suppression strategies, but they are just utilized at different times. For example, restriction is used to pre-empt any emotion activation, while bingeing\u2013vomiting is used after an emotion has been activated.\nParental influence.\nParental influence has been shown to be an intrinsic component in the development of eating behaviors of children. This influence is manifested and shaped by a variety of diverse factors such as familial genetic predisposition, dietary choices as dictated by cultural or ethnic preferences, the parents' own body shape, how they talk about their own body, and eating patterns, the degree of involvement and expectations of their children's eating behavior as well as the interpersonal relationship of parent and child. It is also influenced by the general psychosocial climate of the home and whether a nurturing stable environment is present. It has been shown that maladaptive parental behavior has an important role in the development of eating disorders. As to the more subtle aspects of parental influence, it has been shown that eating patterns are established in early childhood and that children should be allowed to decide when their appetite is satisfied as early as the age of two. A direct link has been shown between obesity and parental pressure to eat more.\nCoercive tactics in regard to diet have not been proven to be efficacious in controlling a child's eating behavior. Affection and attention have been shown to affect the degree of a child's finickiness and their acceptance of a more varied diet.\nAdams and Crane (1980), have shown that parents are influenced by stereotypes that influence their perception of their child's body. The conveyance of these negative stereotypes also affects the child's own body image and satisfaction. Hilde Bruch, a pioneer in the field of studying eating disorders, asserts that anorexia nervosa often occurs in girls who are high achievers, obedient, and always trying to please their parents. Their parents have a tendency to be over-controlling and fail to encourage the expression of emotions, inhibiting daughters from accepting their own feelings and desires. Adolescent females in these overbearing families lack the ability to be independent from their families, yet realize the need to, often resulting in rebellion. Controlling their food intake may make them feel better, as it provides them with a sense of control.\nNegative parental body-talk, meaning when a parent comments on their own weight, shape or size, is strongly correlated with disordered eating in their children. Children whose parents engage in self-talk about their weight frequently are three times as likely to practice extreme weight control behaviors such as disordered eating, than children who do not overhear negative parental body-talk. Additionally, negative body-talk from mothers is explicitly correlated with disordered eating in adolescent girls.\nPeer pressure.\nIn various studies such as one conducted by The McKnight Investigators, peer pressure was shown to be a significant contributor to body image concerns and attitudes toward eating among subjects in their teens and early twenties.\nEleanor Mackey and co-author, Annette M. La Greca of the University of Miami, studied 236 teen girls from public high schools in southeast Florida. \"Teen girls' concerns about their own weight, about how they appear to others and their perceptions that their peers want them to be thin are significantly related to weight-control behavior\", says psychologist Eleanor Mackey of the Children's National Medical Center in Washington and lead author of the study. \"Those are really important.\"\nAccording to one study, 40% of 9- and 10-year-old girls are already trying to lose weight. Such dieting is reported to be influenced by peer behavior, with many of those individuals on a diet reporting that their friends also were dieting. The number of friends dieting and the number of friends who pressured them to diet also played a significant role in their own choices.\nElite athletes have a significantly higher rate in eating disorders. Female athletes in sports such as gymnastics, ballet, diving, etc. are found to be at the highest risk among all athletes. Women are more likely than men to acquire an eating disorder between the ages of 13 and 25. About 0\u201315% of those with bulimia and anorexia are men.\nOther psychological problems that could possibly create an eating disorder such as Anorexia Nervosa are depression, and low self-esteem. Depression is a state of mind where emotions are unstable causing a person's eating habits to change due to sadness and no interest of doing anything. According to PSYCOM \"Studies show that a high percentage of people with an eating disorder will experience depression.\" Depression is a state of mind where people seem to refuge without being able to get out of it. A big factor of this can affect people with their eating and this can mostly affect teenagers. Teenagers are big candidates for Anorexia for the reason that during the teenage years, many things start changing and they start to think certain ways. According to Life Works an article about eating disorders \"People of any age can be affected by pressure from their peers, the media and even their families but it is worse when you're a teenager at school.\"\nCultural pressure.\nWestern perspective.\nThere is a cultural emphasis on thinness which is especially pervasive in western society. A child's perception of external pressure to achieve the ideal body that is represented by the media predicts the child's body image dissatisfaction, body dysmorphic disorder and an eating disorder. \"The cultural pressure on men and women to be 'perfect' is an important predisposing factor for the development of eating disorders\". Further, when women of all races base their evaluation of their self upon what is considered the culturally ideal body, the incidence of eating disorders increases.\nSocioeconomic status (SES) has been viewed as a risk factor for eating disorders, presuming that possessing more resources allows for an individual to actively choose to diet and reduce body weight. Some studies have also shown a relationship between increasing body dissatisfaction with increasing SES. However, once high socioeconomic status has been achieved, this relationship weakens and, in some cases, no longer exists.\nThe media plays a major role in the way in which people view themselves. Countless magazine ads and commercials depict thin celebrities. Society has taught people that being accepted by others is necessary at all costs. This has led to the belief that in order to fit in one must look a certain way. Televised beauty competitions such as the Miss America Competition contribute to the idea of what it means to be beautiful because competitors are evaluated on the basis of their opinion.\nIn addition to socioeconomic status being considered a cultural risk factor so is the world of sports. Athletes and eating disorders tend to go hand in hand, especially the sports where weight is a competitive factor. Gymnastics, horse back riding, wrestling, body building, nordic skiing and dancing are just a few that fall into this category of weight dependent sports. Eating disorders among individuals that participate in competitive activities, especially women, often lead to having physical and biological changes related to their weight that often mimic prepubescent stages. Oftentimes as women's bodies change they lose their competitive edge which leads them to taking extreme measures to maintain their younger body shape. Men often struggle with binge eating followed by excessive exercise while focusing on building muscle rather than losing fat, but this goal of gaining muscle is just as much an eating disorder as obsessing over thinness. The following statistics taken from Susan Nolen-Hoeksema's book, (\"ab)normal psychology\", show the estimated percentage of athletes that struggle with eating disorders based on the category of sport.\nAlthough most of these athletes develop eating disorders to keep their competitive edge, others use exercise as a way to maintain their weight and figure. This is just as serious as regulating food intake for competition. Even though there is mixed evidence showing at what point athletes are challenged with eating disorders, studies show that regardless of competition level all athletes are at higher risk for developing eating disorders that non-athletes, especially those that participate in sports where thinness is a factor.\nPressure from society is also seen within the homosexual community. Gay men are at greater risk of eating disorder symptoms than heterosexual men. Within the gay culture, muscularity gives the advantages of both social and sexual desirability and also power. These pressures and ideas that another homosexual male may desire a mate who is thinner or muscular can possibly lead to eating disorders. The higher eating disorder symptom score reported, the more concern about how others perceive them and the more frequent and excessive exercise sessions occur. High levels of body dissatisfaction are also linked to external motivation to working out and old age; however, having a thin and muscular body occurs within younger homosexual males than older.\nMost of the cross-cultural studies use definitions from the DSM-IV-TR, which has been criticized as reflecting a Western cultural bias. Thus, assessments and questionnaires may not be constructed to detect some of the cultural differences associated with different disorders. Also, when looking at individuals in areas potentially influenced by Western culture, few studies have attempted to measure how much an individual has adopted the mainstream culture or retained the traditional cultural values of the area. Lastly, the majority of the cross-cultural studies on eating disorders and body image disturbances occurred in Western nations and not in the countries or regions being examined.\nWhile there are many influences to how an individual processes their body image, the media does play a major role. Along with the media, parental influence, peer influence, and self-efficacy beliefs also play a large role in an individual's view of themselves. The way the media presents images can have a lasting effect on an individual's perception of their body image. Eating disorders are a worldwide issue and while women are more likely to be affected by an eating disorder it still affects both genders (Schwitzer 2012). The media influences eating disorders whether shown in a positive or negative light, it then has a responsibility to use caution when promoting images that projects an ideal that many turn to eating disorders to attain.\nTo try to address unhealthy body image in the fashion world, in 2015, France passed a law requiring models to be declared healthy by a doctor to participate in fashion shows. It also requires re-touched images to be marked as such in magazines.\nThere is a relationship between \"thin ideal\" social media content and body dissatisfaction and eating disorders among young adult women, especially in the Western hemisphere. New research points to an \"internalization\" of distorted images online, as well as negative comparisons among young adult women. Most studies have been based in the U.S., the U.K, and Australia, these are places where the thin ideal is strong among women, as well as the strive for the \"perfect\" body.\nIn addition to mere media exposure, there is an online \"pro-eating disorder\" community. Through personal blogs and Twitter, this community promotes eating disorders as a \"lifestyle\", and continuously posts pictures of emaciated bodies, and tips on how to stay thin. The hashtag \"#proana\" (pro-anorexia), is a product of this community, as well as images promoting weight loss, tagged with the term \"thinspiration\". According to social comparison theory, young women have a tendency to compare their appearance to others, which can result in a negative view of their own bodies and altering of eating behaviors, that in turn can develop disordered eating behaviors.\nWhen body parts are isolated and displayed in the media as objects to be looked at, it is called objectification, and women are affected most by this phenomenon. Objectification increases self-objectification, where women judge their own body parts as a mean of praise and pleasure for others. There is a significant link between self-objectification, body dissatisfaction, and disordered eating, as the beauty ideal is altered through social media.\nAlthough eating disorders are typically under diagnosed in people of color, they still experience eating disorders in great numbers. It is thought that the stress that those of color face in the United States from being multiply marginalized may contribute to their rates of eating disorders. Eating disorders, for these women, may be a response to environmental stressors such as racism, abuse and poverty.\nAfrican perspective.\nIn the majority of many African communities, thinness is generally not seen as an ideal body type and most pressure to attain a slim figure may stem from influence or exposure to Western culture and ideology. Traditional African cultural ideals are reflected in the practice of some health professionals; in Ghana, pharmacists sell appetite stimulants to women who desire to, as Ghanaians stated, \"grow fat\". Girls are told that if they wish to find a partner and birth children they must gain weight. On the contrary, there are certain taboos surrounding a slim body image, specifically in West Africa. Lack of body fat is linked to poverty and HIV/AIDS.\nHowever, the emergence of Western and European influence, specifically with the introduction of such fashion and modelling shows and competitions, is changing certain views among body acceptance, and the prevalence of eating disorders has consequently increased. This acculturation is also related to how South Africa is concurrently undergoing rapid, intense urbanization. Such modern development is leading to cultural changes, and professionals cite rates of eating disorders in this region will increase with urbanization, specifically with changes in identity, body image, and cultural issues. Further, exposure to Western values through private Caucasian schools or caretakers is another possible factor related to acculturation which may be associated with the onset of eating disorders.\nOther factors which are cited to be related to the increasing prevalence of eating disorders in African communities can be related to sexual conflicts, such as psychosexual guilt, first sexual intercourse, and pregnancy. Traumatic events which are related to both family (i.e. parental separation) and eating related issues are also cited as possible effectors. Religious fasting, particularly around times of stress, and feelings of self-control are also cited as determinants in the onset of eating disorders.\nAsian perspective.\nThe West plays a role in Asia's economic development via foreign investments, advanced technologies joining financial markets, and the arrival of American and European companies in Asia, especially through outsourcing manufacturing operations. This exposure to Western culture, especially the media, imparts Western body ideals to Asian society, termed Westernization. In part, Westernization fosters eating disorders among Asian populations. However, there are also country-specific influences on the occurrence of eating disorders in Asia.\nChina.\nIn China as well as other Asian countries, Westernization, migration from rural to urban areas, after-effects of sociocultural events, and disruptions of social and emotional support are implicated in the emergence of eating disorders. In particular, risk factors for eating disorders include higher socioeconomic status, preference for a thin body ideal, history of child abuse, high anxiety levels, hostile parental relationships, jealousy towards media idols, and above-average scores on the body dissatisfaction and interoceptive awareness sections of the Eating Disorder Inventory. Similarly to the West, researchers have identified the media as a primary source of pressures relating to physical appearance, which may even predict body change behaviors in males and females.\nFiji.\nWhile colonised by the British in 1874, Fiji kept a large degree of linguistic and cultural diversity which characterised the ethnic Fijian population. Though gaining independence in 1970, Fiji has rejected Western, capitalist values which challenged its mutual trusts, bonds, kinships and identity as a nation. Similar to studies conducted on Polynesian groups, ethnic Fijian traditional aesthetic ideals reflected a preference for a robust body shape; thus, the prevailing 'pressure to be slim,' thought to be associated with diet and disordered eating in many Western societies was absent in traditional Fiji. Additionally, traditional Fijian values would encourage a robust appetite and a widespread vigilance for and social response to weight loss. Individual efforts to reshape the body by dieting or exercise, thus traditionally was discouraged.\nHowever, studies conducted in 1995 and 1998 both demonstrated a link between the introduction of television in the country, and the emergence of eating disorders in young adolescent ethnic Fijian girls. Through the quantitative data collected in these studies there was found to be a significant increase in the prevalence of two key indicators of disordered eating: self-induced vomiting and high Eating Attitudes Test- 26. These results were recorded following prolonged television exposure in the community, and an associated increase in the percentage of households owning television sets. Additionally, qualitative data linked changing attitudes about dieting, weight loss and aesthetic ideas in the peer environment to Western media images. The impact of television was especially profound given the longstanding social and cultural traditions that had previously rejected the notions of dieting, purging and body dissatisfaction in Fiji. Additional studies in 2011 found that social network media exposure, independent of direct media and other cultural exposures, was also associated with eating pathology.\nHong Kong.\nFrom the early- to-mid- 1990s, a variant form of anorexia nervosa was identified in Hong Kong. This variant form did not share features of anorexia nervosa in the West, notably \"fat-phobia\" and distorted body image. Patients attributed their restrictive food intake to somatic complaints, such as epigastric bloating, abdominal or stomach pain, or a lack of hunger or appetite. Compared to Western patients, individuals with this variant anorexia nervosa demonstrated bulimic symptoms less frequently and tended to have lower pre-morbid body mass index. This form disapproves the assumption that a \"fear of fatness or weight gain\" is the defining characteristic of individuals with anorexia nervosa.\nIndia.\nIn the past, the available evidence did not suggest that unhealthy weight loss methods and eating disordered behaviors are common in India as proven by stagnant rates of clinically diagnosed eating disorders. However, it appears that rates of eating disorders in urban areas of India are increasing based on surveys from psychiatrists who were asked whether they perceived eating disorders to be a \"serious clinical issue\" in India. One notable Indian psychiatrist and eating disorder specialist Dr Udipi Gauthamadas is on record saying, \"Disturbed eating attitudes and behaviours affect about 25 to 40 percent of adolescent girls and around 20 percent of adolescent boys. While on one hand there is increasing recognition of eating disorders in the country, there is also a persisting belief that this illness is alien to India. This prevents many sufferers from seeking professional help.\"\n23.5% of respondents believed that rates of eating disorders were rising in Bangalore, 26.5% claimed that rates were stagnant, and 42%, the largest percentage, expressed uncertainty. It has been suggested that urbanization and socioeconomic status are associated with increased risk for body weight dissatisfaction. However, due to the physical size of and diversity within India, trends may vary throughout the country.\nAmerican perspective.\nBlack and African American.\nHistorically, identifying as African American has been considered a protective factor for body dissatisfaction. Those identifying as African American have been found to have a greater acceptance of larger body image ideals and less internalization of the thin ideal, and African American women have reported the lowest levels of body dissatisfaction among the five major racial/ethnic groups in the US.\nHowever, recent research contradicts these findings, indicating that African American women may exhibit levels of body dissatisfaction comparable to other racial/ethnic minority groups. In this way, just because those who identify as African American may not internalize the thin ideal as strongly as other racial and ethnic groups, it does not mean that they do not hold other appearance ideals that may promote body shape concerns. Similarly, recent research shows that African Americans exhibit rates of disordered eating that are similar to or even higher than their white counterparts.\nNative American.\nNative American women are more likely than white women to both experience a fear of losing control over their eating and to abuse laxatives and diuretics for weight control purposes. They have comparable rates of binge eating and other disordered weight control behaviors in comparison to other racial groups.\nLatinos.\nDisproportionately high rates of disordered eating and body dissatisfaction have been found in Hispanics in comparison to other racial and ethnic groups. Studies have found significantly more laxative use in those identifying as Hispanic in comparison to non-Hispanic white counterparts. Specifically, those identifying as Hispanic may be at heightened risk of engaging in binge eating and bingeing/purging behaviors.\nFood insecurity.\nFood insecurity is defined as inadequate access to sufficient food, both in terms of quantity and quality, in direct contrast to food security, which is conceptualized as having access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious food to meet dietary needs and preferences. Notably, levels of food security exist on a continuum from reliable access to food to disrupted access to food.\nMultiple studies have found food insecurity to be associated with eating pathology. A study conducted on individuals visiting a food bank in Texas found higher food insecurity to be correlated with higher levels of binge eating, overall eating disorder pathology, dietary restraint, compensatory behaviors and weight self-stigma. Findings of a replication study with a larger, more diverse sample mirrored these results, and a study looking at the relationship between food insecurity and bulimia nervosa similarly found greater food insecurity to be associated with elevated levels of eating pathology.\nTrauma.\nOne study has found that binge-eating disorder may stem from trauma, with some female patients engaging in these disorders to numb pain experienced through sexual trauma. There are various forms of trauma that individuals may have experienced, leading them to cope through an eating disorder. When in pain, individuals may attempt to exert control over this aspect of their lives, perceiving it as their only means of managing their life. The brain is a very complex organ that tries its best to help us navigate through the hardships of life.\nSexual Orientation and Gender Identity.\nSexual orientation, gender identity and gender norms influence people with eating disorders. Some eating disorder patients have implied that enforced heterosexuality and heterosexism led many to engage in their condition to align with norms associated with their gender identity. Families may restrict women's food intake to keep them thin, thus increasing their ability to attain a male romantic partner. Non-heterosexual male adolescents are consistently at higher risk of developing disordered eating than their heterosexual peers for various body image concerns, including worries about weight, shape, muscle tone, and definition. Eating disorders in trans and non-binary adolescents are complicated in that some eating disorder symptoms may affirm gender identity in transitioning patients, complicating treatment. For example, loss of menstruation in birth-assigned females or a slender frame in birth-assigned males may align with their gender identity during transition.\nDiagnosis.\nThere are many medical disorders that mimic eating disorders and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Early detection and intervention can assure a better recovery and can improve the quality of life of these patients. In the past 30 years, eating disorders have become increasingly conspicuous and it is uncertain whether the changes in presentation reflect a true increase. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are the most clearly defined subgroups of a wider range of eating disorders. Many patients present with subthreshold expressions of the two main diagnoses: others with different patterns and symptoms.\nAs eating disorders, especially anorexia nervosa, are thought of as being associated with young, white females, diagnosis of eating disorders in other races happens more rarely. In one study, when clinicians were presented with identical case studies demonstrating disordered eating symptoms in Black, Hispanic, and white women, 44% noted the white woman's behavior as problematic; 41% identified the Hispanic woman's behavior as problematic, and only 17% of the clinicians noted the Black woman's behavior as problematic (Gordon, Brattole, Wingate, &amp; Joiner, 2006).\nMedical.\nThe diagnostic workup typically includes complete medical and psychosocial history and follows a rational and formulaic approach to the diagnosis. Neuroimaging using fMRI, MRI, PET and SPECT scans have been used to detect cases in which a lesion, tumor or other organic condition has been either the sole causative or contributory factor in an eating disorder. \"Right frontal intracerebral lesions with their close relationship to the limbic system could be causative for eating disorders, we therefore recommend performing a cranial MRI in all patients with suspected eating disorders\" (Trummer M \"et al.\" 2002), \"intracranial pathology should also be considered however certain is the diagnosis of early-onset anorexia nervosa. Second, neuroimaging plays an important part in diagnosing early-onset anorexia nervosa, both from a clinical and a research prospective\".(O'Brien \"et al.\" 2001).\nPsychological.\nAfter ruling out organic causes and the initial diagnosis of an eating disorder being made by a medical professional, a trained mental health professional aids in the assessment and treatment of the underlying psychological components of the eating disorder and any comorbid psychological conditions. The clinician conducts a clinical interview and may employ various psychometric tests. Some are general in nature while others were devised specifically for use in the assessment of eating disorders. Some of the general tests that may be used are the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and the Beck Depression Inventory. longitudinal research showed that there is an increase in chance that a young adult female would develop bulimia due to their current psychological pressure and as the person ages and matures, their emotional problems change or are resolved and then the symptoms decline.\nSeveral types of scales are currently used \u2013 (a) self-report questionnaires \u2013EDI-3, BSQ, TFEQ, MAC, BULIT-R, QEWP-R, EDE-Q, EAT, NEQ \u2013 and other; (b) semi-structured interviews \u2013 SCID-I, EDE \u2013 and other; (c) clinical interviews unstructured or observer-based rating scales- Morgan Russel scale The majority of the scales used were described and used in adult populations. From all the scales evaluated and analyzed, only three are described at the child population \u2013 it is EAT-26 (children above 16 years), EDI-3 (children above 13 years), and ANSOCQ (children above 13 years). It is essential to develop specific scales for people under 18 years of age, given the increasing incidence of ED among children and the need for early detection and appropriate intervention. Moreover, the urgent need for accurate scales and telemedicine testing and diagnosis tools are of high importance during the COVID-19 pandemic (Leti, Garner &amp; al., 2020).\nDifferential diagnoses.\nThere are multiple medical conditions which may be misdiagnosed as a primary psychiatric disorder, complicating or delaying treatment. These may have a synergistic effect on conditions which mimic an eating disorder or on a properly diagnosed eating disorder.\nPrevention.\nPrevention aims to promote a healthy development before the occurrence of eating disorders. It also intends early identification of an eating disorder before it is too late to treat. Children as young as ages 5\u20137 are aware of the cultural messages regarding body image and dieting. Prevention comes in bringing these issues to the light. The following topics can be discussed with young children (as well as teens and young adults).\nInternet and modern technologies provide new opportunities for prevention. Online programs have the potential to increase the use of prevention programs. The development and practice of prevention programs via online sources make it possible to reach a wide range of people at minimal cost. Such an approach can also make prevention programs to be sustainable.\nParents can do a lot for their children at a young age to impede them from ever seeing themselves in the eyes of an eating disorder. The parents who are actively engaged in their children's lives' often contribute to fostering a stronger sense of self-love in them.\nTreatment.\nTreatment varies according to type and severity of eating disorder, and often more than one treatment option is utilized.\nVarious forms of cognitive behavioral therapy have been developed for eating disorders and found to be useful. If a person is experiencing comorbidity between an eating disorder and OCD, exposure and response prevention, coupled with weight restoration and serotonin reuptake inhibitors has proven most effective. Other forms of psychotherapies can also be useful.\nFamily doctors play an important role in early treatment of people with eating disorders by encouraging those who are also reluctant to see a psychiatrist. Treatment can take place in a variety of different settings such as community programs, hospitals, day programs, and groups. The American Psychiatric Association (APA) recommends a team approach to treatment of eating disorders. The members of the team are usually a psychiatrist, therapist, and registered dietitian, but other clinicians may be included.\nThat said, some treatment methods are:\nThere are few studies on the cost-effectiveness of the various treatments. Treatment can be expensive; due to limitations in health care coverage, people hospitalized with anorexia nervosa may be discharged while still underweight, resulting in relapse and rehospitalization. Research has found comorbidity between an eating disorder (e.g., anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating) and OCD does not impact the length of the time patients spend in treatment, but can negatively impact treatment outcomes.\nFor children with anorexia nervosa, the only well-established treatment is the family treatment-behavior. For other eating disorders in children, however, there is no well-established treatments, though family treatment-behavior has been used in treating bulimia.\nA 2019 Cochrane review examined studies comparing the effectiveness of inpatient versus outpatient models of care for eating disorders. Four trials including 511 participants were studied but the review was unable to draw any definitive conclusions as to the superiority of one model over another.\nBarriers to treatment.\nA variety of barriers to eating disorder treatment have been identified, typically grouped into individual and systemic barriers. Individual barriers include shame, fear of stigma, cultural perceptions, minimizing the seriousness of the problem, unfamiliarity with mental health services, and a lack of trust in mental health professionals. Systemic barriers include language differences, financial limitations, lack of insurance coverage, inaccessible health care facilities, time conflicts, long waits, lack of transportation, and lack of child care.\u00a0 These barriers may be particularly exacerbated for those who identify outside of the skinny, white, affluent girl stereotype that dominates in the field of eating disorders, such that those who do not identify with this stereotype are much less likely to seek treatment.\nConditions during the COVID-19 pandemic may increase the difficulties experienced by those with eating disorders, and the risk that otherwise healthy individuals may develop eating disorders. The pandemic has been a stressful life event for everyone, increasing anxiety and isolation, disrupting normal routines, creating economic strain and food insecurity, and making it more difficult and stressful to obtain needed resources including food and medical treatment.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic in England exposed a dramatic rise in demand for eating disorder services which the English NHS struggled to meet. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and NHS England both advised that services should not impose thresholds using body mass index or duration of illness to determine whether treatment for eating disorders should be offered, but there were continuing reports that these recommendations were not followed.\nIn terms of access to treatment, therapy sessions have generally switched from in-person to video calls. This may actually help people who previously had difficulty finding a therapist with experience in treating eating disorders, for example, those who live in rural areas.\nStudies suggest that virtual (telehealth) CBT can be as effective as face-to-face CBT for bulimia and other mental illnesses. To help patients cope with conditions during the pandemic, therapists may have to particularly emphasize strategies to create structure where little is present, build interpersonal connections, and identify and avoid triggers.\nMedication.\nOrlistat is used in obesity treatment. Olanzapine seems to promote weight gain as well as the ability to ameliorate obsessional behaviors concerning weight gain. zinc supplements have been shown to be helpful, and cortisol is also being investigated.\nTwo pharmaceuticals, Prozac and Vyvanse, have been approved by the FDA to treat bulimia nervosa and binge-eating disorder, respectively. Olanzapine has also been used off-label to treat anorexia nervosa. Studies are also underway to explore psychedelic and psychedelic-adjacent medicines such as MDMA, psilocybin and ketamine for anorexia nervosa and binge-eating disorder.\nOutcomes.\nFor anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder, there is a general agreement that full recovery rates range between 50% and 85%, with larger proportions of people experiencing at least partial remission. It can be a lifelong struggle or it can be overcome within months.\nAnorexia nervosa symptoms include the increasing chance of getting osteoporosis. Thinning of the hair as well as dry hair and skin are also very common. The muscles of the heart will also start to change if no treatment is inflicted on the patient. This causes the heart to have an abnormally slow heart rate along with low blood pressure. Heart failure becomes a major consideration when this begins to occur. Muscles throughout the body begin to lose their strength. This will cause the individual to begin feeling faint, drowsy, and weak. Along with these symptoms, the body will begin to grow a layer of hair called lanugo. The human body does this in response to the lack of heat and insulation due to the low percentage of body fat.\nBulimia symptoms include heart problems like an irregular heartbeat that can lead to heart failure and death may occur. This occurs because of the electrolyte imbalance that is a result of the constant binge and purge process. The probability of a gastric rupture increases. A gastric rupture is when there is a sudden rupture of the stomach lining that can be fatal. The acids that are contained in the vomit can cause a rupture in the esophagus as well as tooth decay. As a result, to laxative abuse, irregular bowel movements may occur along with constipation. Sores along the lining of the stomach called peptic ulcers begin to appear and the chance of developing pancreatitis increases.\nBinge eating symptoms include high blood pressure, which can cause heart disease if it is not treated. Many patients recognize an increase in the levels of cholesterol. The chance of being diagnosed with gallbladder disease increases, which affects an individual's digestive tract.\nRisk of death.\nEating disorders result in about 7,000 deaths a year as of 2010, making them the mental illnesses with the highest mortality rate. Anorexia nervosa has a risk of death that is increased about 5 fold with 20% of these deaths as a result of suicide. Rates of death in bulimia and other disorders are similar at about a 2 fold increase.\nThe mortality rate for those with anorexia nervosa is 5.4 per 1000 individuals per year. Roughly 1.3 deaths were due to suicide. A person who is or had been in an inpatient setting had a rate of 4.6 deaths per 1000. Of individuals with bulimia about 2 persons per 1000 persons die per year and among those with EDNOS about 3.3 per 1000 people die per year.\nEpidemiology.\nIt is a common misconception that eating disorders are restricted only to women, and this may have skewed research disproportionately to study female populations. Lifetime eating disorder prevalence is 8.4% for women, 2.2% for men. Additionally, lifetime prevalence is 10.5% in trans men and 8.1% in trans women in the United States. and In the developed world, binge eating disorder affects about 1.6% of women and 0.8% of men in a given year. Anorexia nervosa affects about 0.4% and bulimia affects about 1.3% of young women in a given year. Up to 4% of women have anorexia nervosa, 2% have bulimia, and 2% have binge eating disorder at some point in time. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa occur nearly ten times more often in females than males. Typically, they begin in late childhood or early adulthood. Rates of other eating disorders are not clear. Rates of eating disorders appear to be lower in less developed countries.\nIn the United States, twenty million women and ten million men have an eating disorder at least once in their lifetime.\nAnorexia Nervosa.\nLifetime prevalence of anorexia nervosa ranges from 0.1-3.6% in women from 0-0.3% of men. The incidence of female cases is low in general medicine or specialized consultation in town, ranging from 4.2 and 8.3/100,000 individuals per year. The incidence of AN ranges from 109 to 270/100,000 individuals per year. Mortality varies according to the population considered. AN has one of the highest mortality rates among mental illnesses. The rates observed are 6.2 to 10.6 times greater than that observed in the general population for follow-up periods ranging from 13 to 10 years. Standardized mortality ratios for anorexia nervosa vary from 1.36% to 20%.\nBulimia.\nLifetime prevalence of bulimia nervosa ranges from 0.3\u20134.6% in women and 0.1\u20131.3% in men. About 2-3% of women are currently affected in the United States. New cases occur in about 12 per 100,000 population per year. The standardized mortality ratios for bulimia is 1% to 3%.\nBinge eating disorder.\nLifetime rates of BED range from 0.6\u20135.8% for women and 0.3\u20132.0% in men. Reported rates vary from 1.3 to 30% among subjects seeking weight-loss treatment. Based on surveys, 0.1-1% of people are affected by BED in a given year. BED is more common among females than males. There have been no published studies investigating the effects of BED on mortality, although it is comorbid with disorders that are known to increase mortality risks.\nEvolutionary perspective.\nEvolutionary psychiatry as an emerging scientific discipline has been studying mental disorders from an evolutionary perspective. If eating disorders have evolutionary functions or if they are new modern \"lifestyle\" problems is still debated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56826", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56826", "title": "Anorexia Nervosa", "text": ""}
{"id": "56827", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56827", "title": "Asmara", "text": "Capital and largest city of Eritrea\nAsmara ( ), or Asmera, is the capital and most populous city of Eritrea, in the country's Central Region. It sits at an elevation of , making it the sixth highest capital in the world by altitude and the second highest capital in Africa. The city is located at the tip of an escarpment that is both the northwestern edge of the Eritrean Highlands and the Great Rift Valley in neighbouring Ethiopia. In 2017, the city was declared as a UNESCO World Heritage Site for its well-preserved modernist architecture. According to local traditions, the city was founded after four separate villages unified to live together peacefully after long periods of conflict. Asmara existed as a major settlement for over half a millennium and enjoyed some importance as it stood on the trade route to Massawa. Asmara first rose to prominence during the 20th century, when it became capital of Italian Eritrea. Under Italian rule the city of Asmara experienced rapid urbanization and modernization, to the point that was called \"\".\nHistory.\nAccording to Eritrean Tigrinya oral traditional history, there were four clans living in the Asmera area on the Kebessa Plateau: the Gheza Gurtom, the Gheza Shelele, the Gheza Serenser and Gheza Asmae. These villages were frequently attacked by clans from the lowlands, until the women of each clan decided that to preserve peace the four clans must unite. The men accepted, hence the name \"Arbate Asmera\". Arbate Asmera literally means, in the Tigrinya language, \"the four (feminine plural) made them unite\".\nThe first mention of Asmara comes from a Latin itinerary during the reign of Emperor Dawit I (1382\u20131411).\nItalian Asmara.\nAsmara, a small village in the nineteenth century, started to grow quickly when it was occupied by Italy in 1889. Governor Ferdinando Martini made it the capital city of Italian Eritrea in 1897.\nIn the early 20th century, the Eritrean Railway was built to the coast, passing through the town of Ghinda, under the direction of Carlo Cavanna. In both 1913 and 1915 the city suffered only slight damage in large earthquakes.\nA large Italian community developed the city. According to the 1939 census, Asmara had a population of 98,000, of whom 53,000 were Italian. Only 75,000 Italians lived in all of Eritrea, thus making the capital city by far their largest centre. (Compare this to the Italian colonization of Libya, where the settler population, albeit larger, was more dispersed.)\nThe capital acquired an Italian architectural look. Europeans used Asmara \"to experiment with radical new designs\". By the late 1930s, Asmara was called \"Piccola Roma\" (Little Rome). Journalist John Gunther noted in 1955 that \"the Italians built [Asmara] well, like Tripoli, with handsome wide streets, ornate public buildings, and even such refinements of civilization as a modern sewage system ... [Asmara] gives the impression of being a pleasant enough small city in Calabria, or even Umbria.\u201d Nowadays more than 400 buildings are of Italian origin, and many shops still have Italian names (e.g., \"Bar Vittoria\", \"Pasticceria moderna\", \"Casa del formaggio\", and \"Ferramenta\").\nThe Kingdom of Italy invested in the industrial development of Asmara (and surrounding areas of Eritrea), but the beginning of World War II brought this to a halt.\nUNESCO made Asmara a World Heritage Site in July 2017, saying \"It is an exceptional example of early modernist urbanism at the beginning of the 20th century and its application in an African context\".\nFederation with Ethiopia.\nIn 1952, the United Nations resolved to federate the former colony under Ethiopian rule. During the Federation, Asmara was no longer the capital city. The capital was now Addis Ababa, over to the south. In 1961, Emperor Haile Selassie I ended the \"federal\" arrangement and declared the territory to be the 14th province of the Ethiopian Empire. Ethiopia's biggest ally was the United States. The city was home to the US Army's Kagnew Station installation from 1943 until 1977. The Eritrean War of Independence began in 1961 and ended in 1991, resulting in the independence of Eritrea. Asmara was left relatively undamaged throughout the war, as were the majority of highland regions. After independence, Asmara again became the capital of Eritrea.\nGeography.\nThe city lies at an elevation of above sea level. It lies on north\u2013south trending highlands known as the Eritrean Highlands, an extension of the Ethiopian Highlands. The temperate central portion, where Asmara lies, is situated on a rocky highland plateau, which separates the western lowlands from the eastern coastal plains. The lands that surround Asmara are very fertile, especially those to the south towards the Debub Region of Eritrea. The highlands that Asmera is located in fall away to reveal the eastern lowlands, characterized by the searing heat and humidity of the Eritrean salt pans, lapped by the Red Sea. To the west of the plateau stretches a vast semi-arid hilly terrain continuing all the way towards the border with Sudan through the Gash-Barka Region.\nClimate.\nAsmara has a cool semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification.\nIt has year-round moderately warm weather, with recorded temperatures ranging between a minimum of and a maximum of . It has an average humidity of 51% and an UV-index of 6. Holdridge life zones system of bioclimatic classification put Asmara in or near the subtropical thorn woodland biome. Rainfall patterns differ from month to month with highest precipitation in July and August, and lower precipitation in other months.\nAsmara has warm, but not hot summers and mild winters. Due to its altitude, temperatures are relatively mild for a city located not particularly far from the hotter surroundings in the country. This climate is characteristic of rainy, wet seasons and dry seasons. Asmara averages about of precipitation annually. Frost, however, is extremely rare in the city. The long dry season of the year extends from September until around April, and a season of occasional showers occurs from April to June. On average, about 60% of Asmara's annual precipitation is experienced during the months of July and August. In contrast, December to February are typically Asmara's driest months, where on average only of precipitation falls in the three months combined. Due to variable rainfall, Asmara's climate is also characterized by drought. Several prolonged droughts in this region have occurred beginning in the 1960s and have recurred each decade since then. During periods of drought, temperatures are high and little rainfall occurs. As temperatures in a region increase, the rate of evaporation of water from the soil also increases. These combined processes result in the desertification of the soil. In order to obtain nutrient rich and moist soil for farming purposes, populations rely on deforestation to make use of the underlying ground. The most serious environmental issues Asmara faces are deforestation and desertification. Other issues Asmara faces are soil erosion and overgrazing. All of these environmental issues produce soil degradation.\nCulture.\nThe city is home to the Eritrean National Museum. The city is often the starting point of the Tour of Eritrea cycling competition.\nArchitecture.\nThe city is known for its early 20th-century buildings, including the Art Deco Cinema Impero (opened in 1937 and considered by the experts one of the world's finest examples of Art D\u00e9co style building), Cubist Africa Pension, eclectic Eritrean Orthodox Enda Mariam Cathedral and former Opera House, the futurist Fiat Tagliero Building, the neo-Romanesque Church of Our Lady of the Rosary, Asmara, and the neoclassical Governor's Palace. The city is adorned by Italian colonial villas and mansions, one prominent example being the World Bank Building. Most of central Asmara was built between 1935 and 1941, so the Italians effectively managed to build almost an entire city in just six years. At this time, the dictator Benito Mussolini had great plans for a second Roman Empire in Africa. War cut this short, but his injection of funds created the Asmara of today, which supposedly was to be a symbol to the colonial fascism during that period of time.\nThe city shows off most early 20th-century architectural styles. Some buildings are neo-Romanesque, such as the Church of Our Lady of the Rosary, some villas are built in a late Victorian style. Art Deco influences are found throughout the city. Essences of Cubism can be found on the Africa Pension Building, and on a small collection of buildings. The Fiat Tagliero Building shows almost the height of futurism, just as it was coming into big fashion in Italy.\nAsmara is known to be an exceptionally modern city, not only because of its architecture, but Asmara also had more traffic lights than Rome did when the city was being built. The city incorporates many features of a planned city.\nRestaurants, bars, cafes.\nAsmara has wide streets, restaurants, piazzas (town squares), bars and cafes while many of the boulevards are lined with palms trees. The Italian inspired food and culture is very present and was introduced during Italian Eritrea. Countless restaurants and cafes, serve high quality espresso, cappuccinos and lattes, as well as gelato parlours and restaurants with Italian Eritrean cuisine. Common dishes served from the Italian Eritrean cuisine are 'Pasta al Sugo e Berbere', which means \"pasta with tomato sauce and berbere\" (spice), \"lasagna\" and \"cotoletta alla milanese\" (milano cutlet).\nUNESCO World Heritage Site.\nAsmara was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in July 2017, becoming the first modernist city anywhere to be listed in its entirety. The inscription taking place during the 41st World Heritage Committee Session.\nThe city has thousands of Art Deco, futurist, modernist, and rationalist buildings, constructed during the period of Italian Eritrea. The city, nicknamed \"La piccola Roma\" (\"Little Rome\"), is located over 2,000 meters above sea level, and was an ideal spot for construction due to the relatively cool climate; architects used a combination of both Italian and local materials.\nSome notable buildings include the Fiat Tagliero Building, Bar Zilli, opera houses, hotels, and cinemas, such as the Cinema Impero.\nA statement from UNESCO read:\nThe Historic Center of Asmara was placed on the World Monuments Fund's 2006 Watch List of 100 Most Endangered Sites. The listing was designed to bring more attention to the city to save the center from decay and redevelopment and to promote restoration.\nFollowing CARP (a World Bank initiative on Cultural Heritage), the European Union Delegation in Asmara has engaged into a Heritage Project pertaining to building's restoration and archive management. Launched in 2010 the EU/Eritrea Cultural Project was expected to be completed in 2014 (Pierre Cout\u00e9 \u2013 Edward Denison, Project Design Report, EUD Asmara 2009).\nReligion.\nFour big landmarks of the city are the Church of Our Lady of the Rosary and the Kidane Mehret Cathedral of the Catholic faith (the former of Latin and the latter of Coptic rite), the Enda Mariam Cathedral of the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church, and the Al Khulafa Al Rashiudin Mosque of the Islamic faith. The population in the Central Region, which contains Asmara, is 89 percent Christian (almost 84 percent Orthodox, 4 percent Roman Catholic, and more than 1 percent Protestant) and 5 percent Muslim.\nAsmara is also the see of the archbishop of the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church, which became autocephalous in 1993. The archbishop was elevated in 1998 to the rank of Patriarchate of Eritrea, on a par with the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.\nEconomy.\nEritrean Airlines, the Eritrean Telecommunications Corporation, and other companies are headquartered in the city. The country's national television station Eri-TV has many studios located in various areas in the capital.\nAsmara Brewery, built in 1939 under the name of Melotti, is located in the city and employs 600 people. The brewery produces Asmara beer and other beverages like rum and gin. The brewery also owns and operates as a sponsor of the local football team Asmara Brewery FC, also named \"Asmara Birra\" (translated \"Asmara Beer\").\nTransport.\nAfter Eritrean independence, the roads of Asmara underwent extensive construction projects. Old roads were renovated and new highways were also built. There are five primary roads out of Asmara.\nAsmara International Airport serves the city with many international flights. Massawa International Airport is an alternative airport nearby.\nAs of 1999, there is a total of 317 kilometres of (narrow gauge) rail line in Eritrea. The Eritrean Railway was built between 1887 and 1932. Badly damaged during WWII and in later fighting, it was closed section by section, with the final closure coming in 1978. After independence, a rebuilding effort commenced, and the first rebuilt section was reopened in 2003. As of 2009, the section from Asmara to Massawa was fully rebuilt and available for service.\nEducation.\nAsmara has always been a national centre of education, and is home to many elementary and high schools. It was home to the University of Asmara from 1958 until the university was shut down in 2006, following the opening of a university at Mai Nefhi. During the period of Ethiopian Federation and annexation, the university was also linked with what was then the nation's largest tertiary institution, Addis Ababa University.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nInternational schools.\nSecondary Schools \nDistricts.\nAsmara is divided into 13 districts or administrative areas. These districts are subdivided into North, North-West, North-East, South-East, South-West, East, West and Central areas. The thirteen districts (or \"Neous Zobas\") are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56828", "revid": "2156210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56828", "title": "Apia", "text": "Capital of Samoa\nApia () is the capital and largest city of Samoa. It is located on the central north coast of Upolu, Samoa's second-largest island. Apia falls within the political district (\"it\u016bm\u0101l\u014d\") of Tuamasaga.\nThe Apia Urban Area (generally known as the City of Apia) has a population of 35,974 (2021 census). Its geographic boundaries extend from the east approximately from Letogo village in Vaimauga to the west in the newer, industrialized region of Apia which extends to Vaitele village in Faleata.\nHistory.\nApia was originally a small village (the 1800 population was 304), from which the country's capital took its name. Apia Village still exists within the larger modern capital of Apia, which has grown into a sprawling urban area that encompasses many villages. Like every other settlement in the country, Apia Village has its own \"matai\" (leaders) and \"fa'alupega\" (genealogy and customary greetings) according to fa'a Samoa.\nThe modern city of Apia was founded in the 1850s, and it has been the official capital of Samoa since 1959. Seumanutafa Pogai was high chief until his death in 1898.\nThe harbour was the site of a notorious 15 March 1889 naval standoff in which seven ships \u2014 from Germany, the US, and Britain \u2014 refused to leave the harbour, even though a typhoon was clearly approaching, lest the first one to move lose face. All the ships sank or were damaged beyond repair, except for the British cruiser \"Calliope\", which managed to leave port, travelling at a rate of one mile per hour, and was able to ride out the storm. Nearly 200 American and German people died.\nWestern Samoa was ruled by Germany as German Samoa from 1900 to 1914, with Apia as its capital. In August 1914, the Occupation of German Samoa by an expeditionary force from New Zealand began. New Zealand governed the islands, (as the Western Samoa Trust Territory) from 1920 until Samoan independence in 1962 \u2013 first under a League of Nations Class C Mandate and then, after 1945, as a United Nations Trust Territory.\nThe country underwent a struggle for political independence in the early 1900s, organised under the aegis of the national Mau movement. During this period, the streets of Apia were the site of non-violent protests and marches, in the course of which many Samoans were arrested. On what became known as \"Black Saturday\" (28 December 1929), during a peaceful Mau gathering in the town, the New Zealand constabulary killed the paramount chief Tupua Tamasese Lealofi III.\nDuring World War II the United States Navy built and operated Naval Base Upolu from 1941 to 1944.\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nApia is situated on a natural harbour at the mouth of the Vaisigano River. It is on a narrow coastal plain with Mount Vaea (elevation ), the burial place of writer Robert Louis Stevenson, directly to its south. Two main ridges run south on either side of the Vaisigano River, with roads on each. The more western of these is Cross Island Road, one of the few roads cutting north to south across the middle of the island to the south coast of Upolu.\nClimate.\nApia features a tropical rainforest climate (\"Af\" according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification) with consistent temperatures throughout the year. Nevertheless, the climate is not equatorial because the trade winds are the dominant aerological mechanism and besides there are a few cyclones. Apia's driest months are July and August when on average about of rain falls. Its wettest months are December through March when average monthly precipitation easily exceeds . Apia's average temperature for the year is . Apia averages roughly of rainfall annually.\nAdministration.\nApia is part of the Tuamasaga political district and of election district Vaimauga 1,2,3,4 and Faleata 1,2, and 3. There is no city administration for Apia, as it consists of some 45 individual, independent traditional and freehold villages. Apia proper is just a small village between the mouths of the Vaisigano (east) and Mulivai (west) rivers, and is framed by Matautu and Vaiala traditional villages. Together with several freehold villages (no traditional village council), these 45 villages constitute \"Downtown Apia\".\nThe \"Planning and Urban Management Act 2004\" was passed by parliament to better plan for the urban growth of Samoa's built-up areas, with particular reference to the future urban management of Apia. The city's historical haphazard growth from village to colonial trading post to the major financial and business centre of the country has resulted in major infrastructural problems in the city. Problems of flooding are commonplace in the wet season, given the low flood-prone valley that the city is built on. In the inner-city village of Sogi, there are major shoreline pollution and effluent issues given that the village is situated on swamplands. The disparate village administrations of the Apia Urban Area has resulted in a lack of a unified and codified legislative approach to sewage disposal. The significant increase in vehicle ownership has resulted in traffic congestion in the inner city streets and the need for major projects in road-widening and traffic management. The PUMA legislation sets up the Planning Urban Management Authority to manage better the unique planning issues facing Apia's urban growth.\nCity features.\nMulinu\u02bbu, the old ceremonial capital, lies at the city's western end, and is the location of the Parliament House (\"Maota Fono\"), and the historic observatory built during the German era is now the meteorology office.\nThe historic Catholic cathedral in Apia, the Immaculate Conception of Mary Cathedral, was dedicated 31 December 1867. It was pulled down mid-2011, reportedly due to structural damage from the earthquake of September 2009. A new cathedral was built and dedicated 31 May 2014.\nAn area of reclaimed land jutting into the harbour is the site of the Fiame Mataafa Faumuina Mulinuu II (FMFM II) building, the multi-storey government offices named after the first Prime Minister of Samoa, and the Central Bank of Samoa. A clock tower erected as a war memorial acts as a central point for the city. The new market (\"maketi fou\") is inland at Fugalei, where it is more protected from the effects of cyclones. Apia still has some of the early, wooden, colonial buildings which remain scattered around the town, most notably the old courthouse from the German colonial era, with a museum on the upper floor (the new courthouse is in Mulinu\u02bbu). Recent infrastructural development and economic growth has seen several multi-storey buildings rise in the city. The ACC building (2001) houses the Accident Compensation Board, the National Bank of Samoa, and some government departments. The mall below it is home to shops and eateries. The Samoatel building (2004) which is the site for Samoa's international telecommunications hub, was built inland at Maluafou, also to protect it from the effects of seasonal cyclones. The DBS building (2007) in Savalalo houses the Development Bank of Samoa and new courts complex in Mulinuu, with the district, supreme, and land &amp; titles courts (2010). The Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese Building (2012) in Sogi houses government ministries. Another addition to Apia's skyline is the SNPF Molesi shopping mall, opened in 2013. A new hospital complex was completed at Mot'ootua.\nScottish-born writer Robert Louis Stevenson spent the last four years of his life here, and is buried on Mount Vaea, overlooking both the city and the home he built, Vailima, now a museum in his honour. Stevenson had taken the Samoan name Tusitala (\"writer of tales\").\nFalemata'aga - Museum of Samoa is located in a former German colonial school in the city.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u2019\u00ed House of Worship for the Pacific is located in Apia, one of only eight continental Bah\u00e1\u2019\u00ed Houses of Worship. Designed by architect Hossein Amanat and opened in 1984, it serves the island as a gathering space for people of all backgrounds and religions to meditate, reflect, and pray together.\nEconomy.\nTalofa Airways and Samoa Airways have their headquarters in Apia. Grey Investment Group has its headquarters in downtown Apia. This company also owned the first private National Bank of Samoa in Samoa, with Grey Investment Group, Samoa Artisan Water Company Ltd and Apia Bottling Company Ltd as shareholders. Grey Investment owns a multitude of commercial and residential property investments throughout Samoa and New Zealand.\nThirty per cent of the businesses in downtown Apia are owned by one Chinese family. Ten per cent of the downtown businesses are owned by Europeans, while the other 60% are owned by the local community.\nTransport.\nApia Harbour is by far the largest and busiest harbour in Samoa. International shipping with containers, LPG gas, and fuels all dock here. Ferries to Tokelau and American Samoa depart from here.\nApia is served by a good road network, which is generally kept reasonably well maintained. Most of the main roads are sealed; the unsealed roads have lower use. Vehicles drive on the left-hand side of the road since 7 September 2009.\nThe Samoan government started the second phase of a major upgrading of arterial routes around the Apia Urban Area in 2012, with incremental widening of major roads around the city.\nThe country has no trains or trams, but is served by an extensive, privatised bus and taxi system. People commonly walk around the town, or even some distances outside it. There are few bicycles and motorcycles, but traffic congestion due to a huge increase in vehicle ownership has necessitated a major upgrade in road infrastructure.\nThe main international airport, Faleolo International Airport, is a 40-minute drive west of the city. Samoa's major domestic airlines, Polynesian Airlines and Talofa Airways, service this airport. Fagali'i Airport, the small airstrip in Fagali'i, was used for internal flights and some international flights to Pago Pago in American Samoa.\nEducation.\nApia is home to a number of pre-schools, primary, secondary and post-secondary institutions, including Samoa's only university, the National University of Samoa. In addition, the University of the South Pacific School of Agriculture maintains a campus at Alafua, on the outskirts of Apia. Another major school in Apia is Robert Louis Stevenson School which is a private primary and secondary school. Robert Louis Stevenson school is known as Samoa's upper class school, due to many children of Samoa's wealthy classes attending it. \nPrimary schools.\nMost of the villages have their own primary schools, but the Churches run most of the primary schools in downtown Apia.\nSport.\nPacific Games.\nApia hosted the Pacific Games in 1983 for the first time in the country's history. The Games returned to Apia for the 2007 Pacific Games, in which Samoa finished third. A crowd of 20,000 attended the 2007 Games closing ceremony at Apia Park.\nAssociation football.\nApia hosted the Oceania region's qualification matches for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. As such, Apia was the location of the first goal scored in the 2010 qualifiers, by Pierre Wajoka of New Caledonia against Tahiti. The qualification matches commenced on 27 August 2007 and finished on 7 September 2007. All matches were played at the Toleafoa J.S. Blatter Complex, which is named after FIFA president Sepp Blatter.\nThe complex, based in Apia, is also the venue of the Samoa national football team's home matches and has a capacity of 3,500.\nJudo.\nThe capital also hosted from 2009 to 2012 the IJF Judo World Cup, which was downgraded in 2013 to become a regional tournament called the 'Oceania Open'.\nCricket.\nApia hosted the 2012 ICC World Cricket League Division Eight tournament at the Faleata Oval's, which consists of four cricket grounds. The national teams of Samoa, Belgium, Japan, Suriname, Ghana, Bhutan, Norway and Vanuatu took part. It was the first time a tournament officially sanctioned by the International Cricket Council had been held in the region.\nBasketball.\nApia hosted the 2018 FIBA Polynesia Basketball Cup where Samoa's national basketball team finished runner-up.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56830", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56830", "title": "Tselinograd", "text": ""}
{"id": "56831", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56831", "title": "Aqmola", "text": "Aqmola may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "56834", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56834", "title": "Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei", "text": ""}
{"id": "56835", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56835", "title": "Brunei Darussalam", "text": ""}
{"id": "56836", "revid": "50757473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56836", "title": "Asunci\u00f3n", "text": "Capital and most populous city of Paraguay\nAsunci\u00f3n (, ; ) is the capital and the largest city of Paraguay. The city stands on the eastern bank of the Paraguay River, almost at the confluence of this river with the Pilcomayo River. The Paraguay River and the Bay of Asunci\u00f3n in the northwest separate the city from the Occidental Region of Paraguay and from Argentina in the south part of the city. The rest of the city is surrounded by the Central Department.\nAsunci\u00f3n is one of the oldest cities in South America and the longest continually inhabited area in the R\u00edo de la Plata Basin; for this reason it is known as \"the Mother of Cities\". From Asunci\u00f3n, Spanish colonial expeditions departed to found other cities, including the second foundation of Buenos Aires, that of other important cities such as Villarrica, Corrientes, Santa Fe, C\u00f3rdoba, Santa Cruz de la Sierra and 65 more. According to the 2022 Paraguayan Census, Asunci\u00f3n has 462,241 inhabitants, while its metropolitan area (known as Greater Asunci\u00f3n) exceeds 2.3\u00a0million inhabitants, making it the most densely populated area in Paraguay, and also the most productive as it concentrates 70% of the National GDP. Asunci\u00f3n is the third most populated \"jurisdiction\" or \"political division\" in the country, surpassed by the Central and Alto Paran\u00e1 departments.\nAdministratively, the city forms an autonomous capital district, not a part of any department. The metropolitan area, called Gran Asunci\u00f3n, includes the cities of San Lorenzo, Fernando de la Mora, Lambar\u00e9, Luque, Mariano Roque Alonso, \u00d1emby, San Antonio, Limpio, Capiat\u00e1 and Villa Elisa, which are part of the Central Department. The Asunci\u00f3n metropolitan area has around two million inhabitants. The Asunci\u00f3n Stock Exchange lists the Municipality of Asunci\u00f3n as BVPASA: http://. Asunci\u00f3n is one of the best cities for investments, both in construction and services, thus being one of the cities in the region with the highest economic growth, nowadays.\nIt is the headquarters of the three state powers (executive, legislative and judicial), the cultural center of the republic and the different agencies and entities of the state. It used to be the main river port of the country, a function that Villeta occupies today. Despite the situations throughout its history, Asunci\u00f3n continues to be the center of national and cultural activities. From the capital, the main state resolutions and projects are issued, and the banking, economic, cultural, diplomatic, social, union and industrial entities of the country are centralized. Most of the main routes to the main cities of the country begin here. It is the headquarters of the Permanent Review Court of Mercosur. In the metropolitan area of Asunci\u00f3n, district of Luque, is the headquarters of the South American Football Confederation (CONMEBOL).\nIt is located in a strategic area for Mercosur, in the center-north of the Southern Cone. This geographical position allows it relative proximity to cities such as Buenos Aires, Montevideo, C\u00f3rdoba, Rosario, Curitiba, S\u00e3o Paulo, Porto Alegre, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, and other important cities in the region. It is located about from the Pacific Ocean and about from the Atlantic Ocean, being relatively equidistant between both oceans, a factor that promotes economic growth and leads it to become a kind of hub in the region.\nThe Globalization and World Cities Research Network classifies Asunci\u00f3n as a \"Gamma City\". It is the home of the national government, principal port, and the chief industrial, political, economic and cultural center of Paraguay. Asunci\u00f3n ranks as one of the cheapest cities in the world for foreign visitors, and the third-safest capital in Latin America, behind Buenos Aires and Santiago, according to InSight Crime.\nEtymology.\nThe official name of the city is \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Asunci\u00f3n\" (\"Our Lady of the Assumption\"), according to the founding document of the Cabildo, dated 16 September 1541. The fort that preceded it was established with the same name on 15 August 1537, by Juan de Salazar de Espinosa, the day on which the Catholic Church commemorates the Assumption of Mary.\nAsunci\u00f3n comes from the Latin noun, of ecclesiastical use, \"assumpt\u012b\u014d\", defined as: \"the Virgin Mary being elevated body and soul to heaven\" and must be distinguished from the Ascension of Jesus. Although the dogma was not proclaimed until 1950, the festival dates back to the 9th century and was especially celebrated in Spain and America.\nIts name in Guarani is ; it is not to be confused with the country Paraguay, called in Guarani.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Spanish conquistador Juan de Ayolas (died c.\u20091537) may have first visited the site of the future city on his way north, up the Paraguay River, looking for a passage to the mines of Upper Peru (present-day Bolivia). Later, Juan de Salazar y Espinosa and Gonzalo de Mendoza, a relative of Pedro de Mendoza, were sent in search of Ayolas, but failed to find him. On his way up and then down the river, de Salazar stopped briefly at a bay in the left bank to resupply his ships. He found the natives friendly, and decided to found a fort there in August 1537. He named it Nuestra Se\u00f1ora Santa Mar\u00eda de la Asunci\u00f3n (Our Lady Saint Mary of the Assumption \u2013 the Roman Catholic Church celebrates the Feast of the Assumption on 15 August).\nIn 1542 natives destroyed Buenos Aires, and the Spaniards there fled to Asunci\u00f3n. Thus the city became the center of a large Spanish colonial province comprising part of Brazil, present-day Paraguay and northeastern Argentina. In 1603 Asunci\u00f3n was the seat of the First Synod of Asunci\u00f3n, which set guidelines for the evangelization of the natives in their lingua franca, Guaran\u00ed.\nIn 1731 an uprising under Jos\u00e9 de Antequera y Castro was one of the first rebellions against Spanish colonial rule. The uprising failed, but it was the first sign of the independent spirit that was growing among the criollos, mestizos and natives of Paraguay. The event influenced the independence of Paraguay, which subsequently materialized in 1811. The secret meetings between the independence leaders to plan an ambush against the Spanish Governor in Paraguay (Bernardo de Velasco) took place at the home of Juana Mar\u00eda de Lara, in downtown Asunci\u00f3n. On the night of 14 and 15 May 1811, the rebels succeeded and forced governor Velasco to surrender. Today, Lara's former home, known as Casa de la Independencia (House of the Independence), operates as a museum and historical building.\nPost-independence period.\nAfter Paraguay became independent, significant change occurred in Asunci\u00f3n. Under the rule of Gaspar Rodr\u00edguez de Francia (in office 1813\u20131840) roads were built throughout the city and the streets were named. However, during the presidency of Carlos Antonio L\u00f3pez (President 1844\u20131862) Asunci\u00f3n (and Paraguay) saw further progress as the new president implemented new economic policies. More than 400 schools, metallurgic factories and the first railroad service in South America were built during the L\u00f3pez presidency. After L\u00f3pez died in 1862, his son Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez became the new president and led the country through the disastrous Paraguayan War that lasted for five years (1864\u20131870). On 1 January 1869, the capital city Asunci\u00f3n fell to Brazilian forces led by Gen. Jo\u00e3o de Souza da Fonseca Costa. After the end of the armed conflict, Brazilian troops occupied Asunci\u00f3n until 1876.\nMany historians have claimed that this war provoked a steady downfall of the city and country, since it massacred two-thirds of the country's population. Progress slowed down greatly afterwards, and the economy stagnated.\nAfter the Paraguayan War, Asunci\u00f3n began a slow attempt at recovery. Towards the end of the 19th century and during the early years of the 20th century, a flow of immigrants from Europe and the Ottoman Empire came to the city. This led to a change in the appearance of the city as many new buildings were built and Asunci\u00f3n went through an era more prosperous than any since the war.\nA tramway in Asunci\u00f3n opened in 1871, initially using horse-drawn trams and steam-powered trams, with electric trams being introduced in 1913. The last tram service was discontinued around 1995, followed by formal closure in November 1997.\n20th century to the present.\nBetween 1932 and 1935, Paraguay faced a war with Bolivia in the Chaco War and at that time Asunci\u00f3n became a place of relief and help for the wounded in the conflict. The Defensores del Chaco stadium located in the Sajonia neighborhood owes its name precisely to the fact that the army that would go to fight against the Bolivians in defense of the Chaco was recruited in this place.\nAsunci\u00f3n has been the first completely urban city in Paraguay since approximately the middle of the 20th century. On the other hand, until the early 1980s, Asunci\u00f3n was the only city in Paraguay with more than 100,000 inhabitants, taking into account that the rural population has always predominated in Paraguay. At the end of the 1980s, the rural exodus began, contributing to the demographic increase \u2014especially urban\u2014 of Central Department (part of current Greater Asunci\u00f3n). Consequently, the population of Asunci\u00f3n remained practically stagnant since then.\nIn March 1991, just two years after the coup d'\u00e9tat against the government of Alfredo Stroessner \u2014which lasted almost 35 years\u2014 the Treaty of Asunci\u00f3n was signed with the presidents of Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and Paraguay. This treaty gave rise to the Southern Common Market (Mercosur), a regional integration organization.\nSince 1993, Asunci\u00f3n has become an autonomous municipality administered as a capital district and is not formally integrated into any department. Before 1993, it managed the Central Department \u2014although had not been part of it since 1973\u2014. Later, Aregu\u00e1 \u2014a city with a colonial feel\u2014 began to be the capital, and therefore, to administer the department until today.\nIn May 2000, the Congress building was attacked by tanks in the midst of a failed coup d'\u00e9tat, which led to the president declaring a state of exception at the national level. In August 2004, Asunci\u00f3n suffered the greatest tragedy in the history of the country, after the Chaco War, with the infamous blaze at Ycua Bola\u00f1os, a supermarket fire that claimed more than 400 lives, with three hundred more injured.\nDue to the unbridled growth and lack of urban planning and infrastructure in the capital and its surrounding areas \u2014in recent years\u2014, Asunci\u00f3n is becoming a city with problems similar to the large metropolises of the world (e.g.: intense traffic during rush hours, insufficiency of services, among others). However, at the same time, there are dozens of investments in the city, making it one of the cities with the most economic growth in the region. To improve the transportation situation, several alternatives are planned, such as the metrobus or the electric train, among others. Also the construction of more viaducts and tunnels.\nLikewise, Asunci\u00f3n has been the meeting point of the largest demonstrations in Paraguay, the most recent being the Paraguayan March of 1999 (in which 8 protesters were shot dead, causing the resignation of then-president Cubas), the impeachment of President Lugo in 2012 (which caused the suspension of Paraguay in Mercosur), or the political crisis of 2017 (protesters set fire to the Congress building), among others.\nGeography.\nBeing at the Argentina\u2013Paraguay border, Asunci\u00f3n is located between the parallels 25\u00b0 15' and 25\u00b0 20' of south latitude and between the meridians 57\u00b0 40' and 57\u00b0 30' of west longitude. The city sits on the left bank of the Paraguay River, almost at the confluence of this river with the River Pilcomayo. The Paraguay River and the Bay of Asunci\u00f3n in the northwest separate the city from the Occidental Region of Paraguay and Argentina in the south part of the city. The rest of the city is surrounded by the Central Department.\nThe Paraguay River is the most important hydrographic body of the city since river commerce develops through it, and it is also a tourist attraction. Asunci\u00f3n Bay is separated from the great Paraguay River by the San Miguel Bank, a narrow lowland peninsula where two geographical and ecological regions of Paraguay converge: the Humid Chaco and the Alto Paran\u00e1 Atlantic forests. Some important bodies of water are the Pozo Colorado, De Los Patos, Ycu\u00e1 Sat\u00ed, and Ja\u00e9n streams. All of these run hidden under the pavement of Asunci\u00f3n and flow into the river.\nThe orography of the city is characterized by being irregular, partly because of \"the seven hills\" that could be seen from the river upon reaching the city. The old town sits on a hill and preserves the characteristic plan of the towns of the colonial era, while the Church of La Encarnaci\u00f3n is actually located at the highest point in the downtown. One of the highest and most characteristic points of the city is Cerro Lambar\u00e9, at meters above sea level; however, strictly speaking, the highest point in Asunci\u00f3n is Colina Alta Street, in the Nazareth neighborhood, at meters above sea level (located near the Copetrol station on Rep\u00fablica Argentina Avenue).\nThe 7 hills of Asunci\u00f3n are:\nAnother important elevation was Mount Tacumb\u00fa, but in the 1950s began its exploitation in order to pave the streets of Asunci\u00f3n. Today only a lagoon remains as a result of the impossibility of suctioning the waters by the rocks that were left there. The quarry stopped working due to the urbanization of the area. Its current height is .\nBiogeography.\nAsunci\u00f3n has two main biogeographical areas: the interior area and the bay area. The interior area was once covered with lush forests that made up part of the Humid Chaco, containing trees that often exceeded in height. Among the common plant species found here are the tree fern or chachi, the pink lapacho (\"Tabebuia heptaphylla\"), the yvyra pyt\u00e4 (\"Peltophorum dubium\"), the guatamb\u00fa or yvyra \u00f1eti (\"Balfourodendron riedelianum\"), and the cedar or ygary (\"Cedrela fissilis\").\nLarge animals that once lived in the area that is currently Asunci\u00f3n were the jaguar (\"Panthera onca\"), the tapir (\"Tapirus terrestris\"), the harpy eagle (\"Harpia harpyja\"), and the capuchin monkey (\"Cebus apella\"). The last remnants of this great ecosystem can be seen in the Botanical Garden and Zoo of Asunci\u00f3n and in the surroundings of Cerro Lambare; medium and small animals that can still be found here include the toco toucan (\"Ramphastos toco\"), the gold tegu (\"Tupinambis teguixin\"), the opossum (\"Didelphis albiventris\"), the Paraguayan magpie (\"Cyanocorax chrysops\"), and the masakaragua'i or cucucucha (\"Troglodytes aedon\"). Small birds\u2014such as the cardinal (\"Paroaria coronata\"), the turtle dove (\"Zenaida meloda\"), the chingolo or cachilito (\"Zonotrichia capensis\"), the golden goldfinch (\"Sicalis flaveola\"), and the saijovy or common celestine (\"Thraupis sayaca\")\u2014coexist in the densely populated areas of the city along with the domestic pigeon\u2014an invasive species that is reproducing at an accelerated rate, causing damage to the facades of buildings and in some cases displacing the local birdlife.\nThe bay area has an approximate area of and is located just from the old town. It is one of the most important stopping places during the journey of Nearctic and Southern migratory birds. Asunci\u00f3n Bay has a wide variety of habitats, yet their availability changes throughout the year due to large seasonal fluctuations in the water level of the Paraguay River, which make the depth and extent of bay flooding vary considerably. During the southern winter, when the water is abundantly high, the bay is largely underwater, but towards the end of the season when the water level drops, sandy and clay beaches (tidal marsh) appear. If the waters continue to recede, most of the marshes dry out and become grasslands, some of which remain wet. A total of 258 bird species have been recorded, including 7 globally endangered species and 28 species that nest in North America and migrate to southern South America. More than 3% of the global population of one of them, the cinnamon sandpiper (\"Tryngites subruficollis\"), passes through the bay during its migration to the south, turning Asunci\u00f3n Bay into an Important Bird Area (IBA).\nClimate.\nAsunci\u00f3n features a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\", Trewartha: \"Cfhl\") characterized by very hot, humid summers (average of in January) and mild winters (average of in July). Relative humidity is high throughout the year, so the heat index is higher than the true air temperature in the summer, and in the winter it can feel cooler. The average annual temperature is . The average annual precipitation is high, with distributed in over 80 days yearly. The highest recorded temperature was on 17 October 2023, while the lowest recorded temperature was on 27 June 2011. The highest rainfall accumulation within 24 hours was on 26 February 2014.\nSummers are very hot and humid, with temperatures that can eventually exceed , due to ambient humidity. The average temperature in January is . Hours of sunshine abound, as do isolated showers and short summer storms. In Asunci\u00f3n itself, the heat is even more accentuated than in the surrounding area, due to the urban heat island effect. The warm north wind that blows from Brazil is the predominant one in the season, although sometimes winds from the south bring more pleasant precipitation and temperatures.\nWinters are mild and quite irregular because throughout the season there can be cold days \u2014minimums around \u2014 as well as quite warm days \u2014maximums around \u2014. Generally, a typical winter day includes mild afternoons, as well as cool mornings and evenings. The average temperature in winter is . Ground frost may usually occur throughout the season, especially in the suburban and rural areas of Greater Asunci\u00f3n. The fresh south wind that blows from Argentina is the predominant one in the season, although sometimes winds from the north bring warmer temperatures.\nSnow is unknown in modern times, but it fell during the Little Ice Age, the last time being in June 1751. Precipitation is abundant throughout the year, as storms or showers usually develop quite frequently; except for the winter months, when weak but continuous drizzles are more common. The relative humidity in the environment remains high all year round (averaging 70%).\nAsunci\u00f3n generally has a very short dry season between May and September, but the coldest months are June, July and August. During the wet season, Asunci\u00f3n is generally hot and humid though towards the end of this season, it becomes noticeably cooler. In contrast, Asunci\u00f3n's dry season is pleasantly mild. Asunci\u00f3n's annual precipitation values observe a summer maximum, due to severe subtropical summer thunderstorms which travel southward from northern Paraguay, originating in the Gran Chaco region of the northwestern part of the country. The wettest and driest months of the year are April and July, on average receiving respectively of precipitation.\nGovernment.\nThe Municipal Government is exercised by the Municipal Board and the Municipal Intendance, in accordance with the provisions of Article 20 of the Municipal Organic Law (MOL). Those who make up the mayor's office are the Intendant and the administrative departments of the municipality. The Mayor is the general administrator of the district, who is elected directly by the citizens to operate for a period of 5 years, while The councillor integrated into the municipal board last 5 years in their functions, with the possibility of being re-elected, and whose function is limited to that of a deliberative and legislative body of the government municipal. According to article 24 of the aforementioned law, the number of councilors that a municipality requires varies according to the budget amount that the State issues to the jurisdiction.\nThe city is governed by the municipality in similar instances to the national level: the Mayor would be equivalent to an executive body, and the Municipal Board a legislative and regulatory body. The municipal board is responsible for issuing laws or ordinances, which are municipal legal regulations whose mandatory force applies within the limits of the district. There are three types of government acts that give rise to the dynamics of municipal functioning: Ordinance, Regulation and Resolution municipal.\nThe ordinances are general regulations for the community, sanctioned by the Board and promulgated by the Municipality, and serve to establish rights, obligations and prohibitions for the inhabitants of the district and for the inhabitants of the country who for some reason are in the jurisdiction. The initiative of the ordinance projects is agreed upon by the members of the Board, the Intendant, and the citizens by popular initiative. They have the force of local law, that is, within the municipality, but they must comply with the law dictated by the National Congress. The regulations are general internal rules issued by the Board or the Intendant and serve to organize the administrative divisions of the municipality. Resolutions are rules applied to specific or particular cases, whether to a specific individual or group, and can be issued either by the Board or the Intendant.\nAsunci\u00f3n is an autonomous municipality administered as capital district and is not formally integrated into any departments, so in addition to bringing together the three powers of the nation, it also has its own Judicial District and its own municipal police, apart from the traffic police.\nEconomy.\nThe economic development of the country is reflected in the city by how in recent years construction (infrastructure) has grown rapidly due to the great demand for foreign investment. In addition, Asunci\u00f3n ranks sixth as the most profitable city in Latin America. The most important companies, businesses, and investment groups have their headquarters in Asunci\u00f3n. Commerce has expanded considerably in recent years stretching towards the suburbs where shopping malls and supermarkets have been built. Paraguay's only stock exchange, the BVPASA, is located here. The city is the economic center of Paraguay, followed by Ciudad del Este and Encarnaci\u00f3n.\nThe attractiveness of the city has been attributed to its easygoing tax policies. Asunci\u00f3n has unrestrained taxes on the investments and movements of capital. There is also no income tax for investors in Bonds of Asunci\u00f3n Stock Exchange. Incentives like these attract significant foreign investment into the city. According to experts, Paraguay is tapped as one of the top three countries with the best investment climate in Latin America and the Caribbean. As well it remains the most attractive nation in the hemisphere in doing business and is equipped with a series of legislations that protect strategic investments and guarantee a friendly environment for the development of large industrial plants and infrastructure projects.\nThe distribution of the economically active population varies according to the economic sectors. Actually indicates that the population fundamentally participates in the tertiary sector (commerce and services), employing 8 out of every 10 individuals. The secondary sector (industry and construction) concentrates 16% of the economically active, while participation in the primary sector (agriculture and livestock) is practically zero since Asunci\u00f3n is a strictly urban area. Regarding commerce, it should be pointed out that this sector has developed considerably in recent years, moving from the old town to residential neighborhoods, where shopping malls, shopping centers, and commercial promenades are spread. This trend is still increasing.\nImportant international banks have their headquarters in the capital, among them are Citibank, Itau Bank, GNB, BBVA, etc. Among the Paraguayan capital banks, there are the National Development Bank, the Family Bank, the Amambay Bank, the Regional Bank, the Visi\u00f3n Banco, etc.\nAt the same time, the Central Bank of Paraguay has its headquarters in this city. Its mission is to preserve and ensure the stability and value of the currency, promote the effectiveness and stability of the financial system, and fulfill its role as a bank of banks and financial agent of the State. To this end, it has various powers in monetary, financial, credit, and international exchange matters.\nAccording to the 2022 Cost of Living ranking prepared by ECA International, the price of products and services in about 200 cities around the world was compared. The study revealed that Asunci\u00f3n is the third cheapest city in Latin America for a foreigner.\nReal estate growth and expansion.\nRegional Real Estate focuses on Asunci\u00f3n due to low inflation, exchange rate stability, high rental income, and lower taxes. Most of the buildings are intelligent and have cutting-edge technology, like others that combine mixed uses. Between 2015 and 2020, real estate developments demanded an investment of more than US$1\u00a0billion, and the place in Asunci\u00f3n where this impact received the most was on Aviadores del Chaco Avenue and Santa Teresa Avenue.\nMuch of this achievement was due to the change in customs that citizens have been presenting, in relation to the fact that many owners changed their way of living and are more demanding with comfort, especially with technology, which enhances the possibility of going to live in apartments to acquire comfort, location, security, price, quality, among other issues. Another key is that Paraguay in recent years has noticed the rise in the purchasing power of the middle and upper-middle classes (young professionals, with an average age of 35 years), and this situation has led them to search and buy a home in the departments, to work in the offices that were opened from 2014 to the present.\nEducation.\nSchools.\nThe city has a large number of both public and private schools. The best-known public schools are the Colegio Nacional de la Capital (which is one of the oldest schools in the city, founded in 1877), Colegio T\u00e9cnico Nacional, Colegio Nacional Presidente Franco, and Colegio Nacional Asunci\u00f3n Escalada. The best-known private schools are, American School of Asunci\u00f3n, Colegio San Jos\u00e9, St. Annes School, Colegio del Sol, Colegio Santa Clara, Colegio Goethe and Colegio de la Asunci\u00f3n, Colegio Las Almenas, Colegio Campoalto, Colegio Dante Alighieri, Colegio San Francisco, Colegio San Ignacio de Loyola, Colegio Santa Teresa de Jes\u00fas, Colegio Inmaculado Coraz\u00f3n de Mar\u00eda, Salesianito, Colegio Cristo Rey, Colegio Internacional.\nUniversities.\nThe main universities in the city are the Universidad Americana and the Universidad Nacional de Asunci\u00f3n (state-run). The Universidad Nacional de Asunci\u00f3n was founded in 1889 and has an enrollment of just over 40,000 students. The Universidad Cat\u00f3lica Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Asunci\u00f3n was founded in 1960 and has a current enrollment of around 21,000 students. The Cat\u00f3lica has a small campus in the downtown area next to the cathedral and a larger campus in the Santa Ana neighborhood, outwards toward the adjoining city of Lambar\u00e9, while the Universidad Nacional has its main campus in the city of San Lorenzo, some eastward from Asunci\u00f3n. There are also a number of smaller, privately run universities such as Uninorte, Universidad Cat\u00f3lica Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Asunci\u00f3n and Universidad Aut\u00f3noma de Asunci\u00f3n, among others.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the last 2022 census the city has 462,241 inhabitants and a density of 3951/km2, which represents 8% of the population of Paraguay. The Metropolitan Area of Asunci\u00f3n exceeds 2.3\u00a0million people, around 40% of the Paraguayan population. It is the most populated city in the country, with the greatest traffic of people and vehicles, since it is estimated that around 1.5\u00a0million people and 600,000 vehicles of all types circulate daily in Asunci\u00f3n.\nBetween 1962 and 1992, the capital city registered a more than double increase in inhabitants and is currently the only city in Paraguay to have almost 500,000 inhabitants, surpassing other large urban centers such as Ciudad del Este and San Lorenzo. Since the late 1990s, there has been demographic stagnation in the city because the peripheral cities belonging to Greater Asunci\u00f3n have recently absorbed most of the \"new\" population due to the low cost of land, lower taxes, easy access to the capital, among others.\nThe population has increased greatly during the last few decades as a consequence of internal migration from other Departments of Paraguay, at first because of the economic boom in the 1970s, and later because of economic recession in the countryside. The adjacent cities in the Gran Asunci\u00f3n area, such as Luque, Lambar\u00e9, San Lorenzo, Fernando de la Mora and Mariano Roque Alonso, have absorbed most of this influx due to the low cost of the land and easy access to Asunci\u00f3n.\nThe female population predominates in the city, as is characteristic in urban areas, which are poles of attraction due to the better employment opportunities offered to women. In Asunci\u00f3n, for every 100 women, there are only 89 men. The demographic structure by age group reveals that the group of people between 15 and 29 years old prevails, followed by the group of people between 30 and 59 years. The average age of Asunci\u00f3n is 31 years old, above the national average of 27 years. Asunci\u00f3n is considered a multicultural city.\nReligion.\nApproximately 90% of the population of Asunci\u00f3n professes Catholicism. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Asunci\u00f3n covers an area of including the city and surrounding area and has a total population of 1,780,000, of whom 1,612,000 are Catholic. The Catholic Archbishop is Eustaquio Pastor Cuquejo Verga, C.SS.R. In Paraguay's capital there are also places of worship of other Christian denominations, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as well as of other religions including Islam, Buddhism and Judaism. \nLanguage.\nMost people in Asunci\u00f3n speak one of two languages as their principal language: Paraguayan Spanish (spoken by 56.9% of the population) and Guaran\u00ed (spoken by 11.2%). 27.4% of the population speaks the Jopar\u00e1 dialect, a mix of Guaran\u00ed with loanwords from Spanish (Creole). Other languages are represented by 4.5% of the population. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation by sex and age according to the 2002 census\nDistricts and neighborhoods.\nAsunci\u00f3n is organised geographically into districts and these in turn bring together the different neighbourhoods.\nInfrastructure.\nAsunci\u00f3n has the main political, economic, social, recreational, and cultural infrastructure of the country. Its urban development began at the end of the 19th century, when the significant presence of Europeans brought with it an urban and aesthetic remodeling of the city, with the construction of numerous buildings and mansions, maintained to this day under the protection of a municipal ordinance that prevents major changes or demolitions. Drinking water and electricity coverage reaches almost 100% of the city.\nRoads and highways.\nThe road infrastructure has been maintained for various periods of time without significant changes. The main access routes to the city are avenues and to a lesser extent highways and viaducts. Previously, the electric tram existed as a means of transportation until the end of the last century, but it was replaced by new fleets of buses. The construction of the metrobus and the local train was planned, which will connect the capital with the rest of the metropolitan area, but it was interrupted due to various irregularities.\nMariscal L\u00f3pez Avenue connects the capital with the neighboring city of Fernando de la Mora and passes through two large areas: the Villa Morra neighborhood and the Old town; General Santos Avenue is an important access route to the capital, it is mostly used by the inhabitants of neighboring Lambar\u00e9; while Eusebio Ayala Avenue is mainly used by buses during peak hours, due to the large number of lanes available. The Acceso Sur viaduct connects with the Mercado de Abasto, an important supply center. Madame Lynch Avenue borders practically the entire eastern area of the city, being a quick route to cross from one side to the other. Aviadores del Chaco Avenue is an important access road from Luque and also serves as a highway for access to the Conmebol building complex and the international airport, among other important places. \u00d1u Guaz\u00fa highway connects the cities of Luque and Mariano Roque Alonso with Asunci\u00f3n.\nTransportation.\nBecause the Paraguay River runs right next to Asunci\u00f3n the city is served by a river terminal in the downtown area. This port is strategically located inside a bay and it is where most freight enters and leaves the country. There is a lesser terminal in the Sajonia neighborhood, and a shuttle port in Ita Enramada, almost opposite the Argentine city of Clorinda, Formosa.\nPublic transportation is used heavily and is served through buses (locally called \"colectivos\", \"micros\" or \"buses\") that reach all the regions of the city and surrounding dormitory communities. From 23 October 2020, an electronic card is required to use these buses. There are two cards available from two different providers: \"Jaha\" (Guarani for \"Let's Go\") and \"M\u00e1s\" (Spanish for \"More\").\nThe main long-distance bus terminal (TOA, or Terminal de \u00d3mnibus de Asunci\u00f3n) is on the Rep\u00fablica Argentina Avenue and its bus services connect all of the Departments of Paraguay, as well as international routes to nearby countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia and Uruguay. Some 115 companies service more than 1,300 departures per day. As many as 55,000 passengers depart on these routes daily, with demand peaking on special occasions like Holy Week and New Year's Day.\nSilvio Pettirossi International Airport is Paraguay's main national and international gateway, located at Luque, suburb of the capital, Asunci\u00f3n. It is named after Paraguayan aviator Silvio Petrossi and was formerly known as Presidente Stroessner International Airport. As Paraguay's busiest airport, it is the hub of Latam Paraguay and Paranair.\nBolt and Uber compete with various taxi companies.\nHealthcare.\nAsunci\u00f3n houses most of the large medical centers throughout the country. There are currently more than 50 places that provide primary health care. Public Health is dependent on the State and completely free. Through a resolution promoted by President Fernando Lugo in December 2009, free treatment applies at the national level. This has made it possible for more people to have access to different health services, ranging from outpatient consultations to highly complex interventions in public hospitals.\nImportant private sanatoriums and highly complex centers offer their services. Some of them are the Medical Emergency Center, the Clinic Hospital, the Military Hospital, the Central Hospital of the Social Security Institute, the Rigoberto Caballero Police Hospital, among others.\nSecurity.\nAsunci\u00f3n previously did not have its own police force. Despite being an independent municipality, Paraguayan legislation does not establish the creation of police forces by districts. All public security was protected by the National Police. However, on 23 December 2010, the former municipal mayor Arnaldo Samaniego promulgated the first ordinance that created the Municipal Police of Asunci\u00f3n, taking into account that one of the priorities of his government program was citizen security. Currently, the Municipal Police of Asunci\u00f3n is made up of 52 police officers.\nUrban projects.\nSocial housing.\nIn the construction projects of \"Avenida Costanera Norte\" and \"Parque Bicentenario\" a new neighborhood was created with 144 popular homes to resettle families that were directly affected by the plans to improve the infrastructure of the city. The project included a \"social component\" that cost around $5.8\u00a0million to build the houses and infrastructure of the new neighborhood and pay compensation to families who were going to leave the area.\nCoastal Linear Park.\nThe coastal park of about 13 hectares was built. This park unites the old buildings of the urban area, such as the Palacio de los L\u00f3pez, with the Cabildo and Metropolitan Cathedral of Asunci\u00f3n. It was inaugurated in May 2011, within the framework of the celebrations of the bicentennial of the independence of Paraguay.\nSubsequently, work on the \"Parque Lineal Costanera\" project continued, the first stage of which was enabled at the end of 2019 with the following characteristics: exclusive bicycle lanes, paths, fair spaces, gym equipment, and a parking lot with capacity for 350 vehicles. The second stage of this linear park will add 10 hectares of new green space, contemplating three key components: a coastal linear park, a component for the National Navy, and a boat ramp. The characteristics of the second stage Linear Park are: 3-meter-wide bike paths, parking spaces, bicycle parking, drinking fountains, toilets, 3 reinforced concrete bridges, soccer fields, playgrounds, outdoor gym areas, first aid, and a police booth.\nPort axis and government offices.\nThese are five towers where six ministries of the Executive branch will be installed, located in the port of Asunci\u00f3n. These works culminated at the end of 2020 and constitute the new building corporations built in the old town, which will serve as an anchor for the reconversion of the place. The project of the Master Plan for the Reconversion of the Port of Asunci\u00f3n, promoted by The Ministry of Public Works and Communications (MOPC) was conceived in the 1990s, and has been reconfirmed in each government since then. An example of this is the completion of the Costanera Sur and Costanera Norte works. The construction of the new government offices is the nerve center of Asunci\u00f3n, according to \u00d3scar Stark, manager of the Urban Reconversion Program. The project includes scaffolding to prevent the problems generated by the growth of the Paraguay River, with a level of 64, which refers to a protection of up to 10 meters. Historical data indicate that the highest flood in the last 100 years was at level 63. The construction of a museum is also planned, which is a posthumous work of the architect Carlos Colombino, of which the project has been completed, and whose investment will be financed through the public-private alliance (PPA), which will equip a shopping center, hotel, convention center, and apartment buildings.\nCulture.\nBeing the third-oldest capital city of South America, after Quito and Lima, Asunci\u00f3n has plenty to offer, culturally speaking, from Spanish colonial-era buildings (Baroque to neo-Gothic), museums or urban parks, this classic city also hosts several symphony orchestras, ballet, opera and theater companies. The best known orchestras are the City of Asunci\u00f3n's Symphony Orchestra (OSCA), the National Symphony Orchestra and the Northern University Symphony Orchestra. Among professional ballet companies, most renowned are the Asunci\u00f3n Classic and Modern Municipal Ballet, the National Ballet and the Northern University Ballet. The main opera company is the Northern University Opera Company. A long-standing theater company is Arlequ\u00edn Theater Foundation's. Traditional venues include the Municipal Theater, the Paraguayan-Japanese Center, the Central Bank's Great Lyric Theater, the Juan de Salazar Cultural Center, the Americas Theater, the Tom Jobim Theater, the Arlequ\u00edn Theater and the Manzana de la Rivera. Among the many venues for concerts in the city, the Jockey Club (Asunci\u00f3n) is one of the most important. Asunci\u00f3n is also the center of Architecture in Paraguay.\nMuseums.\nMuseums in and around Asunci\u00f3n are generally small. In compensation, the wide variety of its heritage allowed the creation of a large number of small rooms that give visitors the opportunity to learn about the history of the country through the artistic expressions contained therein. These are some of the museums found in Asunci\u00f3n:\nGreen capital.\nAsunci\u00f3n was declared the \"Green Capital of Ibero-America\" during the period of former intendant Arnaldo Samaniego (2010\u20132015) in Lisbon, at the meeting of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities (UCCI). The municipal public policy called \"Rohayhu Asunci\u00f3n, Green Capital\" (Guaran\u00ed: I love you Asunci\u00f3n, the green capital of the world) fulfilled seven indicators that must be adequate by the city to opt for the denomination. These indicators are biodiversity or green areas per person, public green areas, number of trees planted, number of bird species, and number of migratory birds; Waste: waste ratio, collectors and proper disposal, waste generated per person, waste recycling and refusal policy; Land use and buildings: population density, green building policy, land use policy and urban planning; Transportation: extension of the mass transportation network, number of cars and motorcycles, urban mass transportation policy, vehicle congestion reduction policy; Water: population with access to drinking water, water sustainability policy; Sanitation: population with access to improved sanitation, sanitation policy, storm drainage works; Air Quality: clean air policy; and Environmental Governance: environmental monitoring and public participation.\nThe seven treasures of cultural heritage material of Asunci\u00f3n.\nThe selection of the seven treasures of cultural heritage material took place in Asunci\u00f3n during the months of April and May 2009. Promoted by the \"Organizaci\u00f3n Capital Americana de la Cultura\", with the collaboration of the Paraguayan authorities participating in the election was carried out with the intention to disclose the material cultural heritage of Asunci\u00f3n.\nA total of 45 candidates have chosen to become one of the treasures of cultural heritage material Assumption. The result of the vote, which involved 12,417 people, is as follows: Palacio de los L\u00f3pez, the National Pantheon of Heroes, the Cabildo, the Metropolitan Cathedral, the Guaran\u00ed Hotel, the Municipal Theater and the Church of the Holy Trinity.\nTourism.\nThe city is home to the Godoy Museum, the Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes (which contains paintings from the 19th century), the Church of La Encarnaci\u00f3n, the Metropolitan Cathedral and the National Pantheon of the Heroes, a smaller version of Les Invalides in Paris, where many of the nation's heroes are entombed. Other landmarks include the Palacio de los L\u00f3pez, the old Senate building (a modern building opened to house Congress in 2003) and the Casa de la Independencia (one of the few examples of colonial architecture remaining in the city).\nCalle Palma is the main street downtown where several historical buildings, plazas, shops, restaurants and caf\u00e9s are located. The \"Manzana de la Rivera\", located in front of the Presidential Palace, is a series of old traditional homes that have been restored and serve as a museum showcasing the architectural evolution of the city. The old railway station operates as a museum. There is a proposed train route (2027) from here to the cities of Luque and Aregu\u00e1. Near Asunci\u00f3n, about thirty minutes outside the city, there is also a beautiful lake in the city of San Bernardino. People usually go here during the summer and it is a nice place to visit when the weather is warm.\nAsunci\u00f3n also has luxurious malls that contain shops selling well-known brands. The biggest shopping malls are Shopping del Sol; Mariscal L\u00f3pez Shopping, Shopping Villa Morra in the central part of the city, Shopping Multiplaza on the outskirts of the city and the Mall Excelsior located downtown. Pinedo Shopping and San Lorenzo Shopping are the newest and also sizeable shopping malls located just from Asunci\u00f3n's boundaries, respectively, in the city of San Lorenzo, part of Greater Asunci\u00f3n. In 2016 a new shopping mall, La Galeria, was inaugurated. It is in between the blue towers, and is now the largest shopping mall in the country.\nHospitality and gastronomy.\nThe Paraguayan hospitality industry has seen significant investments in recent years. This economic sector is contributing strongly to the growth of the country's tourism sector. This brought with it greater capacity and quality of accommodation and, according to Senatur data, between 2013 and 2017 the number of beds grew 34%. In 2017, Paraguay reached record numbers in the arrival of international tourists, with growth three times higher than the world average, a dynamism that has been underpinned by the increase in the number of accommodation establishments in the country.\nAt the country level there are more than 905 accommodation establishments, totaling 33,813 beds, and one of the challenges that is still being faced is the hotel categorization with sustainability criteria, which if approved would place Paraguay at the forefront in this regard. In 2017, approximately 1.6\u00a0million foreign tourists arrived, generating foreign exchange earnings of more than US$600\u00a0million, especially in Asunci\u00f3n.\nHotel entrepreneurs, both national and representatives of international chains, invested their capital in favor of national tourism development thanks to the confidence generated by economic stability, the strength of the currency, and the continuity of public policies regarding tourism by part of the National Government. Added to this is the commitment of the tourism sector to a solid public-private alliance, which allows it to work committedly in the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Meetings Tourism since 2014, positioning the country as a competitive regional player in this matter.\nSports.\nAssociation football is the main sport in Paraguay, and Asunci\u00f3n is home to some of the most important and traditional teams in the country. These include Olimpia, Cerro Porte\u00f1o, Club Libertad, Club Nacional, Club Guaran\u00ed and Club Sol de Am\u00e9rica, which have their own stadiums and sport facilities for affiliated members.\nThe Defensores del Chaco stadium is the main football stadium of the country and is located in the neighborhood of Sajonia, just a few blocks away from the center of Asunci\u00f3n. Since it is a national stadium sometimes it is used for other activities such as rock concerts. Asunci\u00f3n is also the heart of Paraguayan rugby union. The Estadio General Pablo Rojas of the Cerro Porte\u00f1o is also located among the main stadiums in the country, being the one with the largest capacity in Paraguay.\nThe city also has important sports and recreational centers such as the \u00d1u Guas\u00fa Park, the National Sports Secretariat (where there's a basketball stadium and athletics tracks), the Asunci\u00f3n Golf Club, etc. Asunci\u00f3n is the headquarters of most of the country's sports competitions, whether swimming, tennis, golf, handball, basketball, football, among others.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAsunci\u00f3n is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCooperation agreements.\nAsunci\u00f3n also cooperates with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56838", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56838", "title": "Bangui, Central African Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "56839", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56839", "title": "Banjul, Gambia", "text": ""}
{"id": "56840", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56840", "title": "Basseterre, Saint Kitts and Nevis", "text": ""}
{"id": "56841", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56841", "title": "Basseterre, Saint Kitts", "text": ""}
{"id": "56842", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56842", "title": "Bissau, Guinea-Bissau", "text": ""}
{"id": "56843", "revid": "60840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56843", "title": "Bridgetown, Barbados", "text": ""}
{"id": "56844", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56844", "title": "Bujumbura, Burundi", "text": ""}
{"id": "56845", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56845", "title": "Castries, Saint Lucia", "text": ""}
{"id": "56846", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56846", "title": "Chisinau, Moldova", "text": ""}
{"id": "56847", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56847", "title": "Colombo, Sri Lanka", "text": ""}
{"id": "56848", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56848", "title": "Dhaka, Bangladesh", "text": ""}
{"id": "56849", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56849", "title": "Dodoma, Tanzania", "text": ""}
{"id": "56850", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56850", "title": "Dushanbe, Tajikistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "56851", "revid": "38179619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56851", "title": "Stalinabad", "text": ""}
{"id": "56852", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56852", "title": "Conakry, Guinea", "text": ""}
{"id": "56853", "revid": "38775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56853", "title": "Freetown (disambiguation)", "text": "Freetown is the capital of Sierra Leone.\nFreetown may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56854", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56854", "title": "Hanoi, Vietnam", "text": ""}
{"id": "56855", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56855", "title": "Gaborone, Botswana", "text": ""}
{"id": "56856", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56856", "title": "Koror, Palau", "text": ""}
{"id": "56857", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56857", "title": "Kigali, Rwanda", "text": ""}
{"id": "56858", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56858", "title": "Kampala, Uganda", "text": ""}
{"id": "56859", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56859", "title": "\u00cele de R\u00e9", "text": "Island off the coast of France\n\u00cele de R\u00e9 (; variously spelled Rh\u00e9 or Rh\u00e9a; Poitevin: \"ile de R\u00e9t\"; , ) is an island off the Atlantic coast of France near La Rochelle, Charente-Maritime, on the northern side of the Pertuis d'Antioche strait.\nIts highest point has an elevation of . It is long and wide. The \u00cele de R\u00e9 bridge, completed in 1988, connects it to La Rochelle on the mainland.\nAdministration.\nAdministratively, the island is part of the Charente-Maritime department, Nouvelle-Aquitaine (before 2015: Poitou-Charentes). The island is also a part of the Charente-Maritime's 1st constituency.\nLocated in the arrondissement of La Rochelle, \u00cele de R\u00e9 includes two cantons: Saint-Martin-de-R\u00e9 eastwards and Ars-en-R\u00e9 westwards. The island is divided into 10 communes, from east to west: Rivedoux-Plage, La Flotte, Sainte-Marie-de-R\u00e9, Saint-Martin-de-R\u00e9, Le Bois-Plage-en-R\u00e9, La Couarde-sur-Mer, Loix, Ars-en-R\u00e9, Saint-Cl\u00e9ment-des-Baleines, Les Portes-en-R\u00e9.\nHistory.\nDuring Roman times, \u00cele de R\u00e9 was an archipelago consisting of three small islands. The space between the islands was progressively filled by a combination of human activity (salt fields gained from the sea) and silting.\nIn the seventh and eighth centuries the island, along with Ol\u00e9ron, formed the \"Vacetae Insulae\" or Vacetian Islands, according to the \"Cosmographia\". Since \"Vaceti\" is another name for the Vascones, this reference is evidence of Basque (Gascon) settlement or control of the islands by that date. In 745, Hunald, the Duke of Aquitaine, retired to a monastery on the island. In the mid-twelfth century, a Cistercian monastery was founded on the isle, where the Abbot Isaac of Stella sojourned amid the Becket controversy.\nThe island became English in 1154, when Eleanor of Aquitaine became queen of England through her marriage with Henry Plantagenet. The island reverted to France in 1243, when Henry III of England returned it to Louis IX through a treaty. In 1360, however, with the Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny, \u00cele de R\u00e9 briefly became English again, until the 1370s.\nThe first fishing locks were constructed between the 13th and 15th centuries. The locks consist of fixed fish traps which become submerged at high tide and retain the fish when the tide goes out.\nCapture (1625).\nIn February 1625, the Protestant Duke of Soubise led a Huguenot revolt against the French king Louis XIII, and after publishing a manifesto, invaded and occupied the island of R\u00e9. He seized R\u00e9 with 300 soldiers and 100 sailors. From there he sailed up to Brittany, where he led his successful attack on the royal fleet in Blavet, although he could not take the fort after a three-week siege. Soubise then returned to R\u00e9 with 15 ships and soon occupied the Ile d'Ol\u00e9ron as well, thus giving him command of the Atlantic coast from Nantes to Bordeaux. Through these actions, he was recognized as the head of the reform, and named himself \"Admiral of the Protestant Church\". A few months later, in September 1625, Charles, Duke of Guise, organized a landing in order to recapture the islands, with the support of the Dutch (20 ships) and English navies. The fleet of La Rochelle was defeated, as was Soubise with 3,000 men, when he led a counter-attack against the royal troops who had landed on the island. The island was invested forcing Soubise to flee to England.\nSiege of Saint-Martin-de-R\u00e9 (1627).\nIn 1627, an English invasion force under the command of George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, attacked the island in order to relieve the Siege of La Rochelle. Buckingham's forces were poorly equipped and failed to even scale the walls of the citadel as their scaling ladders were too short. After three months of combat in the Siege of Saint-Martin-de-R\u00e9 against the French under Marshal Toiras, the Duke was forced to withdraw. The English lost more than 4,000 out of 7,000 troops during the campaign.\nLater history.\nThe main port, Saint-Martin, was fortified by Vauban in 1681 as a component of the belt of forts and citadels built to protect the military harbour of Rochefort. It was later used as a depot for convicts on their way to the penal settlements of New Caledonia and French Guiana. Prisoners included Alfred Dreyfus, en route to the penal colony of Devil's Island after his conviction for treason.\nThe old city of Saint-Martin, within the walls of the citadel, was added in 2008 to the World Heritage Site list, along with 11 others Fortifications of Vauban across France.\nDuring World War II, the beaches of the \u00cele de R\u00e9 were fortified by German forces with bunkers, in order to block a possible seaward invasion. Many of the bunkers are still visible, in a more or less derelict state. Several scenes of the 1962 movie \"The Longest Day\" were filmed on the beaches of the island.\nConnection to the mainland.\nIn 1987, a bridge was built to connect the island to the mainland. Previously, the island was connected through roll-on roll-off ferries (called \"bacs\"), which could accommodate vehicles and passengers. In peak summer time periods, the waiting time to board a ferry could reach several hours. The bridge was built by Bouygues. Since then, tourism on the island has developed considerably, with real estate prices reaching high levels. The easier transportation system has stimulated the purchase of holiday homes by people from as far as Paris, who can visit for week-ends, mostly in spring and summer. Using the bridge requires the payment of a toll (either \u20ac8 or \u20ac16 return for a normal car depending on the season) and makes it the most expensive road to use per kilometre in France. The Paris-La Rochelle high-speed train (TGV) trip takes around three hours, and then taxis or buses can be taken to the island. \u00cele de R\u00e9 can also be reached from Paris by plane. It takes 85 minutes to fly from Paris to La Rochelle airport.\nAfter the TF1 channel was purchased by Bouygues, the talk-show \"Droit de r\u00e9ponse\" (Right to reply), shown on prime-time Saturday evening by Michel Polac was suppressed after criticizing this bridge.\nLife.\nThe area is a popular tourist destination. It has approximately the same number of hours of sunshine as the southern coast of France. The island has a constant light breeze, and the water temperature is generally cool. The island is surrounded by sandy beaches.\nThe island has a year-round resident population of approximately 17,650 residents and a summer resident population of about 220,000. The island has a network of cycle tracks, with many residents rarely using cars for transportation.\nAmerican celebrities, including Johnny Depp, Katy Perry, and British actor Orlando Bloom, have holidayed there.\nVisiting French celebrities include Charles Aznavour, Claude Nougaro, Bernard Giraudeau, Claude Rich, Carole Bouquet, Philippe Sollers, and Caroline of Monaco. French politicians, including Jean Monnet and ex-Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, have lived on the island.\nOysters and fresh fish are caught year-round. A tradition sees fishermen sell a small quantity of their catch directly on the quays after a harvest, enabling them to buy a drink. Markets are open in the main towns.\nThe island is known for donkeys wearing (trousers), originally a bite prevention method but now a tourist attraction.\nMiscellaneous.\nNearby Fort Boyard, a Napoleonic maritime fort, is currently used for a television game show series of the same name.\n\u00cele de R\u00e9 is one of the few locations in the world where cross seas produce a square grid of waves.\nMedia.\nR\u00e9 \u00e0 la Hune is a free information newspaper and website founded in 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56861", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56861", "title": "Indonesia/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "56862", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56862", "title": "Indonesia/Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "56863", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56863", "title": "Indonesia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "56864", "revid": "10248457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56864", "title": "Munster", "text": "Traditional province in the south of Ireland\nMunster ( or ) is the largest of the four provinces of Ireland, located in the south west of the island. In early Ireland, the Kingdom of Munster was one of the kingdoms of Gaelic Ireland ruled by a \"king of over-kings\" (). Following the Norman invasion of Ireland, the ancient kingdoms were shired into counties for administrative and judicial purposes. In later centuries, local government legislation has seen further sub-division of the historic counties.\nMunster has no official function for local government purposes. For the purposes of the ISO, the province is listed as one of the provincial sub-divisions of the State () and coded as \"IE-M\". Munster covers an area of . Its population was 1,373,346 in 2022, with Cork being the largest city. Other significant urban centres in the province include Limerick and Waterford.\nHistory.\nIn the early centuries AD, Munster was the domain of the Iverni peoples and the Clanna Dedad familial line, led by C\u00fa Ro\u00ed and to whom the king Conaire M\u00f3r belonged. In the 5th century, Saint Patrick spent several years in the area and founded Christian churches and ordained priests. The area was ruled by the D\u00e1irine and Corcu Lo\u00edgde overlords.\nDuring the Early Middle Ages, most of the area was part of the Kingdom of Munster, ruled by the E\u00f3ganachta dynasty. Later rulers from the E\u00f3ganachta included Cathal mac Finguine and Feidlimid mac Cremthanin. Notable regional kingdoms and lordships of Early Medieval Munster were Iarmuman (West Munster), Osraige (Ossory), U\u00ed Liath\u00e1in, U\u00ed Fidgenti, \u00c9ile, M\u00fascraige, Ciarraige Luachra, Corcu Duibne, Corcu Baiscinn, and D\u00e9isi Muman.\nIn the 9th century, the Gaels were joined by Norse Vikings, who founded towns such as Cork, Waterford and Limerick, for the most part, incorporated into a maritime empire by the Dynasty of Ivar, who periodically threatened Munster with conquest in the next century. Around this period Ossory broke away from Munster. The E\u00f3ganachta dominated Munster until the 10th century, which saw the rise of the Dalcassian clan, who had earlier annexed Thomond, north of the River Shannon to Munster. Their leaders were the ancestors of the O'Brien dynasty and spawned Brian Boru, perhaps the most noted High King of Ireland, and several of whose descendants were also high kings.\nIn 1118, Munster fractured into the Kingdom of Thomond under the O'Briens, the Kingdom of Desmond under the MacCarthy dynasty (E\u00f3ganachta), and the short-lived Kingdom of Ormond under the O'Kennedys (another Dalcassian sept). The three crowns of the flag of Munster represent these three late kingdoms.\nThere was Norman influence from the 14th century, including by the FitzGerald, de Clare and Butler houses, two of whom carved out earldoms within the Lordship of Ireland, the Earls of Desmond eventually becoming independent potentates, while the Earls of Ormond remained closer to England. The O'Brien of Thomond and MacCarthy of Desmond surrendered and regranted sovereignty to the Tudors in 1543 and 1565, joining the Kingdom of Ireland. The impactful Desmond Rebellions, led by the FitzGeralds, soon followed.\nThe area of Munster was colonized in the mid to late 16th century by the British plantations of Ireland during the Tudor conquest of Ireland. A group known as the West Country Men played a role in the colonization of Munster. In 1568, attempts to settle a joint stock colony at Kerrycurrihy were made. Richard Grenville seized lands for colonization at Tracton, to the west of Cork harbour. The Munster plantation was the largest colonial venture of the English at the time.\nIn the mid-19th century much of the area was hit hard in the Great Famine, especially the west. The province was affected by events in the Irish War of Independence in the early 20th century, and there was a brief Munster Republic during the Irish Civil War.\nThe Irish leaders Michael Collins and earlier Daniel O'Connell came from families of the old Gaelic Munster gentry.\nCulture.\nNoted for its traditions in Irish folk music, and with many ancient castles and monasteries in the province, Munster is a tourist destination. During the fifth century, St. Patrick spent seven years founding churches and ordaining priests in Munster, but a fifth-century bishop named Ailbe is the patron saint of Munster.\nIn Irish mythology, a number of ancient goddesses are associated with the province including Anann, \u00c1ine, Grian, Cl\u00edodhna, Aimend, M\u00f3r Muman, B\u00e9binn, Aibell and Mongfind. The druid-god of Munster is Mug Ruith and Tlachtga is his daughter. Another legendary figure is Donn.\nThe province has long had trading and cultural links with continental Europe. The Corcu Lo\u00edgde had a trading fleet active along the French Atlantic coast, as far south as Gascony, importing wine to Munster. The E\u00f3ganachta had ecclesiastical ties with Germany, which show in the architecture of their ceremonial capital at the Rock of Cashel.\nThe majority of Irish ogham inscriptions are found in Munster, principally in areas occupied by the Iverni, especially the Corcu Duibne. Later, Europe's first linguistic dictionary in any non-Classical language, the \"Sanas Cormaic\", was compiled by Munster scholars, traditionally thought to have been directed by the king-bishop Cormac mac Cuilenn\u00e1in (d. 908).\nThe School of Ross in Munster was one of Europe's leading centres of learning in the Early Middle Ages.\nSport.\nSeveral sports in Munster are organised on a provincial basis, or operate competitions along provincial lines. This includes traditionally popular sports such as hurling, Gaelic football, rugby union and soccer, as well as cricket (Munster Cricket Union), hockey (Munster Hockey Union), and others.\nHurling and football.\nMunster is noted for its tradition of hurling. Three of the four most successful teams in the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship are from Munster; Cork GAA, Tipperary GAA and Limerick GAA. The final of the Munster Senior Hurling Championship is one of the most important days in the Irish GAA calendar. Munster is Ireland's only province whose every single county has won at least one All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship.\nTraditionally, the dominant teams in Munster football are Kerry GAA and Cork GAA, although Tipperary GAA and Limerick GAA have also won All-Ireland Senior Football Championships. Kerry in particular are the most successful county in the history of football.\nRugby union.\nRugby is a popular game in the cities of Limerick and Cork. Munster Rugby is an Irish Rugby Football Union representative side which competes in the United Rugby Championship competition, winning in 2003, 2009, 2011 and 2023 and in the Heineken Cup, winning in 2006 and 2008. Until 2016, the Munster side was the only Irish side to have defeated the New Zealand All Blacks.\nSoccer.\nAssociation football is also a popular game in Munster, with the Munster Football Association governing a number of aspects of the game in the province. In 2025 five Munster clubs play in the League of Ireland: Waterford FC and Cork City F.C., in the League of Ireland Premier Division; and Cobh Ramblers, Treaty United F.C. and Kerry F.C. in the First Division.\nCricket.\nIn Cricket, the province is represented by the Munster Reds in the Inter-Provincial Cup one-day competition and the Inter-Provincial Trophy Twenty20 competition. Munster does not currently participate in the first-class inter-provincial tournament, though Cricket Ireland does have plans to include Munster in the format.\nIrish language.\nThe Irish language, or more specifically Munster Irish, is spoken as a first language in Gaeltachta\u00ed (Irish speaking areas) in a number of areas in the province. This includes West Kerry (\"Corca Dhuibhne\"), South Kerry (\"U\u00edbh R\u00e1thach\"), West Cork (\"M\u00fascra\u00ed\"), south-west Cork (\"Oile\u00e1n Cl\u00e9ire\"), and parts of Waterford (\"Gaeltacht na Rinne\" or \"Gaeltacht na nD\u00e9ise\").\nThere are about 35,000 Irish language speakers in Munster, with 9,737 native speakers in the Munster Gaeltacht areas of Cork, Kerry and Waterford. There are also 12,219 pupils attending 45 Gaelscoils (Irish language primary schools) and 15 Gaelchol\u00e1iste (Irish language secondary schools) in the province. In 2011, there were 13,193 daily speakers outside the education system in Munster.\nDivisions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe province is divided into six traditional counties: Clare, Cork, Kerry, Limerick, Tipperary and Waterford. Munster is the largest of Ireland's four provinces by land area, and the third largest by population.\nUrban areas.\nMunster has many large towns, including a number of growing satellite towns, and is the province with the most cities (three) in Ireland. The following is a list of urban areas in Munster in order of size in 2022, with cities and county towns bolded:\nUrban areas over 10,000 inhabitants:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUrban areas with 5,000\u201310,000 inhabitants:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\n2014 CSO figures indicated that GDP per capita in the province ranged from \u20ac28,094 in the South Tipperary/Waterford (South-East) region, to \u20ac50,544 in Cork and Kerry (South-West). Disposable income in the province was approximately \u20ac22,000 per person in 2008 \u2013 behind the Eastern and Dublin region (\u20ac25,000 per person) and ahead of the Border, Midland and Western regions (\u20ac20,000 per person).\nAgriculture.\nMunster's agricultural industry centres around the Golden Vale pasturelands which cover counties Cork, Limerick and Tipperary. Kerry Group manufactures dairy products from the dairy cows of the region. Glanbia is a food producer which operates an \"innovation centre\" in the region. Dawn Meats operate from County Waterford.\nRetail.\nIrish-owned retailer Dunnes Stores was founded in Cork. Ireland's largest supermarket group, the Musgrave Group, is based in Munster.\nEmployment.\nLarge employers in the region include AOL, Bausch &amp; Lomb, Dairygold, Dell, Amazon, Motorola, Amgen, Pfizer, Analog Devices, Fexco Financial Services, Vistakon, Waterford Crystal, Apple Computer, Intel, Novartis, O2, Lufthansa Technik, Kerry Group, Siemens, Sony and Blizzard Entertainment. \nThe largest employment hub in Munster is Metropolitan Cork, where a number of multinational firms are located in the Cork city area, including at Little Island. The Shannon Free Zone, in County Clare and near Limerick city, is also a centre of employment.\nIn media.\nA number of television companies and studios have (or had) a Munster-focus. These include RT\u00c9 Cork (RT\u00c9's regional studio in Cork), South Coast TV and Channel South. Channel South transmitted local programming to Cork, Limerick, and parts of Kerry, Waterford, Clare and Tipperary.\nApart from the local city or regional newspapers, a number of print outlets focus or market themselves on a provincial basis. These include the \"Avondhu\" (covering parts of Cork, Waterford, Limerick and Tipperary), the \"Nationalist &amp; Munster Advertiser\", the \"Munster Express\", and others.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;A County Tipperary, arising from the 2014 amalgamation of North Tipperary and South Tipperary councils, has two county towns\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56865", "revid": "48718399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56865", "title": "Lake Baikal", "text": "Freshwater rift lake in Russia\nLake Baikal is a rift lake and the deepest lake in the world. It is situated in southern Siberia, Russia between the federal subjects of Irkutsk Oblast to the northwest and the Republic of Buryatia to the southeast.\nAt \u2014slightly larger than Belgium\u2014Lake Baikal is the world's seventh-largest lake by surface area, as well as the second largest lake in Eurasia after the Caspian Sea. However, because it is also the deepest lake, with a maximum depth of , Lake Baikal is the world's largest freshwater lake by volume, containing of water or 22\u201323% of the world's fresh surface water, more than all of the North American Great Lakes combined. It is also the world's oldest lake at 25\u201330\u00a0million years, and among the clearest. It is estimated that the lake contains around 19% of the unfrozen fresh water on the planet.\nLake Baikal is home to thousands of species of plants and animals, many of them endemic to the region. It is also home to Buryat tribes, who raise goats, camels, cattle, sheep, and horses, on the eastern side of the lake within Buryatia, where the mean temperature varies from a winter minimum of to a summer maximum of . The region to the east of Lake Baikal is referred to as Transbaikalia or as the Transbaikal, and the loosely defined region around the lake itself is sometimes known as Baikalia. UNESCO declared Baikal a World Heritage Site in 1996.\nGeography and hydrography.\nLake Baikal is in a rift valley, created by the Baikal Rift Zone, where the Earth's crust is slowly pulling apart. At long and wide, Lake Baikal has the largest surface area of any freshwater lake in Asia, at , and is the deepest lake in the world at . The surface of the lake is above sea level, while the bottom of the lake is below sea level, and below this lies some of sediment, placing the rift floor some below the surface, the deepest continental rift on Earth.\nIn geological terms, the rift is young and active \u2013 it widens about 4\u00a0mm (0.16\u00a0in) per year. The fault zone is also seismically active; hot springs occur in the area and notable earthquakes happen every few years. The lake is divided into three basins: North, Central, and South, with depths about , , and , respectively. Fault-controlled accommodation zones rising to depths about separate the basins. The North and Central basins are separated by Academician Ridge, while the area around the Selenga Delta and the Buguldeika Saddle separates the Central and South basins. The lake drains into the Angara, a tributary of the Yenisey. Landforms include Cape Ryty on Baikal's northwest coast.\nBaikal's age is estimated at 25\u201330\u00a0million years, making it the most ancient lake in geological history. It is unique among large, high-latitude lakes, as its sediments have not been scoured by overriding continental ice sheets. Russian, U.S., and Japanese cooperative studies of deep-drilling core sediments in the 1990s provide a detailed record of climatic variation over the past 6.7\u00a0million years.\nLonger and deeper sediment cores are expected in the near future. Lake Baikal is the only confined freshwater lake in which direct and indirect evidence of gas hydrates exists.\nThe lake is surrounded by mountains; the Baikal Mountains on the north shore, the Barguzin Range on the northeastern shore and the Primorsky Range stretching along the western shore. The mountains and the taiga are protected as a national park. It contains 27 islands; the largest, Olkhon, is long and is the third-largest lake-bound island in the world. The lake is fed by as many as 330 inflowing rivers. The main ones draining directly into Baikal are the Selenga, the Barguzin, the Upper Angara, the Turka, the Sarma, and the Snezhnaya. It is drained through a single outlet, the Angara.\nRegular winds exist in Baikal's rift valley.\nWater characteristics.\nBaikal is one of the clearest lakes in the world. During the winter, the water transparency in open sections can be as much as , but during the summer it is typically . Baikal is rich in oxygen, even in deep sections, which separates it from distinctly stratified bodies of water such as Lake Tanganyika and the Black Sea.\nIn Lake Baikal, the water temperature varies significantly depending on location, depth, and time of the year. During the winter and spring, the surface freezes for about 4\u20135 months; from early January to early May\u2013June (latest in the north), the lake surface is covered in ice. On average, the ice reaches a thickness of , but in some places with hummocks, it can be more than . During this period, the temperature slowly increases with depth in the lake, being coldest near the ice-covered surface at around freezing, and reaching about at a depth of . \nAfter the surface ice breaks up, the surface water is slowly warmed up by the sun, and in May\u2013June, the upper or so becomes homothermic (same temperature throughout) at around because of water mixing. The sun continues to heat up the surface layer, and at the peak in August can reach up to about in the main sections and in shallow bays in the southern half of the lake.\nDuring this time, the pattern is inverted compared to the winter and spring, as the water temperature falls with increasing depth. As the autumn begins, the surface temperature falls again and a second homothermic period at around of the upper circa occurs in October\u2013November. In the deepest parts of the lake, from about , the temperature is stable at with only minor annual variations.\nThe average surface temperature has risen by almost 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C (2.7\u00a0\u00b0F) in the last 50 years, resulting in a shorter period where the lake is covered by ice. At some locations, hydrothermal vents with water that is about have been found. These are mostly in deep water but locally have also been found in relatively shallow water. They have little effect on the lake's temperature because of its huge volume.\nStormy weather on the lake is common, especially during the summer and autumn, and can result in waves as high as .\nEcology.\nLake Baikal is rich in biodiversity. It hosts more than 1,000 species of plants and 2,500 species of animals based on current knowledge, but the actual figures for both groups are believed to be significantly higher.\nFlora.\nThe watershed of Lake Baikal has numerous floral species represented. The marsh thistle (\"Cirsium palustre\") is found here at the eastern limit of its geographic range.\nSubmerged macrophytic vascular plants are mostly absent, except in some shallow bays along the shores of Lake Baikal. More than 85 species of submerged macrophytes have been recorded, including genera such as \"Ceratophyllum\", \"Myriophyllum\", \"Potamogeton\", and \"Sparganium\". The invasive species \"Elodea canadensis\" was introduced to the lake in the 1950s. Instead of vascular plants, aquatic flora is often dominated by several green algae species, notably \"Draparnaldioides\", \"Tetraspora\", and \"Ulothrix\" in water shallower than ; although \"Aegagrophila\", \"Cladophora\", and \"Draparnaldioides\" may occur deeper than . Except for \"Ulothrix\", these green algae genera contain species endemic to Baikal. More than 400 diatom species, both benthic and planktonic, are found in the lake, and about half of these are endemic to Baikal; however, significant taxonomic uncertainties remain for this group.\nMammals.\nThe Baikal seal or \"nerpa\" (\"Pusa sibirica\") is endemic to Lake Baikal.\nA wide range of land mammals can be found in the habitats around the lake, such as the brown bear (\"Ursus arctos\"), Eurasian wolf (\"Canis lupus lupus\"), red fox (\"Vulpes vulpes\"), sable (\"Martes zibellina\"), stoat (\"Mustela erminea\"), least weasel (\"Mustela nivalis\"), Eurasian otter (\"Lutra lutra\"), snow leopard (\"Panthera uncia\"), Siberian tiger (\"Panthera tigris tigris\"), Amur leopard (\"Panthera pardus orientalis\"), moose (\"Alces alces\"), elk (\"Cervus canadensis\"), reindeer (\"Rangifer tarandus\"), Siberian roe deer (\"Capreolus pygargus\"), Siberian musk deer (\"Moschus moschiferus\"), wild boar (\"Sus scrofa\"), red squirrel (\"Sciurus vulgaris\"), Siberian chipmunk (\"Eutamias sibiricus\"), marmots (\"Marmota\" sp.), lemmings (\"Lemmus\" sp.), and mountain hare (\"Lepus timidus\"). Until the Early Middle Ages, populations of the European bison (\"Bison bonasus\") were found near the lake; this represented the easternmost range of the species.\nBirds.\nThere are 236 species of birds that inhabit Lake Baikal, 29 of which are waterfowl. Although named after the lake, both the Baikal teal and Baikal bush warbler are widespread in eastern Asia.\nFish.\nFewer than 65 native fish species occur in the lake basin, but more than half of these are endemic. The families Abyssocottidae (deep-water sculpins), Comephoridae (golomyankas or Baikal oilfish), and Cottocomephoridae (Baikal sculpins) are entirely restricted to the lake basin. All these are part of the Cottoidea and are typically less than long. Of particular note are the two species of golomyanka (\"Comephorus baicalensis\" and \"C. dybowskii\"). These long-finned, translucent fish typically live in open water at depths of , but occur both shallower and much deeper. Together with certain abyssocottid sculpins, they are the deepest living freshwater fish in the world, occurring near the bottom of Lake Baikal. The golomyankas are the primary prey of the Baikal seal and represent the largest fish biomass in the lake. Beyond members of Cottoidea, there are few endemic fish species in the lake basin.\nThe most important local species for fisheries is the omul (\"Coregonus migratorius\"), an endemic whitefish. It is caught, smoked, and then sold widely in markets around the lake. Also, a second endemic whitefish inhabits the lake, \"C. baicalensis\". The Baikal black grayling (\"Thymallus baicalensis\"), Baikal white grayling (\"T. brevipinnis\"), and Baikal sturgeon (\"Acipenser baerii baicalensis\") are other important species with commercial value. They are also endemic to the Lake Baikal basin.\nInvertebrates.\nThe lake hosts a rich endemic fauna of invertebrates. Among the most diverse invertebrate groups are the amphipod and ostracod crustaceans, freshwater snails, annelid worms and turbellarian worms.\nCrustaceans.\nMore than 350 species and subspecies of amphipods are endemic to the lake. They are exceptionally diverse in ecology and appearance, ranging from the pelagic \"Macrohectopus\" to the relatively large deep-water \"Abyssogammarus\" and \"Garjajewia\", the tiny herbivorous \"Micruropus\", and the parasitic \"Pachyschesis\" (parasitizing other amphipods). The \"gigantism\" of some Baikal amphipods, which has been compared to that seen in Antarctic amphipods, has been linked to the high level of dissolved oxygen in the lake. Among the \"giants\" are several species of spiny \"Acanthogammarus\" and \"Brachyuropus\" (Acanthogammaridae) found at both shallow and deep depths. These conspicuous and common amphipods are essentially carnivores (will also take detritus), and can reach a body length up to . Another common species is another unique inhabitant of the lake: the pelagic amphipod \"Macrohectopus branickii\" lives its entire life in the water column, which is unique among freshwater amphipods and has been compared to krill.\nThe number of isopods is low; all belonging to the family Asellidae. There are four species of the genus Baicalasellus, and the two species \"Mesoasellus dybowskii\" and \"Limnoasellus poberezhnii\". These six endemic species are found on rocky substrata in depths varying from 3\u201310 meters (\"Baicalasellus angarensis\") to more than hundred meters (\"Mesoasellus dybowskii\").\n\"Epischurella baikalensis\" is a copepod endemic to the lake, being a very abundant species there; it was estimated that they make up 80 to 90% of the total biomass. It is estimated that as a species, they filter as much as a thousand cubic kilometers of water a year, or the lake's entire volume every twenty-three years.\nThere are about 60 known species of native cladocerans (water fleas), several of them endemic.\nSimilar to another ancient lake, Tanganyika, Baikal is a center for ostracod diversity. About 90% of the Lake Baikal ostracods are endemic, meaning that there are c. 200 endemic species. This makes it the second-most diverse group of crustacean in the lake, after the amphipods. The vast majority of the Baikal ostracods belong to the families Candonidae (more than 100 described species) and Cytherideidae (about 50 described species), but genetic studies indicate that the true diversity in at least the latter family has been heavily underestimated. The morphology of the Baikal ostracods is highly diverse.\nSnails and bivalves.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], almost 150 freshwater snails are known from Lake Baikal, including 117 endemic species from the subfamilies Baicaliinae (part of the Amnicolidae) and Benedictiinae (part of the Lithoglyphidae), and the families Planorbidae and Valvatidae. All endemics have been recorded between , but the majority mainly live at shallower depths. About 30 freshwater snail species can be seen deeper than , which represents the approximate limit of the sunlight zone, but only 10 are truly deepwater species. In general, Baikal snails are thin-shelled and small. Two of the most common species are \"Benedictia baicalensis\" and \"Megalovalvata baicalensis\". Bivalve diversity is lower with more than 30 species; about half of these, all in the families Euglesidae, Pisidiidae, and Sphaeriidae, are endemic (the only other family in the lake is the Unionidae with a single nonendemic species). The endemic bivalves are mainly found in shallows, with few species from deep water.\nAquatic worms.\nWith almost 200 described species, including more than 160 endemics, the center of diversity for aquatic freshwater oligochaetes is Lake Baikal. A smaller number of other freshwater annelids is known: 30 species of leeches (Hirudinea), and 4 polychaetes. Several hundred species of nematodes are known from the lake, but a large percentage of these are undescribed.\nMore than 140 endemic flatworm (Plathelminthes) species are in Lake Baikal, where they occur on a wide range of bottom types. Most of the flatworms are predatory, and some are relatively brightly marked. They are often abundant in shallow waters, where they are typically less than long, but in deeper parts of the lake, the largest, \"Baikaloplana valida\", can reach up to when outstretched.\nSponges.\nAt least 18 species of sponges occur in the lake, including about 15 species from the endemic family Lubomirskiidae (the remaining are from the nonendemic family Spongillidae), which colonized the lake about 3.4 million years ago. The lake's sponges makes up around 44% of the benthic animal biomass. \"Lubomirskia baicalensis\", \"Baikalospongia bacillifera\", and \"B. intermedia\" are unusually large for freshwater sponges and can reach or more. These three are also the most common sponges in the lake. While the \"Baikalospongia\" species typically have encrusting or carpet-like structures, \"L. baikalensis\" often has branching structures and in areas where common may form underwater \"forests\". Most sponges in the lake are typically green when alive because of symbiotic chlorophytes (zoochlorella), but can also be brownish or yellowish.\nRelation to humans.\nHistory.\nThe Baikal area, sometimes known as Baikalia, has a long history of human habitation. Near the village of Mal'ta, some 160\u00a0km northwest of the lake, remains of a young human male known as \"MA-1\" or \"Mal'ta Boy\" are indications of local habitation by the Mal'ta\u2013Buret' culture ca. 24,000 BP. An early known tribe in the area was the Kurykans.\nLocated in the former northern territory of the Xiongnu confederation, Lake Baikal is one site of the Han\u2013Xiongnu War, where the armies of the Han dynasty pursued and defeated the Xiongnu forces from the second century BC to the first century AD. They recorded that the lake was a \"huge sea\" (\"hanhai\") and designated it the North Sea (\"B\u011bih\u01cei\") of the semimythical Four Seas. The Kurykans, a Siberian tribe who inhabited the area in the sixth century, gave it a name that translates to \"much water\". Later on, it was called \"natural lake\" (\"Baygal nuur\") by the Buryats and \"rich lake\" (\"Bay g\u00f6l\") by the Yakuts. Lake Baikal was under the Anbei Protectorate of the Tang dynasty from 647 CE to 682 CE.\nLittle was known to Europeans about the lake until Russia expanded into the area in the 1600s.\nAs part of Russia.\nRussian expansion into the Buryat area around Lake Baikal in 1628\u20131658 was part of the Russian conquest of Siberia. It was done first by following the Angara River upstream from Yeniseysk (founded 1619) and later by moving south from the Lena River. Russians first heard of the Buryats in 1609 at Tomsk. According to folktales related a century after the fact, in 1623, Demid Pyanda, who may have been the first Russian to reach the Lena, crossed from the upper Lena to the Angara and arrived at Yeniseysk.\nThe Russian explorers Vikhor Savin (1624) and Maksim Perfilyev (1626 and 1627\u201328) explored Tungus country on the lower Angara. To the west, Krasnoyarsk on the upper Yenisei was founded in 1627. A number of ill-documented (poorly recorded) expeditions explored eastward from Krasnoyarsk. In 1628, Pyotr Beketov first encountered a group of Buryats and collected \"yasak\" (tribute) from them at the future site of Bratsk. In 1629, Yakov Khripunov set off from Tomsk to find a rumored silver mine. His men soon began plundering both Russians and natives. They were joined by another band of rioters from Krasnoyarsk, but left the Buryat country when they ran short of food. This made it difficult for other Russians to enter the area. In 1631, Maksim Perfilyev built an \"ostrog\" at Bratsk. The pacification was moderately successful, but in 1634, Bratsk was destroyed and its garrison killed. In 1635, Bratsk was restored by a punitive expedition under Radukovskii. In 1638, it was besieged unsuccessfully. In 1638, Perfilyev crossed from the Angara over the Ilim portage to the Lena River and went downstream as far as Olyokminsk. Returning, he sailed up the Vitim River into the area east of Lake Baikal (1640) where he heard reports of the Amur country. In 1641, Verkholensk was founded on the upper Lena.\nIn 1643, Kurbat Ivanov went further up the Lena and became the first European to see Lake Baikal and Olkhon Island. Half his party under Skorokhodov remained on the lake, reached the Upper Angara at its northern tip, and wintered on the Barguzin River on the northeast side.\nIn 1644, Ivan Pokhabov went up the Angara to Baikal, becoming perhaps the first Russian to use this route, which is difficult because of the rapids. He crossed the lake and explored the lower Selenge River. About 1647, he repeated the trip, obtained guides, and visited a 'Tsetsen Khan' near Ulan Bator. In 1648, Ivan Galkin built an \"ostrog \"on the Barguzin River which became a center for eastward expansion. In 1652, Vasily Kolesnikov reported from Barguzin that one could reach the Amur country by following the Selenga, Uda, and Khilok Rivers to the future sites of Chita and Nerchinsk.\nIn the past, the Baikal was referred to by many Russians as the \"Baikal Sea\" (, \"More Baikal\"), rather than merely \"Lake Baikal\" (, \"Ozero Baikal\"). This usage is attested already in the \"Life of Protopope Avvakum\" (1621\u20131682), and on the late-17th-century maps by Semyon Remezov. It is also attested in the famous song, now passed into the tradition, that opens with the words \"\u0421\u043b\u0430\u0432\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u043c\u043e\u0440\u0435, \u0441\u0432\u044f\u0449\u0435\u043d\u043d\u044b\u0439 \u0411\u0430\u0439\u043a\u0430\u043b\" (Glorious sea, [the] sacred Bajkal). To this day, the strait between the western shore of the Lake and the Olkhon Island is called \"Maloye More\" (\"\u041c\u0430\u043b\u043e\u0435 \u043c\u043e\u0440\u0435\"), i.e. \"the Little Sea\". Lake Baikal is nicknamed \"Older sister of Sister Lakes (its sister being Lake Kh\u00f6vsg\u00f6l)\".\nThe Trans-Siberian Railway was built between 1896 and 1902. Construction of the scenic railway around the southwestern end of Lake Baikal required 200 bridges and 33 tunnels. Until its completion, a train ferry, the SS Baikal, transported railcars across the lake from Port Baikal to Mysovaya for a number of years. As the railway was built, a large hydrogeographical expedition headed by F.K. Drizhenko produced the first detailed contour map of the lake bed.\nThe lake became the site of the minor military engagement between the Czechoslovak legion and the Red Army in 1918. At times during winter freezes, the lake could be crossed on foot, though at risk of frostbite and deadly hypothermia from the cold wind moving unobstructed across flat expanses of ice. In the winter of 1920, the Great Siberian Ice March occurred, when the retreating White Russian Army crossed frozen Lake Baikal. The wind on the exposed lake was so cold, many people died, freezing in place until spring thaw. Beginning in 1956, the impounding of the Irkutsk Dam on the Angara River raised the level of the lake by .\nResearch.\nSeveral organizations are carrying out natural research projects on Lake Baikal. Most of them are governmental or associated with governmental organizations. The Baikalian Research Centre is an independent research organization carrying out environmental, educational and research projects at Lake Baikal.\nIn July 2008, Russia sent two small submersibles, Mir-1 and Mir-2, to descend to the bottom of Lake Baikal to conduct geological and biological tests on its unique ecosystem. Although originally reported as being successful, they did not set a world record for the deepest freshwater dive, reaching a depth of only . That record is currently held by Anatoly Sagalevich, at (also in Lake Baikal aboard a Pisces submersible in 1990). Russian scientist and federal politician Artur Chilingarov, the leader of the mission, took part in the Mir dives alongside Russian president Vladimir Putin.\nSince 1993, neutrino research has been conducted at the Baikal Deep Underwater Neutrino Telescope (BDUNT). The Baikal Neutrino Telescope NT-200 is being deployed in Lake Baikal, from shore at a depth of . It consists of 192 optical modules.\nEconomy.\nThe lake, nicknamed \"the Pearl of Siberia\", drew investors from the tourist industry as energy revenues sparked an economic boom. Viktor Grigorov's Grand Baikal in Irkutsk is one of the investors, who planned to build three hotels, creating 570 jobs. In 2007, the Russian government declared the Baikal region a special economic zone. A popular resort in Listvyanka is home to the seven-story Hotel Mayak. At the northern part of the lake, Baikalplan (a German NGO) built together with Russians in 2009 the Frolikha Adventure Coastline Track, a -long long-distance trail as an example for sustainable development of the region. Baikal was also declared a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1996. Rosatom plans to build a laboratory near Baikal, in conjunction with an international uranium plant and to invest $2.5\u00a0billion in the region and create 2,000 jobs in the city of Angarsk.\nLake Baikal is a popular destination among tourists from all over the world. According to the Russian Federal State Statistics Service, in 2013, 79,179 foreign tourists visited Irkutsk and Lake Baikal; in 2014, 146,937 visitors. The most popular places to stay by the lake are Listvyanka village, Olkhon Island, Kotelnikovsky cape, Baykalskiy Priboi, resort Khakusy and Turka village. The popularity of Lake Baikal is growing from year to year, but there is no developed infrastructure in the area.\nThe ice road to Olkhon Island is the only legal ice road on Lake Baikal. The route is prepared by specialists every year and it opens when the ice conditions allow it. In 2015, the ice road to Olkhon was open from 17 February to 23 March. The thickness of the ice on the road is about , maximum capacity allowed \u2013 ; it is open to the public from 9\u00a0am to 6\u00a0pm. The road through the lake is long and it goes from the village Kurkut on the mainland to Irkutskaya Guba on Olkhon Island.\nEcotourism.\nBaikal has a number of different tourist activities, depending on the season. Generally, Baikal has two top tourist seasons. The first season is ice season, which starts usually in mid-January and lasts till mid-April. During this season ice depth increases up to 140 centimeters, that allows safe vehicle driving on the ice cover (except heavy vehicles, such as tourist buses, that do not take this risk). This allows access to the figures of ice that are formed at rocky banks of Olkhon Island, including Cape Hoboy, the Three Brothers rock, and caves to the north of Khuzhir. It also provides access to small islands like Ogoy Island and Zamogoy.\nThe ice itself has a transparency of one meter depth. That is why this season is popular for hiking, ice-walking, ice-skating, and bicycle riding. An ice route around Olkhon is around 200\u00a0km.\nThe ice season ends in mid-April. Owing to increasing temperatures ice starts to melt and becomes shallow and fragile, especially in places with strong under-ice flows. A range of factors contribute to an increased risk of falling through the ice towards the end of the season, resulting in multiple deaths in Russia each year, although exact data for Baikal are unknown. Viktor Viktorovych Yanukovych, son of former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, reportedly died after his car fell through the ice while driving on Baikal in 2015.\nThe second tourist season is summer, which lets tourists dive deeper into virgin Baikal nature. Hiking trails become open, many of them cross two mountain ranges: Baikal Range on the western side and Barguzin Range on the eastern side of Baikal.\nSmall tourist vessels operate in the area, availing bird-watching, animal-watching (especially Baikal seal), and fishing. Water in the lake stays extremely cold in most places (does not exceed 10 C most of the year), but in a few gulfs like Chivirkuy, it can be comfortable for swimming.\nOlkhon's most-populated village Khuzhir is an ecotourist destination. Baikal has always been popular in Russia and CIS-countries, but in 2014 Baikal saw an influx of visitors from China and Europe.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nEnvironmentalists have previously acknowledged pollution at Lake Baikal. It faces a series of detrimental phenomena including the disappearance of the omul fish, the rapid growth of putrid algae and the death of endemic species of sponges across its area. Environmental advocacy for the lake began in the late 1950s. Since 2010, more than 15,000 metric tons of toxic waste have flowed into the lake.\nBaykalsk Pulp and Paper Mill.\nThe Baykalsk Pulp and Paper Mill was constructed in 1966, directly on the shoreline of Lake Baikal. The plant bleached paper using chlorine and discharged waste directly into Lake Baikal. The decision to construct the plant on Lake Baikal resulted in strong protests from Soviet scientists; according to them, the ultra-pure water of the lake was a significant resource and should have been used for innovative chemical production (for instance, the production of high-quality viscose for the aeronautics and space industries). The Soviet scientists felt that it was irrational to change Lake Baikal's water quality by beginning paper production on the shore. It was their position that it was also necessary to preserve endemic species of local biota, and to maintain the area around Lake Baikal as a recreation zone. However, the objections of the Soviet scientists faced opposition from the industrial lobby and only after decades of protest, the plant was closed in November 2008 due to unprofitability.\nOn 4 January 2010, production was resumed. On 13 January 2010, Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin introduced changes in legislation legalising the operation of the plant; this action brought about a wave of protests from ecologists and local residents. These changes were based on the determination Prime Minister Putin made through a visual verification of Lake Baikal's condition from a miniature submarine, where he said: \"I could see with my own eyes \u2013 and scientists can confirm \u2013 Baikal is in good condition and there is practically no pollution\". Despite this, in September 2013, the mill underwent a final bankruptcy, with the last 800 workers slated to lose their jobs by 28 December 2013. The mill has since shut down, though its reservoirs of lignin sludge remain an environmental hazard.\nCancelled East Siberia\u2013Pacific Ocean oil pipeline.\nRussian oil pipelines state company Transneft was planning to build a trunk pipeline that would have come within of the lake shore in a zone of substantial seismic activity. Environmental activists in Russia, Greenpeace, Baikal pipeline opposition and local citizens were strongly opposed to these plans, due to the possibility of an accidental oil spill that might cause significant damage to the environment. According to the Transneft's president, numerous meetings with citizens near the lake were held in towns along the route, especially in Irkutsk. Transneft agreed to alter its plans when Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered the company to consider an alternative route to the north to avoid such ecological risks. Transneft has since decided to move the pipeline away from Lake Baikal, so that it will not pass through any federal or republic natural reserves. Work began on the pipeline two days after President Putin agreed to changing the route away from Lake Baikal.\nProposed uranium enrichment center.\nIn 2006, the Russian government announced plans to build the world's first international uranium enrichment center at an existing nuclear facility in Angarsk, a city on the river Angara some downstream from the lake's shores. Critics and environmentalists argued it would be a disaster for the region and are urging the government to reconsider.\nAfter enrichment, only 10% of the uranium-derived radioactive material would be exported to international customers, leaving 90% near the Lake Baikal region for storage. Uranium tailings contain radioactive and toxic materials, which if improperly stored, are potentially dangerous to humans and can contaminate rivers and lakes.\nAn enrichment center was constructed in the 2010s.\nChinese-owned bottled water plant.\nChinese-owned AquaSib had been purchasing land alongside the lake and in 2019 started building a bottling plant and pipeline in the town of Kultuk. The goal was to export 190 million liters of water to China even though the lake had been experiencing historically low water levels. This spurred protests by the local population that the lake would be drained of its water, at which point the local government halted the plans pending analysis.\nOther pollution sources.\nAccording to \"The Moscow Times\" and \"Vice\", an increasing number of an invasive species of algae thrive in the lake from hundreds of tons of liquid waste, including fuel and excrement, regularly disposed into the lake by tourist sites, and up to 25,000 tons of liquid waste are disposed of every year by local ships.\nIn culture.\nAccording to 19th-century traveler T. W. Atkinson, locals in the Lake Baikal Region had the tradition that Christ visited the area:\nThe people have a tradition in connection with this region which they implicitly believe. They say \"that Christ visited this part of Asia and ascended this summit, whence he looked down on all the region around. After blessing the country to the northward, he turned towards the south, and looking across the Baikal, he waved his hand, exclaiming 'Beyond this there is nothing.' Thus they account for the sterility of Daouria, where it is said \"no corn will grow.\"\nLake Baikal has been celebrated in Russian folk songs. Two of these songs are known in Russia and its neighboring countries, such as Japan.\nThe latter song was a secondary theme song for the Soviet Union's second color film, \"Ballad of Siberia\" (1947; ).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56866", "revid": "50835749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56866", "title": "Yam", "text": "Yam or YAM may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56867", "revid": "47732363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56867", "title": "Angara", "text": "River in Irkutsk Oblast and Krasnoyarsk Krai, Russia\nThe Angara (; ) or Angar ( \u043c\u04af\u0440\u044d\u043d) is a major river in Siberia, which traces a course through Russia's Irkutsk Oblast and Krasnoyarsk Krai. It drains out of Lake Baikal and is the headwater tributary of the Yenisey. It is long, and has a drainage basin of . It was formerly known as the Lower or Nizhnyaya Angara (distinguishing it from the Upper Angara). Below its junction with the Ilim, it was formerly known as the Upper Tunguska (, \"Verhnyaya Tunguska\", distinguishing it from the Lower Tunguska) and, with the names reversed, as the Lower Tunguska.\nCourse.\nLeaving Lake Baikal near the settlement of Listvyanka, the Angara flows north past the Irkutsk Oblast cities of Irkutsk, Angarsk, Bratsk, and Ust-Ilimsk. It then crosses the Angara Range and turns west, entering Krasnoyarsk Krai, and joining the Yenisey near Strelka, south-east of Lesosibirsk.\nDams and reservoirs.\nFour dams of major hydroelectric plants - constructed since the 1950s - exploit the waters of the Angara:\nThe reservoirs of these dams flooded a number of villages along the Angara and its tributaries (including the historic fort of Ilimsk on the Ilim), as well as numerous agricultural areas in the river valley. Due to its effects on the way of life of the rural residents of the Angara valley, dam construction was criticized by a number of Soviet intellectuals, in particular by the Irkutsk writer Valentin Rasputin - both in his novel \"Farewell to Matyora\" (1976) and in his non-fiction book \"Siberia, Siberia\" (1991).\nNavigation.\nThe Angara is navigable by modern watercraft on several isolated sections:\nThe section between the Ust-Ilimsk Dam and the Boguchany Dam has not been navigable due to rapids. However, with the completion of the Boguchany Dam, and filling of its reservoir, at least part of this section of the river will become navigable as well. Nonetheless, this will not enable through navigation from Lake Baikal to the Yenisey, as none of the existing three dams has been provided with a ship lock or a boat lift, nor will the Boguchany Dam have one.\nDespite the absence of a continuous navigable waterway, the Angara and its tributary the Ilim were of considerable importance for Russian colonization of Siberia since ca. 1630, when they (and the necessary portages) formed important water routes connecting the Yenisey with Lake Baikal and the Lena. The river lost its transportation significance after the construction of an overland route between Krasnoyarsk and Irkutsk and, later, the Trans-Siberian Railway.\nTributaries.\nThe largest tributaries of the Angara are, from source to mouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56868", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56868", "title": "Famous football players", "text": ""}
{"id": "56870", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56870", "title": "Yenisei", "text": "Fifth-longest river in the world\nThe Yenisey or Yenisei ( ; , ) is the fifth-longest river system in the world, and the largest to drain into the Arctic Ocean.\nRising in Mungaragiyn-gol in Mongolia, it follows a northerly course through Lake Baikal and the Krasnoyarsk Dam before draining into the Yenisey Gulf in the Kara Sea. The Yenisey divides the Western Siberian Plain in the west from the Central Siberian Plateau to the east; it drains a large part of central Siberia. Its delta is formed between the Gyda Peninsula and the Taymyr Peninsula.\nIt is the central one of three large Siberian rivers that flow into the Arctic Ocean (the other two being the Ob and the Lena). The maximum depth of the Yenisey is and the average depth is .\nGeography.\nThe Yenisey proper, from the confluence of its source rivers the Great Yenisey and Little Yenisey at Kyzyl to its mouth in the Kara Sea, is long. From the source of its tributary the Selenga, it is long. It has a drainage basin of . The Yenisey flows through the Russian federal subjects Tuva, Khakassia and Krasnoyarsk Krai. The city of Krasnoyarsk is situated far upstream on the Yenisey, and the industrial city of Norilsk is nearby on the Arctic Ocean's Taymyr Peninsula.\nTributaries.\nThe largest tributaries of the Yenisey are, from source to mouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLake Baikal.\nA significant feature of the Upper Yenisei is Lake Baikal, the deepest and oldest lake in the world.\nBrekhovskie Islands.\nThe Brekhovskie Islands (Russian-language article: \"\") lie in the Yenisey estuary and have an area of some 1,400,000 hectares. They provide a wetland habitat for rare and endangered birds and are an internationally important nesting and breeding area for several types of waterfowl. The most north-easterly of the islands, Nosonovskij Ostrov (\"Nose Island\") was visited by Fridtjof Nansen in 1913.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe Yenisey basin (excluding Lake Baikal and lakes of the Khantayka headwaters) is home to 55 native fish species, including two endemics: \"Gobio sibiricus\" (a gobionine cyprinid) and \"Thymallus nigrescens\" (a grayling). The grayling is restricted to Kh\u00f6vsg\u00f6l Nuur and its tributaries. Most fish found in the Yenisey basin are relatively widespread Euro-Siberian or Siberian species, such as northern pike (\"Esox lucius\"), common roach (\"Rutilus rutilus\"), common dace (\"Leuciscus leuciscus\"), Siberian sculpin (\"Cottus poecilopus\"), European perch (\"Perca fluviatilis\") and Prussian carp (\"Carassius gibelio\"). The basin is also home to many salmonids (trout, whitefish, charr, graylings, taimen and relatives) and the Siberian sturgeon (\"Acipenser baerii\").\nThe Yenisey valley is habitat for numerous flora and fauna, with Siberian pine and Siberian larch being notable tree species. In prehistoric times Scots pine, \"Pinus sylvestris\", was abundant in the Yenisey valley c.\u20096000 BC. There are also numerous bird species present in the watershed, including, for example, the hooded crow, \"Corvus cornix\".\nTaimyr reindeer herd.\nThe Taimyr herd of tundra reindeer (\"Rangifer tarandus\" \"sibiricus\"), the largest reindeer herd in the world, migrates to winter grazing ranges along the Yenisey. It had an estimated 800,000-850,000 individuals as of 2010, but has peaked at over one million.\nNavigation.\nRiver steamers first came to the Yenisei River in 1864 and were brought in from the Netherlands and the United Kingdom across the icy Kara Sea. One was the steamer \"Nikolai\". The steamship \"Thames\" attempted to explore the river, overwintered in 1876, but was damaged in the ice and eventually wrecked in the river. Success came with the steamers \"Frazer\", \"Express\" in 1878 and, the next year, \"Moscow\" hauling supplies in and wheat out. The \"Dalman\" reached Yeniseisk in 1881.\nImperial Russia placed river steamers on the massive river in an attempt to free up communication with land-locked Siberia. One, \"St. Nicholas\" took the future Tsar Nicholas II on his voyage to Siberia, and later conveyed Vladimir Lenin to prison.\nEngineers attempted to place river steamers in regular service on the river during the building of the Trans-Siberian Railway. The boats were needed to bring in the rails, engines and supplies. Captain Joseph Wiggins sailed the \"Orestes\" with rail in 1893. However, the sea and river route proved very difficult with several ships lost at sea and on the river. Both the Ob and Yenisey mouths feed into very long inlets, several hundred kilometres in length, which are shallow, ice bound and prone to high winds and thus treacherous for navigation. After the completion of the railway, river traffic reduced to only local service as the Arctic route and long river proved much too indirect a route.\nThe first recreation team to navigate the Yenisey's entire length, including its violent upper tributary in Mongolia, was an Australian-Canadian expedition completed in September 2001. Ben Kozel, Tim Cope, Colin Angus and Remy Quinter were on this team. Both Kozel and Angus wrote books detailing this expedition, and a documentary was produced for National Geographic Television.\nA canal inclined plane was built on the river in 1985 at the Krasnoyarsk Dam.\nHistory.\nNomadic tribes such as the Ket people and the Yugh people have lived along the banks of the Yenisey since ancient times, and this region is the location of the Yeniseian language family. The Ket, numbering about 1000, are the only survivors today of those who originally lived throughout central southern Siberia near the river banks. Their extinct relatives included the Kotts, Assans, Arins, Baikots and Pumpokols who lived further upriver to the south. The modern Ket lived in the eastern middle areas of the river before being assimilated politically into Russia during the 17th through 19th centuries.\nSome of the earliest known evidence of Turkic origins was found in the Yenisey Valley in the form of stelae, stone monoliths and memorial tablets dating from between the seventh and ninth centuries AD, along with some documents that were found in China's Xinjiang region. The written evidence gathered from these sources tells of battles fought between the Turks and the Chinese and other legends. There are also examples of Uyghur poetry, though most have survived only in Chinese translation.\nWheat from the Yenisey was sold by Muslims and Uighurs during inadequate harvests to Bukhara and Soghd during the Tahirid era.\nRussians first reached the upper Yenisey in 1605, travelling from the Ob, up the Ket, portaging and then down the Yenisey as far as the Sym.\nIn 1862 Paul Theodor von Krusenstern attempted to navigate with two ships from Murmansk through the Kara Sea to the delta of the river Yenissei, but unfortunately was shipwrecked before obtaining success.\nDuring World War II, Nazi Germany and the Japanese Empire agreed to divide Asia along a line that followed the Yenisey to the border of China and then along the border of China and the Soviet Union.\nEtymology.\nThe first written mention of the Yenisei River, as \"Kem\", dates back to the 7th century in Tang dynasty China, at the time of contact with Yenisei Kyrgyz of this region. The word \"Jian shui\" (\u5294\u6c34, \"Jian River\") appears in the Book of Zhou, vol. 50, and the History of the Northern Dynasties, vol. 99, while \"Jian he\" (\u528d\u6cb3, \"Jian River\") appears in the New Book of Tang, vol. 217. In addition, \"Qian he\" (\u8b19\u6cb3, \"Qian River\") is found in the 14th-century the History of Yuan, vol. 63. These contacts were made by the Chinese as they approached the upper Yenisei River from the south. The characters \"jian\" \"\u5294\" (or \"jian\" \"\u528d\") and \"qian\" \"\u8b19\" have been compared to \"K\u00e4m\" in Orkhon inscriptions from the 8th century. The term \"Kem\" \u0643\u064a\u0645 is also found in the 13th\u201214th-century Oirat Biography in \"the Jami' al-Tawarikh\".\nFurthermore, even in the 18th century, Chinese maps show &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:MongolUnicode/fonts.css\" /&gt;\u1874\u185d\u180a\u182e\u180a\u1820&lt;br&gt;\u182a\u1873\u180a\u1875\u1820 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Kem bira\" \u201cKem River\u201d (\"the Kangxi Imperial Atlas of China\" (\u5eb7\u7155\u7687\u8f3f\u5168\u89a7\u56f3) in 1717), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:MongolUnicode/fonts.css\" /&gt;\u1874\u185d\u180a\u182e\u180a\u1820&lt;br&gt;\u1873&lt;br&gt;\u182a\u1823\u180a\u182e &lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Kem-i bom\" \"Cliffs of the Kem River\" (\"the Yongzheng Atlas\" (\u96cd\u6b63\u5341\u6392\u56f3) in 1727 or 1728), \u4f0a\u514b\u7a46\u5fc5\u62c9 (\"yeke Kem bira\") \"Great Kem River\" (\"the Ch'ien-lung Atlas\" (\u4e7e\u9686\u5185\u5e9c\u8f3f\u56f3) in 1769).\nThe etymology of \"K\u00e4m\" is not believed to be of Turkic origin, and although a Samoyed derivation has been proposed, its precise origins remain unclear.\nToday, the word survives only in Sayan Turkic languages: in Tuvan as \"xem\" \u0445\u0435\u043c, meaning \"river\", and in its sister language, Tofa, as \"hem\" h\u0435\u043c, also meaning \"river\". These languages are considered to have had close contact with those mentioned above in ancient times. Additionally, there are just over 50 river names containing the suffix \"-kem\" -\u043a\u0435\u043c in the Altai Republic, and the term \"Kim\" (\u041a\u0438\u043c) as in \"Kim su\u011f\" (\u041a\u0438\u043c \u0441\u0443\u0493), meaning \"Yenisei River\" barely exists in Khakas. All of these instances are confined to the region in and around the present-day Republic of Tuva.\nMeanwhile, in the 17th century, Russians reached the lower part of the Yenisei River from the northwest; along the way, by 1600, the Tobolsk Cossacks built Fort Mangazeya by the Taz River. It is believed that the name of the Yenisei River was transmitted, either directly or indirectly, from Samoyed-speaking peoples in the region with whom the Russians had contact. This contact eventually led to the adoption of the name \"Yenisei\", with a Russian accent.\nAdditionally, by the end of the 16th century, the Yenisei River was already known to Dutch navigators, who referred to it as \"Gilissi\", \"Gelissi\", or \"Geniscea\", among other names. Although the exact spelling varied, these are phonetically similar to \"Yenisei\". In particular, the modern Dutch pronunciation of \"Geniscea\" as [x\u025bnis\u0259] is quite close to \"Yenisei\". The term \"Yenisei\" (\u0415\u043d\u0438\u0441\u0435\u0439) appeared in Russian literature slightly later, around 1600, in the form that is still used today. Unlike in Dutch, the Russian spelling has been relatively stable since the 17th century, with only minor variations such as \"Yeniseya\" (\u0415\u043d\u0438\u0441\u0435\u044f) or \"Yenisya\" (\u0415\u043d\u0438\u0441\u044f).\nThe etymology of \"Yenisei\" remains unclear.\nRenowned linguist Max Vasmer, for instance, has suggested that the Nganasan word \"Jentajea\", the Enets \"Jeddosi\", and the Selkup \"N'andesi\", all meaning \"Yenisei River\", might correspond to unidentified Samoyed languages, probably quoted Matthias Castr\u00e9n's vocabulary. V. K. Nikonov has proposed that the word could derive from \"iondessi\" (\u0438\u043e\u043d\u0434\u0435\u0441\u0441\u0438), meaning \"big river\" in Selkup, Khanty, or even Evenki. More recently, some have speculated that \"Yenisei\" is a compound word of unconfirmed Old Kyrgyz (or inspired by Tuvan language?) \"ene\" (\u044d\u043d\u0435), meaning \"great-grandmother; nanny\" + \"say\" (\u0441\u0430\u0439), meaning \"gravel; ford\".\nHowever, the above considerations, except Vasmer's, remain speculative false etymologies, as they do not refer to the reliable modern dictionaries of the respective languages. Researchers are encouraged to conduct more detailed studies based on proper contemporary linguistic sources and historical documents.\nPollution.\nStudies have shown that the Yenisey suffers from contamination caused by radioactive discharges from a factory that produced bomb-grade plutonium in the secret city of Krasnoyarsk-26, now known as Zheleznogorsk.\nOn 8 June 2025, a ship towing two barges ran aground and broke apart along a section of the river in Kazachinsky District, Krasnoyarsk Krai, spilling around 30 metric tons of diesel fuel and causing an oil spill reaching up to 50 kilometers along the shoreline.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56871", "revid": "1300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56871", "title": "Lactose-intolerance", "text": ""}
{"id": "56872", "revid": "50719507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56872", "title": "Irkutsk", "text": "City in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia\nIrkutsk ( ; Russian: , ; Buryat and , \"Erh\u00fc\u00fc\", ) is the largest city and administrative center of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia. With a population of 587,891 as of the 2010 Census,[ [update]] Irkutsk is the 25th-largest city in Russia by population, the fifth-largest in the Siberian Federal District, and one of the largest cities in Siberia.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLocated in the south of the eponymous oblast, the city proper lies on the Angara River, a tributary of the Yenisei, about 850 kilometres (530\u00a0mi) to the south-east of Krasnoyarsk and about 520 kilometres (320\u00a0mi) north of Ulaanbaatar. The Trans-Siberian Highway (Federal M53 and M55 Highways) and Trans-Siberian Railway connect Irkutsk to other regions in Russia and Mongolia.\nMany distinguished Russians were sent into exile in Irkutsk for their part in the Decembrist revolt of 1825, and the city became an exile-post for the rest of the century. Some historic wooden houses still survive. When the railway reached Irkutsk, it had earned the nickname of \"The Paris of Siberia.\" The city was the center of bitter fighting in the Russian Civil War of 1918\u201320. Afterward, in the Soviet period, its architecture was dominated by the mandatory squared-up style. The city became a major centre of aircraft manufacture. The historic centre of Irkutsk is included in UNESCO's tentative list of World Heritage Sites.\nEtymology.\nIrkutsk was named after the Irkut River. Its name was derived from the Buryat word for \"spinning,\" and was used as an ethnonym among local tribes, who were known as \"Yrkhu\", \"Irkit\", \"Irgit\", and \"Irgyt\". The city was formerly known as \"Yandashsky\", named after the local Tuvan chief Yandasha Gorogi.\nThe old spelling of the city's name was \u00ab\u0418\u0440\u043a\u0443\u0446\u043a\u044a\u00bb. Before the revolution, the city was called \"East Paris\", \"Siberian Petersburg\", \"Siberian Athens\".\nHistory.\nIn 1652, Ivan Pokhabov built a \"zimovye\" (winter quarters) near the site of Irkutsk for gold trading and for collecting fur taxes from the Buryats. In 1661, Yakov Pokhabov built an \"ostrog\" (a small fort) nearby. The \"ostrog\" gained official town rights from the government in 1686.\nThe Irkutsk prison, founded in 1661 as an outpost for the advancement of Russian explorers in the Angara region, soon ceased to be only a defensive structure due to the advantage of its geographical position. According to historical documents, 10 years later, in 1671, here, in addition to servicemen and yasak people, lived \"plowed peasants with their wives and children.\" A posad appeared, which gave rise to residential quarters of the future city. As for the prison itself, as its influence in the region grew, it was completely rebuilt twice (in 1669 and 1693), expanding in size.\nThe fate of the prison was such that its military-defensive significance was less noticeable than other previously erected forts near the Angara, for example, Bratsk (1631) or Verkholensk (1644). However, its location at the crossroads of colonization, trade and industrial routes predetermined the role of Irkutsk in the history of Eastern Siberia. In 1682 it became the center of an independent region, and in 1686 it received the status of a city. Irkutsk at the beginning of the 18th century was divided into two parts: \"small town\", or the prison itself, and \"big city\". The first one started from the bank of the Angara and was a wooden fortress with adjacent buildings. These included the stone building of the provincial chancellery, the house of the vice-governor (former voivodship) with barns and cellars, the Church of the Savior. \"Small town\" was the administrative center of the vast Irkutsk province since 1731.\nIn the \"big city\", as the posad was called, the commercial and economic life of Irkutsk was concentrated. It was inhabited mainly by people from the northern regions of Russia: Veliky Ustyug, Yarensk, Pinega, Solvychegodsk, Pereyaslavl-Zalessky, who brought their traditions, customs, and culture to Siberia.\nThe first road connection between Moscow and Irkutsk, the Siberian Route, was built in 1760, and benefited the town economy. Many new products, often imported from China via Kyakhta, became widely available in Irkutsk for the first time, including gold, diamonds, fur, wood, silk, and tea. In 1821, as part of the Mikhail Speransky's reforms, Siberia was administratively divided at the Yenisei River. Irkutsk became the seat of the Governor-General of East Siberia.\nIn the early 19th century, many Russian artists, officers, and nobles were sent into exile in Siberia for their part in the Decembrist revolt against Tsar Nicholas\u00a0I. Irkutsk became the major center of intellectual and social life for these exiles, and they developed much of the city's cultural heritage. They had wooden houses built that were adorned with ornate, hand-carved decorations. Many still survive today, in stark contrast with the standard Soviet apartment blocks that surround them.\nBy the end of the 19th century, the population consisted of one exiled man for every two locals. People of varying backgrounds, from members of the Decembrist uprising to Bolsheviks, had been in Irkutsk for many years and had greatly influenced the culture and development of the city. As a result, Irkutsk became a prosperous cultural and educational center in Eastern Siberia.\nFrom 1848 to 1861, Count Nikolay Muravyov-Amursky was the Governor-General. He annexed the Amur Territory to Russia, however, on the spot he showed unbridled despotism and extreme cruelty. Since the opening of communication along the Amur in 1854, on the way from St. Petersburg to the Pacific Ocean, the old Yakutsk tract began to decline. The population of the city is 28,000, of them there were 3,768 exiles.\nIn 1879, on July\u00a04 and\u00a06, a fire burned out of control, destroying the palace of the Governor General, and the principal administrative and municipal offices. Many of the other public buildings, including the government archives, the library, and the museum of the Siberian section of the Russian Geographical Society, were completely ruined. Three-quarters of the city was destroyed, including approximately 4,000 houses. The city quickly rebounded, installing electricity in 1896. The first theater was built in 1897 and a major train station opened in 1898. The first train arrived in Irkutsk on August\u00a016 of that year. By 1900, the city had earned the nickname of \"The Paris of Siberia.\"\nDuring the Russian Civil War, which broke out after the October Revolution, Irkutsk became the site of many furious, bloody clashes between the \"White movement\" and the \"Bolsheviks\", known as the \"Reds\". In 1920, Aleksandr Kolchak, the once-feared commander of the largest contingent of anti-Bolshevik forces, was executed in Irkutsk. This effectively destroyed the anti-Bolshevik resistance.\nIrkutsk was the administrative center of the short-lived East Siberian Oblast, from 1936 to 1937. The city subsequently became the administrative center of Irkutsk Oblast, after East Siberian Oblast was divided into Chita Oblast and Irkutsk Oblast.\nThe Irkutsk Region KGB estimated that 15-17,000 victims of the Great Terror were buried on the city outskirts but only after 1989 was the burial area explored and the city authorities declared it to be a memorial cemetery.\nDuring the communist years, the industrialization of Irkutsk and Siberia in general was strongly encouraged. The large Irkutsk Reservoir was built on the Angara River between 1950 and 1959 in order to generate hydroelectric power and facilitate industrial development.\nThe Epiphany Cathedral, the governor's palace, a school of medicine, a museum, a military hospital and the crown factories are among the public institutions and buildings. The Aleksandr Kolchak monument, designed by Vyacheslav Klykov, was unveiled in 2004. On July\u00a027, 2004, the Irkutsk Synagogue (1881) was gutted by a fire.\nIn December 2016, 74 people in Irkutsk died in a mass methanol poisoning, after drinking this toxic alcohol substitute.\nIn 2018, the BBC reported that men in Irkutsk had an average life span of only 63. The society had declined and their health had suffered markedly.\nIn October 2021, it was reported that armed Russian OMON (Special Purpose Mobile Unit of the Russian National Guard) officers physically assaulted and tortured two Jehovah\u2019s Witness couples as part of a round up of Jehovah\u2019s Witnesses in the city.\nGeography.\nIrkutsk is located about to the south-east of Krasnoyarsk, and about north of Ulaanbaatar, the capital of Mongolia. The city proper lies on the Angara River, a tributary of the Yenisei, below its outflow from Lake Baikal and on the bank opposite the suburb of Glaskovsk. The river, wide, is crossed by the Irkutsk Hydroelectric Dam and three other bridges downstream.\nThe Irkut River, from which the town takes its name, is a smaller river that joins the Angara directly opposite the city. The main portion of the city is separated from several landmarks\u2014the monastery, the fort and the port, as well as its suburbs\u2014by another tributary, the Ida (or Ushakovka) River. The two main parts of Irkutsk are customarily referred to as the \"left bank\" and the \"right bank\", with respect to the flow of the Angara River.\nIrkutsk is situated in a landscape of rolling hills in the thick taiga that is typical in Eastern Siberia.\nThe population has been shrinking since the late 1980s: \u2009(2010 census); \u2009(2002 census); \u2009(1989 Soviet census). According to the regional plan, Irkutsk city will be combined with its neighboring industrial towns of Shelekhov and Angarsk to form a metropolitan area with a total population of over a million.\nUrban layout.\nThe center of the historical part of the city is Kirov Square. In that place on July 6, 1661, Yakov Pokhabov laid a prison for collecting Yasak, a tax collected from the local population with fur. The architectural appearance of present-day Irkutsk has been born since the days of the wooden prison. The historic center of the city is now in its place. By the beginning of the 18th century, it had turned into a wooden fortress, which protected the inhabitants from the raids of nomads. A major fire of 1716 almost completely destroyed the fortifications, but in just a year new ones were built, already made of stone.\nOf the buildings on the territory of the Irkutsk Kremlin of that time, the Savior Church has survived, the stone building of which was laid in 1706 in the north-western corner of the fort. Along with the Epiphany Cathedral, erected behind the eastern wall of the fortress and also preserved to this day, this is one of the oldest stone buildings in Siberia. The protective palisade and the moat, which once defended the Irkutsk fortress from the south, from the Angara bank to the Ushakovka River, existed until the middle of the 18th century.\nIn early Irkutsk there were no streets at all, the buildings approached the driveways with random turns and only with subsequent alterations were turned around with front facades. The first settlers did not orient their houses in relation to neighboring buildings either. When building a new house, the owners usually adhered only to the orientation of the windows to the south side. This is how the layout of the oldest part of the city took shape \u2014 from Angara to modern Karl Marx Street: the main directions of the streets repeat the outlines of the coastline, which, in turn, are crossed by transverse passages connecting the outskirts of the city with the center and overlooking the Angara bank.\nThe curvature of the central streets and the disparity of the quarters formed by them, shows the spontaneous process of their formation. This is especially noticeable in the example of Basninskaya Street (now Sverdlova Street), which they tried to straighten with each new attempt to streamline the development. And it simply repeated the outlines of the log that once was here, formed, possibly, by the old lady of the Gryaznushka river, which connected Ushakovka and Angara.\nIn 1726, defensive fortifications (palisade) were built in Irkutsk, behind which the barracks of the local garrison were taken out. The construction of the palisade changed the process of the spontaneous evolution of buildings and influenced the formation of the city's layout in the most significant way. After the fortification was dismantled in 1790, a complete mismatch of street directions in the old and new parts of the city was revealed.\nThe state of development of the \"pre-palisade\" period is reflected in the first of the known plans of Irkutsk in 1729. Its main advantage is the fixation of the city's borders, which ran along the line of the modern Karl Marx Street. Between 1729 and 1768 in the space between Angara and Ushakovka, the first \"zapalisadny\" row of blocks is formed. A spontaneous settlement appears near the soldiers' barracks, first along the roads that approached the Mill and Overseas gates, and then between them. The development proceeded unevenly, the closest to the current state at that time were the fragments of buildings located in the area of Zamorskaya (Lenin st.) And Institutskaya (Oktyabrskaya Revolyutsii st.) Streets. Now it is, roughly, quarters No. 90, 91, 92.\nThe last third of the 18th century was significant both for the history of the city as a whole and for the formation of its buildings. With the formation of the Irkutsk province in 1764, Irkutsk became the center of the largest region in Russia\u2014Eastern Siberia, which included Transbaikalia, Yakutia, the entire northeast to the Pacific Ocean. Irkutsk needed to expand, and by that time there were no enemies ready to lay claim to the city. The palisade was dismantled, and in its place appeared Bolshaya Preshpektnaya Street, now Karla Marxa Street, the only straight street in modern Irkutsk. The devastating fire of 1879 made its own adjustments to the construction laws as it was from here that the border began, beyond which it was forbidden to build from wood. This has divided the old Irkutsk into two parts: closer to the Angara river, mainly stone buildings remained, and on the other side, where there were once outskirts, the wooden Irkutsk grew.\nClimate.\nIrkutsk has a borderline humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dwb\", bordering \"Dwc\", Trewartha climate classification \"Dcbc\", bordering on \"Ecbc\").\nIrkutsk is characterized by an extreme variation of temperatures between seasons. It can be very warm in the summer, and very cold in the winter. However, Lake Baikal has a tempering effect, giving Irkutsk temperatures that are slightly less extreme than at similar latitudes elsewhere in Siberia. The warmest month of the year is July, when the average temperature is ; the highest temperature recorded being . The coldest month of the year is January, when the average temperature is , and record low of . Precipitation varies widely throughout the year, with July being the wettest month, when precipitation averages . The driest month is February, when precipitation averages only . Almost all precipitation during the Siberian winter falls as fluffy, dry snow.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nIrkutsk is the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Irkutsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is incorporated separately as the City of Irkutsk\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the City of Irkutsk is incorporated as Irkutsk Urban Okrug.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Irkutsk features an old symbol of Dauria: a Siberian tiger with a sable in his mouth. When the coat of arms was devised in 1690, the animal was described as a tiger (\"babr\", a bookish word of Persian derivation) with a sable in his mouth. This image had been used by the Yakutsk customs office from about 1642. It has its origin in a seal of the Siberia Khanate representing a sable and showcasing the fact that Siberia (or rather Yugra) was the main source of sable fur throughout the Middle Ages.\nBy the mid-19th century, the word \"babr\" had fallen out of common usage, but it was still recorded in the Armorial of the Russian Empire. Furthermore, the tigers became extinct in this part of Siberia. In the 1870s, a high-placed French heraldist with a limited command of Russian assumed that \"babr\" was a misspelling of \"bobr\", the Russian word for \"beaver\", and changed the wording accordingly. This modification engendered a long dispute between the local authorities, who were so confused by the revised description that they started to depict the \"babr\" as a fabulous animal, half-tiger and half-beaver.\nThe Soviets abolished the image altogether, but it was restored following the dissolution of the Soviet Union.\nEconomy.\nEnergy.\nThe 662.4 MW Irkutsk Hydroelectric Power Station was the first cascade hydroelectric power station in the Irkutsk region. The construction of the dam started in 1950 and finished in 1958.\nIndustry.\nThe largest industry in Irkutsk is Irkut, the Irkutsk Aviation Industrial Association, which was set up in 1932 in the Transbaykal region of the Soviet Union. It is best known as being the manufacturer of the Su-30 family of interceptor/ground-attack aircraft. The Russian government has merged Irkut with Ilyushin, Mikoyan, Sukhoi, Tupolev, and Yakovlev into a new company named United Aircraft Building Corporation.\nTransportation.\nImportant roads and railways like the Trans-Siberian Highway (Federal M53 and M55 Highways) and Trans-Siberian Railway connect Irkutsk to other regions in Russia and Mongolia. The city is also served by the Irkutsk International Airport and the smaller Irkutsk Northwest Airport.\nThe Federal road and railway to Moscow and Vladivostok pass through the other side of the Angara River from central Irkutsk.\nTrams are one major mode of public transit in Irkutsk. Other modes are trolleybus, bus, fixed-route taxi (marshrutka) and cycling.\nHealth.\nDespite its remoteness, Irkutsk was reported in 2004 to have the highest HIV infection rate in Russia. Tens of thousands of drug addicts, mostly ethnic Russians in their mid to late teens are infected. The number of reported AIDS cases increased by more than 10,000% during the 1999\u20132000 period. Although the epidemic, which started in 1999, is reported to have slowed down, Irkutsk will lose tens of thousands of its working age population from 2010 onwards. This is one of the reasons Irkutsk's male life expectancy, at 53 years, is one of the lowest in all of Russia. Preventive measures are in place to prevent the spread of the epidemic to the generation which was born after the breakup of the USSR.\nCulture.\nTelevision and mass media.\nThere are state-owned and privately owned television stations in Irkutsk, including state company IGTRK and private ones, such as AS Baikal TV, TV company AIST, TV company Gorod, and also other media outlets, like the VSP Newspaper Agency. There is also a live webcam broadcasting from the city center.\nEducation.\nIrkutsk is home to the East Siberian Education Academy (since 1909), Irkutsk State University (1918), Irkutsk State Medical University (1918), Baykalsky State University of Economics and Law (since 1932), Irkutsk State Technical University (since 1939), Irkutsk State Academy of Agriculture, Irkutsk State Linguistic University (1948), Irkutsk State Railway Transport University (since 1975), and a number of private colleges: Siberian Institute of Law, Economics and Management (since 1993), Institute of Economics of ISTU (since 1996), and others.\nScience.\nAs Irkutsk is within the influence of the Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences, there are nine research institutes located in the Irkutsk Academgorodok suburb: the Institute of Geography, the Energy System Institute, the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of System Dynamics and Control Theory, the Earth's Crust Institute, the Solar-Terrestrial Physics Institute, the Institute of Chemistry, the Limnological Institute (formerly located on Lake Baikal's shore), the Institute of Plant Physics, Laser Physics Institute (a Branch of the Institute of Laser Physics in Novosibirsk).\nA number of institutes conduct research within Irkutsk State University: the Institute of Biology, the Institute of Oil and Coal Chemistry and Synthesis, the Laboratory of Quantum Chemistry, the Institute of Applied Physics, the Interregional Institute of Social Studies, the Astronomical Observatory, and the Botanical Gardens.\nThe East-Siberian Scientific Center of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences is also located in Irkutsk and is represented by the following research organizations: the Scientific Center for Medical Ecology, the Institute for Paediatrics and Human Reproduction, the Institute for Microbiology and Epidemiology, the Institute for Medicine of the Workplace and Human Ecology, the Institute of Reconstructive and Restorative Surgery, the Institute of Surgery, and the Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics. Also, the Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Scientific and Technical Center has a branch in Irkutsk. Additionally, there are R&amp;D institutes including GAZPROM R&amp;D Institute (a Branch of a Moscow-based institute), the Irkutsk Institute of Rare and Precious Metals and Diamonds (Irgiredmet), part of the Petropavlovsk Group of Companies., and the Vostoksibacademcenter of the Russian Academy of Architecture and Construction Sciences that publishes the Project Baikal journal.\nLiterature.\nIrkutsk plays a crucial role in Jules Verne\u2019s 1876 novel \"Michael Strogoff\". In the novel Strogoff is the heroic courier of the Czar Alexander II entrusted with delivering a critical dispatch to the Czar\u2019s brother in Irkutsk with vital information about a rebellion brewing in Siberia. Irkutsk was home to Russian writer Valentin Rasputin; many of his novels and stories take place in the Angara Valley. An essay on the cultural history of Irkutsk (and another one about the nearby Lake Baikal) is included in Rasputin's non-fiction collection Siberia, Siberia, which is also available in an English translation. Irkutsk also figures prominently in descriptions by foreign travelers, including the so-called British \"Blind Traveler\" James Holman, who was suspected of spying and conducted back forcibly to the frontiers of Poland.\nMuseums.\nIrkutsk is a point of interest for tourists with its numerous museums and old architecture. The Taltsy Museum (), located on the Angara south of Irkutsk, is an open-air museum of Siberian traditional architecture. Numerous old wooden buildings from villages in the Angara valley, which have been flooded after the construction of the Bratsk Dam and Ust-Ilimsk Dam, have been transported to the museum and reassembled there. One of the centerpieces of the collection is a partial recreation of the 17th-century \"ostrog\" (fortress) of Ilimsk, which consists of the original Spasskaya Tower and the Church of Our Lady of Kazan transported from the flooded \"ostrog\" in the mid-1970s, to which an exact modern copy of another tower of the \"ostrog\" and the Southern wall of the fortress were added in the early 2000s.\nThe Botanic Garden of the Irkutsk State University known as the \"Irkutsk Botanic Garden\" is the only botanic garden as a living museum in Irkutsk Oblast and Baikalian Siberia. Its mission is \"to protect and enrich the flora of the Lake Baikal area and the world for people through public education, collection, propagation, research, and conservation of plants\". The garden is mainly an educational and scientific tool for the Irkutsk State University and maintains the largest plant collection of living plants in Eastern Siberia (more than 5,000 plant taxa), a herbarium, and a seed bank. It occupies within Irkutsk city, west of Lake Baikal. It has a federal status of especially protected land and a nature memorial of Irkutsk.\nTheaters.\nIrkutsk is home to several theaters, including the Okhlopkov Drama Theater, one of Russia's oldest.\nSports.\nBandy is popular in the city. There are several clubs, most notably Baykal-Energiya of the Russian Bandy Super League, which can draw spectator crowds of 30,000. It is also the centre of women's bandy in Russia with the club Rekord, which provides most players to the national team. In the 2019 national championship, four teams were from Irkutsk and only two were from the rest of the country.\nIn Irkutsk, there are 384 sports facilities, of which 200 are municipal ones. Among them there are 23 swimming pools, 14 ski bases, a sports palace, 154 courts, 165 gyms, an athletics arena, a racetrack, 7 stadiums\u2014Trud, Rekord, Dynamo, Zenit, Aviator, Lokomotiv-2, sports complex of Irktusk and the main football arena\u2014Lokomotiv.\n2012 Women's Bandy World Championship was hosted in Irkutsk and received praise from Federation of International Bandy. 2014 Bandy World Championship was played in the city. The final of Russian Bandy Super League 2016 was played at Rekord Stadium. The 2019 Bandy World Championship was scheduled to also be hosted in Irkutsk. The decision was reconsidered, though. Then it was thought that Irkutsk might get the right to host the 2020 tournament instead, if FIB was given guarantees that the planned indoor arena would be ready for use in time. It will also be an indoor speed skating arena. Its construction started in October 2018 and is expected to be ready for use by March 2020, just in time for the Bandy World Championship.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nIrkutsk is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "56873", "revid": "50272375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56873", "title": "Lactose intolerance", "text": "Inability to digest lactose\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLactose intolerance is caused by a lessened ability or a complete inability to digest lactose, a sugar found in dairy products. Humans vary in the amount of lactose they can tolerate before symptoms develop. Symptoms may include abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, flatulence, and nausea. These symptoms typically start thirty minutes to two hours after eating or drinking something containing lactose, with the severity typically depending on the amount consumed. Lactose intolerance does not cause damage to the gastrointestinal tract.\nLactose intolerance is due to the lack of the enzyme lactase in the small intestines to break lactose down into glucose and galactose. There are four types: primary, secondary, developmental, and congenital. Primary lactose intolerance occurs as the amount of lactase declines as people grow up. Secondary lactose intolerance is due to injury to the small intestine. Such injury could be the result of infection, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, or other diseases. Developmental lactose intolerance may occur in premature babies and usually improves over a short period of time. Congenital lactose intolerance is an extremely rare genetic disorder in which little or no lactase is made from birth. The reduction of lactase production starts typically in late childhood or early adulthood, but prevalence increases with age.\nDiagnosis may be confirmed if symptoms resolve following eliminating lactose from the diet. Other supporting tests include a hydrogen breath test and a stool acidity test. Other conditions that may produce similar symptoms include irritable bowel syndrome, celiac disease, and inflammatory bowel disease. Lactose intolerance is different from a milk allergy. Management is typically by decreasing the amount of lactose in the diet, taking lactase supplements (the amount of supplements should be based on the amount of lactose consumed), or treating the underlying disease. People are typically able to drink at least one cup of milk without developing symptoms, with greater amounts tolerated if drunk with a meal or throughout the day.\nWorldwide, around 65% of adults are affected by lactose malabsorption. Other mammals usually lose the ability to digest lactose after weaning. Lactose intolerance is the ancestral state of all humans before the recent evolution of lactase persistence in some cultures, which extends lactose tolerance into adulthood. Lactase persistence evolved in several populations independently, probably as an adaptation to the domestication of dairy animals around 10,000 years ago. Today the prevalence of lactose tolerance varies widely between regions and ethnic groups. The ability to digest lactose is most common in people of Northern European descent, and to a lesser extent in some parts of Central Asia, the Middle East and Africa. \nLactose intolerance is most common among people of East Asian descent (with 90% lactose intolerance), people of Jewish descent, people in African and Arab countries, and among people of Southern European descent (notably Greeks and Italians). Traditional food cultures reflect local variations in tolerance and historically many societies have adapted to low levels of tolerance by making dairy products that contain less lactose than fresh milk. One ethnographic example of this is \"kumis\", a fermented milk product that contains little to no lactose, which is the main source of dairy nutrition in Mongolia.\nThe medicalization of lactose intolerance as a disorder has been attributed to biases in research history, since most early studies were conducted amongst populations which are normally tolerant, as well as the cultural and economic importance and impact of milk in countries such as the United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\n\"Lactose intolerance\" primarily refers to a syndrome with one or more symptoms upon the consumption of food substances containing lactose sugar. Individuals may be lactose intolerant to varying degrees, depending on the severity of these symptoms.\n\"Hypolactasia\" is the term specifically for the small intestine producing little or no lactase enzyme. If a person with hypolactasia consumes lactose sugar, it results in \"lactose malabsorption\". The digestive system is unable to process the lactose sugar, and the unprocessed sugars in the gut produce the symptoms of \"lactose intolerance\".\nLactose intolerance is not an allergy, because it is not an immune response, but rather a sensitivity to dairy caused by a deficiency of lactase enzyme. Milk allergy, occurring in about 2% of the population, is a separate condition, with distinct symptoms that occur when the presence of milk protein, whey, trigger an immune reaction. A milk allergy most often appears in the first year of life, while lactose intolerance typically appears later in life.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe principal manifestation of lactose intolerance is an adverse reaction to products containing lactose (primarily milk), including abdominal bloating and cramps, flatulence, diarrhea, nausea, borborygmi, and vomiting (particularly in adolescents). These appear one-half to two hours after consumption. The severity of these signs and symptoms typically increases with the amount of lactose consumed; most lactose-intolerant people can tolerate a certain level of lactose in their diets without ill effects.\nBecause lactose intolerance is not an allergy, it does not produce allergy symptoms (such as itching, hives, or anaphylaxis).\nCauses.\nLactose intolerance is a consequence of lactase deficiency, which may be genetic (primary hypolactasia and primary congenital alactasia) or environmentally induced (secondary or acquired hypolactasia). In either case, symptoms are caused by insufficient levels of lactase in the lining of the duodenum. Lactose, a disaccharide molecule found in milk and dairy products, cannot be directly absorbed through the wall of the small intestine into the bloodstream, so, in the absence of lactase, passes intact into the colon. Bacteria in the colon can metabolise lactose, and the resulting fermentation produces copious amounts of gas (a mixture of hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and methane) that causes the various abdominal symptoms. The unabsorbed sugars and fermentation products also raise the osmotic pressure of the colon, causing an increased flow of water into the bowels (diarrhea).\nLactose intolerance in infants (congenital lactase deficiency) is caused by mutations in the \"LCT\" gene. The \"LCT\" gene provides the instructions for making lactase. Mutations are believed to interfere with the function of lactase, causing affected infants to have a severely impaired ability to digest lactose in breast milk or formula. Lactose intolerance in adulthood is a result of gradually decreasing activity (expression) of the \"LCT\" gene after infancy, which occurs in most humans. The specific DNA sequence in the \"MCM6\" gene helps control whether the \"LCT\" gene is turned on or off. At least several thousand years ago, some humans developed a mutation in the \"MCM6\" gene that keeps the \"LCT\" gene turned on even after breast feeding is stopped. Populations that are lactose intolerant lack this mutation. The \"LCT\" and \"MCM6\" genes are both located on the long arm (q) of chromosome 2 in region 21. The locus can be expressed as 2q21. The lactase deficiency also could be linked to certain heritages and varies widely. A 2016 study of over 60,000 participants from 89 countries found regional prevalence of lactose malabsorption was \"64% (54\u201374) in Asia (except Middle East), 47% (33\u201361) in eastern Europe, Russia, and former Soviet Republics, 38% (CI 18\u201357) in Latin America, 70% (57\u201383) in the Middle East, 66% (45\u201388) in northern Africa, 42% (13\u201371) in northern America, 45% (19\u201371) in Oceania, 63% (54\u201372) in sub-Saharan Africa, and 28% (19\u201337) in northern, southern and western Europe.\" According to Johns Hopkins Medicine, lactose intolerance is more common in Asian Americans, African Americans, Mexican Americans, and Native Americans. Analysis of the DNA of 94 ancient skeletons in Europe and Russia concluded that the mutation for lactose tolerance appeared about 4,300 years ago and spread throughout the European population.\nSome human populations have developed lactase persistence, in which lactase production continues into adulthood probably as a response to the benefits of being able to digest milk from farm animals. Some have argued that this links intolerance to natural selection favoring lactase-persistent individuals, but it is also consistent with a physiological response to decrease lactase production when it is not needed in cultures in which dairy products are not an available food source. Although populations in Europe, India, Arabia, and Africa were first thought to have high rates of lactase persistence because of a single mutation, lactase persistence has been traced to a number of mutations that occurred independently. Different alleles for lactase persistence have developed at least three times in East African populations, with persistence extending from 26% in Tanzania to 88% in the Beja pastoralist population in Sudan.\nThe accumulation of epigenetic factors, primarily DNA methylation, in the extended LCT region, including the gene enhancer located in the \"MCM6\" gene near C/T-13910 SNP, may also contribute to the onset of lactose intolerance in adults. Age-dependent expression of \"LCT\" in mice intestinal epithelium has been linked to DNA methylation in the gene enhancer.\nLactose intolerance is classified according to its causes as:\n Primary hypolactasia, or primary lactase deficiency, is genetic, develops in childhood at various ages, and is caused by the absence of a lactase persistence allele. In individuals without the lactase persistence allele, less lactase is produced by the body over time, leading to hypolactasia in adulthood. The frequency of lactase persistence, which allows lactose tolerance, varies enormously worldwide, with the highest prevalence in Northwestern Europe, declines across southern Europe and the Middle East and is low in Asia and most of Africa, although it is common in pastoralist populations from Africa.\n Secondary hypolactasia or secondary lactase deficiency, also called acquired hypolactasia or acquired lactase deficiency, is caused by an injury to the small intestine. This form of lactose intolerance can occur in both infants and lactase persistent adults and is generally reversible. It may be caused by acute gastroenteritis, coeliac disease, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, chemotherapy, intestinal parasites (such as giardia), or other environmental causes.\n Primary congenital alactasia, also called congenital lactase deficiency, is an extremely rare, autosomal recessive enzyme defect that prevents lactase expression from birth. People with congenital lactase deficiency cannot digest lactose from birth, so cannot digest breast milk. This genetic defect is characterized by a complete lack of lactase (alactasia). About 40 cases have been reported worldwide, mainly limited to Finland. Before the 20th century, babies born with congenital lactase deficiency often did not survive, but death rates decreased with soybean-derived infant formulas and manufactured lactose-free dairy products.\nDiagnosis.\nIn order to assess lactose intolerance, intestinal function is challenged by ingesting more dairy products than can be readily digested. Clinical symptoms typically appear within 30 minutes, but may take up to two hours, depending on other foods and activities. Substantial variability in response (symptoms of nausea, cramping, bloating, diarrhea, and flatulence) is to be expected, as the extent and severity of lactose intolerance varies among individuals.\nThe next step is to determine whether it is due to primary lactase deficiency or an underlying disease that causes secondary lactase deficiency. Physicians should investigate the presence of undiagnosed coeliac disease, Crohn's disease, or other enteropathies when secondary lactase deficiency is suspected and infectious gastroenteritis has been ruled out.\nLactose intolerance is distinct from milk allergy, an immune response to cow's milk proteins. They may be distinguished in diagnosis by giving lactose-free milk, producing no symptoms in the case of lactose intolerance, but the same reaction as to normal milk in the presence of a milk allergy. A person can have both conditions. If positive confirmation is necessary, four tests are available.\nHydrogen breath test.\nIn a hydrogen breath test, the most accurate lactose intolerance test, after an overnight fast, 25 grams of lactose (in a solution with water) are swallowed. If the lactose cannot be digested, enteric bacteria metabolize it and produce hydrogen, which, along with methane, if produced, can be detected on the patient's breath by a clinical gas chromatograph or compact solid-state detector. The test takes about 2.5 hours to complete. If the hydrogen levels in the patient's breath are high, they may have lactose intolerance. This test is not usually done on babies and very young children, because it can cause severe diarrhea.\nLactose tolerance test.\nIn conjunction, measuring blood glucose level every 10 to 15 minutes after ingestion will show a \"flat curve\" in individuals with lactose malabsorption, while the lactase persistent will have a significant \"top\", with a typical elevation of 50% to 100%, within one to two hours. However, due to the need for frequent blood sampling, this approach has been largely replaced by breath testing.\nAfter an overnight fast, blood is drawn and then 50 grams of lactose (in aqueous solution) are swallowed. Blood is then drawn again at the 30-minute, 1-hour, 2-hour, and 3-hour marks. If the lactose cannot be digested, blood glucose levels will rise by less than 20\u00a0mg/dl.\nStool acidity test.\nThis test can be used to diagnose lactose intolerance in infants, for whom other forms of testing are risky or impractical. The infant is given lactose to drink. If the individual is tolerant, the lactose is digested and absorbed in the small intestine; otherwise, it is not digested and absorbed, and it reaches the colon. The bacteria in the colon, mixed with the lactose, cause acidity in stools. Stools passed after the ingestion of the lactose are tested for level of acidity. If the stools are acidic, the infant is intolerant to lactose.\nStool pH in lactose intolerance is less than 5.5.\nIntestinal biopsy.\nAn intestinal biopsy must confirm lactase deficiency following discovery of elevated hydrogen in the hydrogen breath test. Modern techniques have enabled a bedside test, identifying presence of lactase enzyme on upper gastrointestinal endoscopy instruments. However, for research applications such as mRNA measurements, a specialist laboratory is required.\nStool sugar chromatography.\nChromatography can be used to separate and identify undigested sugars present in faeces. Although lactose may be detected in the faeces of people with lactose intolerance, this test is not considered reliable enough to conclusively diagnose or exclude lactose intolerance.\nGenetic diagnostic.\nGenetic tests may be useful in assessing whether a person has primary lactose intolerance. Lactase activity persistence in adults is associated with two polymorphisms: C/T 13910 and G/A 22018 located in the \"MCM6\" gene. These polymorphisms may be detected by molecular biology techniques at the DNA extracted from blood or saliva samples; genetic kits specific for this diagnosis are available. The procedure consists of extracting and amplifying DNA from the sample, following with a hybridation protocol in a strip. Colored bands are obtained as result, and depending on the different combinations, it would be possible to determine whether the patient is lactose intolerant. This test allows a noninvasive definitive diagnostic.\nManagement.\nWhen lactose intolerance is due to secondary lactase deficiency, treatment of the underlying disease may allow lactase activity to return to normal levels. In people with celiac disease, lactose intolerance normally reverts or improves several months after starting a gluten-free diet, but temporary dietary restriction of lactose may be needed.\nPeople with primary lactase deficiency cannot modify their body's ability to produce lactase. In societies where lactose intolerance is the norm, it is not considered a condition that requires treatment. However, where dairy is a larger component of the normal diet, a number of efforts may be useful. There are four general principles in dealing with lactose intolerance: avoidance of dietary lactose, substitution to maintain nutrient intake, regulation of calcium intake, and use of enzyme substitute. Regular consumption of dairy food by lactase deficient individuals may also reduce symptoms of intolerance by promoting colonic bacteria adaptation.\nDietary avoidance.\nThe primary way of managing the symptoms of lactose intolerance is to limit the intake of lactose to a level that can be tolerated. Lactase deficient individuals vary in the amount of lactose they can tolerate, and some report that their tolerance varies over time, depending on health status and pregnancy. However, as a rule of thumb, people with primary lactase deficiency and no small intestine injury are usually able to consume at least 12 grams of lactose per sitting without symptoms, or with only mild symptoms, with greater amounts tolerated if consumed with a meal or throughout the day.\nLactose is found primarily in dairy products, which vary in the amount of lactose they contain:\nThere used to be a lack of standardization on how lactose is measured and reported in food. The different molecular weights of anhydrous lactose or lactose monohydrate result in up to 5% difference. One source recommends using the \"carbohydrates\" or \"sugars\" part of the nutritional label as surrogate for lactose content, but such \"lactose by difference\" values are not assured to correspond to real lactose content. The stated dairy content of a product also varies according to manufacturing processes and labelling practices, and commercial terminology varies between languages and regions. As a result, absolute figures for the amount of lactose consumed (by weight) may not be very reliable.\nKosher products labeled \"pareve\" or \"fleishig\" are free of milk. However, if a \"D\" (for \"dairy\") is present next to the circled \"K\", \"U\", or other \"hechsher\", the food product likely contains milk solids, although it may also simply indicate the product was produced on equipment shared with other products containing milk derivatives.\nLactose is also a commercial food additive used for its texture, flavor, and adhesive qualities. It is found in additives labelled as casein, caseinate, whey, lactoserum, milk solids, modified milk ingredients, etc. As such, lactose is found in foods such as processed meats (sausages/hot dogs, sliced meats, p\u00e2t\u00e9s), gravy stock powder, margarines, sliced breads, breakfast cereals, potato chips, processed foods, medications, prepared meals, meal replacements (powders and bars), protein supplements (powders and bars), and even beers in the milk stout style. Some barbecue sauces and liquid cheeses used in fast-food restaurants may also contain lactose. When dining out, carrying lactose intolerance cards that explain dietary restrictions in the local language can help communicate needs to restaurant staff. Lactose is often used as the primary filler (main ingredient) in most prescription and non-prescription solid pill form medications, though product labeling seldom mentions the presence of 'lactose' or 'milk', and neither do product monograms provided to pharmacists, and most pharmacists are unaware of the very wide scale yet common use of lactose in such medications until they contact the supplier or manufacturer for verification.\nMilk substitutes.\nPlant-based milks and derivatives such as soy milk, rice milk, almond milk, coconut milk, hazelnut milk, oat milk, hemp milk, macadamia nut milk, and peanut milk are inherently lactose-free. Low-lactose and lactose-free versions of foods are often available to replace dairy-based foods for those with lactose intolerance.\nLactase supplements.\nWhen lactose avoidance is not possible, or on occasions when a person chooses to consume such items, then enzymatic lactase supplements may be used.\nLactase enzymes similar to those produced in the small intestines of humans are produced industrially by fungi of the genus \"Aspergillus\". The enzyme, \u03b2-galactosidase, is available in tablet form in a variety of doses, in many countries without a prescription. It functions well only in high-acid environments, such as that found in the human gut due to the addition of gastric juices from the stomach. Unfortunately, too much acid can denature it, so it should not be taken on an empty stomach. Also, the enzyme is ineffective if it does not reach the small intestine by the time the problematic food does. Lactose-sensitive individuals can experiment with both timing and dosage to fit their particular needs.\nWhile essentially the same process as normal intestinal lactose digestion, direct treatment of milk employs a different variety of industrially produced lactase. This enzyme, produced by yeast from the genus \"Kluyveromyces\", takes much longer to act, must be thoroughly mixed throughout the product, and is destroyed by even mildly acidic environments. Its main use is in producing the lactose-free or lactose-reduced dairy products sold in supermarkets.\nRehabituation to dairy products.\nRegular consumption of dairy foods containing lactose can promote a colonic bacteria adaptation, enhancing a favorable microbiome, which allows people with primary lactase deficiency to diminish their intolerance and to consume more dairy foods. The way to induce tolerance is based on progressive exposure, consuming smaller amounts frequently, distributed throughout the day. Lactose intolerance can also be managed by ingesting live yogurt cultures containing lactobacilli that are able to digest the lactose in other dairy products.\nEpidemiology.\nWorldwide, about 80% of people experience some form of lactose intolerance as they age past infancy, but there are significant differences between populations and regions. As few as 5% of northern Europeans are lactose intolerant, while as many as 90% of adults in parts of Asia are lactose intolerant.\nIn northern European countries, early adoption of dairy farming conferred a selective evolutionary advantage to individuals that could tolerate lactose. This led to higher frequencies of lactose tolerance in these countries. For example, almost 100% of Irish people are predicted to be lactose tolerant. Conversely, regions of the south, such as Africa, did not adopt dairy farming as early and tolerance from milk consumption did not occur the same way as in northern Europe. Lactose intolerance is common among people of Jewish descent, as well as from West Africa, the Arab countries, Greece, and Italy. Different populations will present certain gene constructs depending on the evolutionary and cultural pre-settings of the geographical region.\nHistory.\nGreater lactose tolerance has come about in two ways. Some populations have developed genetic changes to allow the digestion of lactose: lactase persistence. Other populations developed cooking methods like milk fermentation.\nLactase persistence in humans evolved relatively recently (in the last 10,000 years) among some populations. Around 8,000 years ago in modern-day Turkey, humans became reliant on newly-domesticated animals that could be milked; such as cows, sheep, and goats. This resulted in higher frequency of lactase persistence. Lactase persistence became high in regions such as Europe, Scandinavia, the Middle East and Northwestern India. However, most people worldwide remain lactase non-persistent. Populations that raised animals not used for milk tend to have 90\u2013100 percent of a lactose intolerant rate. For this reason, lactase persistence is of some interest to the fields of anthropology, human genetics, and archaeology, which typically use the genetically derived persistence/non-persistence terminology.\nThe rise of dairy and producing dairy related products from cow milk alone, varies across different regions of the world, aside from genetic predisposition. The process of turning milk into cheese dates back earlier than 5200 BC.\nDNA analysis in February 2012 revealed that \u00d6tzi was lactose intolerant, supporting the theory that lactose intolerance was still common at that time, despite the increasing spread of agriculture and dairying.\nGenetic analysis shows lactase persistence has developed several times in different places independently in an example of convergent evolution.\nHistory of research.\nIt was not until relatively recently that medicine recognised the worldwide prevalence of lactose intolerance and its genetic causes. Its symptoms were described as early as Hippocrates (460\u2013370 BC), but until the 1960s, the prevailing assumption was that tolerance was the norm. Intolerance was explained as the result of a milk allergy, intestinal pathogens, or as being psychosomatic \u2013 it being recognised that some cultures did not practice dairying, and people from those cultures often reacted badly to consuming milk. Two reasons have been given for this misconception. One was that early research was conducted solely on European-descended populations, which have an unusually low incidence of lactose intolerance and an extensive cultural history of dairying. As a result, researchers wrongly concluded that tolerance was the global norm. Another reason is that lactose intolerance tends to be under-reported: lactose intolerant individuals can tolerate at least some lactose before they show symptoms, and their symptoms differ in severity. The large majority of people are able to digest some quantity of milk, for example in tea or coffee, without developing any adverse effects. Fermented dairy products, such as cheese, also contain significantly less lactose than plain milk. Therefore, in societies where tolerance is the norm, many lactose intolerant people who consume only small amounts of dairy, or have only mild symptoms, may be unaware that they cannot digest lactose.\nEventually, in the 1960s, it was recognised that lactose intolerance was correlated with race in the United States. Subsequent research revealed that lactose intolerance was more common globally than tolerance, and that the variation was due to genetic differences, not an adaptation to cultural practices.\nOther animals.\nMost mammals normally cease to produce lactase and become lactose intolerant after weaning. The downregulation of lactase expression in mice could be attributed to the accumulation of DNA methylation in the \"Lct\" gene and the adjacent \"Mcm6\" gene.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56874", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56874", "title": "Horizontal line test", "text": "Test for the injectivity of a function\nIn mathematics, the horizontal line test is a test used to determine whether a function is injective (i.e., one-to-one).\nIn calculus.\nA \"horizontal line\" is a straight, flat line that goes from left to right. Given a function formula_1 (i.e. from the real numbers to the real numbers), we can decide if it is injective by looking at horizontal lines that intersect the function's graph. If any horizontal line formula_2 intersects the graph in more than one point, the function is not injective. To see this, note that the points of intersection have the same y-value (because they lie on the line formula_2) but different x values, which by definition means the function cannot be injective.\nVariations of the horizontal line test can be used to determine whether a function is surjective or bijective:\nIn set theory.\nConsider a function formula_4 with its corresponding graph as a subset of the Cartesian product formula_5. Consider the horizontal lines in formula_5 :formula_7. The function \"f\" is injective if and only if each horizontal line intersects the graph at most once. In this case the graph is said to pass the horizontal line test. If any horizontal line intersects the graph more than once, the function fails the horizontal line test and is not injective.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56876", "revid": "45678539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56876", "title": "Ob", "text": "Major river in Siberia\nThe Ob (; ) is a major river in Russia. It is in western Siberia, and with its tributary the Irtysh forms the world's seventh-longest river system, at . The Ob forms at the confluence of the Biya and Katun which have their origins in the Altai Mountains. It is the westernmost of the three great Siberian rivers that flow into the Arctic Ocean (the other two being the Yenisei and the Lena). Its flow is north-westward, then northward.\nThe main city on its banks is Novosibirsk, the largest city in Siberia, and the third-largest city in Russia. It is where the Trans-Siberian Railway crosses the river.\nThe Gulf of Ob is the world's longest estuary.\nNames.\nThe internationally known name of the river is based on the Russian name \"\u041e\u0431\u044c\" (\"Ob\u02b9\", ). Possibly from Proto-Indo-Iranian \"*H\u0101\u0301p-\", \"river, water\" (compare Vedic Sanskrit \"\u00e1p-\", Persian \"\u0101b\", Tajik \"ob\", and Pashto \"ob\u0259\", \"water\"). Katz (1990) proposes Komi \"ob\" 'river' as the immediate source of derivation for the Russian name. Katz's proposal of a common Finno-Ugric root, borrowed early on from a pre-Indo-Iranian source related to Sanskrit \"ambhas-\" 'water' is deemed improbable by R\u00e9dei (1992), who prefers to analyse this as a later loan from a descendant of the non-nasal root form \"*H\u0101\u0301p-\".\nThe Ob is known to the Khanty people as the \"As\" (the source of the name \"Ostyak\"), \"Yag\", \"Kolta\" and \"Yema\"; to the Nenets people as the \"Kolta\" or \"Kuay\"; and to the Siberian Tatars as the \"Umar\" or \"Omass\".\nGeography.\nThe Ob forms southwest of Biysk in Altai Krai at the confluence of the Biya and Katun rivers. Both these streams have their origin in the Altai Mountains, which gradually give way to the Ob Plateau. The Biya has its sources in Lake Teletskoye and the long Katun in a glacier on Mount Byelukha.\nThe Ob itself is in Russia. Its tributaries extend into northern Kazakhstan, a western corner of China and a tiny upland parcel of the western tip of Mongolia, where the wider borders match the drainage basin almost precisely. The river splits into more than one arm after the large Irtysh flows into it at about 69\u00b0 E. Originating in China, the Irtysh is the furthest source of the Ob. From their respective sources to the confluence, the Irtysh measures 4,248 kilometers (2,640\u00a0mi) and the Ob 2,538\u00a0km (1,577\u00a0mi). Other noteworthy tributaries are: from the east, the Tom, Chulym, Ket, Tym and Vakh rivers; and, from the west and south, the Vasyugan, Irtysh (with the Ishim and Tobol rivers), and Severnaya Sosva.\nThe Ob zigzags west and north until it reaches 55\u00b0 N, where it curves to the northwest, south of the Siberian Uvaly, at the western end of which it bends northwards, wheeling finally eastwards into the Gulf of Ob, a bay of the Kara Sea, separating the Yamal Peninsula from the Gyda Peninsula.\nThe combined Ob-Irtysh system, the fourth-longest river system of Asia (after Yenisei, and China's Yangzi and Yellow rivers), is long, and the area of its basin .\nThe river basin of the Ob consists mostly of steppe, taiga, swamps, tundra, and semi-desert topography. The floodplains of the Ob are characterised by many tributaries and lakes.\nThe Ob is icebound at southern Barnaul from early in November to near the end of April, and at northern Salekhard, above its mouth, from the end of October to the beginning of June.\nThe Ob River crosses several climatic zones. The upper Ob valley, in the south, supports grapes, melons and watermelons, whereas the lower reaches of the Ob are Arctic tundra. The most temperate climates on the Ob are at Biysk, Barnaul, and Novosibirsk.\nHuman use.\nThe Ob provides irrigation, drinking water, hydroelectric energy, and fishing (the river hosts more than 50 species of fish).\nThere are several hydroelectric power plants along the Ob river, the largest being Novosibirskaya GES.\nThe navigable waters within the Ob basin reach a total length of .\nThe importance of navigation in the Ob basin for transport was particularly great before the completion of the Trans-Siberian Railway, since, despite the general south-to-north direction of the flow of Ob and most of its tributaries, the width of the Ob basin provided for (somewhat indirect) transport in the east\u2013west direction as well.\nHistory.\nThe Novgorodians were aware of the lands of western Siberia from at least the 11th century, which were designated by the Russian word \"Yugra\". Novgorod established two trade routes to the Ob River, both starting from the town of Ustyug. The first route went along the Sukhona and Vychegda, then along the Usa to the lower reaches of the Ob. The second route went down the Northern Dvina, then along the coasts of the White Sea and Kara Sea, before reaching the mouth of the Ob.\nThe Russian settlements of Beryozov and Obdorsk were founded towards the end of the 16th century on the lower reaches of the Ob, while Surgut was founded on the middle course of the Ob.\nUntil the early 20th century, a particularly important western river-port was\nTyumen, located on the Tura, a tributary of the Tobol. Reached by an extension of the Yekaterinburg\u2013Perm railway in 1885, and thus obtaining a rail link to the Kama and Volga rivers in the heart of Russia, Tyumen became an important railhead for some years until the railway extended further east. In the eastern reaches of the Ob basin, Tomsk on the Tom functioned as an important terminus.\nTyumen had its first steamboat in 1836, and steamboats have navigated the middle reaches of the Ob since 1845. In 1916, there were 49 steamers on the Ob; 10 on the Yenisei. In the 1870s, the navigability of the river was explored by Christian Dahl, who was instrumental in opening up a direct trade route from central Siberia to Western Europe.\nIn an attempt to extend the Ob navigable system even further, a system of canals, utilising the Ket, long in all, was built in the late 19th-century to connect the Ob with the Yenisei, but soon abandoned as being uncompetitive with the railway.\nThe Trans-Siberian Railway, once completed, provided for more direct, year-round transport in the east\u2013west direction. But the Ob river-system still remained important for connecting the huge expanses of Tyumen Oblast and Tomsk Oblast with the major cities along the Trans-Siberian route, such as Novosibirsk or Omsk. In the second half of the 20th century, construction of rail links to Labytnangi, Tobolsk, and the oil and gas cities of Surgut, and Nizhnevartovsk provided more railheads, but did not diminish the importance of the waterways for reaching places still not served by the rail.\nA dam built near Novosibirsk in 1956 created the then-largest artificial lake in Siberia, called Novosibirsk Reservoir.\nFrom the 1960s through 1980s, Soviet engineers and administrators contemplated a gigantic project to divert some of the waters of Ob and Irtysh to Kazakhstan and the Soviet Central Asian republics, replenishing the Aral Sea as well. The project never left the drawing board, abandoned in 1986 for economic and environmental considerations.\nPollution.\nAs of 2019, the anthropogenic loading on the Ob river is substantially increased relative to the mid-1900s.\nThe Ob river catchment is part of the West Siberian petroleum basin and as such has large oilfields and oil and gas infrastructure in its area, which are a substantial source of pollutants to the Ob. In the lower reaches, the maximum permissible concentrations of petroleum products are exceeded by 9\u201310 times. The oxygen content in the water is 4 times lower than normal.\nA study of the Middle Ob from 2003-2008 and 2014-2018 identified the main pollutants as phenols, hydrocarbons, iron, manganese, copper, and phosphate from natural and anthropogenic sources. \nTributaries.\nThe Irtysh is the major tributary of the Ob. The larger tributaries along its course are:\nSmaller tributaries include Pemboy (right), 207km off the mouth of Ob.\nIn addition, the Nadym and the Pur River flow into the Gulf of Ob and the Taz into the Taz Estuary, a side arm of the Gulf of Ob.\nCities.\nCities along the river include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBridges.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrom a confluence to a source:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56877", "revid": "46324769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56877", "title": "Tatars", "text": "Turkic ethnic groups in Eurasia\nTatars ( ) are a group of Turkic speaking peoples found across Eastern Europe and Asia who bear the name \"Tatar\".\nInitially, the ethnonym \"Tatar\" possibly referred to the Tatar confederation. That confederation was eventually incorporated into the Mongol Empire when Genghis Khan unified the various steppe tribes. Historically, the term \"Tatar\" (or \"Tartar\") was applied by western cartographers to anyone from the vast Northern and Central Asian landmass then known as Tartary, a term that was falsely conflated with the Mongol Empire. More recently, the term has come to refer more narrowly to related ethnic groups who call themselves \"Tatars\".\nBy far the largest group amongst the Tatars are the Volga Tatars, native to the Volga-Ural region (Tatarstan and Bashkortostan) of European Russia, who for this reason are often also known as \"Tatars\" in Russian. They compose 53% of Tatarstan's population. Their language is known as the Tatar language. As of 2010[ [update]], there were an estimated 5.3\u00a0million ethnic Tatars in Russia.\nWhile also speaking languages belonging to different Kipchak sub-groups, genetic studies have shown that the three main groups of Tatars (Volga, Crimean, and Siberian) are apparently unrelated, and thus their formation occurred independently of one another, but it is possible that at least one of the Tatar groups had cultural influence mainly from the times of the Golden Horde.\nMany noble families in the Tsardom of Russia and Russian Empire had Tatar origins.\nEtymology.\n\"Tatar\" became a name for populations of the former Golden Horde in Europe, such as those of the former Kazan, Crimean, Astrakhan, Qasim, and Siberian Khanates. The form \"Tartar\" has its origins in either Latin or French, coming to Western European languages from Turkish and the Persian (, \"mounted messenger\"). From the beginning, the extra \"r\" was present in the Western forms and according to the Oxford English Dictionary this was most likely due to an association with \"Tartarus\".\nThe Persian word is first recorded in the 13th century in reference to the hordes of Genghis Khan and is of unknown origin; according to the Oxford English Dictionary it is \"said to be\" ultimately from \"tata\". The Arabic word for Tatars is . Tatars themselves wrote their name as or .\nOchir (2016) states that Siberian Tatars and the Tatars living in the territories between Asia and Europe are of Turkic origin, acquired the appellation Tatar later, and do not possess ancestral connection to the Mongolic Nine Tatars, whose ethnogenesis involved Mongolic people as well as Mongolized Turks who had been ruling over them during the 6\u20138th centuries. Pow (2019) proposes that Turkic-speaking peoples of Cumania, as a sign of political allegiance, adopted the endonym \"Tatar\" of their Mongol conquerors, before ultimately subsuming the latter culturally and linguistically. Valikhova et al. (2022) states that Siberian Tatars, at least Tom Tatars, have Mongol genetic component, which is in line with their genetic history.\nSome Turkic peoples living within the Russian Empire were named \"Tatar\", although not all Turkic peoples of Russian Empire were referred to as Tatars (for instance, this name was never used in relation to the Yakuts, Chuvashes, Sarts and some others). Some of these populations used and keep using \"Tatar\" as a self-designation, others do not.\nThe term is originally not just an exonym, since the Polovtsians of Golden Horde called themselves \"Tatar\". It is also an endonym to a number of peoples of Siberia and Russian Far East, namely the Khakas people (\u0442\u0430\u0434\u0430\u0440, \"tadar).\"\nLanguages.\nEleventh-century Kara-khanid scholar Mahmud al-Kashgari noted that the historical Tatars were bilingual, speaking other Turkic languages besides their own.\nThe modern Tatar language, together with the Bashkir language, forms the Kypchak-Volga-Ural group within the Kipchak languages (also known as Northwestern Turkic).\nThere are two Tatar dialects\u2014Central and Western. The Western dialect (Misher) is spoken mostly by Mish\u00e4rs, the Central dialect is spoken by Kazan and Astrakhan Tatars. Both dialects have subdialects. Central Tatar furnishes the base of literary Tatar.\nThe Siberian Tatar language is independent of Volga\u2013Ural Tatar. The dialects are quite remote from Standard Tatar and from each other, often preventing mutual comprehension. The claim that Siberian Tatar is part of the modern Tatar language is typically supported by linguists in Kazan and denounced by Siberian Tatars.\nCrimean Tatar is the indigenous language of the Crimean Tatar people. Because of its common name, Crimean \"Tatar\" is sometimes mistakenly seen in Russia as a dialect of Kazan Tatar. Although these languages are related (as both are Turkic), the Kypchak languages closest to Crimean Tatar are (as mentioned above) Kumyk and Karachay-Balkar, not Kazan Tatar. Still, there exists an opinion (E. R. Tenishev), according to which the Kazan Tatar language is included in the same Kipchak-Cuman group as Crimean Tatar.\nContemporary groups and nations.\nThe largest Tatar populations are the Volga Tatars, native to the Idel-Ural (Volga-Ural) region of European Russia, and the Crimean Tatars of Crimea. Smaller groups of Lipka Tatars and Astrakhan Tatars also live in Europe and the Siberian Tatars in Asia.\nVolga Tatars.\nIn the 7th century AD, the Volga Bulgars settled on the territory of the Volga-Kama region, where Finno-Ugrians lived compactly at that time. Bulgars inhabited part of the modern territory of Tatarstan, Udmurtia, Ulyanovsk region, Samara region and Chuvashia. After the invasion of Batu Khan in 1223\u20131236, the Golden Horde destroyed Volga Bulgaria. Most of the population of the Bulgars survived and crossed to the right bank of the Volga, displacing the Mountain Mari (\"cheremis\") from the inhabited territories to the meadow side. In the year 1236, according to a Russian annalist: \"there came from the countries of the East into the Bulgar lands the godless Tatars and sacked the good city of Bolgar and killed everyone from the old to the young and the tiniest suckling\". It is likely the first time that the name \"Tatar\" was used in connection with the region.\nAfter a while, Tatars from all the outskirts of the Golden Horde began to arrive in the Kazan Khanate, and consisted mainly of Kipchak peoples: Nogais and Crimean Tatars.Kazan was built by the Perekop fugitives from Taurida during the reign of Vasily Vasilyevich in Moscow. Vasily Ivanovich forced her to take tsars from him for herself. And then, when she was indignant, he embarrassed her with the hardships of a dangerous war, but he did not conquer her. But in 7061 (1552), his son Ivan IV took the city of Kazan after a six-month siege together with the Cheremis. However, in the form of a reward for the offense, he subdued neighboring Bulgaria, which he could not stand for frequent rebellions.\n\"\u2014 The journey to Muscovy of Baron Augustine Mayerberg and Horace Wilhelm Calvucci, ambassadors of the August Roman Emperor Leopold to the Tsar and Grand Duke Alexei Mikhailovich in 1661, described by Baron Mayerberg himself\"Kazan Tatars are descendants of the Tatars of the Kazan Kingdom of the Kipchak Horde. \"\u2014 \"Alphabetical list of peoples living in the Russian Empire in 1895\"https://\"Kazan Tatars got their name from the main city of Kazan\"\u2014\"and it is so called from the Tatar word Kazan, the cauldron, which was omitted by the servant of the founder of this city, Khan Altyn Bek, not on purpose, when he scooped water for his master to wash, in the river now called Kazanka. In other respects, according to their own legends, they were not of a special tribe, but descended from the fighters who remained here [in Kazan] on the settlement of different generations and from foreigners attracted to Kazan, but especially Nogai Tatars, who all through their union into a single society formed a special people.\n\u2014 \"Carl Wilhelm M\u00fcller\". \"Description of all the peoples living in the Russian state..\" Part Two. About the peoples of the Tatar tribe. S-P, 1776, Translated from German.\n\u2014 \"Johann Gottlieb Georgi\". Description of all the peoples living in the Russian state : their everyday rituals, customs, clothes, dwellings, exercises, amusements, faiths and other memorabilia. Part 2 : About the peoples of the Tatar tribe and other undecided origin of the Northern Siberian. \"\u2014\" 1799. page 8Also in Kazan there is a famous \"Kaban Lake\" similar to the name of the \"Kuban River\", which translates from Nogai as \"overflowing\".\nThe main now central Bauman Street that leads to the Kremlin is one of the oldest streets in Kazan. In the era of the Kazan Khanate, it was called the Nogai district. Nogai daruga is a conditional territory, the possessions of which are controlled by the Nogai Horde, they were run by foremen beki:\nThe Tatar Queen Syuyumbike, who was the daughter of the Nogai biya, also testifies to the Nogai roots of the Kazan Tatars. And this is also confirmed by the Khans of the Kazan Khanate:\nThe large coat of arms of Tsar Ivan IV the Terrible testifies that the Tatars of the Kazan Khanate and the Bulgars of the Volga Bulgarian land are different peoples and territories with different coats of arms.\nThe majority of Volga Tatars (Kazan Tatars and Mishars) are usually thought to be descendants of either the Kipchaks (Polovtsians) of Golden Horde, or Bulgars, that survived the Mongol conquest of 1236\u20131237. There were only minor groups of Kipchak tribes on the Bulgarian and Cheremis land, and there were very few of them on the territory of the future Kazan Khanate. But during the events of 1438\u20131445, associated with the formation of the Kazan Khanate, together with Khan Uluk-Muhammad, about 40 thousand Tatars arrived here at once. Subsequently, Tatars from Astrakhan, Azov, Crimea, Akhtubinsk and other places moved to the Kazan Khanate. The Arab historian Al-Omari (Shihabuddin al-Umari) wrote that, having joined the Golden Horde, the Cumans moved to the position of subjects. The Tatar-Mongols settled on the territory of the Polovtsian steppe and gradually mixed with the Polovtsians. Al-Omari concludes that after several generations, the Tatars began to look like Polovtsy: \"as if from the same (with them) kind,\" because they began to live on their lands.\nFinally in the end of the 19th century; although the name Nogailars persisted in some places; the majority identified themselves simply as \"the Muslims\") and the language of the Kipchaks; on the other hand, the invaders eventually converted to Sunni Islam (c. 14th century). As the Golden Horde disintegrated in the 15th century, the area became the territory of the Kazan khanate, which Russia ultimately conquered in the 16th century.\nSome Volga Tatars speak different dialects of the Tatar language. Accordingly, they form distinct groups such as the Mi\u015f\u00e4r group and the Qasim group:\nA minority of Christianized Volga Tatars are known as Ker\u00e4\u015fens.\nThe Volga Tatars used the Turkic Old Tatar language for their literature between the 15th and 19th centuries. It was written in the \u0130ske iml\u00e2 variant of the Arabic script, but actual spelling varied regionally. The older literary language included many Arabic and Persian loanwords. However, the modern literary language (generally written using a Cyrillic alphabet), often has Russian- and other European-derived words instead.\nOutside of Tatarstan, urban Tatars usually speak Russian as their first language (in cities such as Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Nizhniy Novgorod, Tashkent, Almaty, and in cities of the Ural region and western Siberia) and other languages in a worldwide diaspora.\nIn the 1910s the Volga Tatars numbered about half a million in the Kazan Governorate in Tatarstan, their historical homeland, about 400,000 in each of the governments of Ufa, 100,000 in Samara and Simbirsk, and about 30,000 in Vyatka, Saratov, Tambov, Penza, Nizhny Novgorod, Perm and Orenburg. An additional 15,000 had migrated to Ryazan or were settled as prisoners in the 16th and 17th centuries in Lithuania (Vilnius, Grodno and Podolia). An additional 2,000 resided in St. Petersburg.\nMost Kazan Tatars practice Islam. The Kazan Tatars speak Kazan (normal) Tatar language, with a substantial amount of Russian and Arabic loanwords.\nBefore 1917, polygamy was practiced only by the wealthier classes and was a waning institution.\nAstrakhan Tatars.\nThe Astrakhan Tatars (around 80,000) are a group of Tatars, descendants of the Astrakhan Khanate's population, who live mostly in Astrakhan Oblast. In the Russian census of 2010 most Astrakhan Tatars declared themselves simply as \"Tatars\" and few declared themselves as \"Astrakhan Tatars\". Many Volga Tatars live in Astrakhan Oblast, and differences between the two groups have been disappearing.\nLipka Tatars.\nThe Lipka Tatars are a group of Turkic-speaking Tatars who originally settled in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania at the beginning of the 14th century. The first settlers tried to preserve their shamanistic religion and sought asylum amongst the non-Christian Lithuanians. Towards the end of the 14th century Grand Duke Vytautas the Great of Lithuania (ruled 1392\u20131430) invited another wave of Tatars\u2014Muslims, this time\u2014into the Grand Duchy. These Tatars first settled in Lithuania proper around Vilnius, Trakai, Hrodna and Kaunas and spread to other parts of the Grand Duchy that later became part of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569. These areas comprise parts of present-day Lithuania, Belarus and Poland. From the very beginning of their settlement in Lithuania they were known as the Lipka Tatars.\nFrom the 13th to 17th centuries various groups of Tatars settled and/or found refuge within the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The Grand Dukes of Lithuania especially promoted the migrations because of the Tatars' reputation as skilled warriors. The Tatar settlers were all granted \"szlachta\" (nobility) status, a tradition that survived until the end of the Commonwealth in the late 18th century. Such migrants included the Lipka Tatars (13th\u201314th centuries) as well as Crimean and Nogay Tatars (15th\u201316th centuries), all of which were notable in Polish military history, as well as Volga Tatars (16th\u201317th centuries). They all mostly settled in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.\nVarious estimates of the Tatars in the Commonwealth in the 17th century place their numbers at about 15,000 persons and 60 villages with mosques. Numerous royal privileges, as well as internal autonomy granted by the monarchs, allowed the Tatars to preserve their religion, traditions, and culture over the centuries. The Tatars were allowed to intermarry with Christians, a practice uncommon in Europe at the time. The May Constitution of 1791 gave the Tatars representation in the Polish Sejm (parliament).\nAlthough by the 18th century the Tatars had adopted the local language, the Islamic religion and many Tatar traditions (e.g. the sacrifice of bulls in their mosques during the main religious festivals) survived. This led to the formation of a distinctive Muslim culture, in which the elements of Muslim orthodoxy mixed with religious tolerance formed a relatively liberal society. For instance, the women in Lipka Tatar society traditionally had the same rights and status as men, and could attend non-segregated schools.\nAbout 5,500 Tatars lived within the inter-war boundaries of Poland (1920\u20131939), and a Tatar cavalry unit had fought for the country's independence. The Tatars had preserved their cultural identity and sustained a number of Tatar organisations, including Tatar archives and a museum in Vilnius.\nThe Tatars suffered serious losses during World War II and furthermore, after the border change in 1945, a large part of them found themselves in the Soviet Union. It is estimated that about 3,000 Tatars live in present-day Poland, of which about 500 declared Tatar (rather than Polish) nationality in the 2002 census. There are two Tatar villages (Bohoniki and Kruszyniany) in the north-east of present-day Poland, as well as urban Tatar communities in Warsaw, Gda\u0144sk, Bia\u0142ystok, and Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski. Tatars in Poland sometimes have a Muslim surname with a Polish ending: \"Ryzwanowicz\"; other surnames adopted by more assimilated Tatars are \"Tatara\" or \"Tataranowicz\" or \"Taterczy\u0144ski\", which literally mean \"son of a Tatar\".\nThe Tatars played a relatively prominent role for such a small community in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth military as well as in Polish and Lithuanian political and intellectual life. In modern-day Poland, their presence is also widely known, due in part to their noticeable role in the historical novels of Henryk Sienkiewicz (1846\u20131916), which are universally recognized in Poland. A number of Polish intellectual figures have also been Tatars, e.g. the prominent historian Jerzy \u0141ojek.\nA small community of Polish-speaking Tatars settled in Brooklyn, New York City, in the early 20th century. They established a mosque that remained in use as of 2017[ [update]].\nCrimean Tatars.\nCrimean Tatars are an indigenous people of Crimea. Their formation occurred during the 13th\u201317th centuries, primarily from Cumans that appeared in Crimea in the 10th century, with strong contributions from all the peoples who ever inhabited Crimea (Greeks, Scythians, and Goths).\nAt the beginning of the 13th century, Crimea, where the majority of the population were Turkic people Cumans, became a part of the Golden Horde. The Crimean Tatars mostly adopted Islam in the 14th century and thereafter Crimea became one of the centers of Islamic civilization in Eastern Europe. In the same century, trends towards separatism appeared in the Crimean Ulus of the Golden Horde. De facto independence of Crimea from the Golden Horde may be counted since the beginning of the reign in the peninsula of \"khanum\" (princess) Canike, daughter of Tokhtamysh, the powerful Khan of the Golden Horde, and wife of Edigey, the founder of the Nogai Horde. During her reign she strongly supported Hac\u0131 Giray in the struggle for the Crimean throne until her death in 1437. Following the death of \u0421anike, the situation of Hac\u0131 Giray in Crimea weakened and he was forced to leave Crimea for Lithuania.\nIn 1441, an embassy from the representatives of several strong clans of Crimea, including the Golden Horde clans Sh\u0131r\u0131n and Bar\u0131n and the Cumanic clan K\u0131p\u00e7ak, went to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to invite Hac\u0131 Giray to rule in Crimea. He became the founder of the Giray dynasty, which ruled until the annexation of the Crimean Khanate by Russia in 1783. Hac\u0131 I Giray was a Jochid descendant of Genghis Khan and of his grandson Batu Khan of the Golden Horde. In 1502, during the reign of Hac\u0131's son Me\u00f1li I Giray, the Crimean Khanate defeated the \"Great Horde\" (the remnant of the Golden Horde) and captured Sarai. Me\u00f1li proclaimed himself the Great Khan and overlord of neigboring khanates. After that, the Crimean Khanate was among the strongest powers in Eastern Europe until the beginning of the 18th century. The Khanate was formally a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire, with great autonomy after 1580. As a Muslim state, the Crimean Khanate had to recognize the Ottoman caliph as the supreme ruler, in fact, the viceroy of God on earth. A major source of prosperity were frequents raids into Eastern Europe for slaves.\nAt the same time, the Nogai hordes, not having their own khan, were vassals of the Crimean Khan. The Tsardom of Russia and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth paid annual tribute to the khan (until 1700 and 1699, respectively). In 1711, when Peter I of Russia went on a campaign with all his troops (80,000) to gain access to the Black Sea, he was surrounded by the army of the Crimean Khan Devlet II Giray, finding himself in a hopeless situation. And only the betrayal of the Ottoman vizier Baltac\u0131 Mehmet Pasha allowed Peter to get out of the encirclement of the Crimean Tatars. When Devlet II Giray protested against the vizier's decision, his response was: \"You might know your Tatar affairs. The affairs of the Sublime Porte are entrusted to me. You do not have the right to interfere in them.\" The Treaty of the Pruth was signed, and 10 years later, Russia declared itself an empire. In 1736, the Crimean Khan Qaplan I Giray was summoned by the Turkish Sultan Ahmed III to Persia. Understanding that Russia could take advantage of the lack of troops in Crimea, Qaplan Giray wrote to the Sultan to think twice, but the Sultan was persistent. As it was expected by Qaplan Giray, in 1736 the Russian army invaded Crimea, led by M\u00fcnnich, devastated the peninsula, killed civilians and destroyed all major cities, occupied the capital, Bakhchisaray, and burnt the Khan's palace with all the archives and documents, and then left Crimea because of the epidemic that had begun in it. One year later the same was done by another Russian general\u2014Peter Lacy. Since then, the Crimean Khanate had not been able to recover, and its slow decline began. The Russo-Turkish War of 1768 to 1774 resulted in the defeat of the Ottomans by the Russians, and according to the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca (1774) signed after the war, Crimea became independent and the Ottomans renounced their political right to protect the Crimean Khanate. After a period of political unrest in Crimea, Imperial Russia violated the treaty and annexed the Crimean Khanate in 1783.\nDue to the oppression by the Russian administration, the Crimean Tatars were forced to immigrate to the Ottoman Empire. In total, from 1783 till the beginning of the 20th century, at least 800 thousand Tatars left Crimea. In 1917, the Crimean Tatars, in an effort to recreate their statehood, announced the Crimean People's Republic\u2014the first democratic republic in the Muslim world, where all peoples were equal in rights. The head of the republic was the young politician Noman \u00c7elebicihan. However, a few months later the Bolsheviks captured Crimea, and \u00c7elebicihan was killed without trial and thrown into the Black Sea. Soon in Crimea, Soviet power was established.\nThrough the fault of the Soviet government, which exported bread from Crimea to other regions of the country, in 1921\u20131922, at least 76,000 Crimean Tatars died of starvation, which became a disaster for such a small nation. In 1928, the first wave of repression against the Crimean Tatar intelligentsia was launched, in particular, the head of the Crimean ASSR, Veli \u0130braimov, was executed in a fabricated case. In 1938, the second wave of repression against the Crimean Tatar intelligentsia was started, during which many Crimean Tatar writers, scientists, poets, politicians, teachers were killed (Asan Sabri Ayvazov, Usein Bodaninsky, Seitdzhelil Hattatov, Ilyas Tarhan and many others). In May 1944, the USSR State Defense Committee ordered the total deportation of all the Crimean Tatars from Crimea. The deportees were transported in\ncattle trains to Central Asia, primarily to Uzbekistan. During the deportation and in the first years of being in exile, 46% of Crimean Tatars died. In 1956, Khrushchev exposed Stalin's cult of personality and allowed deported peoples to return to their homeland. The exception was the Crimean Tatars. Since then, a powerful national movement of the Crimean Tatars, supported abroad and by Soviet dissidents, began, and in 1989 the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union was made to condemn the deportation of Crimean Tatars from their motherland as inhumane and lawless. Crimean Tatars began to return to their homeland. Today, Crimean Tatars constitute approximately 12% of the population of Crimea. There is a large diaspora in Turkey and Uzbekistan, but most (especially in Turkey) of them do not consider themselves Crimean Tatars. Still, there remains a diaspora in Dobruja, where most of the Tatars keep identifying themselves as Crimean Tatars.\nNowadays, the Crimean Tatars comprise three sub-ethnic groups:\nCrimean Tatars in Dobruja.\nSome Crimean Tatars have lived in the territory of today's Romania and Bulgaria since the 13th century. In Romania, according to the 2002 census, 24,000 people declared their ethnicity as Tatar, most of them being Crimean Tatars living in Constan\u021ba County in the region of Dobruja. Most of the Crimean Tatars, living in Romania and Bulgaria nowadays, left the Crimean peninsula for Dobruja after the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Empire.\nDobrujan Tatars have been present in Romania since the 13th century. The Tatars first reached the mouths of the Danube in the mid-13th century at the height of the power of the Golden Horde. In the 14th and 15th centuries the Ottoman Empire colonized Dobruja with Nogais from Budjak. Between 1593 and 1595 Tatars from Nogai and Budjak were also settled to Dobruja. Toward the end of the 16th century, about 30,000 Nogai Tatars from the Budjak were brought to Dobruja. After the Russian annexation of Crimea in 1783 Crimean Tatars began emigrating to the Ottoman coastal provinces of Dobruja (today divided between Romania and Bulgaria). Once in Dobruja most settled in the areas surrounding Mecidiye, Babadag, K\u00f6stence, Tul\u00e7a, Silistre, Be\u015ftepe, or Varna and went on to create villages named in honor of their abandoned homeland such as \u015eirin, Yayla, Akmecit, Yalta, Kefe or Beybucak. Tatars together with Albanians served as gendarmes, who were held in high esteem by the Ottomans and received special tax privileges. The Ottomans additionally accorded a certain degree of autonomy for the Tatars who were allowed governance by their own kaymakam, Khan Mirza. The Giray dynasty (1427\u20131878) multiplied in Dobruja and maintained their respected position. A Dobrujan Tatar, Kara Hussein, was responsible for the destruction of the Janissary corps on orders from Sultan Mahmut II.\nSiberian Tatars.\nThe Siberian Tatars occupy three distinct regions:\nThey originated in the agglomerations of various indigenous North Asian groups which, in the region north of the Altay, reached some degree of culture between the 4th and 5th centuries, but were subdued and enslaved by the Mongols.\nThe 2010 census recorded 6,779 Siberian Tatars in Russia. According to the 2002 census there are 500,000 Tatars in Siberia, but 400,000 of them are Volga Tatars who settled in Siberia during periods of colonization.\nGallery.\nFlags\nPictures\nPaintings\nLanguage\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56878", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56878", "title": "List of diseases with short names", "text": ""}
{"id": "56879", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56879", "title": "OCD", "text": ""}
{"id": "56880", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56880", "title": "Image (function)", "text": ""}
{"id": "56881", "revid": "724850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56881", "title": "Arnold Bennett", "text": "English author (1867\u20131931)\nEnoch Arnold Bennett (27 May 1867 \u2013 27 March 1931) was an English author, best known as a novelist, who wrote prolifically. Between the 1890s and the 1930s he completed 34 novels, seven volumes of short stories, 13 plays (some in collaboration with other writers), and a daily journal totalling more than a million words. He wrote articles and stories for more than 100 newspapers and periodicals, worked in and briefly ran the Ministry of Information during the First World War, and wrote for the cinema in the 1920s. Sales of his books were substantial, and he was the most financially successful British author of his day.\nBorn into a modest but upwardly mobile family in Hanley, in the Staffordshire Potteries, Bennett was intended by his father, a solicitor, to follow him into the legal profession. Bennett worked for his father before moving to another law firm in London as a clerk at the age of 21. He became assistant editor and then editor of a women's magazine before becoming a full-time author in 1900. Always a devotee of French culture in general and French literature in particular, he moved to Paris in 1903; there the relaxed milieu helped him overcome his intense shyness, particularly with women. He spent ten years in France, marrying a Frenchwoman in 1907. In 1912 he moved back to England. He and his wife separated in 1921, and he spent the last years of his life with a new partner, an English actress. He died in 1931 of typhoid fever, having unwisely drunk tap-water in France.\nMany of Bennett's novels and short stories are set in a fictionalised version of the Staffordshire Potteries, which he called The Five Towns. He strongly believed that literature should be accessible to ordinary people and he deplored literary cliques and \u00e9lites. His books appealed to a wide public and sold in large numbers. For this reason, and for his adherence to realism, writers and supporters of the modernist school, notably Virginia Woolf, belittled him, and his fiction became neglected after his death. During his lifetime his journalistic \"self-help\" books sold in substantial numbers, and he was also a playwright; he did less well in the theatre than with novels but achieved two considerable successes with \"Milestones\" (1912) and \"The Great Adventure\" (1913).\nStudies by Margaret Drabble (1974), John Carey (1992), and others have led to a re-evaluation of Bennett's work. The finest of his novels, including \"Anna of the Five Towns\" (1902), \"The Old Wives' Tale\" (1908), \"Clayhanger\" (1910) and \"Riceyman Steps\" (1923), are now widely recognised as major works.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nArnold Bennett was born on 27 May 1867 in Hanley, Staffordshire, now part of Stoke-on-Trent but then a separate town. He was the eldest child of the three sons and three daughters of Enoch Bennett (1843\u20131902) and his wife Sarah Ann, \"n\u00e9e\" Longson (1840\u20131914). Enoch Bennett's early career had been one of mixed fortunes: after an unsuccessful attempt to run a business making and selling pottery, he set up as a draper and pawnbroker in 1866. Four years later, Enoch's father died, leaving him some money with which he articled himself to a local law firm; in 1876, he qualified as a solicitor. The Bennetts were staunch Wesleyans, musical, cultured and sociable. Enoch Bennett had an authoritarian side, but it was a happy household, although a mobile one: as Enoch's success as a solicitor increased, the family moved, within the space of five years in the late 1870s and early 1880s, to four different houses in Hanley and the neighbouring Burslem.\nFrom 1877 to 1882, Bennett's schooling was at the Wedgwood Institute, Burslem, followed by a year at a grammar school in Newcastle-under-Lyme. He was good at Latin and better at French; he had an inspirational headmaster who gave him a love for French literature and the French language that lasted all his life. He did well academically and passed Cambridge University examinations that could have led to an Oxbridge education, but his father had other plans. In 1883, aged 16, Bennett left school and began work \u2013 unpaid \u2013 in his father's office. He divided his time between uncongenial jobs, such as rent collecting, during the day, and studying for examinations in the evening. He began writing in a modest way, contributing light pieces to the local newspaper. He became adept in Pitman's shorthand, a skill much sought after in commercial offices, and on the strength of that he secured a post as a clerk at a firm of solicitors in Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. In March 1889, aged 21, he left for London and never returned to live in his native county.\nFirst years in London.\nIn the solicitors' office in London, Bennett became friendly with a young colleague, John Eland, who had a passion for books. Eland's friendship helped alleviate Bennett's innate shyness, which was exacerbated by a lifelong stammer. Together, they explored the world of literature. Among the writers who impressed and influenced Bennett were George Moore, \u00c9mile Zola, Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, Guy de Maupassant, Gustave Flaubert and Ivan Turgenev. He continued his own writing, and won a prize of twenty guineas from \"Tit-Bits\" in 1893 for his story 'The Artist's Model'; another short story, 'A Letter Home', was submitted successfully to \"The Yellow Book\", where it featured in 1895 alongside contributions from Henry James and other well-known writers.\nIn 1894 Bennett resigned from the law firm and became assistant editor of the magazine \"Woman\". The salary, \u00a3150 a year, was \u00a350 less than he was earning as a clerk, but the post left him much more free time to write his first novel. For the magazine he wrote under a range of female pen-names such as \"Barbara\" and \"Cecile\". As his biographer Margaret Drabble puts it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;He did a bit of everything. He learned about recipes and layettes, about making-up, making-ready and running-round. He reviewed plays and books\u00a0... He acquainted himself with hundreds of subjects that would never have come his way otherwise\u00a0... the domestic column told one \"How to train a Cook\", \"How to keep parsley fresh\", \"How to make money at home\", \"How to bath the baby (Part One)\". The knowledge was not wasted, for Bennett is one of the few novelists who can write with sympathy and detail about the domestic preoccupations of women.\nThe informal office life of the magazine suited Bennett, not least because it brought him into lively female company, and he began to be a little more relaxed with young women. He continued work on his novel and wrote short stories and articles. He was modest about his literary talent: he wrote to a friend, \"I have no inward assurance that I could ever do anything more than mediocre viewed strictly as art \u2013 very mediocre\", but he knew he could \"turn out things which would be read with zest, &amp; about which the man in the street would say to friends 'Have you read so &amp; so in the \"What-is-it\"?'\" He was happy to write for popular journals like \"Hearth and Home\" or for the highbrow \"The Academy\".\nHis debut novel, \"A Man from the North\", completed in 1896, was published two years later, by John Lane, whose reader, John Buchan, recommended it for publication. It elicited a letter of praise from Joseph Conrad and was well and widely reviewed, but Bennett's profits from the sale of the book were less than the cost of having it typed.\nIn 1896 Bennett was promoted to be editor of \"Woman\"; by then he had set his sights on a career as a full-time author, but he served as editor for four years. During that time he wrote two popular books, described by the critic John Lucas as \"pot-boilers\": \"Journalism for Women\" (1898) and \"Polite Farces for the Drawing Room\" (1899). He also began work on a second novel, \"Anna of the Five Towns\", the five towns being Bennett's lightly fictionalised version of the Staffordshire Potteries, where he grew up.\nFreelance; Paris.\nIn 1900 Bennett resigned his post at \"Woman\", and left London to set up house at Trinity Hall Farm, near the village of Hockliffe in Bedfordshire, where he made a home not only for himself but for his parents and younger sister. He completed \"Anna of the Five Towns\" in 1901; it was published the following year, as was its successor, \"The Grand Babylon Hotel\". The latter, an extravagant story of crime in high society, sold 50,000 copies in hardback and was almost immediately translated into four languages. By this stage he was confident enough in his abilities to tell a friend:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Although I am 33 &amp; I have not made a name, I infallibly know that I shall make a name, &amp; that soon. But I should like to be a legend. I think I have settled in my own mind that my work will never be better than third rate, judged by the high standards, but I shall be cunning enough to make it impose on my contemporaries.\nIn January 1902 Enoch Bennett died, after a decline into dementia. His widow chose to move back to Burslem, and Bennett's sister married shortly afterwards. With no dependants, Bennett \u2212 always a devotee of French culture \u2212 decided to move to Paris; he took up residence there in March 1903. Biographers have speculated on his precise reasons for doing so. Drabble suggests that perhaps \"he was hoping for some kind of liberation. He was thirty-five and unmarried\"; Lucas writes that it was almost certainly Bennett's desire to be recognised as a serious artist that prompted his move; according to his friend and colleague Frank Swinnerton, Bennett was following in the footsteps of George Moore by going to live in \"the home of modern realism\"; in the view of the biographer Reginald Pound it was \"to begin his career as a man of the world\". The 9th arrondissement of Paris was Bennett's home for the next five years, first in the rue de Calais, near the Place Pigalle, and then the more upmarket rue d'Aumale.\nLife in Paris evidently helped Bennett overcome much of his remaining shyness with women. His journals for his early months in Paris mention a young woman identified as \"C\" or \"Chichi\", who was a chorus girl; the journals \u2013 or at least the cautiously selected extracts published since his death \u2013 do not record the precise nature of the relationship, but the two spent a considerable amount of time together.\nIn a restaurant where he dined frequently a trivial incident in 1903 gave Bennett the germ of an idea for the novel generally regarded as his masterpiece. A grotesque old woman came in and caused a fuss; the beautiful young waitress laughed at her, and Bennett was struck by the thought that the old woman had once been as young and lovely as the waitress. From this grew the story of two contrasting sisters in \"The Old Wives' Tale\". He did not begin work on that novel until 1907, before which he wrote ten others, some \"sadly undistinguished\", in the view of his biographer Kenneth Young. Throughout his career, Bennett interspersed his best novels with some that his biographers and others have labelled pot-boilers.\nMarriage; Fontainebleau and US visit.\nIn 1905 Bennett became engaged to Eleanor Green, a member of an eccentric and capricious American family living in Paris, but at the last moment, after the wedding invitations had been sent out, she broke off the engagement and almost immediately married a fellow American. Drabble comments that Bennett was well rid of her, but it was a painful episode in his life. In early 1907 he met Marguerite Souli\u00e9 (1874\u20131960), who soon became first a friend and then a lover. In May he was taken ill with a severe gastric complaint, and Marguerite moved into his flat to look after him. They became still closer, and in July 1907, shortly after his fortieth birthday, they were married at the Mairie of the 9th arrondissement. The marriage was childless. Early in 1908 the couple moved from the rue d'Aumale to the Villa des N\u00e9fliers in Fontainebleau-Avon, about 40 miles (64\u00a0km) south-east of Paris.\nLucas comments that the best of the novels written while in France \u2013 \"Whom God Hath Joined\" (1906), \"The Old Wives' Tale\" (1908), and \"Clayhanger\" (1910) \u2013 \"justly established Bennett as a major exponent of realistic fiction\". In addition to these, Bennett published lighter novels such as \"The Card\" (1911). His output of literary journalism included articles for T. P. O'Connor's \"T. P.'s Weekly\" and the left-wing \"The New Age\"; his pieces for the latter, published under a pen-name, were concise literary essays aimed at \"the general cultivated reader\", a form taken up by a later generation of writers including J. B. Priestley and V. S. Pritchett.\nIn 1911 Bennett made a financially rewarding visit to the US, which he later recorded in his 1912 book \"Those United States\". Crossing the Atlantic aboard the \"Lusitania\", he visited not only New York and Boston but also Chicago, Indianapolis, Washington and Philadelphia in a tour that was described by US publisher George Doran as \"one of continuous triumph\": in the first three days of his stay in New York he was interviewed 26 times by journalists. While rival E.P. Dutton had secured rights to such Bennett novels as \"Hilda Lessways\" and \"the Card\" (retitled \"Denry the Audacious\"), Doran, who travelled everywhere with Bennett while in America, was the publisher of Bennett's wildly successful 'pocket philosophies' \"How to Live on Twenty-Four Hours a Day\" and \"Mental Efficiency.\" Of these books the influential critic Willard Huntington Wright wrote that Bennett had \"turned preacher and a jolly good preacher he is\". While in the US Bennett also sold the serial rights of his forthcoming novel, \"The Price of Love\" (1913\u201314), to \"Harpers\" for \u00a32,000, eight essays to \"Metropolitan\" magazine for a total of \u00a31,200, and the American rights of a successor to \"Clayhanger\" for \u00a33,000.\nDuring his ten years in France he had gone from a moderately well-known writer enjoying modest sales to outstanding success. Swinnerton comments that in addition to his large sales, Bennett's critical prestige was at its zenith.\nReturn to England.\nIn 1912, after an extended stay at the Hotel Californie in Cannes, during which time he wrote \"The Regent\", a light-hearted sequel to \"The Card\", Bennett and his wife moved from France to England. Initially they lived in Putney, but \"determined to become an English country landowner\", he bought Comarques, an early-18th-century country house at Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex, and moved there in February 1913. Among his early concerns, once back in England, was to succeed as a playwright. He had dabbled previously but his inexperience showed. \"The Times\" thought his 1911 comedy \"The Honeymoon\", staged in the West End with a starry cast, had \"one of the most amusing first acts we have ever seen\", but fell flat in the other two acts. In the same year Bennett met the playwright Edward Knoblauch (later Knoblock) and they collaborated on \"Milestones\", the story of the generations of a family seen in 1860, 1885 and 1912. The combination of Bennett's narrative gift and Knoblauch's practical experience proved a success. The play was strongly cast, received highly favourable notices, ran for more than 600 performances in London and over 200 in New York, and made Bennett a great deal of money. His next play, \"The Great Adventure\" (1913), a stage version of his novel \"Buried Alive\" (1908), was similarly successful.\nBennett's attitude to the First World War was that British politicians had been at fault in failing to prevent it, but that once it had become inevitable it was right that Britain should join its allies against the Germans. He concentrated his attention on journalism, aiming to inform and encourage the public in Britain and allied and neutral countries. He served on official and unofficial committees, and in 1915 he was invited to visit France to see conditions at the front and write about them for readers at home. The collected impressions appeared in a book called \"Over There\" (1915). He was still writing novels, however: \"These Twain\", the third in his Clayhanger trilogy, was published in 1916 and in 1917 he completed a sequel, \"The Roll Call\", which ends with its hero, George Cannon, enlisting in the army. Wartime London was the setting for Bennett's \"The Pretty Lady\" (1918), about a high-class French \"cocotte\": although well reviewed, because of its subject-matter the novel provoked \"a Hades of a row\" and some booksellers refused to sell it.\nWhen Lord Beaverbrook became Minister of Information in February 1918 he appointed Bennett to take charge of propaganda in France. Beaverbrook fell ill in October 1918 and made Bennett director of propaganda, in charge of the whole ministry for the last weeks of the war. At the end of 1918 Bennett was offered, but declined, a knighthood in the new Order of the British Empire instituted by George V. The offer was renewed some time later, and again Bennett refused it. One of his closest associates at the time suspected that he was privately hoping for the more prestigious Order of Merit.\nAs the war was ending, Bennett returned to his theatrical interests, although not primarily as a playwright. In November 1918 he became chairman, with Nigel Playfair as managing director, of the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith. Among their productions were \"Abraham Lincoln\" by John Drinkwater, and \"The Beggar's Opera\", which, in Swinnerton's phrase, \"caught different moods of the post-war spirit\", and ran for 466 and 1,463 performances respectively.\nLast years.\nIn 1921 Bennett and his wife legally separated. They had been drifting apart for some years and Marguerite had taken up with Pierre Legros, a young French lecturer. Bennett sold Comarques and lived in London for the rest of his life, first in a flat near Bond Street in the West End, on which he had taken a lease during the war. For much of the 1920s he was widely known to be the highest-paid literary journalist in England, contributing a weekly column to Beaverbrook's \"Evening Standard\" under the title 'Books and Persons'; according to Frank Swinnerton, these articles were \"extraordinarily successful and influential ... and made a number of new reputations\". By the end of his career, Bennett had contributed to more than 100 newspapers, magazines and other publications. He continued to write novels and plays as assiduously as before the war.\nSwinnerton writes, \"Endless social engagements; inexhaustible patronage of musicians, actors, poets, and painters; the maximum of benevolence to friends and strangers alike, marked the last ten years of his life\". Hugh Walpole, James Agate and Osbert Sitwell were among those who testified to Bennett's generosity. Sitwell recalled a letter Bennett wrote in the 1920s:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;I find I am richer this year than last; so I enclose a cheque for 500 pounds for you to distribute among young writers and artists and musicians who may need the money. You will know, better than I do, who they are. But I must make one condition, that you do not reveal that the money has come from me, or tell anyone about it.\nIn 1922 Bennett met and fell in love with an actress, Dorothy Cheston (1891\u20131977). Together they set up home in Cadogan Square, where they stayed until moving in 1930 to Chiltern Court, Baker Street. As Marguerite would not agree to a divorce, Bennett was unable to marry Dorothy, and in September 1928, having become pregnant, she changed her name by deed poll to Dorothy Cheston Bennett. The following April she gave birth to the couple's only child, Virginia Mary (1929\u20132003). She continued to appear as an actress, and produced and starred in a revival of \"Milestones\" which was well reviewed, but had only a moderate run. Bennett had mixed feelings about her continuing stage career, but did not seek to stop it.\nDuring a holiday in France with Dorothy in January 1931, Bennett twice drank tap-water \u2013 not, at the time, a safe thing to do there. On his return home he was taken ill; influenza was diagnosed at first, but the illness was typhoid fever; after several weeks of unsuccessful treatment he died in his flat at Chiltern Court on 27 March 1931, aged 63.\nBennett was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium and his ashes were interred in Burslem Cemetery in his mother's grave. A memorial service was held on 31 March 1931 at St Clement Danes, London, attended by leading figures from journalism, literature, music, politics and theatre, and, in Pound's words, many men and women who at the end of the service \"walked out into a London that for them would never be the same again\".\nWorks.\nFrom the outset, Bennett believed in the \"democratisation of art which it is surely the duty of the minority to undertake\". He admired some of the modernist writers of his time, but strongly disapproved of their conscious appeal to a small \u00e9lite and their disdain for the general reader. Bennett believed that literature should be inclusive, accessible to ordinary people.\nFrom the start of his career, Bennett was aware of the appeal of regional fiction. Anthony Trollope, George Eliot and Thomas Hardy had created and sustained their own locales, and Bennett did the same with his Five Towns, drawing on his experiences as a boy and young man. As a realistic writer he followed the examples of the authors he admired \u2013 above all George Moore, but also Balzac, Flaubert and Maupassant among French writers, and Dostoevsky, Turgenev and Tolstoy among Russians. In writing about the Five Towns, Bennett aimed to portray the experiences of ordinary people coping with the norms and constraints of the communities in which they lived. J. B. Priestley considered that the next influence on Bennett's fiction was his time in London in the 1890s, \"engaged in journalism and ingenious pot-boiling of various kinds.\"\nNovels and short stories.\nBennett is remembered chiefly for his novels and short stories. The best known are set in, or feature people from, the six towns of the Potteries of his youth. He presented the region as \"the Five Towns\", which correspond closely with their originals: the real-life Burslem, Hanley, Longton, Stoke and Tunstall become Bennett's Bursley, Hanbridge, Longshaw, Knype and Turnhill. These \"Five Towns\" make their first appearance in Bennett's fiction in \"Anna of the Five Towns\" (1902) and are the setting for further novels including \"Leonora\" (1903), \"Whom God Hath Joined\" (1906), \"The Old Wives' Tale\" (1908) and the Clayhanger trilogy \u2013 \"Clayhanger\" (1910), \"Hilda Lessways\" (1911) and \"These Twain\" (1916) \u2013 as well as for dozens of short stories. Bennett's fiction portrays the Five Towns with what \"The Oxford Companion to English Literature\" calls \"an ironic but affectionate detachment, describing provincial life and culture in documentary detail, and creating many memorable characters\". In later life Bennett said that the writer George Moore was \"the father of all my Five Towns books\" as it was reading Moore's 1885 novel \"A Mummer's Wife\", set in the Potteries, that \"opened my eyes to the romantic nature of the district I had blindly inhabited for over twenty years\". Earlier, Bennett's view of his home town had been stimulated by H.G. Wells's 1895 short story \"The Cone\", set in the Potteries: in 1897, at the start of their long friendship, he wrote to Wells that he was \"very glad to find that the Potteries made such an impression on you. I lived there till I was 21, &amp; have been away from it for 9 years, &amp; only during the last few years have I begun to see its possibilities. ... [T]here is an aspect of these industrial districts which is really \"grandiose\", full of dark splendours, &amp; which has been absolutely missed by all novelists up to date.\"\nIt was not only locations on which Bennett drew for his fiction. Many of his characters are discernibly based on real people in his life. His Lincoln's Inn friend John Eland was a source for Mr Aked in Bennett's first novel, \"A Man from the North\" (1898); \"A Great Man\" (1903) contains a character with echoes of his Parisienne friend Chichi; Darius Clayhanger's early life is based on that of a family friend and Bennett himself is seen in Edwin in \"Clayhanger\". He has been criticised for making literary use in that novel of the distressing details of his father's decline into senility, but in Pound's view, in committing the details to paper Bennett was unburdening himself of painful memories.\n\"These Twain\" is Bennett's \"last extended study of Five Towns life\". The novels he wrote in the 1920s are largely set in London and thereabouts: \"Riceyman Steps\" (1923), for instance, generally regarded as the best of Bennett's post-war novels, was set in Clerkenwell: it was awarded the James Tait Black novel prize for 1923, \"the first prize for a book I ever had\", Bennett noted in his journal on 18 October 1924. His \"Lord Raingo\" (1926), described by Dudley Barker as \"one of the finest of political novels in the language\", benefited from Bennett's own experience in the Ministry of Information and his subsequent friendship with Beaverbrook: John Lucas states that \"As a study of what goes on in the corridors of power [\"Lord Raingo\"] has few equals\". And Bennett's final \u2013 and longest \u2013 novel, \"Imperial Palace\" (1930), is set in a grand London hotel reminiscent of the Savoy, whose directors assisted him in his preliminary research.\nBennett usually gave his novels subtitles; the most frequent was \"A fantasia on modern themes\", individual books were called \"A frolic\" or \"A melodrama\", but he was sparing with the label \"A novel\" which he used for only a few of his books \u2013 for instance \"Anna of the Five Towns\", \"Leonora\", \"Sacred and Profane Love\", \"The Old Wives' Tale\", \"The Pretty Lady\" (1918) and \"Riceyman Steps\". Literary critics have followed Bennett in dividing his novels into groups. The literary scholar Kurt Koenigsberger proposes three categories. In the first are the long narratives \u2013 \"freestanding, monumental artefacts\" \u2013 \"Anna of the Five Towns\", \"The Old Wives' Tale\", \"Clayhanger\" and \"Riceyman Steps\", which \"have been held in high critical regard since their publication\". Koenigsberger writes that the \"Fantasias\" such as \"The Grand Babylon Hotel\" (1902), \"Teresa of Watling Street\" (1904) and \"The City of Pleasure\" (1907), have \"mostly passed from public attention along with the 'modern' conditions they exploit\". His third group includes \"Idyllic Diversions\" or \"Stories of Adventure\", including \"Helen with the High Hand\" (1910), \"The Card\" (1911), and \"The Regent\" (1913), which \"have sustained some enduring critical and popular interest, not least for their amusing treatment of cosmopolitanism and provinciality\".\nBennett published 96 short stories in seven volumes between 1905 and 1931. His ambivalence about his native town is vividly seen in \"The Death of Simon Fuge\" in the collection \"The Grim Smile of the Five Towns\" (1907), judged by Lucas the finest of all the stories. His chosen locations ranged widely, including Paris and Venice as well as London and the Five Towns. As with his novels, he would sometimes give a story a label, calling \"The Matador of the Five Towns\" (1912) \"a tragedy\" and \"Jock-at-a-Venture\" from the same collection \"a frolic\". The short stories, particularly those in \"Tales of the Five Towns\" (1905), \"The Grim Smile of the Five Towns\" (1907), and \"The Matador of the Five Towns\" contain some of the most striking examples of Bennett's concern for realism, with an unflinching narrative focus on what Lucas calls \"the drab, the squalid, and the mundane\". In 2010 and 2011 two further volumes of Bennett's hitherto uncollected short stories were published: they range from his earliest work written in the 1890s, some under the pseudonym Sarah Volatile, to US magazine commissions from the late 1920s.\nStage and screen.\nIn 1931 the critic Graham Sutton, looking back at Bennett's career in the theatre, contrasted his achievements as a playwright with those as a novelist, suggesting that Bennett was a complete novelist but a not-entirely-complete dramatist. His plays were clearly those of a novelist: \"He tends to lengthy speeches. Sometimes he overwrites a part as though distrusting the actor. He is more interested in what his people are than in what they visibly do. He 'thinks nowt' of mere slickness of plot.\"\nBennett's lack of a theatrical grounding showed in the uneven construction of some of his plays, such as his 1911 comedy \"The Honeymoon\", which played for 125 performances from October 1911. The highly successful \"Milestones\" was seen as impeccably constructed but the credit for that was given to his craftsmanlike collaborator, Edward Knoblauch (Bennett being credited with the inventive flair of the piece). By far his most successful solo effort in the theatre was \"The Great Adventure\", based on his 1908 novel \"Buried Alive\", which ran in the West End for 674 performances, from March 1913 to November 1914. Sutton praised its \"new strain of impish and sardonic fantasy\" and rated it a much finer play than \"Milestones\".\nAfter the First World War, Bennett wrote two plays on metaphysical questions, \"Sacred and Profane Love\" (1919, adapted from his novel) and \"Body and Soul\" (1922), which made little impression. \"The Saturday Review\" praised the \"shrewd wit\" of the former, but thought it \"false in its essentials\u00a0... superficial in its accidentals\". Of the latter, the critic Horace Shipp wondered \"how the author of \"Clayhanger\" and \"The Old Wives' Tale\" could write such third-rate stuff\". Bennett had more success in a final collaboration with Edward Knoblock (as Knoblauch had become during the war) with \"Mr Prohack\" (1927), a comedy based on his 1922 novel; one critic wrote \"I could have enjoyed the play had it run to double its length\", but even so he judged the middle act weaker than the outer two. Sutton concludes that Bennett's \"forte\" was character, but that the competence of his technique was variable. The plays are seldom revived, although some have been adapted for television.\nBennett wrote two opera libretti for the composer Eugene Goossens: \"Judith\" (one act, 1929) and \"Don Juan\" (four acts, produced in 1937 after the writer's death). There were comments that Goossens's music lacked tunes and Bennett's libretti were too wordy and literary. The critic Ernest Newman defended both works, finding Bennett's libretto for Judith \"a drama told simply and straightforwardly\" and \"Don Juan\" \"the best thing that English opera has so far produced\u00a0... the most dramatic and stageworthy\", but though politely received, both operas vanished from the repertory after a few performances.\nBennett took a keen interest in the cinema, and in 1920 wrote \"The Wedding Dress\", a scenario for a silent movie, at the request of Jesse Lasky of the Famous Players film company. It was never made, though Bennett wrote a full-length treatment, assumed to be lost until his daughter Virginia found it in a drawer in her Paris home in 1983; subsequently the script was sold to the Potteries Museum and Art Gallery and was finally published in 2013. In 1928 Bennett wrote the scenario for the silent film \"Piccadilly\", directed by E. A. Dupont and starring Anna May Wong, described by the British Film Institute as \"one of the true greats of British silent films\". In 1929, the year the film came out, Bennett was in discussion with a young Alfred Hitchcock to script a silent film, \"Punch and Judy\", which foundered on artistic disagreements and Bennett's refusal to see the film as a \"talkie\" rather than silent. His original scenario, acquired by Pennsylvania State University, was published in the UK in 2012.\nJournalism and self-help books.\nBennett published more than two dozen non-fiction books, among which eight could be classified as \"self-help\": the most enduring is \"How to Live on 24 Hours a Day\" (1908), which is still in print and has been translated into several languages. Other \"self-help\" volumes include \"How to Become an Author\" (1903), \"The Reasonable Life\" (1907), \"\" (1909), \"The Human Machine\" (1908), \"Mental Efficiency\" (1911), \"The Plain Man and his Wife\" (1913), \"Self and Self-Management\" (1918) and \"How to Make the Best of Life\" (1923). They were, says Swinnerton, \"written for small fees and with a real desire to assist the ignorant\". According to the Harvard academic Beth Blum, these books \"advance less scientific versions of the argument for mental discipline espoused by William James\".\nIn his biography of Bennett, Patrick Donovan argues that in the US \"the huge appeal to the ordinary readers\" of his self-help books \"made his name stand out vividly from other English writers across the massive, fragmented American market.\" As Bennett put it to his London-based agent J. B. Pinker, these \"pocket philosophies are just the sort of book for the American public\". However, \"How to Live on 24 Hours\" was aimed initially at \"the legions of clerks and typists and other meanly paid workers caught up in the explosion of British office jobs around the turn of the century \u2026 they offered a strong message of hope from somebody who so well understood their lives\".\nBennett never lost his journalistic instincts, and throughout his life sought and responded to newspaper and magazine commissions with varying degrees of enthusiasm: \"from the start of the 1890s right up to the week of his death there would never be a period when he was not churning out copy for newspapers and magazines\". In a journal entry at the end of 1908, for instance, he noted that he had written \"over sixty newspaper articles\" that year; in 1910 the figure was \"probably about 80 other articles\". While living in Paris he was a regular contributor to \"T. P.'s Weekly\"; later he reviewed for \"The New Age\" under the pseudonym Jacob Tonson and was associated with the \"New Statesman\" as not only a writer but also a director.\nJournals.\nInspired by the \"Journal des Goncourt\", Bennett kept a journal throughout his adult life. Swinnerton says that it runs to a million words; it has not been published in full. Edited extracts were issued in three volumes, in 1932 and 1933. According to Hugh Walpole, the editor, Newman Flower, \"was so appalled by much of what he found in the journals that he published only brief extracts, and those the safest\". Whatever Flower censored, the extracts he selected were not always \"the safest\": he let some defamatory remarks through, and in 1935 he, the publishers and printers had to pay an undisclosed sum to the plaintiff in one libel suit and \u00a32,500 in another.\nCritical reputation.\nNovels and short stories.\nThe literary modernists of his day deplored Bennett's books, and those of his well-known contemporaries H. G. Wells and John Galsworthy. Of the three, Bennett drew the most opprobrium from modernists such as Virginia Woolf, Ezra Pound and Wyndham Lewis who regarded him as representative of an outmoded and rival literary culture. There was a strong element of class-consciousness and snobbery in the modernists' attitude: Woolf accused Bennett of having \"a shopkeeper's view of literature\" and in her essay \"Mr Bennett and Mrs Brown\" accused Bennett, Galsworthy and Wells of ushering in an \"age when character disappeared or was mysteriously engulfed\".\nIn a 1963 study of Bennett, James Hepburn summed up and dissented from the prevailing views of the novels, listing three related evaluative positions taken individually or together by almost all Bennett's critics: that his Five Towns novels are generally superior to his other work, that he and his art declined after \"The Old Wives' Tale\" or \"Clayhanger\", and that there is a sharp and clear distinction between the good and bad novels. Hepburn countered that one of the novels most frequently praised by literary critics is \"Riceyman Steps\" (1923) set in Clerkenwell, London, and dealing with material imagined rather than observed by the author. On the third point he commented that although received wisdom was that \"The Old Wives' Tale\" and \"Clayhanger\" are good and \"Sacred and Profane Love\" and \"Lillian\" are bad, there was little consensus about which other Bennett novels were good, bad or indifferent. He instanced \"The Pretty Lady\" (1918), on which critical opinion ranged from \"cheap and sensational\"\u00a0... \"sentimental melodrama\" to \"a great novel\". Lucas (2004) considers it \"a much underrated study of England during the war years, especially in its sensitive feeling for the destructive frenzy that underlay much apparently good-hearted patriotism\".\nIn 1974 Margaret Drabble published \"Arnold Bennett\", a literary biography. In the foreword she demurred at the critical dismissal of Bennett:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;I'd been brought up to believe that even his best books weren't very good \u2013 Leavis dismisses him in a sentence or two, and not many people seemed to take him as seriously as I did. The best books I think are very fine indeed, on the highest level, deeply moving, original, and dealing with material that I had never before encountered in fiction, but only in life.\nWriting in the 1990s the literary critic John Carey called for a reappraisal of Bennett in his book \"The Intellectuals and the Masses\" (1992):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;His writings represent a systematic dismemberment of the intellectuals' case against the masses. He has never been popular with intellectuals as a result. Despite Margaret Drabble's forceful advocacy, his novels are still undervalued by literary academics, syllabus-devisers and other official censors.\nIn 2006 Koenigsberger commented that one reason why Bennett's novels had been sidelined, apart from \"the exponents of modernism who recoiled from his democratising aesthetic programme\", was his attitude to gender. His books include the pronouncements \"the average man has more intellectual power than the average woman\" and \"women as a sex love to be dominated\"; Koenigsberger nevertheless praises Bennett's \"sensitive and oft-praised portrayals of female figures in his fiction\".\nLucas concludes his study with the comment that Bennett's realism may be limited by his cautious assumption that things are as they are and will not change. Nevertheless, in Lucas's view, successive generations of reader have admired Bennett's best work, and future generations are certain to do so.\nCrime fiction.\nBennett dabbled in crime fiction, in \"The Grand Babylon Hotel\" and \"The Loot of Cities\" (1904). In \"Queen's Quorum\" (1951), a survey of crime fiction, Ellery Queen listed the latter among the 100 most important works in the genre. This collection of stories recounts the adventures of a millionaire who commits crimes to achieve his idealistic ends. Although it was \"one of his least known works\", it was nevertheless \"of unusual interest, both as an example of Arnold Bennett's early work and as an early example of dilettante detectivism\".\nLegacy.\nArnold Bennett Society.\nThe society was founded in 1954 \"to promote the study and appreciation of the life, works and times not only of Arnold Bennett himself but also of other provincial writers, with particular relationship to North Staffordshire.\" In 2021 its president was Denis Eldin, Bennett's grandson; among the vice presidents was Margaret Drabble.\nIn 2017 the society instituted an annual Arnold Bennett Prize as part of the author's 150th-anniversary celebrations, to be awarded to an author who was born, lives or works in North Staffordshire and has published a book in the relevant year or to the author of a book which features the region. In 2017 John Lancaster won the award for his poetry collection \"Potters: A Division of Labour\". Subsequent winners have been Jan Edwards for her novel \"Winter Downs\" (2018), Charlotte Higgins for \"Red Thread: On Mazes and Labyrinths\" (2019) and Lisa Blower for her story collection \"It's Gone Dark Over Bill's Mother's\" (2020). The prize was not awarded in 2021 because of the Covid-19 situation, but in 2022 it was won by John Pye, a former detective inspector turned crime writer, for his novel \"Where the Silent Screams Are Loudest.\" The prize in 2023 went to Philip Nanney Williams for his book \"Adams: Britain's Oldest Potting Dynasty\". Following this, it was decided to make the prize biennial; in 2025 it was awarded to Jonathan Taylor for his \"Scablands and Other Stories\".\nPlaques and statuary.\nBennett has been commemorated by several plaques. Hugh Walpole unveiled one at Comarques in 1931, and in the same year another was placed at Bennett's birthplace in Hanley. A plaque to and bust of Bennett were unveiled in Burslem in 1962, and there are blue plaques commemorating him at the house in Cadogan Square where he lived from 1923 to 1930 and on the house in Cobridge where he lived in his youth. The southern Baker Street entrance of Chiltern Court has a plaque to Bennett on the left and another to H. G. Wells on the right. A blue plaque has been placed on the wall of Bennett's home in Fontainebleau.\nThere is a two-metre-high bronze statue of Bennett outside The Potteries Museum &amp; Art Gallery in Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, unveiled on 27 May 2017 during the events marking the 150th anniversary of his birth.\nArchives.\nThere are substantial archives of Bennett's papers and artworks, including drafts, diaries, letters, photographs, and watercolours, at The Potteries Museum &amp; Art Gallery in Stoke-on-Trent and at Keele University. Other Bennett papers are held by University College London, the British Library, Staffordshire University's Special Collections and, in the US, Texas and Yale universities and the Berg Collection in the New York Public Library.\nOmelette.\nBennett shares with the composer Gioachino Rossini, the singer Nellie Melba and some other celebrities the distinction of having a well-known dish named in his honour. An omelette Arnold Bennett is one that incorporates smoked haddock, hard cheese (typically Cheddar), and cream. It was created at the Savoy Grill in London for Bennett, who was an \"habitu\u00e9\", by the chef Jean Baptiste Virlogeux. It remains a British classic; cooks from Marcus Wareing to Delia Smith and Gordon Ramsay have published their recipes for it, and a variant remains on the menu at the Savoy Grill.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nWorks"}
{"id": "56882", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56882", "title": "Irkutsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "56884", "revid": "50022150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56884", "title": "Plum", "text": "Edible fruit\nA plum is a fruit of some species in \"Prunus\" subg. \"Prunus\"\".\" Dried plums are usually called prunes.\nPlums are likely to have been one of the first fruits domesticated by humans, with origins in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus Mountains and China. They were brought to Britain from Asia, and their cultivation has been documented in Andalusia, southern Spain. Plums are a diverse group of species, with trees reaching a height of when pruned. The fruit is a drupe, with a firm and juicy flesh. Plums can be eaten fresh, dried to make prunes, used in jams, or fermented into wine and distilled into brandy. Plum seeds (also called kernels) contain the cyanide-like poison, amygdalin, a cyanogenic glycoside.\nIn 2023, China produced 55% of the world total of plums. Japanese or Chinese plums dominate the fresh fruit market, while European plums are also common in some regions.\nHistory.\nPlums are likely to have been one of the first fruits domesticated by humans. Three of the most abundantly cultivated species are not found in the wild, only around human settlements: \"Prunus domestica\" has been traced to East European and Caucasian mountains, while \"Prunus salicina\" and \"Prunus simonii\" originated in China. Plum remains have been found in Neolithic age archaeological sites along with olives, grapes and figs. According to Ken Albala, plums originated in Iran. They were brought to Britain from Asia.\nAn article on plum tree cultivation in Andalusia (southern Spain) appears in Ibn al-'Awwam's 12th-century agricultural work, \"Book on Agriculture\".\nPlum cultivation is recorded in medieval monasteries in England. A garden with 'ploumes' and 'bulaces' is referred to by Chaucer.\nThe cultivation of plums increased during the 17th and 18th centuries. During this period greengages were given their English name and the Mirabelle plum became firmly established. Advances in the development of new varieties in England were made by Thomas Rivers. Two examples of River's work are the varieties Early Rivers and Czar. Both are still esteemed. The fame of the Victoria plum, first sold in 1844, has been put down to good marketing rather than any inherent quality.\nEtymology and names.\nThe name plum comes from Old English \"plum, plum tree\", an evolution of , which was a common West Germanic loanword from Latin , which borrowed it from Ancient Greek : , itself believed to be a loanword from an unknown language of Asia Minor. In the late 18th century, the word \"plum\" was used to indicate \"something sweet or agreeable\", probably in reference to tasty fruit pieces in desserts, as in the word \"sugar plum\".\nDescription.\nPlums are a diverse group of species. The commercially important plum trees are medium-sized, usually pruned to height. The tree is of medium hardiness. Without pruning, the trees can reach in height and spread across . They blossom in different months in different parts of the world; for example, in about January in Taiwan and early April in the United Kingdom.\nFruits are usually of medium size, between in diameter, globose to oval. The flesh is firm and juicy. The fruit's peel is smooth, with a natural waxy surface that adheres to the flesh. The plum is a drupe, meaning its fleshy fruit surrounds a single hard fruitstone which encloses the fruit's seed.\nCultivation and uses.\nJapanese or Chinese plums are large and juicy with a long shelf life and therefore dominate the fresh fruit market. They are usually clingstone and not suitable for making prunes. They are cultivars of \"Prunus salicina\" or its hybrids. The cultivars developed in the US are mostly hybrids of \"P. salicina\" with \"P. simonii\" and \"P. cerasifera\". Although these cultivars are often called Japanese plums, two of the three parents (\"P. salicina\" and \"P. simonii\") originated from China and one (\"P. cerasifera\") from Eurasia.\nIn some parts of Europe, European plum (\"Prunus domestica\") is also common in fresh fruit market. It has both dessert (eating) or culinary (cooking) cultivars, which include:\nIn West Asia, myrobalan plum or cherry plum (\"Prunus cerasifera\") is also widely cultivated. In Russia, apart from these three commonly cultivated species, there are also many cultivars resulting from hybridization between Japanese plum and myrobalan plum, known as Russian plum (\"Prunus\" \u00d7 \"rossica\").\nWhen it flowers in the early spring, a plum tree will be covered in blossoms, and in a good year approximately 50% of the flowers will be pollinated and become plums. Flowering starts after 80 growing degree days.\nIf the weather is too dry, the plums will not develop past a certain stage, but will fall from the tree while still tiny, green buds, and if it is unseasonably wet or if the plums are not harvested as soon as they are ripe, the fruit may develop a fungal condition called brown rot. Brown rot is not toxic, and some affected areas can be cut out of the fruit, but unless the rot is caught immediately, the fruit will no longer be edible. Plum is used as a food plant by the larvae of some Lepidoptera, including November moth, willow beauty and short-cloaked moth.\nThe taste of the plum fruit ranges from sweet to tart; the skin itself may be particularly tart. It is juicy and can be eaten fresh or used in jam-making or other recipes. Plum juice can be fermented into plum wine. In central England, a cider-like alcoholic beverage known as plum jerkum is made from plums. Dried, salted plums are used as a snack, sometimes known as \"saladito\" or \"salao\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nVarious flavors of dried plum are available at Chinese grocers and specialty stores worldwide. They tend to be much drier than the standard prune. Cream, ginseng, spicy, and salty are among the common varieties. Licorice is generally used to intensify the flavor of these plums and is used to make salty plum drinks and toppings for shaved ice or \"baobing\". Pickled plums are another type of preserve available in Asia and international specialty stores. The Japanese variety, called \"umeboshi\", is often used for rice balls, called \"onigiri\" or \"omusubi\". The \"ume\", from which \"umeboshi\" are made, is more closely related, however, to the apricot than to the plum.\nIn the Balkans, plum is converted into an alcoholic drink named \"slivovitz\" (plum brandy, called in Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin or Serbian \"\u0161ljivovica\"). A large number of plums, of the Damson variety, are also grown in Hungary, where they are called \"szilva\" and are used to make \"lekvar\" (a plum paste jam), \"palinka\" (traditional fruit brandy), plum dumplings, and other foods. In Romania, 80% of the plum production is used to create a similar brandy, called \"\u021buic\u0103\".\nAs with many other members of the rose family, plum kernels contain cyanogenic glycosides, including amygdalin. Prune kernel oil is made from the fleshy inner part of the pit of the plum. Though not available commercially, the wood of plum trees is used by hobbyists and other private woodworkers for musical instruments, knife handles, inlays, and similar small projects.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, world production of plums (data combined with sloes) was 12.5 million tonnes, led by China with 55% of the total, and Romania and Chile as the next largest producers (table).\nNutrition.\nRaw plums are 87% water, 11% carbohydrates, 1% protein, and less than 1% fat (table). In a reference amount of , raw plums supply 46 calories of food energy, and are a moderate source only of vitamin C (11% of the Daily Value), with no other micronutrients in significant content (table).\nSpecies.\nThe numerous species of \"Prunus\" subg. \"Prunus\" are classified into many sections, but not all of them are called plums. Plums include species of sect. \"Prunus\" and sect. \"Prunocerasus\", as well as \"P. mume\" of sect. \"Armeniaca\". Only two plum species, the hexaploid European plum (\"Prunus domestica\") and the diploid Japanese plum (\"Prunus salicina\" and hybrids), are of worldwide commercial significance. The origin of \"P. domestica\" is uncertain but may have involved \"P. cerasifera\" and possibly \"P. spinosa\" as ancestors. Other species of plum variously originated in Europe, Asia and America.\nSect. Prunus (Old World plums) \u2013 leaves in bud rolled inwards; flowers 1\u20133 together; fruit smooth, often wax-bloomed\nSect. Prunocerasus (New World plums) \u2013 leaves in bud folded inwards; flowers 3\u20135 together; fruit smooth, often wax-bloomed\nSect. Armeniaca (apricots) \u2013 leaves in bud rolled inwards; flowers very short-stalked; fruit velvety; treated as a distinct subgenus by some authors\nIn certain parts of the world, some fruits are called plums and are quite different from fruits known as plums in Europe or the Americas. For example, marian plums are popular in Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, otherwise also known as \"gandaria\", \"plum mango\", \"ma-praang\", \"ma-yong\", \"ramania\", \"kundang\", \"rembunia\" or \"setar\". Another example is the loquat, also known as Japanese plum and Japanese medlar, as well as \"nispero\", \"bibassier\" and \"wollmispel\" elsewhere. In South Asia and Southeast Asia, Jambul, a fruit from tropical tree in family Myrtaceae, is similarly sometimes referred to 'damson plums', and it is different from damson plums found in Europe and Americas. Jambul is also called as \"Java plum\", \"Malabar plum\", \"Jaman\", \"Jamun\", \"Jamblang\", \"Jiwat\", \"Salam\", \"Duhat\", \"Koeli\", \"Jambul\u00e1o\" or \"Koriang\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56885", "revid": "8144267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56885", "title": "Limerick", "text": "City in Ireland\nLimerick ( ; ) is a city in western Ireland, in County Limerick. It is in the province of Munster and is in the Mid-West which comprises part of the Southern Region. With a population of 102,287 at the 2022 census, Limerick is the third-most populous urban area in Ireland, and the fourth-most populous city on the island of Ireland. It was founded by Scandinavian settlers in 812, during the Viking Age.\nThe city straddles the River Shannon, with the historic core of the city located on King's Island, which is bounded by the Shannon and Abbey Rivers. Limerick is at the head of the Shannon Estuary, where the river widens before it flows into the Atlantic Ocean. Limerick City and County Council is the local authority for the city.\nGeography and metropolitan area.\nLimerick is located on the River Shannon with four main river-crossing points near the city centre. To the south of the city is the Golden Vale, an area of rich pastureland. Historically, much of the city's industry was based on this agricultural hinterland.\nOn 1 June 2014, following the amalgamation of the separate local government areas of the county of Limerick and the local government area of the city of Limerick to form Limerick City and County, a new Metropolitan District of Limerick was formed within the united council, which extended the city area. The Metropolitan District includes the city urban area and extends outwards towards Patrickswell in the west and Castleconnell in the east. The City Metropolitan Area however excludes city suburbs located within County Clare. At the 2016 census, the Metropolitan District of Limerick had a population of 104,952.\nHistory.\nAncient and medieval history.\n originally referred to the general area along the banks of the Shannon Estuary known as . The earliest settlement, , was the original name for King's Island during the pre-Viking and Viking eras. This island was also called , 'The Dark Foreigner's Island'. The name is recorded in Viking sources as .\nThe settlement dates from 812; however, history suggests the presence of earlier settlements in the area surrounding King's Island, the island at the historical city centre. Antiquity's map-maker, Ptolemy, produced in 150 AD the earliest map of Ireland, showing a place called at the same site as King's Island. History also records an important battle involving Cormac mac Airt in 221 and a visit by Saint Patrick in 434 to baptise a D\u00e1l gCais king, Carthann Finn. Saint Munchin, the first bishop of Limerick died in 652, indicating the settlement was a place of some note then. In 812 the Vikings sailed up the Shannon and pillaged the settlement, burned Mungret Abbey but were forced to flee when the Irish attacked and killed many of their number. The Normans redesigned the city in the 12th century and added much of the most notable architecture, such as King John's Castle and St Mary's Cathedral.\nIn early medieval times Limerick was at the centre of the Kingdom of Thomond which corresponds to the present day County Clare, the Kingdom also included North Kerry and parts of South Offaly. One of the kingdom's most notable kings was Brian Boru, ancestor of the O'Brien Clan of Dalcassians. The word Thomond is synonymous with the region and is retained in place names such as Thomondgate, Thomond Bridge and Thomond Park.\nLate Renaissance/Early modern history.\nLimerick in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was sometimes called the most beautiful city in Ireland. The English-born judge Luke Gernon, a resident of Limerick, wrote in 1620 that at his first sight of the city he had been taken by its \"lofty buildings of marble, like the Colleges in Oxford\".\nDuring the civil wars of the 17th century the city played a pivotal role, besieged by Oliver Cromwell in 1651 and twice by the Williamites in the 1690s. The Treaty of Limerick ended the Williamite war in Ireland which was fought between supporters of the Catholic King James II (Jacobites) and the Protestant King William of Orange (Williamites). The treaty offered toleration to Catholicism and full legal rights to Catholics that swore an oath of loyalty to William III and Mary II. The Treaty was of national significance as it ensured closer British and Protestant dominance over Ireland. The articles of the Treaty protecting Catholic rights were not passed by the Protestant Irish Parliament which rather updated the Penal Laws against Catholics which had major implications for Irish history. Reputedly the Treaty was signed on the Treaty Stone, an irregular block of limestone which once served as a mounting block for horses. This stone is now displayed on a pedestal at Clancy Strand. Because of the treaty, Limerick is sometimes known as the Treaty City. This turbulent period earned the city its motto: (an ancient city well studied in the arts of war).\nThe peaceful times that followed the turmoil of the late 17th century allowed the city to prosper through trade in the late 18th century. During this time Limerick Port established itself as one of Ireland's major commercial ports exporting agricultural produce from one of Ireland's most fertile areas, the Golden Vale, to Britain and America. This increase in trade and wealth, particularly amongst the city's merchant classes saw a rapid expansion of the city as Georgian Limerick began to take shape. This gave the city its present-day look, including the extensive terraced streets of Georgian townhouses which remain in the city centre today. The Waterford and Limerick Railway linked the city to the Dublin\u2013Cork railway line in 1848 and to Waterford in 1853. The opening of a number of secondary railways in the subsequent decades developed Limerick as a regional centre of communications. However, the economic downturn in the European conflicts of the French Revolution and Napoleonic eras, and following the Act of Union 1800, and the impact of the Great Irish Famine of 1848 caused much of the 19th century to be a more troubled period.\n20th-century history.\nThe Limerick boycott was an economic boycott waged against the small Jewish community for over two years in the first decade of the 20th century. It was accompanied by a number of assaults, stone-throwing and intimidation, which caused many Jews to leave the city. It was instigated in 1904 by a Redemptorist priest, Father John Creagh.\nDuring the Irish War of Independence, the Limerick Soviet was a self-declared soviet that existed from 15 to 27 April 1919. A general strike was organised by the Limerick Trades and Labour Council, as a protest against the British Army's declaration of a \"Special Military Area\" under the Defence of the Realm Act, which covered most of Limerick city and a part of the county. During the strike a special strike committee was set up to print their own money, control food prices and publish newspapers.\nBy the mid-20th century, Limerick was characterised by economic stagnation and decline as many traditional industries closed or left the city. However, there were some success stories. In 1942 Shannon Airport (located in County Clare, 20\u00a0km west of the city) opened for the first time offering transatlantic flights. In 1959, Shannon Airport enabled the opening of the Shannon Free Zone which attracted a large number of multinational companies to the region. A long campaign for a third-level educational institute to be located in the city finally bore fruit with the establishment of NIHE Limerick in 1969 which eventually became the University of Limerick in 1989.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLimerick is the third-largest city in the Republic of Ireland (after Dublin and Cork), with a population of 102,287 in the urban area and 104,952 in the metropolitan district, according to the 2016 CSO census. the 2011 census had reported a large population decline in central city areas due in part to the Limerick regeneration process where in these areas the largest reduction was reported nationally and also to outward migration following the collapse of the local and national economy from 2008 onwards. The population of the Limerick Larger Urban Zone as defined by the EU is 162,413. The ethnic diversity in Limerick's population, which includes a large immigrant community, saw rapid growth during the Celtic Tiger and the following decade. As of the 2016 census the Polish community was one of the largest demographic groups in the Municipal District, with approximately 4,000 living and working in the area. In late 2006, it was proposed that Ireland's first Polish bank could open in the area during 2007.\nLimerick has a large stock of local authority housing. Before the amalgamation of Limerick City and County Council, 41% of all housing within the old Limerick City Council boundary was local authority, which was the highest in Ireland. This figure is however no longer accurate given the larger metropolitan district of the city.\nAs of the 2022 census, the ethnic makeup of the city was 76.53% white total, including 67.47% white Irish and 8.53% other white people, 13.52% not stated, 5.48% Asian, 2.31% other and 2.14% black. The city's religious makeup in 2022 was 61.31% Catholic, 14.11% no religion, 13.91% not stated, and 10.66% other religions.\nGovernment and politics.\nLocal government.\nLimerick city is under the jurisdiction of Limerick City and County Council, which is based at City Hall, Limerick. The council has responsibility for local services such as sanitation, planning and development, libraries, collection of motor taxation, local roads and social housing in the city. The council comprises elected councillors with an appointed full-time CEO as the city (and county) manager. Local elections are held every five years and the councillors annually elect a Cathaoirleach or chairperson to chair the council. Limerick City and County council was the first local authority in Ireland to have a directly-elected mayor. In May 2019, residents voted in favour of a proposal for a directly-elected mayor. Elections were held in conjunction with local government and European elections on 7 June 2024. John Moran was subsequently announced as the first directly-elected mayor. Former well-known mayors include TDs Donogh O'Malley, Stephen Coughlan, Michael Lipper, Jim Kemmy and Jan O'Sullivan.\nThroughout most of the city's history, from 1197 when it gained its first charter, Limerick City had its own local government authority, Limerick Corporation later known as Limerick City Council. The council was one of the oldest in Ireland and was only exceeded in age by Dublin City Council. In October 2012 the Government of Ireland published \"Putting People First- Action Programme for Effective Local Government\" which set out government policy for reforms across all the main areas of local government in Ireland. Among the recommendations was the merging of Limerick City Council with Limerick County Council. The changes came into effect on 1 June 2014 following the implementation of the Local Government Reform Act 2014.\nBy the 1960s onwards the city had outgrown its boundary considerably; the city boundary was only altered slightly and never reflected the overall urban area of the city. A limited boundary extension on the city's north side in 2008 enlarged the city boundary by 1,020 hectares increasing the city's area by almost 50% and raising the population by an estimated 7,000. The previous boundary, encompassing 2,086 hectares, was delineated in 1950. Newer suburban districts such as Dooradoyle, Castletroy \u2013 including the University, Gouldavoher, and Raheen were continually administered to by Limerick County Council until the merger of the two authorities in June 2014. This local government structure in Limerick caused a number of inefficiencies, most notably in the area of planning. A number of suburbs such as Westbury and Parteen to the north of the city are governed by Clare County Council.\nFollowing the merger of the two authorities in 2014, a new Metropolitan District of Limerick City was set up that included the city urban area and also settlements close to the city such as Patrickswell and Castleconnell. The Metropolitan district returns 21 councillors to Limerick City and County Council which in total has 40 councillors returned from across Limerick City and County. The Limerick City Metropolitan District is divided into 3 local electoral areas: Limerick City East, Limerick City North and Limerick City South which elect eight, six and seven councillors respectively.\nFollowing the 2024 local elections, Fine Gael is the largest party on the authority with 13 seats followed by Fianna F\u00e1il with 10, Labour and Sinn F\u00e9in with 3 each, and Independent Ireland and the Social Democrats with 2 each, and Aont\u00fa and the Green Party with 1 seat each, and independents and other parties the remaining 5 seats.\nNational politics.\nFor elections to the D\u00e1il, Limerick City is in the Limerick City constituency. From 2011, the constituency boundaries changed in accordance with the proposals of the Constituency Commission and the subsequent Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009. This changed the electoral boundaries from Limerick East and Limerick West to Limerick City and Limerick. Limerick city encompasses the city, the suburban areas of Castletroy and as far east as Murroe. It also includes part of North County Tipperary. The Limerick county constituency takes in most of the rest of the county. For European Parliament elections, Limerick is in the South constituency.\nClimate.\nLimerick's climate is classified as temperate oceanic (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\"). Met \u00c9ireann maintains a climatological weather observation station at Shannon Airport, 21 kilometres west-northwest of the city in County Clare. Shannon Airport records an average of 977 millimetres of precipitation annually, most of which is rain. Limerick has a mild climate, with an average daily maximum in July of and an average daily minimum in January of . The highest temperature recorded was in June 2018, and the lowest in 2010. Limerick is the cloudiest city in the country, averaging only 1,295 sunshine hours annually, 3.5 hours of sunshine every day. There are on average 62 days of no recordable sunshine, 6 days of thunder, 22 days of hail, 32 days of fog and 11 days of snow per year. Shannon Airport is situated on the Shannon Estuary at an elevation of 14 metres.\nCulture.\nIn 2014, Limerick became Ireland's inaugural \"National City of Culture\", with a variety of artistic and cultural events occurring at locations around the city throughout the year.\nArt.\nThe Limerick City Gallery of Art on Pery Square is the city's chief venue for contemporary art exhibitions. It is home to a permanent collection of Irish art, which shows works from the early 18th to 20th century. The gallery houses the National Collection of Contemporary Drawing founded by the artist Samuel Walsh in 1987. Limerick's major contemporary art event is EVA International, Ireland's Biennial of Contemporary Art. EVA International, centered mainly in the Limerick City Gallery of Art, is curated by varying guest curators and includes contemporary artworks by both international and Irish artists.\nOther Limerick arts groups include Contact Studios, which provides individual studio spaces for visual artists; Ormston House, a meeting place for the arts; and Limerick Printmakers Studio and Gallery, which provides printmaking facilities, a venue for exhibitions and events and an education programme.\nTheatre.\nThe Lime Tree Theatre officially opened at the Mary Immaculate College campus in October 2012. The venue hosts theatre, music, comedy, traditional arts, schools' performances, and conferences.\nThe Belltable on O'Connell Street hosts local playwrights and drama productions. The University Concert Hall located in the University of Limerick is a 1,000 seat venue and provides a large venue for national and international acts to visit the city. Limerick is also the home of street theatre companies, including \"The Umbrella Project\".\nThere is also the Impact Theatre Company, and Bottomdog Theatre Company.\nLiterature.\nLimerick's literature scene is supported by projects like the Limerick Writers' Centre, which was established in 2008 and runs a range of writing activities in the city. Limerick natives include Pulitzer Prize-winning author Frank McCourt, and novelists Kate O'Brien, Michael Curtin, Kevin Barry and Donal Ryan. Poets from Limerick include Michael Hogan, Desmond O'Grady, and John Liddy.\nThe city is the setting for Frank McCourt's memoir \"Angela's Ashes\" and its film adaptation. The Frank McCourt Museum situated in McCourt's former school on Hartsonge Street opened in 2011, and contains artefacts from the book. Limerick has also been the setting or location for the dramas \"The Real Thing\" (2002), \"Cowboys &amp; Angels\" (2003) and \"Lost &amp; Found\" (2015), among other films.\nMusic.\nThe Irish Chamber Orchestra and the Irish World Music Centre are both based in the University of Limerick. The university has a thousand-seat state-of-the-art concert hall that hosts visiting performers. The city's music scene has produced bands such as The Cranberries, guitarist Noel Hogan's MonoBand, and The Hitchers. Electronic musician Richard D. James, more commonly known as Aphex Twin, was born in Limerick in 1971. The Limerick Art Gallery and the Art College cater for painting, sculpture, and performance art.\nThe Limerick International Band Championship is an annual competition featuring marching bands from Limerick, the rest of Ireland, and the rest of the world. It is typically held around just after Saint Patrick's Day, with the bands parading through the city centre, and attracts large crowds.\nDolan's Warehouse on the Dock Road is a venue specialising in live music, established in 1998. Baker Place was a nightclub that held mainly local underground nights until its closure in 2011. In 2020, it was announced that the Dromkeen-based Shiloh Trust was seeking planning permission to convert the former premises of Baker Place into a bible school.\nHumorous verse.\nA limerick is a type of humorous verse of five lines with an AABBA rhyme scheme: the poem's connection with the city is obscure, but the name is generally taken to be a reference to Limerick city or County Limerick, sometimes, particularly to the Maigue Poets, and may derive from an earlier form of nonsense verse parlour game that traditionally included a refrain that included \"Will [or won't] you come (up) to Limerick?\" The earliest known use of the name \"Limerick\" for this type of poem is an 1880 reference, in a Saint John, New Brunswick, newspaper, to a well-known tune.\nMedia.\nBroadcasting.\nRT\u00c9 lyric fm, a state-run classical music radio station and part of RT\u00c9, broadcasts nationally from studios in the city centre on Cornmarket Square which opened in 1994. Limerick's local radio station is Live 95FM, broadcasting from 'Radio House', near the waterfront at Steamboat Quay. Spin South West, owned by Communicorp, broadcasts to Counties Kerry, Clare, Limerick, Tipperary and southwest Laois from its studios at Landmark Buildings in the Raheen Industrial Estate. Student radio station, Wired FM, broadcasts on 99.9FM from Mary Immaculate College. Wired FM also has studios at Limerick Institute of Technology. Limerick City Community Radio broadcasts on 99.9FM every Saturday and Sunday. University Hospital Limerick has a radio station on 94.2FM, but this can be heard only in the hospital and surrounding area. West Limerick 102 is broadcast from Newcastle West. The national broadcaster, RT\u00c9, has radio and television studios in the city, which are periodically used to broadcast programming from Limerick.\nPrint.\nSeveral local newspapers are published in the city, including \"The Limerick Post\" and \"The Limerick Leader\" and magazines include the \"Limerick Event Guide\", \"Business Limerick\", and \"Limerick Now\".\nPlaces of interest.\nLimerick city is approximately 25\u00a0km from Shannon Airport. Tourist attractions in the city centre include Limerick City Museum, King John's Castle (1210), St Mary's Cathedral (1168), the Hunt Museum, The People's Museum of Limerick, the University of Limerick, Georgian houses and gardens and the Treaty Stone. There are several seasonal tours, including Angela's Ashes walking tour of Limerick City, a historical walking tour, and kayaking tours along the River Shannon.\nThe city centre is divided between the traditional areas of \"English Town\" on the southern end of King's Island, which includes King John's Castle; \"Irish Town\", which includes the older streets on the south bank; and the current economic centre further south, called \"Newtown Pery\". Newtown Pery was built in the late 18th century before the Act of Union and, unusually for an Irish city and unique in Limerick, is laid out on a grid plan. The Limerick Museum (formerly aka the Jim Kemmy Municipal Museum), is located in the Old Franciscan Friary in Henry Street. It contains displays on Limerick's history and manufactures.\nThe Georgian core of the city, with its Georgian architecture in the Newtown Pery, was developed from the mid-18th century. This core includes O'Connell Street (George Street before independence) from the Cecil Street intersection running to the southwest end of the Crescent, and southeast to Pery Street including Glentworth Street and Barrington Street. Other buildings of architectural note in the city are St John's Cathedral, designed by the notable Victorian architect, Philip Charles Hardwick. St Mary's Cathedral, at over 800 years old, is one of the oldest in Ireland. St John's Cathedral is more modern.\nThe Hunt Museum is based in the historic 18th-century former Custom House. The museum was established to house a collection of approximately 2000 works of art and antiquities formed by John and Gertrude Hunt during their lifetimes.\nThe main park in Limerick is the People's Park which was opened in 1877 in memory of Richard Russell, a prominent local businessman. The park is dominated by the Thomas Spring Rice memorial (MP for the city 1820\u20131832) and has a large collection of mature deciduous and evergreen trees.\nLimerick city centre changed significantly with the construction of several modern high-rise buildings in the early 2000s, in particular as part of the regeneration of the former docks area along the Dock Road. The suburban areas, where the majority of the population now live, have grown out from the centre along the main roads to Ennis (North Circular and Ennis Road areas/Caherdavin), Dublin (Castletroy and the university) and Cork (Ballinacurra/Dooradoyle/Raheen). Suburban houses are generally two-floor semi-detached homes for single families. These were built from the 1950s onwards in large estates by government projects and commercial developments, although there are many examples of Edwardian and older 1930s suburban homes on the main suburban thoroughfares leading towards the city (North &amp; South Circular, Ballinacurra Road, O'Connell Avenue).\nLimerick city's nightlife is supported by a number of nightclubs and pubs which offer music. For example, Dolan's Warehouse is a small music venue that hosts local, national, and international folk, indie, jazz, rock, and traditional Irish music acts.\nIn County Limerick, Adare village and the Foynes Flying Boat Museum, approximately 35\u00a0km (22 miles/30 minutes) from Limerick City along the scenic coastal N69 route from Limerick to Tralee, are also attractions. Bunratty Castle in County Clare is another local attraction, and is situated 15.4\u00a0km north of the city.\nEconomy.\nLimerick is in the region dubbed \"the Midwest\". Also known as the \"Shannon Region\", this is primarily an economic and social concept. The region encompasses County Limerick, County Clare, North County Tipperary, Northwest County Kerry and south County Offaly, with its focal point centred on Limerick and its environs within an radius.\nThe city's economic development has been driven in part by the University of Limerick, Limerick Institute of Technology, Shannon Airport in County Clare and Shannon Development (an economic development agency), whose precursor was SFADCO (Shannon Free Airport Development Company), an economic agency that provided tax incentives to companies locating in the area surrounding Shannon Airport. Limerick Chamber of Commerce, a representative body for businesses in the region, celebrated its bicentennial/bicentenary in 2015. As of 2015, Limerick had the highest disposable income per person in Ireland outside Dublin.\nHistorically Limerick was an agricultural commodity-driven economy, due to its position as the first major port along the River Shannon. By the middle of the 18th century, Limerick Port grew to become one of Ireland's principal commercial ports, exporting agricultural produce from the most fertile tracts in Ireland known as the Golden Vale as well as produce from the surrounding counties. The city was one of the main meat processing areas in Ireland, and industries included confectionery and flour production. The city was known for its bacon industry, including the production of Limerick ham \u2013 however this went into decline in the mid-20th century. The fishing industry in Limerick, based on Clancy's Strand opposite King John's Castle and at Coonagh nearby, once employed hundreds of men. The boat most commonly used was the Gandelow which was also used as a small Lighter (barge) to ferry goods to and from larger ships in the port. In the 1920s the construction of a dam at Ardnacrusha severely impacted salmon breeding and that, and the introduction of quotas, had by the 1950s caused salmon fishing to diminish. By 2006, most fishermen had relinquished their drift net licences and the industry can now be said to be dormant.\nAs with other cities in Ireland, several multinational companies are based in Limerick, and the city is a growing recipient of foreign direct investment. Dell had its main European Manufacturing Facility at the Raheen Business Park however in January 2009 Dell announced that it would close its Limerick computer manufacturing plant and move the production lines to Poland. The facility was the largest Dell manufacturing plant outside the United States and produced 30,000\u201360,000 units per day for export to the EMEA. Dell remains one of the largest employers in the mid-west with over 1,000 people employed in service and support. Analog Devices has its European manufacturing base in Raheen, 3\u00a0km south-west of the city centre. The site employs more than 1,000 people. Johnson &amp; Johnson subsidiary Vistakon (the world's largest manufacturer of contact lenses) has a large facility in Castletroy in the National Technology Park and also employs close to 1,000 people. It is Vistakon's only production facility outside the United States and one of the largest contact-lens manufacturing plants in the world. Cook Medical, the world's largest privately owned Medical Devices company, employs over 800 people in Limerick at the National Technology Park.\nThe Post-2008 Irish economic downturn had a profound effect on Limerick. The announcement in 2009 that Dell was to move its manufacturing facility from Limerick to Poland devastated the local economy. 1,900 jobs were lost at Dell and it is believed that for every job that was lost at Dell at least another 4 to 5 were at risk. The closure of the Dell manufacturing facility amounted to 2% of Ireland's national GDP. The downturn in the construction industry also cost many jobs as did the stalled Limerick regeneration programme which promised investment in Limerick's deprived city areas. As of 2012 unemployment had become a major problem across the city with the unemployment rate in the city at 28.6% which was almost twice the national average.\nRetail.\nThe Crescent Shopping Centre is the largest shopping centre in Ireland, outside of Dublin, and the largest in the province of Munster. It is located in Dooradoyle about 3\u00a0km south of the city centre, and has over 90 shopping outlets along with restaurants and a 12-screen Omniplex Cinema. The city centre also has a large retail district which includes a mix of more traditional type of shops as well as some modern high street stores. Cruises Street is one of the main shopping streets. O'Connell Street, William Street, Bedford Row and Thomas Street) are also retail streets within the city. The city centre saw some works on remodeling in the early 21st century, with pedestrianisation works on Bedford Row, Thomas Street and parts of Catherine Street, as well as widening footpaths on William Street. These works have sought to address a reduction of footfall in the city centre (in turn influencing the closure of many city centre retail businesses) which occurred from the recession of 2008 onwards.\nRetail parks and shopping centres.\nDuring the Celtic Tiger years a number of shopping centres and retail parks opened in suburban areas of Limerick. In addition to the Crescent Shopping Centre, which expanded in the early 2000s, the Jetland Shopping Centre and Childers Road Retail Park opened in the mid-2000s. As of 2017, unfinished retail centres included the Coonagh Cross retail development and the Parkway Valley Shopping Centre on the Dublin Road.\nThe plans for the Opera Centre, a proposed retail development described as \"one of the biggest commercial development sites in the city's history\", make up part of the \"Limerick 2030\" scheme.\nThe Milk Market.\nThe Milk Market located at Cornmarket Row in the city centre sells locally produced foods and products and is governed by Limerick Market Trustees. In 2010 work was undertaken to redevelop the existing premises to an all-weather, all year round facility as it operated in an outdoor environment. The work involved constructing a large canopy over the existing market premises and was officially re-opened in June 2010. The Milk Market Project won the 2011 Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland (RIAI) 'Peoples Choice Award'.\nEnergy.\nIn 2013, a renewable energy strategy was launched for the region, and proposed a 20% reduction in CO2-emissions, while ensuring that short-term actions were beneficial to the long-term goal of 100% renewable energy. The strategy was completed by the Danish Aalborg University.\nTransport.\nAir.\nShannon Airport is 20\u00a0km west of the city in County Clare. It is one of Ireland's main airports and is accessible from Limerick via the N18 dual carriageway and from other regions via the Limerick Tunnel. It has scheduled flights to European and North American destinations. There is no rail link to the airport. Coonagh airfield, a few kilometres west of Caherdavin, serves small private aircraft. Kerry and Cork Airports are around 1 hour 30 minutes and 2 hours drive away, respectively. Kerry Airport is connected via Farranfore railway station from Limerick railway station, and Irish Citylink provide a direct service to Cork Airport\nBus.\nLocal public transport is provided by several companies. Bus \u00c9ireann, Ireland's state-owned bus company, operates a number of services subsidised by the National Transport Authority, while a number of provide operators also run commercial bus services in and around Limerick. An updated city bus network was introduced in Limerick City in December 2016, which introduced new routes. In May 2019, Bus \u00c9ireann further changed and improved the Limerick City timetable, including increased frequency and later operating times.\nOther rural buses run to towns and villages in the county and to Shannon Airport. There are also a number of Intercity and international buses from Bus \u00c9ireann's bus terminal adjoining Limerick Colbert railway station. These include hourly services to Dublin, Cork, Ennis and Galway. Expressway runs the 343 bus from Limerick Colbert Station to Shannon Airport. Bus \u00c9ireann also run a Limerick to Galway Express service traveling on the M18 in addition to the regular service. Other buses run every 2 hours to Tralee and Killarney. There are also regular daily services to Waterford and Athlone, and a daily service to London via the ferry from Rosslare Europort.\nThere are some private bus companies in operation providing city and intercity services. Dublin Coach provides the M7 express service which operates every hour from Arthur's Quay which goes to Dublin or Ennis. JJ Kavanagh also provide Dublin to Limerick services from Arthur's Quay. Citylink runs a number of services from Limerick to Galway, Cork and Cork Airport and operate from Henry Street.\nRail.\nIarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann's Limerick Colbert station is the railway hub for the city and the Mid-West Region with a number of intercity and commuter rail services. Limerick railway station opened on 28 August 1858, replacing an earlier temporary station a short distance away, which had operated from 9 May 1848.\nThe following inter city routes are available from Limerick Colbert station :\nThere are 3 suburban/commuter services in the Limerick Suburban Rail network:\nThere are also some disused railway lines including the Limerick to Foynes line which closed to freight in the early 2000s, having lost passenger services in the early 1960s, although the track is still in situ. This is the last remaining part of the North Kerry Line which closed to passenger traffic in the early 1960s and to freight traffic (other than Limerick \u2013 Foynes) in the mid-1970s. In 2022, Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann commenced works to reopen the former Limerick\u2013Foynes line for freight traffic. As of 2024, these works were projected to be completed by 2025, with freight operations due to commence from early 2026.\nRoad.\nLimerick's central location in the midwest of Ireland means many national primary routes converge on the city. The M7 (Dublin), N/M18 (Galway, Ennis, Shannon), N/M20 (Cork), N21 (Tralee) and N24 (Waterford) routes all start/terminate in or near the city. Road infrastructure is further supplemented by the southern ring road and Limerick Tunnel bypass of the city and the M20 bypass of Dooradoyle and Raheen to the south of the city. Connections to the other cities were improved with the completion of the M7 motorway in December 2010, and continuing upgrades ongoing to the N/M18 to Shannon, Ennis, Galway, and Tuam \u2013 the final section opened in September 2017. A motorway is also planned between Cork and Limerick, with a proposed completion date in the mid-2020s.\nWaterway transport.\nHistorically, waterway transport has been key to Limerick's development. Vikings established the city as a maritime trading port. The city's position on a major Irish river system, the Shannon, enabled transport to the midlands of Ireland and further north and west. By the 18th century with the opening of canal systems throughout Ireland, Limerick Port established itself as Ireland's premier commercial port on the western side of the country. This was enabled by the ease of access facilitated by the opening of canals but most importantly to the River Shannon. The opening of the Grand Canal in the 18th century provided further access to Dublin and the east of the country. There are also a number of disused canals in the vicinity of the city including the Park Canal &amp; the Passey \u2013 Errina Canal on the old Limerick navigation. Waterway transport on the Shannon was regularly used to transport goods from Limerick to Dublin and vice versa however this mode of transport fell into decline in the 20th century. Originally Limerick port was located near the confluence of the Abbey and Shannon rivers at King's Island. Today the Shannon Foynes Port is located further downstream on the Shannon alongside the Dock Road. This general-purpose facility port is operated by the Shannon Foynes Port Company which operates all marine activities in the Shannon estuary.\nEducation.\nLimerick is a centre of higher education in the region, and technical and continuation education within the city traces its beginning back to the formation of the Limerick Athenaeum Society in 1852, marking the foundation of the Limerick Institute of Technology. The Society's aims included \"the promotion of Literature, Science, Art and Music\". Limerick is now home to a number of higher-education institutions including the University of Limerick, Limerick Institute of Technology (one of the two constituent campuses of the ) and Mary Immaculate College and has a student population of over 20,000.\nThe University of Limerick (UL) has a student population of over 17,000 and is about 5\u00a0km east of the city centre, in the suburb of Castletroy. It was established as the National Institute for Higher Education (NIHE) in 1972, and in 1989 was the first university to be established since the foundation of the State in 1922. Its academic programs include courses in engineering, information technology, materials science, sports science, humanities, teacher education, social sciences and music. In 2007, the university opened a medical school. The Irish World Music Centre specialises in traditional music and dance, and UL is host to the Irish Chamber Orchestra. The campus includes a 50m Olympic-standard swimming complex, the first to be established in Ireland. The campus has one of the longest footbridges in Europe, \"The Living Bridge\". Thomond College of Education, Limerick was a teacher training college for secondary level and was integrated into the university in 1991.\nLimerick Institute of Technology (LIT) has a student population of approximately 7,000 and is a centre for undergraduate and postgraduate education in business, engineering, information technology, humanities, science, and art education. In October 2021, it merged with Athlone IT to become the , in 2021/2022. The main campus is located at Moylish Park, about 3 kilometres north-west of the city centre, and the Limerick School of Art and Design is located on campuses at Clare Street and George's Quay. Additional facilities and outreach centres are located at O'Connell Street and in Ennis, County Clare and LIT has two campuses in County Tipperary, LIT Thurles and LIT Clonmel. These were formerly the campuses of the Tipperary Institute which merged with LIT in 2011. LIT was originally established in 1852 as a School of Ornamental Art. In the mid-1970s it was incorporated as the Limerick College of Art, Commerce &amp; Technology (CoACT) and achieved the designation of a Regional Technical College (RTC) in 1993 and finally an Institute of Technology in 1997. LIT has connections with several enterprise centres.\nMary Immaculate College is an education and arts college located just southwest of the city centre. The main focus is on the education of primary-level teachers. Mary Immaculate College is a constituent college of the University of Limerick.\nGriffith College Limerick (GCL) is a private college in Limerick. The college was established in 2006 when the Mid-West Business Institute was acquired by Griffith College. The college runs full-time and part-time courses in accountancy, business, law, engineering, computing, and IT.\nPrimary and secondary education in the city is organised similarly to the rest of Ireland. The Limerick and Clare Education and Training Board (formerly the City of Limerick Vocational Education Committee) provides education services for over 25,000 learners in the city at secondary and further education levels. Secondary level schools in Limerick include Castletroy College, Crescent College Comprehensive, Thomond Community College, Villiers, Educate Together, and the all-Irish language Gaelchol\u00e1iste Luimnigh, which are all co-educational. Ardscoil R\u00eds, St. Clements Redemptorist College, CBS Sexton Street and St Munchin's College are boys-only schools, and Laurel Hill Col\u00e1iste, Laurel Hill Secondary School, Col\u00e1iste Nano Nagle and Ardscoil Mhuire are girls-only schools.\nSport.\nRugby, Gaelic football, hurling, and association football are popular sporting pastimes in Limerick. The city and suburbs also have many tennis, athletics, cricket and golf clubs. The city is host to many large sporting events. Examples in the 21st century include the 2008 and 2009 Irish Open Golf Championships, the 2010 Irish Special Olympics, the All-Ireland Corporate Games, and the World Baton twirling Championships. Limerick was designated as a European City of Sport for 2011 by the European Capitals of Sport Association (ACES).\nThe National Elite Swimming Club is based at The University of Limerick Arena. Former World Boxing Champion, Andy Lee, who held the WBO middleweight title from 2014 to 2015, trained at St. Francis Boxing Club on Mungret Street in Limerick.\nBasketball.\nSimilar to the rest of Ireland, basketball was a popular sport in Limerick during the 1970s and 1980s, with up to four divisions in the men's and women's local leagues. It suffered a decline during the 1990s culminating in the complete demise of local league basketball in the city and surrounding areas. The main clubs in the city were St. Colm's and Marathon with St. Colm's, in particular, having a long history in the National Leagues. Limerick is currently represented in the National Leagues by the men's UL Eagles team and the women's UL Aughinish team. They both play their home games at the 2,500-capacity University Arena at the University of Limerick. There are several other teams at the school and club level, including St. Colm's, Limerick Lakers, Taste of Europe, Limerick Celtic, and Limerick Lions.\nCricket.\nLimerick Cricket Club is a member of the Munster Cricket Union and plays in competitions organised by the Union. The club has in the past provided players for the Ireland national cricket team.\nRowing.\nFour rowing clubs are located in the city, namely Limerick Boat Club, Shannon Rowing Club, St Michael's Rowing Club, and Athlunkard Boat Club. St Michael's member and Limerick native Sam Lynch won the World Rowing Championships gold medal in the Men's Lightweight Single Sculls in 2001 and 2002.\nGaelic games.\nIreland's national sports of hurling and Gaelic football are widely played in the city and its surrounding suburbs. The Limerick county hurling team have won five All-Ireland senior hurling championships since 2018 and are fourth most successful historically.\nNa Piarsaigh is the only city club currently playing hurling at senior level. Claughaun (Cloch\u00e1n), Monaleen (M\u00f3in a'L\u00edn) and Mungret (Mungairit) compete at intermediate level and Old Christians (Sean-Chr\u00edostaithe), Milford (\u00c1th an Mhuilinn), Saint Patrick's (Naomh P\u00e1draig) and Abbey Sarsfields (S\u00e1irs\u00e9alaigh na Mainistreach) compete at junior level.\nLimerick won the first All-Ireland Senior Football Championship in 1887 when represented by the city's Commercials club and repeated the feat in 1896. Since then, the game has lived mostly in the shadow of hurling but a resurgence in 2000 saw the county win its first Munster Under-21 title and has since reached three Munster Senior finals. Monaleen (M\u00f3in a'L\u00edn) is the only city club to play football in the senior grade. Saint Patrick's (Naomh P\u00e1draig), Claughaun (An Cloch\u00e1n), Mungret St. Paul's (Mungairit Naomh P\u00f3l) and Na Piarsaigh are at intermediate level and Milford (\u00c1th a Mhuilinn), Abbey Sarsfields (S\u00e1irs\u00e9alaigh na Mainstreach) and Ballinacurra Gaels (Gaeil Bhaile na Cora) play at junior level.\nSome secondary school's compete in the Dr. Harty Cup, which is the Munster Colleges Hurling Championship. Limerick CBS has won the cup on 10 occasions, including four in a row from 1964 to 1967 and most recently in 1993. The school also won the Dr. Croke Cup, the All-Ireland Colleges Hurling Championship, on two occasions, in 1964 and 1966. Ardscoil R\u00eds has won the championship on five occasions, in 2010, 2011, 2013,2015, and 2021 and St. Munchin's College won it once, in 1922.\nBoth the University of Limerick (UL) and Limerick Institute of Technology (LIT) have been successful in the Fitzgibbon Cup, the All-Ireland Higher Education Hurling Championship. UL first won the championship in 1989 and has won it four times in all. LIT's two wins came in 2005 and 2007. Both of the colleges met in the final in 2011, with UL scoring an injury-time goal to win.\nLimerick's Gaelic Grounds (P\u00e1irc na nGael), on the Ennis Road, is the county team's home venue for both sports and has a capacity of 49,000 following reconstruction in 2004. In 1961 it hosted Ireland's biggest crowd for a sporting event outside Croke Park when over 61,000 paid to see the Munster hurling final between Tipperary and Cork.\nGolf.\nThere are three golf clubs associated with Limerick city. Limerick Golf Club was founded in 1891 and is located at Ballyclough, due south of the city centre. Castletroy Golf Club was founded in 1937 and is located in the suburb of Castletroy in the southwest of the city. Rathbane Golf Club is based at Rathbane Golf Course, a municipal facility opened in 1998 on the southern outskirts of the city and operated under a licence for Limerick City Council. Limerick has won the Irish Senior Cup, the blue riband event of Irish amateur golf, on four occasions and was the first Irish club to win the European Club Championship, in 1980. Castletroy has won the Irish Senior Cup once.\nLimerick Golf Club was host to the JP McManus Invitational Pro-Am, one of the largest pro-am events of its kind in the world. It has contributed over \u20ac95m to local charities since its inception in 1990. The event moved to the larger Adare Golf Club in 2005 as it had outgrown the Ballyclough venue. Adare also played host to the Irish Open in 2007 and 2008.\nRugby.\nRugby union is popular in the city and is widely played at all levels, with Limerick sometimes referred to as the \"spiritual home of Irish rugby\". Two-time European champions Munster play most home matches at Thomond Park, where they held a record of being unbeaten in the Heineken Cup for 26 consecutive games until the 16\u20139 defeat by Leicester in January 2007. Munster recorded a famous 12\u20130 victory against the New Zealand All Blacks in 1978 at Thomond Park and came close a second time when the teams met in 2008, losing 18\u201316. Munster also defeated an Australian touring side at Thomond Park in 2010 and the Maori All Blacks 27-14 in 2016.\nSince its inception in 1991 the All-Ireland League has been dominated by Limerick City teams, with three clubs winning the competition 13 times between them: Shannon (9); Garryowen (3) and Young Munster (1). Other senior rugby clubs in the city include Old Crescent, Thomond, and UL Bohemians. Richmond and St. Mary's are city clubs playing in the junior leagues.\nThe city's secondary schools compete in the Munster Senior and Junior Cups and a number of schools have had notable success at both levels. The most successful rugby school in the city is Crescent College, eleven-time Senior Cup and five-time Junior Cup winners. The school is affiliated with Old Crescent RFC. St. Munchin's has won the Senior Cup five times since 1968 and the Junior Cup three times. Limerick CBS won the Senior Cup on four occasions in the 1920s and 1930s and the Junior Cup in 1932. Ardscoil R\u00eds has won the Junior Cup twice, in 2003 and 2005 and Castletroy College won both senior and junior competitions in 2008.\nIn 2013, Thomond Park hosted rugby league in the 2013 Rugby League World Cup, and an academy was briefly set up in 2011 to identify Irish players to play for Super League clubs. Domestic rugby league was formerly played in Limerick, with the Treaty City Titans representing the city in the All-Ireland Rugby League Championship. The Titans were Irish champions eight times between 2005 and 2015, but as of 2023 the team is defunct.\nAssociation football.\nAssociation football is popular in the city and suburbs, and the city was historically represented in the League of Ireland by Limerick FC. The club first joined the league in 1937. There have been a number of variations of the club, and their most successful period was from the 1960s to the 1980s when they won two League of Ireland championships and two FAI Cups. The club played at Markets Field until the mid-1980s when they controversially moved to a new venue. Limerick FC returned to the Markets Field in June 2015, following the purchase of the venue by the Limerick Enterprise Development Partnership (LEDP) from Bord na gCon. However, the club suffered a financial collapse in 2019 and lost its licence.\nIn place of Limerick FC, a new club called Treaty United F.C. was created. The women's team, Treaty United W.F.C., began playing in the 2020 season of the Women's National League. The men's team was not able to begin playing until the 2021 season, joining the League of Ireland First Division.\nHorse racing.\nLimerick Racecourse is located 10\u00a0km outside the city at Greenmount, Patrickswell and holds flat and National Hunt meetings throughout the year.\nThe racecourse superseded Greenpark Racecourse, a course inside the city, which closed in 1999 after 130 years of racing.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLimerick is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56886", "revid": "49604096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56886", "title": "Transposing instrument", "text": "Musical instrument for which notated pitch differs from sounding pitch\nA transposing instrument is a musical instrument for which music notation is not written at concert pitch (concert pitch is the pitch on a non-transposing instrument such as the piano). For example, playing a written middle C on a transposing instrument produces a pitch other than middle C; that sounding pitch identifies the interval of transposition when describing the instrument. Playing a written C on clarinet or soprano saxophone produces a concert B\u266d (i.e. B\u266d at concert pitch), so these are referred to as B\u266d instruments. Providing transposed music for these instruments is a convention of musical notation. The instruments do not transpose the music; rather, their music is written at a transposed pitch. Where chords are indicated for improvisation they are also written in the appropriate transposed form.\nFor some instruments, a written C sounds as a C but is in a different octave; these instruments are said to transpose \"at the octave\". Pitches on the double bass sound an octave lower than written, while those on the piccolo and celesta sound an octave higher, and those on the glockenspiel sound two octaves higher.\nReasons for transposing.\nEase of switching instruments.\nSome instruments are constructed in a variety of sizes, with the larger versions having a lower range than the smaller ones. Common examples are clarinets (the high E\u266d clarinet, soprano instruments in C, B\u266d and A, the alto in E\u266d, and the bass in B\u266d), flutes (the piccolo, transposing at the octave, the standard concert-pitch flute, and the alto flute in G), saxophones (in several octaves in B\u266d and E\u266d), and trumpets (the common instrument in B\u266d, instruments in C, D and E\u266d, and the piccolo trumpet transposing at the octave). Music is often written in transposed form for these groups of instruments so that the fingerings correspond to the same written notes for any instrument in the family, even though the sounding pitches will differ. A musician who plays several instruments in a family can thus read music in the same way regardless of which particular instrument is being used.\nInstruments that transpose this way are often said to be in a certain \"key\" (e.g., the \"B\u266d clarinet\" or \"clarinet in B\u266d\"). This refers to the concert pitch that is heard when a written C is played on the instrument in question. Playing a written C produces a concert B\u266d on a B\u266d clarinet, a concert A on an A clarinet, and a concert C on a C clarinet (this last example is a non-transposing instrument).\nHorn crooks.\nBefore valves were invented in the 19th century, horns and trumpets could play only the notes of the overtone series from a single fundamental pitch. (Exceptions included slide-bearing versions such as the sackbut and finger-hole horns like the cornett and serpent.) Beginning in the early 18th century, a system of crooks was devised in Germany, enabling this fundamental to be changed by inserting one of a set of crooks between the mouthpiece and the lead pipe of the instrument, increasing the total length of its sounding tube. As a result, all horn music was written as if for a fundamental pitch of C, but the crooks could make a single instrument a transposing instrument into almost any key.\nChanging these lead-pipe crooks was time-consuming, and even keeping them from falling out while playing was a matter of some concern to the player, so changing crooks could take place only during substantial rests. Medial crooks, inserted in the central portion of the instrument, were an improvement devised in the middle of the 18th century, and they could also be made to function as a slide for tuning, or to change the pitch of the fundamental by a semitone or tone. The introduction of valves made this process unnecessary, though many players and composers found the tone quality of valved instruments inferior (Richard Wagner sometimes wrote horn parts for both natural and valved horns together in the same piece). F transposition became standard in the early 19th century, with the horn sounding a perfect fifth below written pitch in treble clef. In bass clef, composers differed in whether they expected the instruments to transpose down a fifth or up a fourth.\nReconciling pitch standards.\nIn Germany during the Baroque period, instruments used for different purposes were often tuned to different pitch standards, called \"Chorton\" (\"choir pitch\") and \"Kammerton\" (\"chamber [music] pitch\"). When playing together in an ensemble, the music of some instruments would therefore be transposed to compensate. In many of Bach's cantatas, the organ part is notated a full step lower than the other instruments. See pitch inflation.\nSome present day early-music ensembles combine instruments tuned to A415 with instruments tuned to A440. Since these pitches are approximately a semitone apart, the music for one set of instruments may be transposed to match the pitch of the others. Modern builders of continuo instruments sometimes include moveable keyboards which can play with either pitch standard. Some harpsichords are made with a mechanism that shifts the keyboard action right or left, causing each key to play the adjacent string. If A4 is tuned at A415, that key can then play either the A\u266f at 440\u00a0Hz or the A\u266d at 392\u00a0Hz. The top or bottom key on the instrument will not produce sound unless the builder has added extra strings to accommodate this transposition.\nTransposition at the octave.\nSome instruments have ranges that do not fit on the staff well when using one of the common clefs. In order to avoid the use of excessive ledger lines, music for these instruments may be written one, or even two, octaves away from concert pitch, using treble or bass clef. These instruments are said to \"transpose at the octave\"\u2014their music is not written in a different key from concert pitch instruments, but sound one or two octaves higher or lower than written.\nDouble bass, bass guitar, guitar, and contrabassoon sound an octave lower than written. Piccolo, xylophone, celesta, and some recorders (sopranino, soprano, bass and sometimes alto) sound an octave above the written note. Glockenspiel, garklein recorder, and crotales sound two octaves above the written note.\nMost authorities include this type of notation in the definition of \"transposing instruments\", although it is a special case in the sense that these instruments remain in the same key as non-transposing instruments.\nMechanical and physical considerations.\nMany woodwind instruments have one major scale whose execution involves lifting the fingers more or less sequentially from bottom to top. On flute and saxophone, and in the second register of the clarinet, this scale is notated as a C scale. This is not the case for oboe (where this scale is D) or bassoon (where it is F). The note written as C sounds as the note of the instrument's transposition: on an E\u266d alto saxophone, that note sounds as a concert E\u266d, while on an A clarinet, that note sounds as a concert A.\nBrass instruments, when played with no valves engaged (or, for trombones, with the slide all the way in), play a series of notes that form the overtone series based on some fundamental pitch, e.g., the B\u266d trumpet, when played with no valves engaged, can play the overtones based on B\u266d. Usually, that pitch is the note that indicates the transposition of the instrument. Trombones are an exception: while tenor and bass trombones are pitched in B\u266d, and the alto trombone is in E\u266d, they read at concert pitch. This convention is not followed in British Brass Band music, where tenor trombone is treated as a transposing instrument in B\u266d. French horn is treated as a transposing instrument in F even though many horns have two (or even three) different sets of tubing in different keys (the common double horn has tubing in F and B\u266d).\nIn general, for these instruments there is some reason to consider a certain pitch the \"home\" note of an instrument, and that pitch is usually written as C for that instrument. The concert pitch of that note is what determines how we refer to the transposition of that instrument.\nConductor's score.\nIn full scores, music for transposing instruments is generally written in transposed form, just as in the players' parts. Since the beginning of the 20th century, some composers have written orchestral scores entirely in concert pitch, e.g. the score of Sergei Prokofiev's Piano Concerto No. 1 in D\u266d.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56887", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56887", "title": "Pineapple", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the family Bromeliaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe pineapple (Ananas comosus) is a tropical plant with an edible fruit; it is the most economically significant plant in the family Bromeliaceae.\nThe pineapple is indigenous to South America, where it has been cultivated for many centuries. The introduction of the pineapple plant to Europe in the 17th century made it a significant cultural icon of luxury. Since the 1820s, pineapple has been commercially grown in greenhouses and many tropical plantations. The fruit, particularly its juice, has diverse uses in cuisines and desserts.\nPineapples grow as a small shrub; the individual flowers of the unpollinated plant fuse to form a multiple fruit. The plant normally propagates from the offset produced at the top of the fruit or from a side shoot, and typically matures within a year.\nEtymology.\nThe words, \"pine apple\", first referred to the cone (fruit) of the pine tree in the 14th century. This name convention occurred because medieval botanists called any unfamiliar tree fruit an \"apple\" if it had a firm, round shape.\nThe generic name, \"pineapple\", derived from a language of the indigenous people of Brazil, and by Gonzalo Hernandez Oviedo who described the \"pi\u00f1as\" or \"pomme de pin\" (apple of pine) in Hispaniola around 1540. The first reference in English to the pineapple fruit was the 1568 translation from the French of Andr\u00e9 Thevet's \"The New Found World, or Antarctike\" where he refers to a , a fruit cultivated and eaten by the Tupinamb\u00e1 people, living near modern Rio de Janeiro, and now believed to be a pineapple. Later in the same English translation, Thavet described the fruit as a \"Nana made in the manner of a Pine apple\", where he used another Tupi word . When it was first discovered by explorers, the Tupi-Guarani and Carib people used it as a staple food with the name, \"nanas\", meaning \"excellent fruit\". This usage was adopted in many European languages and led to the plant's scientific binomial , where ('tufted') refers to the stem of the plant. \nIn 1624, English explorer John Smith was one of the first to use the name \"pineapple\" referring to the tropical fruit, possibly because the naming practice for any newly-encountered, roundish fruit at that time was to call it an \"apple\".\nDescription.\nThe pineapple is a herbaceous perennial, which grows to tall on average, although sometimes it can be taller. The plant has a short, stocky stem with tough, waxy leaves. When creating its fruit, it usually produces up to 200 flowers, although some large-fruited cultivars can exceed this. Once it flowers, the individual fruits of the flowers join together to create a multiple fruit. After the first fruit is produced, side shoots (called 'suckers' by commercial growers) are produced in the leaf axils of the main stem. These suckers may be removed for propagation, or left to produce additional fruits on the original plant. Commercially, suckers that appear around the base are cultivated. It has 30 or more narrow, fleshy, trough-shaped leaves that are long, surrounding a thick stem; the leaves have sharp spines along the margins. In the first year of growth, the axis lengthens and thickens, bearing numerous leaves in close spirals. After 12 to 20 months, the stem grows into a spike-like inflorescence up to long with over 100 spirally arranged, trimerous flowers, each subtended by a bract.\nIn the wild, pineapples are pollinated primarily by hummingbirds. Certain wild pineapples are foraged and pollinated at night by bats. Under cultivation, because seed development diminishes fruit quality, pollination is performed by hand, and seeds are retained only for breeding. In Hawaii, where pineapples were cultivated and canned industrially throughout the 20th century, importation of hummingbirds was prohibited.\nThe ovaries develop into berries, which coalesce into a large, compact, multiple fruit. The fruit of a pineapple is usually arranged in two interlocking helices, often with 8 in one direction and 13 in the other, each being a Fibonacci number.\nThe pineapple carries out CAM photosynthesis, fixing carbon dioxide at night and storing it as the acid malate, then releasing it during the day, aiding photosynthesis.\nTaxonomy.\nThe pineapple comprises five botanical varieties, formerly regarded as separate species. The genomes of three varieties, including the wild progenitor variety \"bracteatus\", have been sequenced.\nHistory.\nPrecolonial cultivation.\nThe wild plant originates from the Paran\u00e1\u2013Paraguay River drainages between southern Brazil and Paraguay. Little is known about its domestication, but it spread as a crop throughout South America. Archaeological evidence of use is found as far back as 1200\u2013800 BC (3200\u20132800 BP) in Peru and 200 BC \u2013 700 AD (2200\u20131300 BP) in Mexico, where it was cultivated by the Mayas and the Aztecs. By the late 1400s, cropped pineapple was widely distributed and a staple food of Native Americans. The first European to encounter the pineapple was Christopher Columbus, in Guadeloupe on 4 November 1493. The Portuguese took the fruit from Brazil and introduced it into India by 1550. The 'Red Spanish' cultivar was also introduced by the Spanish from Latin America to the Philippines, and it was grown to produce \"pi\u00f1a\" fibers that would then be used to produce textiles from at least the 17th century.\nColumbus brought the plant back to Spain and called it , meaning \"pine of the Indians\". The pineapple was documented in Peter Martyr's \"Decades of the New World\" (1516) and Antonio Pigafetta's (1524\u20131525), and the first known illustration was in Oviedo's (1535).\nOld World introduction.\nWhile the pineapple fascinated Europeans as a fruit of colonialism, it was not successfully cultivated in Europe until Pieter de la Court (1664\u20131739) developed greenhouse horticulture near Leiden. Pineapple plants were distributed from the Netherlands to English gardeners in 1719 and French ones in 1730. In England, the first pineapple was grown at Dorney Court, Dorney in Buckinghamshire, and a huge \"pineapple stove\" to heat the plants was built at the Chelsea Physic Garden in 1723. In France, King Louis XV was presented with a pineapple that had been grown at Versailles in 1733. In Russia, Peter the Great imported de la Court's method into St. Petersburg in the 1720s; in 1730, twenty pineapple saplings were transported from there to a greenhouse at Empress Anna's new Moscow palace.\nBecause of the expense of direct import and the enormous cost in equipment and labour required to grow them in a temperate climate, in greenhouses called \"pineries\", pineapple became a symbol of wealth. They were initially used mainly for display at dinner parties, rather than being eaten, and were used again and again until they began to rot. In the second half of the 18th century, the production of the fruit on British estates became the subject of great rivalry between wealthy aristocrats. John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, built a hothouse on his estate surmounted by a huge stone cupola 14 metres tall in the shape of the fruit; it is known as the Dunmore Pineapple. In architecture, pineapple figures became decorative elements symbolizing hospitality.\nSince the 19th century: mass commercialization.\nMany different varieties, mostly from the Antilles, were tried for European glasshouse cultivation. The most significant cultivar was \"Smooth Cayenne\", first imported to France in 1820, then subsequently re-exported to the United Kingdom in 1835, and then from UK, the cultivation spread via Hawaii to Australia and Africa. The \"Smooth Cayenne\" cultivar (and sub-selections or clones of the \"Smooth Cayenne\") make up for the majority of world pineapple production today. Jams and sweets based on pineapple were imported to Europe from the West Indies, Brazil, and Mexico from an early date. By the early 19th century, fresh pineapples were transported direct from the West Indies in large enough quantities to reduce European prices. Later pineapple production was dominated by the Azores for Europe, and Florida and the Caribbean for North America, because of the short trade routes.\nThe Spanish had introduced the pineapple into Hawaii in the 18th century where it is known as the (\"foreign hala\"), but the first commercial plantation was established in 1886. The most famous investor was James Dole, who moved to Hawaii in 1899 and started a pineapple plantation in 1900 which grew into the Dole Food Company. Dole and Del Monte began growing pineapples on the island of Oahu in 1901 and 1917, respectively, and the Maui Pineapple Company began cultivation on Maui in 1909. James Dole began the commercial processing of pineapple, and Dole employee Henry Ginaca invented an automatic peeling and coring machine in 1911.\nHawaiian production started to decline from the 1970s because of competition and the shift to refrigerated sea transport. Dole ceased its cannery operations in Honolulu in 1991, and in 2008, Del Monte terminated its pineapple-growing operations in Hawaii. In 2009, the Maui Pineapple Company reduced its operations to supply pineapples only locally on Maui, and by 2013, only the Dole Plantation on Oahu grew pineapples in a volume of about 0.1 percent of the world's production. Despite this decline, the pineapple is sometimes used as a symbol of Hawaii. Further, foods with pineapple in them are sometimes known as \"Hawaiian\" for this reason alone.\nIn the Philippines, \"Smooth Cayenne\" was introduced in the early 1900s by the US Bureau of Agriculture during the American colonial period. Dole and Del Monte established plantations in the island of Mindanao in the 1920s; in the provinces of Cotabato and Bukidnon, respectively. Large scale canning had started in Southeast Asia, including in the Philippines, from 1920. This trade was severely damaged by World War II, and Hawaii dominated the international trade until the 1960s.\nThe Philippines remain one of the top exporters of pineapples in the world. The Del Monte plantations are now locally managed, after Del Monte Pacific Ltd., a Filipino company, completed the purchase of Del Monte Foods in 2014.\nComposition.\nNutrition.\nRaw pineapple pulp is 86% water, 13% carbohydrates, 0.5% protein, and contains negligible fat (table). In a reference amount of , raw pineapple supplies of food energy, and is a rich source of manganese (40% of the Daily Value, DV) and vitamin C (53% DV), but otherwise contains no micronutrients in significant amounts (table).\nPhytochemistry.\nPineapple fruits and peels contain diverse phytochemicals, among which are polyphenols, including gallic acid, syringic acid, vanillin, ferulic acid, sinapic acid, coumaric acid, chlorogenic acid, epicatechin, and arbutin.\nPresent in all parts of the pineapple plant, bromelain is a mixture of proteolytic enzymes. It is present in stem, fruit, crown, core, leaves of pineapple itself. Bromelain is under preliminary research for treatment of a variety of clinical disorders, but has not been adequately defined for its effects in the human body. Bromelain may be unsafe for some users, such as in pregnancy, allergies, or anticoagulation therapy.\nHaving sufficient bromelain content, raw pineapple juice may be useful as a meat marinade and tenderizer. Although pineapple enzymes can interfere with the preparation of some foods or manufactured products, such as gelatin-based desserts or gel capsules, their proteolytic activity responsible for such properties may be degraded during cooking and canning. The quantity of bromelain in a typical serving of pineapple fruit is probably not significant, but specific extraction can yield sufficient quantities for domestic and industrial processing.\nVarieties.\nCultivars.\nMany cultivars are known. The leaves of the commonly grown \"Smooth Cayenne\" cultivar and its various clones are smooth, and it is the most commonly grown worldwide. Many cultivars have become distributed from its origins in Paraguay and the southern part of Brazil, and later improved stocks were introduced into the Americas, the Azores, Africa, India, Malaysia and Australia. Varieties include:\nIn the US, in 1986, the Pineapple Research Institute was dissolved and its assets divided between Del Monte and Maui Land and Pineapple. Del Monte took cultivar '73\u2013114', dubbed 'MD-2', to its plantations in Costa Rica, found it to be well-suited to growing there, and launched it publicly in 1996 as 'Gold Extra Sweet', while Del Monte also began marketing '73\u201350', dubbed 'CO-2', as 'Del Monte Gold'. The Maui Pineapple Company began growing variety 73-50 in 1988 and named it Maui Gold. The successor company to MPC, the Hali'imaile Pineapple Company continues to grow Maui Gold on the slopes of Haleakala.\nCultivation.\nIn commercial farming, flowering can be induced artificially, and the early harvesting of the main fruit can encourage the development of a second crop of smaller fruits. Once removed during cleaning, the top of the pineapple can be planted in soil and a new plant will grow. Slips and suckers are planted commercially.\nStorage and transport.\nSome buyers prefer green fruit, others ripened or off-green. A plant growth regulator, Ethephon, is typically sprayed onto the fruit one week before harvest, developing ethylene, which turns the fruit golden yellow. After cleaning and slicing, a pineapple is typically canned in sugar syrup with added preservative. A pineapple never becomes any riper than it was when harvested since it is a non-climacteric fruit.\nEthical and environmental concerns.\nLike most modern fruit production, pineapple plantations are highly industrialized operations. In Costa Rica particularly, the pineapple industry uses large amounts of insecticides to protect the crop, which have caused health problems in many workers. These workers often receive little compensation, and are mostly poor migrants, often Nicaraguan. Workers' wages also decrease every time prices are lowered overseas. In 2016, the government declared that it would be trying to improve the situation, with the help of various other groups.\nHistorically, tropical fruit agriculture, such as for pineapples, has been concentrated in so-called \"banana republics\".\nIllegal drug trade.\nExport pineapples from Costa Rica to Europe are often used as a cover for narcotrafficking, and containers are impounded routinely in both locations.\nExpansion into protected areas.\nIn Costa Rica, pineapple cultivation has expanded into the Maquenque, , Barra del Colorado and Ca\u00f1o Negro wildlife refuges, all located in the north of the country. As those are protected areas and not national parks, limited and restricted sustainable activities are allowed, however pineapple plantations are industrial operations and many of these do not have the proper license to operate in the protected areas, or were started before either the designation of the area, recent regulations or the creation of the environmental regulatory agency (Setena) in 1996. The agency has registers for around of pineapple plantations operating within protected areas, but satellite imagery from 2018 reports around .\nPests and diseases.\nPineapples are subject to a variety of diseases, the most serious of which is wilt disease vectored by mealybugs typically found on the surface of pineapples, but possibly in the closed blossom cups. Other diseases include citrus pink disease, bacterial heart rot, anthracnose, fungal heart rot, root rot, black rot, butt rot, fruitlet core rot, and yellow spot virus. Pineapple pink disease (not citrus pink disease) is characterized by the fruit developing a brownish to black discoloration when heated during the canning process. The causal agents of pink disease are the bacteria \"Acetobacter aceti\", \"Gluconobacter oxydans\", \"Pantoea citrea\" and \"Tatumella ptyseos\".\nSome pests that commonly affect pineapple plants are scales, thrips, mites, mealybugs, ants, and symphylids.\nHeart-rot is the most serious disease affecting pineapple plants. The disease is caused by \"Phytophthora cinnamomi\" and \"P. parasitica\", fungi that often affect pineapples grown in wet conditions. Since it is difficult to treat, it is advisable to guard against infection by planting resistant cultivars where these are available; all suckers that are required for propagation should be dipped in a fungicide, since the fungus enters through the wounds.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, world production of pineapples was 30 million tonnes, led by Indonesia, the Philippines, and Costa Rica, each producing about 3 million tonnes.\nUses.\nCulinary.\nThe flesh and juice of the pineapple are used in cuisines around the world. In many tropical countries, pineapple is prepared and sold on roadsides as a snack. It is sold whole or in halves with a stick inserted. Whole, cored slices with a cherry in the middle are a common garnish on hams in the West. Chunks of pineapple are used in desserts such as fruit salad, as well as in some savory dishes, including Hawaiian pizza, or as a grilled ring on a hamburger. Traditional dishes that use pineapple include , , , and Hawaiian haystack. Crushed pineapple is used in yogurt, jam, sweets, and ice cream. The juice of the pineapple is served as a beverage, and it is also the main ingredient in cocktails such as and in the drink .\nIn the Philippines, a traditional jelly-like dessert called has also been produced since the 18th century. It is made by fermenting pineapple juice with the bacteria \"Komagataeibacter xylinus\".\nPineapple vinegar is an ingredient found in both Honduran and Filipino cuisine, where it is produced locally. In Mexico, it is usually made with peels from the whole fruit, rather than the juice; however, in Taiwanese cuisine, it is often produced by blending pineapple juice with grain vinegar.\nThe European Union consumed 50% of the global total for pineapple juice in 2012\u20132016. The Netherlands was the largest importer of pineapple juice in Europe. Thailand, Costa Rica and the Netherlands are the major suppliers to the European Union market in 2012\u20132016. Countries consuming the most pineapple juice in 2017 were Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines, having a combined consumption of 47% of the world total. The consumption of pineapple juice in China and India is low compared to their populations.\nTextiles.\nThe 'Red Spanish' cultivar of pineapples were once extensively cultivated in the Philippines. The long leaves of the cultivar were the source of traditional fibers, an adaptation of the native weaving traditions with fibers extracted from . These were woven into lustrous lace-like fabrics usually decorated with intricate floral embroidery known as and . The fabric was a luxury export from the Philippines during the Spanish colonial period and gained favor among European aristocracy in the 18th and 19th centuries. Domestically, they were used to make the traditional , , and clothing of the Filipino upper class, as well as women's kerchiefs (). They were favored for their light and breezy quality, which was ideal in the hot tropical climate of the islands. The industry was destroyed in the Second World War and is only starting to be revived.\nHouseplant.\nThe variety \"A. comosus\" 'Variegatus' is occasionally grown as a houseplant. It needs direct sunlight and thrives at temperatures of , with a minimum winter temperature of . It should be kept humid, but the soil should be allowed to dry out between waterings. It has almost no resting period but should be repotted each spring until the container reaches .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56889", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56889", "title": "Group (algebra)", "text": ""}
{"id": "56890", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56890", "title": "Hawk", "text": "Bird of prey\nHawks are birds of prey of the family Accipitridae. They are very widely distributed and are found on all continents, except Antarctica. \nThe subfamily Accipitrinae includes goshawks, sparrowhawks, sharp-shinned hawks, and others. This subfamily are mainly woodland birds with short broad wings, long tails, and high visual acuity. They hunt by dashing suddenly from a concealed perch.\nIn the United States, members of the \"Buteo\" group are also called hawks, though birds of this group are called buzzards in other parts of the world. Generally, buteos have broad wings and sturdy builds. They are relatively larger-winged and shorter-tailed than accipiters, and fly further distances in open areas. Buteos descend or pounce on their prey rather than engaging in fast, horizontal pursuit.\nThe terms \"accipitrine hawk\" and \"buteonine hawk\" are used to distinguish between the types in regions where \"hawk\" applies to both. The term \"true hawk\" is sometimes used for the accipitrine hawks in regions where \"buzzard\" is preferred for the buteonine hawks.\nAll these groups are members of the family Accipitridae, which includes hawks and buzzards as well as kites, harriers, and eagles. To confuse things further, some authors use \"hawk\" generally for any small to medium Accipitrid that is not an eagle.\nThe common names of some birds include the term \"hawk\", reflecting traditional usage rather than taxonomy. For example, some people call an osprey a \"fish hawk\" or a peregrine falcon a \"duck hawk\".\nHistory.\nFalconry was once called \"hawking\", and any bird used for falconry could be referred to as a hawk.\nAristotle listed eleven types of (\"hierakes\", hawks; singular , \"hierax\"): aisal\u014dn (merlin), asterias, hypotriorch\u0113s, kirkos, leios, perkos, phassophonos, phrynologos, pternis, spizias, and triorch\u0113s. Pliny numbered sixteen kinds of hawks, but named only aigithos, epileios, kenchr\u0113\u00efs (kestrel), kybindis, and triorch\u0113s (buzzard).\nGroups.\n\"Accipiterine\" group.\nAccipitrine hawks generally hunt other birds as their primary prey and thus are sometimes called \"hen-hawks\". Similarly, they are sometimes called \"wood-hawks\" because of their woodland habitat. Though they are also known as \"true hawks\" With most being called \"sparrowhawks\" or \"goshawks\" with the both being named such because of them hunting small birds (like sparrow) and large water-fowl (like goose) respectively\nThe subfamily Accipitrinae contains the genus \"Accipiter\" as well as the genera \"Micronisus\" (Gabar goshawk), \"Urotriorchis\" (long-tailed hawk), and \"Megatriorchis\" (Doria's goshawk). \"Melierax\" (chanting goshawk) may be included in the subfamily or given a subfamily of its own.\n\"Erythrotriorchis\" (red- and chestnut-shouldered goshawk) is traditionally included in Accipitridae, but is possibly a convergent genus from an unrelated group (see red goshawk taxonomy).\n\"Buteonine\" group.\nThe \"\"Buteonine\" group\" includes genera \"Buteo\", \"Parabuteo\", \"Geranoetus\", and most of \"Leucopternis\". Members of this group have also been called \"hawk-buzzards\".\nThe proposed new genera \"Morphnarchus\", \"Rupornis\", and \"Pseudastur\" would be formed from members of \"Buteo\" and \"Leucopternis\".\nMembers of the \"\"Buteogallus\" group\" are also called hawks, with the exception of solitary eagle species. \"Buteo\" is the type genus of the subfamily Buteoninae. This subfamily traditionally includes eagles and sea-eagles, but Lerner and Mindell (2005) proposed placing them into separate the subfamilies Aquilinae and Haliaaetinae. This would leave only the buteonine hawks/buzzards in Buteoninae.\nCharacteristics.\nIntelligence.\nIn February 2005, Canadian ornithologist Louis Lefebvre announced a method of measuring avian \"IQ\" by measuring their innovation in feeding habits. Based on this scale, hawks were named among the most intelligent birds.\nEyesight.\nHawks, like most birds, are tetrachromats with four types of colour receptors in the eye. Unlike some birds, but similar to other diurnal raptors, most hawk species are violet-sensitive but cannot perceive ultraviolet light. Hawks also have relatively high visual acuity \u2013 the distance at which they can resolve an image \u2013 with red-tailed hawks reported to have 16.8 cycles per degree. This is due to the large number of photoreceptors in the retina (up to 1,000,000 per square mm in \"Buteo\", compared to 200,000 in humans), a high number of nerves connecting these receptors to the brain, and an indented fovea, which magnifies the central portion of the visual field. Hawks additionally have two foveae (depressions in the retina with high photoreceptor density) in each eye, one centrally-placed and the other temporally-placed. Finally, the eyeball is elongated, placing the lens far from the retina and giving a long focal length.\nMigration.\nLike most birds, hawks migrate in the autumn and the spring. The autumn migration season begins in August and ends mid-December, and different types of hawk choose different times in each season to migrate. Some migration distances are longer than others, and birds traveling longer distances tend to depart in early autumn while those traveling shorter distances start much later. Studies have shown that it is better for a hawk to arrive at its destination as early as possible to have first pick of mates, territory, food, and other resources.\nThere are a variety of factors impacting the strategy and success of a hawk's migration. Kerlinger states that a bird has more body fat when it begins its migration than when it arrives at its destination. Thus, the more fat a bird has when it begins its migration, the better its chances of making the trip safely. Flight path is another important factor in migration because a bird's route can greatly affect the conditions it encounters during its journey. For example, wind direction and speed can either throw the bird off course or push it in the right direction. Due to the relative variability of air conditions over large bodies of water and the resulting impact on safety, hawks tend to avoid any large bodies of water while migrating by detouring around lakes or flying along coasts.\nHawkwatching is a citizen scientist activity that monitors hawk migration and provides data to the scientific community.\nHabitat and distribution.\nThe red-tailed hawk is probably the most common hawk in North America.\nPast observations have indicated that, while hawks can easily adapt to most environments, they prefer open habitats such as deserts and fields, likely because it is easier to spot prey. As they are able to live anywhere, they can also be found in mountainous plains and tropical, moist areas such as Central America, the West Indies, and Jamaica.\nBehavior.\nParents feed young hawks from early in their lives until they leave the nest. Young hawks, while still in the fledgling phase, will leave their nests as early as six weeks old, but they do not hunt until they are older. Like most birds of prey, hawks kill their prey with their talons. Hawks usually prefer hunting just before nightfall when daylight lessens. Although hawks are known for being violent predators, some are gentle and quiet.\nHawks fly by flapping their wings rapidly then relying on momentum to glide through the air. Like other birds, they are known to form flocks when migrating, which improves survival rates over traveling alone. Flocks of birds, especially hawks, are sometimes called \"kettles\" in the United States.\nReproduction.\nHawks are known for their unique mating season and means of reproduction.\nSome species of hawk are monogamous and have one partner their whole lives. The male and female of a mating pair build their nest before mating season then improve it throughout nesting season. They usually do this before mating.\nHawks have a striking mating ritual. First, a male and a female fly together in a https://. Once they reach a certain height, the male dives toward the female before ascending back to that height. The two birds repeat this until the male latches onto the female, and they begin to free-fall towards the ground.\nIn one year, a female hawk will lay about five eggs. Both the male and the female guard and care for the eggs for about a month until they hatch.\nDiet.\nHawks feed on a variety of smaller animals such as snakes, lizards, fish, mice, rabbits, squirrels, birds, or any other type of small game that is found on the ground. As an example, red-shouldered hawks eat smaller birds like doves as well as bugs like grasshoppers and crickets.\nIn culture.\nThe term \"war hawk\", or simply \"hawk\", is used in politics to describe someone perceived as favoring war. The term reportedly originated in the United States during the 1810 debates in Congress over a possible war with Great Britain. Congressman John Randolph is said to have referred to Henry Clay's pro-war faction as the \"war-hawks\". Those who are politically opposed to war or philosophically advocate peace are referred to as doves.\nNumerous sporting clubs, such as the Atlanta Hawks, the Hawthorn Hawks, and the Malm\u00f6 Redhawks, use the bird as an emblem. The sports teams of Miami University in Oxford, Ohio officially became known as the RedHawks in 1997 after changing the name from Redskins. The sports teams of Saint Joseph's University in Philadelphia use the Hawk as an emblem for sports teams as well for students and graduates. The University of Iowa uses the name Hawkeyes for their sports teams. Although the name \"Hawkeyes\" is not derived from a hawk, they have Herky the Hawk as their mascot and a hawk head as their team logo. \nHawks are strongly associated with Guru Gobind Singh in the Sikh community. He is believed to have kept a white Northern Goshawk. As a result, the Northern Goshawk was made the official state bird of Punjab, India.\nIn Korea, from the early Joseon period, hawks and other birds of prey were associated with a branch of government known as the Imperial Censorate, suggesting the qualities of courage and a keen sense of justice. Artists such as Ch\u014fng Hongnae specialised in portraying hawks for royalty, and his \"Hawk at Sunrise\" is in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56891", "revid": "3542054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56891", "title": "Carbon (API)", "text": "Application programming interface (API)\nCarbon is one of two primary C-based application programming interfaces (APIs) that were developed by Apple for the Mac OS X operating system. Carbon provided a good degree of backward compatibility for programs that ran on Mac OS 8 and 9. Developers could use the Carbon APIs to port (\u201ccarbonize\u201d) their \u201cclassic\u201d Mac applications and software to the Mac OS X platform with little effort, compared to porting the app to the entirely different Cocoa system, which originated in OPENSTEP. With the release of the Macintosh's 10.15 (Catalina) update, the Carbon API was officially discontinued and removed, leaving Cocoa as the sole primary API for developing modern Mac applications.\nCarbon was an important part of Apple's strategy for bringing Mac OS X to market, offering a path for quick porting of existing software applications, as well as a means of shipping applications that would run on either Mac OS X or the classic Mac OS. As the market has increasingly moved to the Cocoa-based frameworks, especially after the release of iOS, the need for a porting library was reduced. Apple did not create a 64-bit version of Carbon while updating their other frameworks in the 2007 time-frame, and eventually deprecated the entire API in OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion, which was released on July 24, 2012.\nHistory.\nClassic Mac OS programming.\nThe original Mac OS used Pascal as its primary development platform, and the APIs were heavily based on Pascal's call semantics. Much of the Macintosh Toolbox consisted of procedure calls, passing information back and forth between the API and program using a variety of data structures based on Pascal's variant record concept.\nOver time, a number of object libraries evolved on the Mac, notably the Object Pascal library MacApp and the THINK C Think Class Library, and later versions of MacApp and CodeWarrior's PowerPlant in C++. \nRhapsody.\nWith the purchase of NeXT in late 1996, Apple developed a new operating system strategy based largely on the existing OPENSTEP for Mach platform. The new Rhapsody OS strategy was relatively simple; it retained most of OpenStep's existing object libraries under the name \"Yellow Box\", ported the existing GUI in OPENSTEP for Mach and made it look more Mac-like, ported several major APIs from the Mac OS to Rhapsody's underlying Unix-like system (notably QuickTime and AppleSearch), and added an emulator known as the \"Blue Box\" that ran existing Mac OS software.\nWhen this plan was revealed at the Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) in 1997 there was some push-back from existing Mac OS developers who were upset that their code bases would be effectively locked into an emulator that was unlikely to ever be updated. They took to calling the Blue Box the \"penalty box\". Larger developers like Microsoft and Adobe balked outright, and refused to consider porting to OpenStep, which was so different from the existing Mac OS that there was little or no compatibility.\nApple took these concerns to heart. When Steve Jobs announced Apple's change in direction at the next WWDC in 1998, he stated that \"what developers really wanted was a modern version of the Mac OS, and Apple [was] going to deliver it\".\nThe original Rhapsody concept, with only the Blue Box for running existing Mac OS software, was eventually released in 1999 as Mac OS X Server 1.0. This was the only release based on the original Rhapsody concept.\nCocoa and Carbon.\nIn order to offer a real and well supported upgrade path for existing Mac OS code bases, Apple introduced the Carbon system. Carbon consists of many libraries and functions that offer a Mac-like API, but running on top of the underlying Unix-like OS, rather than a copy of the Mac OS running in emulation. The Carbon libraries are extensively cleaned up, modernized and better \"protected\". While the Mac OS was filled with APIs that shared memory to pass data, under Carbon all such access was re-implemented using accessor subroutines on opaque data types. This allowed Carbon to support true multitasking and memory protection, features Mac developers had been requesting for a decade. Other changes from the pre-existing API removed features which were conceptually incompatible with Mac OS X, or simply obsolete. For example, applications could no longer install interrupt handlers or device drivers.\nIn order to support Carbon, the entire Rhapsody model changed. Whereas Rhapsody would effectively be OpenStep with an emulator, under the new system both the OpenStep and Carbon API would, where possible, share common code. To do this, many of the useful bits of code from the lower-levels of the OpenStep system, written in Objective-C and known as Foundation, were re-implemented in pure C. This code became known as Core Foundation, or CF for short. A version of the Yellow Box ported to call CF became the new Cocoa API, and the Mac-like calls of Carbon also called the same functions. Under the new system, Carbon and Cocoa were peers. This conversion would normally have slowed the performance of Cocoa as the object methods called into the underlying C libraries, but Apple used a technique they called \"toll-free bridging\" to reduce this impact.\nAs part of this conversion, Apple wrote a new window server and graphics engine from scratch to replace the licence-encumbered Display PostScript: the Quartz (which has been called \"Display PDF\"). Quartz provided C API calls that could be used from either Carbon or Cocoa. The underlying operating system itself was further isolated and released as Darwin.\nRelease and evolution.\nCarbon was introduced in incomplete form in 2000, as a shared library backward-compatible with 1997's Mac OS 8.1. This version allowed developers to port their code to Carbon without losing the ability for those programs to run on existing Mac OS machines. Porting to Carbon became known as \"Carbonization\". Official Mac OS X support arrived in 2001 with the release of Mac OS X v10.0, the first public version of the new OS. Carbon was very widely used in early versions of Mac OS X by almost all major software houses, even by Apple. The Finder, for instance, remained a Carbon application for many years, only being ported to Cocoa with the release of Mac OS X 10.6 in 2009.\nThe transition to 64-bit Macintosh applications beginning with Mac OS X v10.5, released October 26, 2007, brought the first major limitations to Carbon. Apple does not provide compatibility between the Macintosh graphical user interface and the C programming language in the 64-bit environment, instead requiring the use of the Objective-C dialect with the Cocoa API. Many commentaries took this to be the first sign of Carbon's eventual disappearance, a position that was re-enforced when Apple stated no new major additions would be added to the Carbon system, and further reinforced with its deprecation in 2012.\nTransition to Cocoa.\nDespite the purported advantages of Cocoa, the need to rewrite large amounts of legacy code slowed the transition of Carbon-based applications, famously with Adobe Photoshop, which was eventually updated to Cocoa in April 2010. This also extended to Apple's own flagship software packages, as iTunes, the Finder application, and Final Cut Pro (as well as the features in the QuickTime engine that powers it) remained written in Carbon for many years. iTunes, Finder, and Final Cut Pro have since been released in Cocoa versions.\nDeprecation and discontinuation.\nIn 2012, with the release of OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion, most Carbon APIs were considered deprecated. The APIs were still accessible to developers and all Carbon applications still ran, but the APIs would no longer be updated. On June 28, 2017, Apple announced that 32-bit software for macOS, such as all Carbon applications, would no longer be supported \u201cwithout compromise\u201d on versions of macOS after macOS 10.13 High Sierra. macOS 10.15 Catalina officially removed support for 32-bit applications, including all Carbon applications.\nArchitecture.\nCarbon descends from the Toolbox, and as such, is composed of \"Managers\". Each Manager is a functionally related API, defining sets of data structures and functions to manipulate them. Managers are often interdependent or layered. Carbon consists of a broad set of functions for managing files, memory, data, the user interface, and other system services. It is implemented as any other API: in macOS, it is spread over several frameworks (each a structure built around a shared library), principally codice_1, codice_2, and codice_3, and in classic Mac OS, it resides in a single shared library named codice_4.\nCarbon is not a compatibility box; it is a native API for Mac OS X. It sits roughly alongside Cocoa in an architectural diagram. Carbon apps can use all of the native functionality of Mac OS X, and you can mix Carbon and Cocoa windows in the same process.\nCarbon is compatible with all of the several executable formats available for PowerPC Mac OS. Binary compatibility between Mac OS X and previous versions requires use of a Preferred Executable Format file, which Apple never supported in their Xcode IDE.\nNewer parts of Carbon tend to be much more object-oriented in their conception, most of them based on Core Foundation. Some Managers, such as the HIView Manager (a superset of the Control Manager), are implemented in C++, but Carbon remains a C API.\nSome examples of Carbon Managers:\nEvent handling.\nThe Mac Toolbox's Event Manager originally used a polling model for application design. The application's main event loop asks the Event Manager for an event using GetNextEvent. If there is an event in the queue, the Event Manager passes it back to the application, where it is handled, otherwise it returns immediately. This behavior is called \"busy-waiting\", running the event loop unnecessarily. Busy-waiting reduces the amount of CPU time available for other applications and decreases battery power on laptops. The classic Event Manager dates from the original Mac OS in 1984, when whatever application was running was guaranteed to be the \"only\" application running, and where power management was not a concern.\nWith the advent of MultiFinder and the ability to run more than one application simultaneously came a new Event Manager call, \"WaitNextEvent\", which allows an application to specify a sleep interval. One easy trick for legacy code to adopt a more efficient model without major changes to its source code is simply to set the sleep parameter passed to \"WaitNextEvent\" to a very large value\u2014on macOS, this puts the thread to sleep whenever there is nothing to do, and only returns an event when there is one to process. In this way, the polling model is quickly inverted to become equivalent to the callback model, with the application performing its own event dispatching in the original manner. There are loopholes, though. For one, the legacy toolbox call \"ModalDialog\", for example, calls the older \"GetNextEvent\" function internally, resulting in polling in a tight loop without blocking.\nCarbon introduces a replacement system, called the Carbon Event Manager. (The original Event Manager still exists for compatibility with legacy applications). Carbon Event Manager provides the event loop for the developer (based on Core Foundation's codice_5 in the current implementation); the developer sets up event handlers and enters the event loop in the main function, and waits for Carbon Event Manager to dispatch events to the application.\nTimers.\nIn the classic Mac OS, there was no operating system support for application level timers (the lower level Time Manager was available, but it executed timer callbacks at interrupt time, during which calls could not be safely made to most Toolbox routines). Timers were usually left to application developers to implement, and this was usually done by counting elapsed time during the \"idle\" event - that is, an event that was returned by \"WaitNextEvent\" when any other event wasn't available. In order for such timers to have reasonable resolution, developers could not afford \"WaitNextEvent\" to delay too long, and so low \"sleep\" parameters were usually set. This results in highly inefficient scheduling behavior, since the thread will not sleep for very long, instead repeatedly waking to return these idle events. Apple added timer support to Carbon to address this problem\u2014the system can schedule timers with great efficiency.\nOpen source implementations.\nGNUstep contains an implementation of the Carbon API called Boron. It aims to be compatible with non-deprecated parts of ApplicationServices and CoreServices. The name derives from the fact that Boron comes before Carbon on the periodic table of elements. Darling also contains a Carbon implementation. Both implementations are highly incomplete and consist mostly of stub functions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56892", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56892", "title": "Classic Environment", "text": ""}
{"id": "56893", "revid": "31439127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56893", "title": "Farmer's loop", "text": "Type of knot\nThe farmer's loop is a knot which forms a fixed loop. As a midline loop knot made with a bight, it is related to several other similar knots, including the alpine butterfly knot and artillery loop.\nIf pulled with one hand holding one end, the other hand holding the start side of the loop that is the continuation of the same end, before tightening the knot of the loop, it may capsize to a slip knot with a complicated and heavy knot.\nIt is tied on one hand to make a loop about twice the size of that hand (use fingers for a smaller one, thumb-hook-to-elbow for a large one), as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The knot is a good one on all three counts\u2014lead, security, and strength. Moreover, the method of tying is both ingenious and distinctive, and once mastered, it is not apt to be forgotten.\nTo tie: Take three turns around the left arm or hand, according to the size of the material being used. Move the center turn to the outside three times, as indicated by the arrows, first right, then left, and finally right again. Finally, pull out (extend) the center turn, and the knot is ready for use.\nHistory.\nCornell University professor Howard W. Riley published this knot in an agricultural extension pamphlet devoted to farming knots in 1912. He was shown the knot by a farmer at the 1910 Genesee County Fair in Bativia, New York. Riley noted that he had never seen the knot described in any reference book.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56894", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56894", "title": "Samoyedes", "text": ""}
{"id": "56895", "revid": "810326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56895", "title": "Ostiaks", "text": ""}
{"id": "56896", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56896", "title": "Altai Mountains", "text": "Mountain range in Central\u2013East Asia\nThe Altai Mountains ( ) are a mountain range in Central Asia, where Russia, China, Mongolia, and Kazakhstan converge, and where the rivers Irtysh and Ob have their headwaters. The highest summit of the range is Belukha, whose summit reaches 4,506 m (14,783 ft) above sea level. The massif merges with the Sayan Mountains in the northeast, and gradually becomes lower in the southeast, where it merges into the high plateau of the Gobi Desert. In the southwest, it is separated from the higher Tian Shan range by the Junggar Basin. It spans from about 45\u00b0 to 52\u00b0 N and from about 84\u00b0 to 99\u00b0 E. \nThe region is inhabited by a sparse but ethnically diverse population, including Russians, Kazakhs, Altais, Tuvans, Mongols, and Volga Germans, though predominantly represented by indigenous ethnic minorities of semi-nomadic people. The local economy is based on bovine, sheep, horse husbandry, hunting, agriculture, forestry, and mining. The now discredited Altaic language family takes its name from this mountain range.\n\u1820\u182f\u1832\u1820\u1822 \u200d\u1836\u180b\u1822\u1828 \u1828\u1822\u1837\u1824\u182d\u1824 Name inMongolianlanguage and script,\"altai-yin niru\u0263u\"\nEtymology and modern names.\n\"Altai\" is derived from underlying form *\"alta\u00f1\" \"gold, golden\" (compare Old Turkic \ud803\udc1e\ud803\udc43\ud803\udc06\ud803\udc23 \"altun\" \"gold, golden\") with coda \"-\u00f1\" underlying the \"-n\" &amp; \"-y\" correspondence among cognates in different Turkic languages &amp; dialects (e.g. \"q\u014d\u00f1\" ~ \"qoy\" \"sheep\", \"Qitan\" ~ \"Qitay\" \"Khitans\", etc.), as well as in Mongolian. \nThe mountains are called \"Altain nuruu\" () in Khalkha Mongolian, \"altai-yin niru\u0263u\" in Chakhar Mongolian, and \"Altay tuular\" () in the Altay language. They are also called or in Kazakh; \"Altajskije gory\" () in Russian; \"Altay Taghliri\" (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Ug-textonly/styles.css\" /&gt;\u0626\u0627\u0644\u062a\u0627\u064a \u062a\u0627\u063a\u0644\u0649\u0631\u0649\u200e or ) in Uyghur; \"\u0101'\u011brt\u00e0i sh\u0101nm\u00e0i\" in Chinese ( simplified, traditional, or in Xiao'erjing); and \"Arte\u02d0 shanme\u02d0\" () in Dungan.\nGeography.\nThe Altai Mountains are a system of remote mountains in central Asia that cover an area of . The mountains stretch for from northwest to southeast. \nIn the north of the region is the Sailughem Mountains, also known as \"Kolyvan Altai\", which stretch northeast from 49\u00b0 N and 86\u00b0 E towards the western extremity of the Sayan Mountains in 51\u00b0 60' N and 89\u00b0 E. Their mean elevation is . The snow-line runs at on the northern side and at on the southern, and above it the rugged peaks tower some higher. Mountain passes across the range are few and difficult, the chief being the Ulan-daban at (or according to Kozlov), and the Chapchan-daban, at , in the south and north respectively. On the east and southeast this range is flanked by the great plateau of Mongolia, the transition being affected gradually by means of several minor plateaus, such as Ukok () with Pazyryk Valley, Chuya (), Kendykty (), Kak (), (), and ().\nThis region is studded with large lakes, e.g. Uvs above sea level, Khyargas, Dorgon and Khar , and traversed by various mountain ranges, of which the principal are the Tannu-Ola Mountains, running roughly parallel with the Sayan Mountains as far east as the Kosso-gol, and the Khan Kh\u00f6khii mountains, also stretching west and east.\nThe north western and northern slopes of the Sailughem Mountains are extremely steep and difficult to access. On this side lies the highest summit of the range, the double-headed Belukha, whose summits reach and respectively, and give origin to several glaciers and glaciokarst formations ( in aggregate area, as of 1911[ [update]]). Altaians call it Kadyn Bazhy, but is also called Uch-Sumer.\nThe second highest peak of the range is in Mongolian part named Kh\u00fciten Peak. This massive peak reaches . Numerous spurs, striking in all directions from the Sailughem mountains, fill up the space between that range and the lowlands of Tomsk. Such are the Chuya Belki, having an average elevation of , with summits from and several glaciers on their northern slope; the Katun Belki, which have a mean elevation of about and are mostly snow-clad; the Kholzun range; the Korgon, highest point Mayak Shangina, the Talitsk and Selitsk ranges; as well as the Tigeretsk Range.\nSeveral secondary plateaus of lower elevations are also distinguished by geographers. The Valley of the Katun river begins as a wild gorge on the south-west slope of Belukha; then, after a big bend, the river ( long) pierces the Katun Belki, and enters a wider valley, lying at an elevation of , which it follows until it emerges from the Altai highlands to join the Biya River. Here, the two rivers merge to form the Ob River.\nThe next valley is that of the Charysh, which has the Korgon and Tigeretsk Range on one side and the Talitsk and Baschelaksk Range (\u0411\u0430\u0449\u0435\u043b\u0430\u043a\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0445\u0440\u0435\u0431\u0435\u0442) on the other. This, too, is very fertile. The Altai, seen from this valley, presents the most romantic scenes, including the small but deep Kolyvan Lake at an altitude of , which is surrounded by fantastic granite domes and towers.\nFarther west the valleys of the Uba, the Ulba and the Bukhtarma open south-westwards towards the Irtysh. The lower part of the first, like the lower valley of the Charysh, is thickly populated; in the valley of the Ulba is the Riddersk mine, at the foot of the Ivanovsk Peak (), clothed with alpine meadows. The valley of the Bukhtarma, which has a length of , also has its origin at the foot of the Belukha and the Kuitun peaks, and as it falls some in about , from an alpine plateau at an elevation of to the Bukhtarma fortress (), it offers the most striking contrasts of landscape and vegetation. Its upper parts abound in glaciers, the best known of which is the Berel, which descends from the Belukha. On the northern side of the range which separates the upper Bukhtarma from the upper Katun is the Katun glacier, which after two ice-falls widen out to . From a grotto in this glacier bursts tumultuously the Katun river.\nThe middle and lower parts of the Bukhtarma valley have been colonized since the 18th century by runaway Russian peasants, serfs, and religious schismatics (Raskolniks), who created a free republic there on Chinese territory; and after this part of the valley was annexed to Russia in 1869, it was rapidly colonized. The high valleys farther north, on the same western face of the Sailughem range, are but little known, their only visitors being Kyrgyz shepherds.\nThose of Bashkaus, Chulyshman, and Chulcha, all three leading to the alpine lake of Teletskoye (length, ; maximum width, ; elevation, ; area, ; maximum depth, ; mean depth, ), are inhabited by Telengit people. The shores of the lake rise almost sheer to over . From this lake issues the Biya, which joins the Katun at Biysk, and then meanders through the prairies of the north-west of the Altai.\nFarther north the Altai highlands are continued in the Kuznetsk district, which has a slightly different geological aspect, but belongs to the Altai system. But the Abakan River, which rises on the western shoulder of the Sayan mountains, belongs to the system of the Yenisei. The Kuznetsk Ala-tau range, on the left bank of the Abakan, runs north-east into the government of Yeniseisk, while a complexus of mountains (Chukchut, Salair, Abakan) fills up the country northwards towards the Trans-Siberian Railway and westwards towards the Ob.\nThe Ek-tagh or Mongolian Altai, which separates the Khovd basin on the north from the Irtysh basin on the south, is a true border-range, in that it rises in a steep and lofty escarpment from the Dzungarian depression (), but descends on the north by a relatively short slope to the plateau () of north-western Mongolia. East of 94\u00b0 E the range is continued by a double series of mountain chains, all of which exhibit less sharply marked orographical features and are at considerably lower elevations. The slopes of the constituent chains of the system are inhabited principally by nomadic Kyrgyz.\nThe five highest mountains of the Altai are:\nFauna.\n \nThe Altai-Sayan ecoregion is located at the intersection of the Central Asian and Siberian faunal provinces.\nThe Altai mountains are home to a diverse fauna, because of its different habitats, like steppes, northern taigas and alpine vegetation. Steep slopes are home to the Siberian ibex (\"Capra sibirica\"), whereas the rare argali (\"Ovis ammon\") is found on more gentle slopes. Deer are represented by five species: Altai wapiti (\"Cervus elaphus sibiricus\"), moose (\"Alces alces\"), forest reindeer (\"Rangifer tarandus valentinae\"), Siberian musk deer (\"Moschus moschiferus\"), and Siberian roe deer (\"Capreolus pygargus\"). Moose and reindeer however, are restricted to the northern parts of the mountain range. The wild boar (\"Sus scrofa\") is found in the lower foothills and surrounding lowlands. Until recently, the Mongolian gazelle (\"Procapra gutturosa\") was found in the Russian Altai mountains, more specifically in the Chuya River steppe close to the Mongolian border. Large predators are represented by snow leopards (\"Panthera uncia\", syn. \"Uncia uncia\"), wolves (\"Canis lupus\"), Eurasian lynx (\"Lynx lynx\"), and brown bears (\"Ursus arctos\"), in the northern parts also by the wolverine (\"Gulo gulo\"). The Tien Shan dhole (\"Cuon alpinus hesperius\") (a northwestern subspecies of the Asiatic wild dog) also lived there. Most species of the region are of Mongolian origin. The western Siberian eagle-owl can be found in the western part of the mountains.\nUntil the 20th century, the Caspian tiger (\"Panthera tigris tigris\") was found in the southern parts of the Altai mountains, where it reached Lake Zaisan and the Black Irtysh. Single individuals were also shot further north, for example close to Barnaul. Closely related to the Caspian tiger is the extant Amur tiger, which has the taxonomic name \"Panthera tigris altaica\".\nThe wisent was present in the Altai mountains until the Middle Ages, perhaps even until the 18th\u00a0century. Today, there is a small herd in a nursery in the Altai Republic.\nMoor frogs are near bodies of water as high up as in the Altai mountains.\nHistory.\nThe Altai mountains have retained a remarkably stable climate, changing little since the last ice age. In addition the mix of mammals has remained largely the same, with a few exceptions such as extinct mammoths, making it one of the few places on earth to retain an ice age fauna.\nThe Altai mountains were home to the Denisovan branch of hominids who were contemporaries of Neanderthals and of \"Homo sapiens\" (modern humans), descended from Hominids who reached Asia earlier than modern humans. The Denisova hominin, dated to 40,000 years ago, was discovered in the Denisova Cave of the Altai mountains in southern Siberia in 2008. Knowledge of the Denisovan humans derives primarily from DNA evidence and artifacts, as no complete skeletons have yet been recovered. DNA evidence has been unusually well preserved because of the low average temperature in the Denisova caves. Neanderthal bones and tools made by \"Homo sapiens\" have also been found in the Denisova Cave, making it the only place in the world where all three hominids are known to have lived.\nA dog-like canid from 33,000 years ago was found in the Razboinichya Cave. DNA analysis published in 2013 affirmed that it was more closely related to modern dogs than to wolves.\nThe Afanasievans are considered as the earliest herders of East Asia, who were instrumental in the establishment of the long tradition of pastoralism in Mongolia. The Afanasevan population was descended from people who migrated c.\u00a03700\u20133300 BCE across the Eurasian Steppe from the pre-Yamnaya Repin culture of the Don-Volga region. In the Altai Mountains and to the southeast, Afanasievans seem to have coexisted with the early period of the Chemurchek culture for some time. The Afanasevo culture was replaced by the second wave of Indo-European migrations from the Andronovo culture during late Bronze Age and early Iron Age. Numerous Eastern Scythian remains have been found in an excellent state of preservation in the Altai mountains, with soft tissues such as skin and hair preserved.\nThe Altai Mountains have been identified as being the point of origin of a cultural enigma termed the Seima-Turbino Phenomenon which arose during the Bronze Age around the start of the 2nd millennium BC and led to a rapid and massive migration of peoples from the region into distant parts of Europe and Asia.\nThe area was part of the Xiongnu Empire, the First Turkic Khaganate, the Uyghur Empire, and the Yeniseian Kyrgyzs. It was during this time that the local population became fully Turkicized culturally and linguistically. There is increasing evidence for a partial continuity from the eastern Scythians to the Turkic-speakers of the Altai region.\nSome historians believe that the Altai mountain region may have been the location where skiing was born, however this remains disputed. Evidence to support the claims includes several cave petroglyphs within the Altai Mountains in modern China that depict human figures on skis that are chasing after an ibex. According to a study published by the Australian Rock Art Research Association (AURA) in 2016, this rock art was estimated to be from between 4,000 and 5,250 years ago, which consequently meant it may be just as old or possibly older than ancient skiing rock art and artefacts located in Scandinavia. However, dating petroglyphs accurately with current technology is very difficult. The oldest known text that describes skiing is from a Chinese text that dates to the Western Han Dynasty (206 BC to 24 AD) and refers to skiers in the Altai Mountains.\nWorld Heritage Site.\nA vast area of 2, which incorporates the Altai and Katun Natural Reserves, Lake Teletskoye, Mount Belukha, and the Ukok Plateau, this area is designated as a World Heritage Site (UNESCO), entitled the Golden Mountains of Altai. As stated in the UNESCO description of the site, \"the region represents the most complete sequence of altitudinal vegetation zones in central Siberia, from steppe, forest-steppe, mixed forest, subalpine vegetation to alpine vegetation\". While making its decision, UNESCO also cited Russian Altai's importance for preservation of the globally endangered mammals, such as Snow leopard, Altai argali, and Siberian ibex that live in these mountains. The Uvs Nuur basin is also a protected site.\nViolations of the protection status of Argali sheep and other species have been alleged, together with accusations of corruption, in the Altaigate Scandal. The incident arose from the death of several Russian VIPs in a helicopter crash early in 2009, purportedly on a poaching excursion.\nGeology.\nThe Siberian Altai represents the northernmost region affected by the tectonic collision of India into Asia. Extensive fault systems run through the area, including the Kurai fault zone and the recently identified Tashanta fault zone. These fault systems are typically thrusts or right lateral strike-slip faults, some of which are tectonically active. Rock types in the mountains are typically granites and metamorphic schists, and some are highly sheared near to fault zones.\nGeologist Victor R. Baker \"has discovered past cataclysmic floods in the Altai Mountains of Siberia\" from \"an even larger glacial lake\" than Lake Missoula, which was once thought to have been \"the largest ice-dammed lake in the world\".\nSeismic activity.\nAlthough earthquakes are generally rare occurrences, on September 27, 2003, a large earthquake measuring MW 7.3 occurred in the Chuya Basin area to the south of the Altai region. This earthquake and its aftershocks devastated much of the region, causing $10.6\u00a0million in damage (USGS) and wiping out the village of Beltir.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAuthorities cited:"}
{"id": "56897", "revid": "1301929863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56897", "title": "Politics of Ghana", "text": "Politics of Ghana takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the president of Ghana is both head of state and head of government, and of a two party system. The seat of government is at Golden Jubilee House. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and Parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nThe constitution that established the Fourth Republic provided a basic charter for republican democratic government. It declares Ghana to be a unitary republic with sovereignty residing in the Ghanaian people. Intended to prevent future coups, dictatorial government, and one-party states, it is designed to establish the concept of powersharing. The document reflects lessons learned from the abrogated constitutions of 1957, 1960, 1969, and 1979, and incorporates provisions and institutions drawn from British and American constitutional models. One controversial provision of the Constitution indemnifies members and appointees of the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC) from liability for any official act or omission during the years of PNDC rule. The Constitution calls for a system of checks and balances, with power shared between a president, a unicameral parliament, a council of state, and an independent judiciary.\nShortly after independence, the dominant political party in Ghana established a one-party authoritarian system of government. Prior to its democratic transition in 1992, Ghana had one-party rule and military rule. The foundations of Ghanaian democracy are rooted in the 1992 Constitution which established an independent Electoral Commission and independent court system. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Ghana a \"flawed democracy\" in .\nExecutive Branch.\nNana Akufo-Addo is established in the Office of the Presidency, together with their Council of State. The president is head of state, head of government, and commander in chief of the armed forces. They appoint (buffalo) the vice president. According to the Constitution, more than half of the presidentially appointed ministers of state must be appointed from among members of Parliament.\nNana Akufo-Addo is established in the Office of the Presidency, together with his Council of State. The president is head of state, head of government, and commander in chief of the armed forces. He also appoints the vice president. According to the Constitution, more than half of the presidentially appointed ministers of state must be appointed from among members of Parliament.\nThe outcome of the December 2012 elections, in which John Dramani Mahama was declared President by the Ghana Electoral Commission, was challenged by Nana Akufo-Addo, Mahamudu Bawumia and Jake Obetsebi-Lamptey at the Supreme Court of Ghana, which came out with the verdict that Mahama legally won the 2012 presidential election\nThis precedent which was set by Nana Akufo-Addo and the NPP party in 2012 was followed by John Dramani Mahama the then president, and now opposition leader and the NDC party when they petition the Highest Court of the Land to overturn the election victory of Nana Akufo-Addo and the NPP party on the grounds that the victory was illegal.\nLegislative Branch.\nLegislative functions are vested in Parliament, which consists of a unicameral 276-member body plus the Speaker. To become law, legislation must have the assent of the president, who has a qualified veto over all bills except those to which a vote of urgency is attached.\nMembers are elected for a four-year term in single-seat constituencies by simple plurality vote. As it is predicted by Duverger's law, the voting system has encouraged Ghanaian politics into a two-party system, which means that there are two dominant political parties, with extreme difficulty for anybody to achieve electoral success under the banner of any other party. Elections have been held every four years since 1992. Presidential and parliamentary elections are held alongside each other, generally on 7 December.\nRecent political developments.\nNana Akufo-Addo, the ruling party candidate, was defeated in a very close election by John Atta Mills of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) following the Ghanaian presidential election, 2008. Mills died of natural causes and was succeeded by vice-president John Dramani Mahama on 24 July 2012.\nFollowing the Ghanaian presidential election, 2012, John Dramani Mahama became President-elect and was inaugurated on 7 January 2013. Ghana was a stable democracy.\nAs a result of the Ghanaian presidential election, 2016, Nana Akufo-Addo became President-elect and was inaugurated as the fifth President of the Fourth Republic of Ghana and eighth President of Ghana on 7 January 2017. In December 2020, President Nana Akufo-Addo was re-elected after a tightly contested election.\nJudicial branch.\nThe structure and the power of the judiciary are independent of the two other branches of government. The Judiciary of Ghana is responsible for interpreting, applying and enforcing the laws of Ghana, and exists to settle legal conflicts fairly and in a more competent way. The Supreme Court of Ghana has broad powers of judicial review. It is authorized by the Constitution to rule on the constitutionality of any legislation or executive action at the request of any aggrieved citizen. The hierarchy of courts derives largely from British juridical forms. The courts have jurisdiction over all civil and criminal matters. They include the Superior Courts of Judicature, established under the 1992 Constitution, and the Inferior Courts, established by Parliament. The Superior Courts are, from highest to lowest, the Supreme Court of Ghana, the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice, and the ten Regional Tribunals. The Inferior Courts, since the Courts Act 2002, include the Circuit Courts, the Magistrate Courts, and special courts such as the Juvenile Courts.\nIn 2007, Georgina Wood became the first-ever female chief justice of the Ghanaian Supreme Court. On May 11, 2011, Nana Akufo-Addo nominated Sophia Abena Boafoa Akuffo the Chief Justice of Ghana to replace Georgina Wood. She was officially inaugurated into the position on June 19, 2017 and she retired on 20 December 2019. On Tuesday, January 7, 2020, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, sworn into office Kwasi Anin-Yeboah as the next Chief Justice of Ghana replacing Sophia A. B. Akuffo. He retired on 24 May 2023 after having served 21 years as a judge and 3 years as the head of the Judiciary of Ghana. The current Chief Justice is Gertrude Araba Esaaba Sackey Torkornoo, she was sworn-in into office on 12 June 2023.\nAdministrative divisions.\nGhana is divided into sixteen regions: \nInternational organization participation.\nGhana is member of ACP, AfDB, AU, C, ECOWAS, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICCt, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MIGA, MINURSO, MONUC, NAM, OAS (observer), ONUB, OPCW, UN, UNAMSIL, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNITAR, UNMEE, UNMIK, UNMIL, UNOCI, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56898", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56898", "title": "History of Ghana", "text": " \nThe area of the Republic of Ghana (the then Gold Coast) became known in Europe and Arabia as the Ghana Empire after the title of its Emperor, the Ghana. Geographically, the ancient Ghana Empire was approximately 500 miles (800\u00a0km) north and west of the modern state of Ghana, and controlled territories in the area of the S\u00e9n\u00e9gal River and east towards the Niger rivers, in modern Senegal, Mauritania and Mali. The empire appears to have broken up following the 1076 conquest by the Almoravid General Abu-Bakr Ibn-Umar. A reduced kingdom continued to exist after Almoravid rule ended, and the kingdom was later incorporated into subsequent Sahelian empires, such as the Mali Empire. Around the same time, south of the Mali empire in present-day northern Ghana, the Kingdom of Dagbon emerged. The decentralised states ruled by the tindaamba were unified into a kingdom. Many sub-kingdoms would later arise from Dagbon including the Mossi Kingdoms of Burkina Faso and Bouna Kingdom of Ivory Coast. Dagbon pioneered Ghana's earliest learning institutions, including a university town, and a writing system prior to European arrival.\nToward the end of the classical era, larger regional kingdoms had formed in West Africa, one of which was the Kingdom of Ghana, north of what is today the nation of Ghana. Before its fall at the beginning of the 10th century, Akans migrated southward and founded several nation-states around their matriclans, including the first empire of Bono state founded in the 11th century and for which the Brong-Ahafo (Bono Ahafo) region is named. The Mole-Dagbon people, who founded the earliest centralised political kingdoms of Ghana, migrated from Lake Chad to present-day Ghana. Later, Akan ethnic groups such as the Ashanti, Akwamu, Akyem, Fante state and others are thought to possibly have roots in the original Bono state settlement at Bono Manso. The Ashanti kingdom's government operated first as a loose network and eventually as a centralized empire-kingdom with an advanced, highly specialized bureaucracy centred on the capital Kumasi.\nEarly history.\nBy the end of 16th century, most of the ethnic groups constituting the modern Ghanaian population had settled in their present locations. Archaeological remains found in the coastal zone indicated that the area had been inhabited since the Bronze Age (ca. 2000 BC), but these societies, based on fishing, had left few traces. Archaeological work also suggests that central Ghana north of the forest zone was inhabited as early as 3,000 to 4,000 years ago.\nThese migrations resulted in part from the formation and disintegration of a series of large states in the western Sudan (the region north of modern Ghana drained by the Niger River). Strictly speaking, \"Ghana\" was the title of the king, but the Arabs, who left records of the kingdom, applied the term to the King, the capital, and the state. The 9th-century Berber historian and geographer Al Yaqubi described ancient Ghana as one of the three most organized states in the region.\nIts rulers were renowned for their wealth in gold, the opulence of their courts, and their warrior/hunting skills. They were also masters of the trade in gold, which drew North African merchants to the western Sudan. The military achievements of these and later western Sudanic rulers, and their control over the region's gold mines, constituted the nexus of their historical relations with merchants and rulers in North Africa and the Mediterranean.\nGhana succumbed to attacks by its neighbors in the 11th century, but its name and reputation endured. Although none of the states of the western Sudan controlled territories in the area that is modern Ghana, several kingdoms that later developed such as Bonoman, were ruled by nobles believed to have immigrated from that region. The trans-Saharan trade that contributed to the expansion of kingdoms in the western Sudan also led to the development of contacts with regions in northern modern Ghana, and in the forest to the south.\nThe growth of trade stimulated the development of early Akan states located on the trade route to the goldfields, in the forest zone of the south. The forest itself was thinly populated, but Akan-speaking peoples began to move into it toward the end of the 15th century, with the arrival of crops from South-east Asia and the New World that could be adapted to forest conditions. These new crops included sorghum, bananas, and cassava. By the beginning of the 16th century, European sources noted the existence of the gold-rich states of Akan and Twifu in the Ofin River Valley.\nThe Mole-Dagbon Kingdoms are the earliest political kingdoms of Modern Ghana. Found by Naa Gbewaa, numerous kingdoms such as the Kingdom of Dagbon, Gmamprugu, Nanung and others emerged. These kingdoms are spread across the Upper East Region, Upper West Region, North East Region, Ghana, and Northern Region (Ghana) of Ghana. The Kingdom of Dagbon resisted slavery and colonisation fiercely, preferring trade in commodities than humans. As a result, the Kingdom has been significantly influenced by Islam due to trade with neighbouring Kingdoms under the rulership of Yaa Naa Zangina. European and colonial influence was more in Southern and Central Ghana.\nKingdom of Dagbon.\nAccording to oral traditions and archaeological evidence, the Dagomba states were the earliest kingdoms to emerge in present-day Ghana as early as the 11th century, being well established by the close of the 16th century. Although the rulers of the Dagomba states were not usually Muslim, they brought with them, or welcomed, Muslims as scribes and medicine men. As a result of their presence, Islam influenced the north and Muslim influence spread by the activities of merchants and clerics.\nIn the broad belt of rugged country between the northern boundaries of the Muslim-influenced state of Dagomba, and the southernmost outposts of the Mossi Kingdoms (of present-day northern Ghana and southern Burkina Faso), were peoples who were not incorporated into the Dagomba entity. Among these peoples were the Kassena agriculturalists. They lived in a so-called segmented society, bound together by kinship tie, and ruled by the head of their clan. Trade between Akan kingdoms and the Mossi kingdoms to the north flowed through their homeland, subjecting them to Islamic influence, and to the depredations of those more powerful.\nBono State.\nBono State (or Bonoman) was a trading state created by the Bono people, located in what is now southern Ghana. They were Twi-speaking Akan Group. It was founded sometime around the eleventh century. Bonoman was a medieval Akan kingdom in what is now Bono, Bono East and Ahafo \u2014 regions respectively named after Bono, Ahafo and Eastern Ivory Coast. It is generally accepted as the origin of the subgroups of the Akan people who migrated out of the state at various times to create new Akan states in search of gold. The gold trade, which started to boom in Bonoman as early in the 12th century, was the genesis of Akan power and wealth in the region, beginning in the Middle Ages. Various aspects of Akan culture stem from the Bono state, including the umbrella used for the kings, the swords of the nation, the stools or thrones, goldsmithing, blacksmithing, Kente Cloth weaving, and goldweighing.\nAshanti Empire.\nUnder Chief Oti Akenten (r. ca. 1630\u201360), a series of successful military operations against neighboring Akan states brought a larger surrounding territory into alliance with Ashanti. At the end of the 17th century, Osei Tutu became Asantehene (king of Ashanti). Under Osei Tutu's rule, the confederacy of Ashanti states was transformed into an empire with its capital at Kumasi. Political and military consolidation ensued, resulting in firmly established centralized authority.\nOsei Tutu was strongly influenced by the high priest, Anokye, who, tradition asserts, caused a stool of gold to descend from the sky to seal the union of Ashanti states. Stools already functioned as traditional symbols of chieftainship, but the Golden Stool represented the united spirit of all the allied states and established a dual allegiance that superimposed the confederacy over the individual component states. The Golden Stool remains a respected national symbol of the traditional past and figures extensively in Ashanti ritual.\nOsei Tutu permitted newly conquered territories that joined the confederation to retain their own customs and chiefs, who were given seats on the Ashanti state council. Tutu's gesture made the process relatively easy and nondisruptive, because most of the earlier conquests had subjugated other Akan peoples. Within the Ashanti portions of the confederacy, each minor state continued to exercise internal self-rule, and its chief jealously guarded the state's prerogatives against encroachment by the central authority. A strong unity developed, however, as the various communities subordinated their individual interests to central authority in matters of national concern.\nBy the mid-18th century, Ashanti was a highly organized state. The wars of expansion that brought the northern states of Dagomba, Mamprusi, and Gonja under Ashanti influence were won during the reign of Opoku Ware I (died 1750), successor to Osei Kofi Tutu I. By the 1820s, successive rulers had extended Ashanti boundaries southward. Although the northern expansions linked Ashanti with trade networks across the desert and in Hausaland to the east, movements into the south brought the Ashanti into contact, sometimes antagonistic, with the coastal Fante, as well as with the various European merchants whose fortresses dotted the Gold Coast.\nEarly European contact and the slave trade.\nWhen the first European colonizers arrived in the late 15th century, many inhabitants of the Gold Coast area were striving to consolidate their newly acquired territories and to settle into a secure and permanent environment. Initially, the Gold Coast did not participate in the export slave trade, rather as Ivor Wilks, a leading colonial historian of Ghana, noted, the Akan purchased slaves from Portuguese traders operating from other parts of Africa, including the Congo and Benin in order to augment the labour needed for the state formation that was characteristic of this period.\nThe Portuguese by 1471 had reached the area that was to become known as the Gold Coast, so named because it was an important source of gold. The Portuguese interest in trading for gold, ivory, and pepper so increased that in 1482, the Portuguese built their first permanent trading post on the western coast of present-day Ghana. This fortress, S\u00e3o Jorge da Mina (later called Elmina Castle), was constructed to protect Portuguese trade from European competitors, and after frequent rebuildings and modifications, still stands.\nThe Portuguese position on the Gold Coast remained secure for over a century. During that time, Lisbon sought to monopolize all trade in the region in royal hands, through appointed officials at S\u00e3o Jorge, and used force to prevent English, French, and Flemish efforts to trade on the coast. By 1598, the Dutch began trading on the Gold Coast. The Dutch built forts at Komenda and Kormantsi by 1612. In 1637 they captured Elmina Castle from the Portuguese and Axim in 1642 (Fort St Anthony). Other European traders joined in by the mid-17th century, largely English, Danes, and Swedes. The coastline was dotted by more than 30 forts and castles built by Dutch, British, and Danish merchants primarily to protect their interests from other Europeans and pirates. The Gold Coast became the highest concentration of European military architecture outside of Europe. Sometimes they were also drawn into conflicts with local inhabitants as Europeans developed commercial alliances with local political authorities. These alliances, often complicated, involved both Europeans attempting to enlist or persuade their closest allies to attack rival European ports and their African allies, or conversely, various African powers seeking to recruit Europeans as mercenaries in their inter-state wars, or as diplomats to resolve conflicts.\nForts were built, abandoned, attacked, captured, sold, and exchanged, and many sites were selected at one time or another for fortified positions by contending European nations.\nThe Dutch West India Company operated throughout most of the 18th century. The \"British African Company of Merchants\", founded in 1750, was the successor to several earlier organizations of this type. These enterprises built and manned new installations as the companies pursued their trading activities and defended their respective jurisdictions with varying degrees of government backing. There were short-lived ventures by the Swedes and the Prussians. These nation-states maintained varying alliances with the colonial powers and each other, which resulted in the 1806 Ashanti-Fante War, as well as an ongoing struggle by the Empire of Ashanti against the British, the four Anglo-Ashanti Wars. The Danes remained until 1850, when they withdrew from the Gold Coast. The British gained possession of all Dutch coastal forts by the last quarter of the 19th century, thus making them the dominant European power on the Gold Coast.\nIn the late 17th century, social changes within the politics of the Gold Coast led to transformations in warfare, and to the shift from being a gold exporting and slave importing economy to being a major local slave exporting economy.\nSome scholars have challenged the premise that rulers on the Gold Coast engaged in wars of expansion for the sole purpose of acquiring slaves for the export market. For example, the Ashanti waged war mainly to pacify territories that were under Ashanti control, to exact tribute payments from subordinate kingdoms, and to secure access to trade routes\u2014particularly those that connected the interior with the coast.\nThe supply of slaves to the Gold Coast was entirely in African hands. Most rulers, such as the kings of various Akan states engaged in the slave trade, as well as individual local merchants. The demographic impact of the slave trade on West Africa was probably substantially greater than the number actually enslaved because a significant number of Africans perished during wars and bandit attacks or while in captivity awaiting transshipment. All nations with an interest in West Africa participated in the slave trade. Relations between the Europeans and the local populations were often strained, and distrust led to frequent clashes. Disease caused high losses among the Europeans engaged in the slave trade, but the profits realized from the trade continued to attract them.\nThe growth of anti-slavery sentiment among Europeans made slow progress. Although individual clergymen condemned the slave trade as early as the 17th century, major Christian denominations did little to further early efforts at abolition. In 1807, Britain used its naval power and its diplomatic muscle to outlaw trade in slaves by its citizens and to begin a campaign to stop the international trade. The British withdrawal helped to decrease external slave trade. The importation of slaves into the United States was outlawed in 1808. These efforts, however, were not successful until the 1860s because of the continued demand for plantation labour in the New World.\nBecause it took decades to end the trade in slaves, some historians doubt that the humanitarian impulse inspired the abolitionist movement. According to historian Eric Williams, for example, Europe abolished the trans-Atlantic slave trade only because its profitability was undermined by the Industrial Revolution. Other scholars, however, disagree with Williams, arguing that humanitarian concerns as well as social and economic factors were instrumental in ending the African slave trade.\nBritish Gold Coast.\nBy the later part of the 19th century the Dutch and the British were the only traders left. After the Dutch withdrew in 1874, Britain made the Gold Coast a protectorate\u2014a British Crown Colony. Two major factors laid the foundations of British rule and the eventual establishment of a colony on the Gold Coast: British reaction to the Ashanti wars and the resulting instability and disruption of trade, and Britain's increasing preoccupation with the suppression and elimination of the slave trade.\nDuring most of the 19th century, Ashanti, the most powerful state of the Akan interior, sought to expand its rule and to promote and protect its trade. The first Ashanti invasion of the coastal regions took place in 1807; the Ashanti moved south again in 1811 and in 1814. These invasions, though not decisive, disrupted trade and threatened the security of the European forts. Local British, Dutch, and Danish authorities were all forced to come to terms with Ashanti, and in 1817 the African Company of Merchants signed a treaty of friendship that recognized Ashanti claims to sovereignty over large areas of the coast and its peoples.\nThe coastal people, primarily some of the Fante and the inhabitants of the new town of Accra came to rely on British protection against Ashanti incursions, but the ability of the merchant companies to provide this security was limited. The British Crown dissolved the company in 1821, giving authority over British forts on the Gold Coast to Charles MacCarthy, governor of Sierra Leone. The British forts and Sierra Leone remained under common administration for the first half of the century. MacCarthy's mandate was to impose peace and to end the slave trade. He sought to do this by encouraging the coastal peoples to oppose Kumasi rule and by closing the great roads to the coast. Incidents and sporadic warfare continued, however. In 1823, the First Anglo-Ashanti War broke out and lasted until 1831. MacCarthy was killed, and most of his force was wiped out in a battle with Ashanti forces in 1824.\nWhen the English government allowed control of the Gold Coast settlements to revert to the British African Company of Merchants in the late 1820s, relations with the Ashanti were still problematic. From the Ashanti point of view, the British had failed to control the activities of their local coastal allies. MacCarthy's encouragement of coastal opposition to Ashanti and the subsequent 1824 British military attack further indicated to the Ashanti authorities that the Europeans, especially the British, did not respect Ashanti.\nProtestant missions.\nThe Protestant nations in Western Europe, including Britain, had a vigorous evangelical element in the 19th century that felt their nations had a duty to \"civilize\" what they saw as slaves, sinners, and savages. Along with business opportunities, and the quest for national glory, the evangelical mission was a powerful impulse to imperialism. Practically all of Western Africa consisted of slave societies, in which warfare to capture new slaves\u2014and perhaps sell them to itinerant slave traders\u2014was a well-established economic, social, and political situation. The missionaries first of all targeted the slave trade, but they insisted that both the slave trade in the practice of traditional slavery were morally abhorrent. They organized to abolish the trade. The transoceanic slave ships were targeted by the Royal Navy, and the trade faded away. \nThe abolition of slavery did not end the forced labor of children, however. The first missionaries to pre-colonial Ghana, were a multiracial mixture of European, African, and Caribbean pietists employed by Switzerland's Basel Mission. The Basel Mission had tight budgets and depended on child labor for many routine operations. The children were students in the mission schools who split their time between general education, religious studies, and unpaid labor. The Basel Mission made it a priority to alleviate the harsh conditions of child labor imposed by slavery, and the debt bondage of their parents.\nBritish rule of the Gold Coast: the colonial era.\nIn 1830 a London committee of merchants chose Captain George Maclean to become president of a local council of merchants. Although his formal jurisdiction was limited, Maclean's achievements were substantial. For example, a peace treaty was arranged with the Ashanti in 1831. Maclean also supervised the coastal people by holding regular court in Cape Coast where he punished those found guilty of disturbing the peace. Between 1830 and 1843 while Maclean was in charge of affairs on the Gold Coast, no confrontations occurred with Ashanti, and the volume of trade reportedly increased threefold.\nMaclean's exercise of limited judicial power on the coast was so effective that a parliamentary committee recommended that the British government permanently administer its settlements and negotiate treaties with the coastal chiefs that would define Britain's relations with them. The government did so in 1843, the same year crown government was reinstated. Commander H. Worsley Hill was appointed first governor of the Gold Coast. Under Maclean's administration, several coastal tribes had submitted voluntarily to British protection. Hill proceeded to define the conditions and responsibilities of his jurisdiction over the protected areas. He negotiated a special treaty with a number of Fante and other local chiefs that became known as the Bond of 1844. This document obliged local leaders to submit serious crimes to British jurisdiction and laid the legal foundation for subsequent British colonization.\nMilitary confrontations between Ashanti and the Fante contributed to the growth of British influence on the Gold Coast, as the Fante states\u2014concerned about Ashanti activities on the coast\u2014signed the Bond of 1844 at Fomena-Adansi, that allowed the British to usurp judicial authority from African courts. Additional coastal states as well as other states farther inland eventually signed the Bond, and British influence was accepted, strengthened, and expanded. Under the terms of the 1844 arrangement, the British gave the impression that they would protect the coastal areas; thus, an informal protectorate came into being. As responsibilities for defending local allies and managing the affairs of the coastal protectorate increased, the administration of the Gold Coast was separated from that of Sierra Leone in 1850.\nBeginning in 1850, the coastal regions increasingly came under control of the governor of the British fortresses, who was assisted by the Executive Council and the Legislative Council. The Executive Council was a small advisory body of European officials that recommended laws and voted taxes, subject to the governor's approval. The Legislative Council included the members of the Executive Council and unofficial members initially chosen from British commercial interests. After 1900 three chiefs and three other Africans were added to the Legislative Council, though the inclusion of Africans from Ashanti and the Northern Territories did not take place until much later. In April 1852, local chiefs and elders met at Cape Coast to consult with the governor on means of raising revenue. With the governor's approval, the council of chiefs constituted itself as a legislative assembly. In approving its resolutions, the governor indicated that the assembly of chiefs should become a permanent fixture of the protectorate's constitutional machinery, but the assembly was given no specific constitutional authority to pass laws or to levy taxes without the consent of the people.\nThe Second Anglo-Ashanti War broke out in 1863 and lasted until 1864. In 1872, British influence over the Gold Coast increased further when Britain purchased Elmina Castle, the last of the Dutch forts along the coast. The Ashanti, who for years had considered the Dutch at Elmina as their allies, thereby lost their last trade outlet to the sea. To prevent this loss and to ensure that revenue received from that post continued, the Ashanti staged their last invasion of the coast in 1873. After early successes, they finally came up against well-trained British forces who compelled them to retreat beyond the Pra River. Later attempts to negotiate a settlement of the conflict with the British were rejected by the commander of their forces, Major General Sir Garnet Wolseley. The British invaded Ashanti with a sizable military force, initiating the Third Anglo-Ashanti War. The attack, which was launched in January 1874 by 2,500 British soldiers and large numbers of African auxiliaries, resulted in the occupation and burning of Kumasi, the Ashanti capital.\nAs a result of the exercise of ever-expanding judicial powers on the coast and also to ensure that the coastal peoples remained firmly under control, the British proclaimed the existence of the Gold Coast Colony on 24 July 1874, which extended from the coast inland to the edge of Ashanti territory. Though the coastal peoples were unenthusiastic about this development, there was no popular resistance. The subsequent peace treaty of 1875 required the Ashanti to renounce any claim to many southern territories. The Ashanti also had to keep the road to Kumasi open to trade. From this point on, Ashanti power steadily declined. The confederation slowly disintegrated as subject territories broke away and as protected regions defected to British rule. Enforcement of the treaty led to recurring difficulties and outbreaks of fighting. In 1896, the British dispatched another expedition that again occupied Kumasi and that forced Ashanti to become a protectorate of the British Crown. This became the Fourth Anglo-Ashanti War which lasted from 1894 until 1896.\nIn 1896, a British military force invaded Ashanti and overthrew the native \"Asantehene\", Prempeh I. The deposed Ashanti leader was replaced by a British resident at Kumasi. The British sphere of influence was, thus, extended to include Ashanti following their defeat in 1896. However, British Governor Hodgson went too far in his restrictions on the Ashanti when, in 1900, he demanded the \"Golden Stool,\" the symbol of Ashanti rule and independence for the Ashanti. This led to the War of the Golden Stool against the British. The Ashanti were defeated again in 1901. Once the Asantehene and his council had been exiled, the British appointed a resident commissioner to Ashanti. Each Ashanti state was administered as a separate entity and was ultimately responsible to the governor of the Gold Coast.\nIn the meantime, the British became interested in the Northern Territories north of Ashanti, which they believed would forestall the advances of the French and the Germans. After 1896 protection was extended to northern areas whose trade with the coast had been controlled by Ashanti. In 1898 and 1899, European colonial powers amicably demarcated the boundaries between the Northern Territories and the surrounding French and German colonies. The Northern Territories of the Gold Coast Protectorate was established as British protectorate on 26 September 1901. Unlike the Ashanti Colony, the Northern Territories were not annexed. However, like the Ashanti Colony they were placed under the authority of a resident commissioner who was responsible to the Governor of the Gold Coast. The Governor ruled both Ashanti and the Northern Territories by proclamations until 1946.\nWith the north under British control, the three territories of the Gold Coast\u2014the Colony (the coastal regions), Ashanti, and the Northern Territories\u2014became, for all practical purposes, a single political unit, or crown colony, known as the Gold Coast. The borders of present-day Ghana were realized in May 1956 when the people of the Volta region, known as British Mandated Togoland, a vote was made in a plebiscite on whether British Togoland should become part of modern Ghana; the Togoland Congress voted 42% against. 58% of votes opted for integration.\nColonial administration.\nThe gradual emergence of centralized colonial government brought about unified control over local services, although the actual administration of these services was still delegated to local authorities. Specific duties and responsibilities came to be clearly delineated, and the role of traditional states in local administration was also clarified. The structure of local government had its roots in traditional patterns of government. Village councils of chiefs and elders were responsible for the immediate needs of individual localities, including traditional law and order and the general welfare. The councils ruled by consent rather than by right: though chosen by the ruling class, a chief continued to rule because he was accepted by his people.\nBritish authorities adopted a system of indirect rule for colonial administration, wherein traditional chiefs maintained power but took instructions from their European supervisors. Indirect rule was cost-effective (by reducing the number of European officials needed), minimized local opposition to European rule, and guaranteed law and order. Though theoretically decentralizing, indirect rule in practice caused chiefs to look to Accra (the capital) rather than to their people for decisions. Many chiefs, who were rewarded with honors, decorations, and knighthood by government commissioners, came to regard themselves as a ruling aristocracy. In its preservation of traditional forms of power, indirect rule failed to provide opportunities for the country's growing population of educated young men. Other groups were dissatisfied because there was insufficient cooperation between the councils and the central government and because some felt that the local authorities were too dominated by the British district commissioners.\nIn 1925 provincial councils of chiefs were established in all three territories of the colony, partly to give the chiefs a colony-wide function. The 1927 Native Administration Ordinance clarified and regulated the powers and areas of jurisdiction of chiefs and councils. In 1935 the Native Authorities Ordinance combined the central colonial government and the local authorities into a single governing system. New native authorities, appointed by the governor, were given wide powers of local government under the supervision of the central government's provincial commissioners, who made sure that their policies would be those of the central government. The provincial councils and moves to strengthen them were not popular. Even by British standards, the chiefs were not given enough power to be effective instruments of indirect rule. Some Ghanaians believed that the reforms, by increasing the power of the chiefs at the expense of local initiative, permitted the colonial government to avoid movement toward any form of popular participation in the colony's government.\nEconomic and social development.\nThe years of British administration of the Gold Coast during the 20th century were an era of significant progress in social, economic, and educational development. Communications and railroads were greatly improved. Poverty fell significantly and Ghanaian peasantry flourished. New crops were introduced. A leading crop that was the result of an introduced crop was coffee. However, most spectacular among these introduced crops was the cocoa tree which had been indigenous to the New World and had been introduced in Africa by the Spanish and Portuguese. Cocoa had been introduced to the Gold Coast in 1879 by Tetteh Quashie. Cocoa tree raising and farming became widely accepted in the eastern part of the Gold Coast. In 1891, the Gold Coast exported 80\u00a0lbs of cocoa worth no more than 4 pounds sterling. By the 1920s cocoa exports had passed 200,000 tons and had reached a value of 4.7\u00a0million pounds sterling. Cocoa production became a major part of the economy of the Gold coast and later a major part of Ghana's economy.\nThe colony's earnings increased further from the export of timber and gold. Revenue from export of the colony's natural resources financed internal improvements in infrastructure and social services. The foundation of an educational system more advanced than any other else in West Africa also resulted from mineral export revenue. It was through British-style education that a new Ghanaian elite was created. From beginnings in missionary schools, the early part of the 20th century saw the opening of secondary schools and the country's first institute of higher learning.\nMany of the economic and social improvements in the Gold Coast in the early part of the 20th century have been attributed to the Canadian-born Gordon Guggisberg, governor from 1919 to 1927. Within the first six weeks of his governorship, he presented a ten-year development programme to the Legislative Council. He suggested first the improvement of transportation. Then, in order of priority, his prescribed improvements included water supply, drainage, hydroelectric projects, public buildings, town improvements, schools, hospitals, prisons, communication lines, and other services. Guggisberg also set a goal of filling half of the colony's technical positions with Africans as soon as they could be trained. His programme has been described as the most ambitious ever proposed in West Africa up to that time.\nThe colony assisted Britain in both World War I and World War II. In the ensuing years, however, postwar inflation and instability severely hampered readjustment for returning veterans, who were in the forefront of growing discontent and unrest. Their war service and veterans' associations had broadened their horizons, making it difficult for them to return to the humble and circumscribed positions set aside for Africans by the colonial authorities.\nGrowth of nationalism and the end of colonial rule.\nAs Ghana developed economically, education of the citizenry progressed apace. In 1890 there were only 5 government and 49 \"assisted\" mission schools in the whole of the Gold Coast with a total enrollment of only 5,000. By 1920 there were 20 governmental schools, 188 \"assisted\" mission and 309 \"unassisted\" mission schools with a total enrollment of 43,000 pupils. By 1940, there were 91,000 children attending Gold Coast schools. By 1950, the 279,000 children attending some 3,000 schools in the Gold Coast. This meant that, in 1950, 43.6% of the school-age children in the Gold Coast colony were attending school.\nThus by the end of the Second World War, the Gold Coast colony was the richest and most educated territories in West Africa. Within this educated environment, the focus of government power gradually shifted from the hands of the governor and his officials into those of Ghanaians, themselves. The changes resulted from the gradual development of a strong spirit of nationalism and were to result eventually in independence. The development of national consciousness accelerated quickly in the post-World War II era, when, in addition to ex-servicemen, a substantial group of urban African workers and traders emerged to lend mass support to the aspirations of a small educated minority.\nEarly manifestations of nationalism in Ghana.\nBy the late 19th century, a growing number of educated Africans increasingly found unacceptable an arbitrary political system that placed almost all power in the hands of the governor through his appointment of council members. In the 1890s, some members of the educated coastal elite organized themselves into the Aborigines' Rights Protection Society to protest a land bill that threatened traditional land tenure. This protest helped lay the foundation for political action that would ultimately lead to independence. In 1920, one of the African members of the Legislative Council, Joseph E. Casely-Hayford, convened the National Congress of British West Africa. The National Congress demanded a wide range of reforms and innovations for British West Africa.\nThe National Congress sent a delegation to London to urge the Colonial Office to consider the principle of elected representation. The group, which claimed to speak for all British West African colonies, represented the first expression of political solidarity between intellectuals and nationalists of the area. Though the delegation was not received in London (on the grounds that it represented only the interests of a small group), its actions aroused considerable support among the African elite at home.\nNotwithstanding their call for elected representation as opposed to a system whereby the governor appointed council members, these nationalists insisted that they were loyal to the British Crown and that they merely sought an extension of British political and social practices to Africans. Notable leaders included Africanus Horton, the writer John Mensah Sarbah, and S. R. B. Attah-Ahoma. Such men gave the nationalist movement a distinctly elitist flavour that was to last until the late 1940s.\nThe constitution of 8 April 1925, promulgated by Guggisberg, created provincial councils of paramount chiefs for all but the northern provinces of the colony. These councils in turn elected six chiefs as unofficial members of the Legislative Council, which however had an inbuilt British majority and whose powers were in any case purely advisory. Although the new constitution appeared to recognize some African sentiments, Guggisberg was concerned primarily with protecting British interests. For example, he provided Africans with a limited voice in the central government; yet, by limiting nominations to chiefs, he drove a wedge between chiefs and their educated subjects. The intellectuals believed that the chiefs, in return for British support, had allowed the provincial councils to fall completely under control of the government. By the mid-1930s, however, a gradual rapprochement between chiefs and intellectuals had begun.\nAgitation for more adequate representation continued. Newspapers owned and managed by Africans played a major part in provoking this discontent\u2014six were being published in the 1930s. As a result of the call for broader representation, two more unofficial African members were added to the Executive Council in 1943. Changes in the Legislative Council, however, had to await a different political climate in London, which came about only with the postwar election of a British Labour Party government.\nThe new Gold Coast constitution of 29 March 1946, was a bold document. For the first time, the concept of an official majority was abandoned. The Legislative Council was now composed of six ex-officio members, six nominated members, and eighteen elected members, however the Legislative Council continued to have purely advisory powers \u2013 all executive power remained with the governor. The 1946 constitution also admitted representatives from Ashanti into the council for the first time. Even with a Labour Party government in power, however, the British continued to view the colonies as a source of raw materials that were needed to strengthen their crippled economy. Change that would place real power in African hands was not a priority among British leaders until after rioting and looting in Accra and other towns and cities in early 1948 over issues of pensions for ex-servicemen, the dominant role of settler-colonists in the economy, the shortage of housing, and other economic and political grievances.\nWith elected members in a decisive majority, Ghana had reached a level of political maturity unequalled anywhere in colonial Africa. The constitution did not, however, grant full self-government. Executive power remained in the hands of the governor, to whom the Legislative Council was responsible. Hence, the constitution, although greeted with enthusiasm as a significant milestone, soon encountered trouble. World War II had just ended, and many Gold Coast veterans who had served in British overseas expeditions returned to a country beset with shortages, inflation, unemployment, and black-market practices. There veterans, along with discontented urban elements, formed a nucleus of malcontents ripe for disruptive action. They were now joined by farmers, who resented drastic governmental measures required to cut out diseased cacao trees in order to control an epidemic, and by many others who were unhappy that the end of the war had not been followed by economic improvements.\nPolitics of the independence movements.\nAlthough political organizations had existed in the British colony, the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC), founded on 4 August 1947 by educated Ghanaians known as The Big Six, was the first nationalist movement with the aim of self-government \"in the shortest possible time.\" It called for the replacement of chiefs on the Legislative Council with educated persons. They also demanded that, given their education, the colonial administration should respect them and accord them positions of responsibility. In particular, the UGCC leadership criticized the government for its failure to solve the problems of unemployment, inflation, and the disturbances that had come to characterize the society at the end of the war. Though they opposed the colonial administration, UGCC members did not seek drastic or revolutionary change. \nPublic dissatisfaction with the UGCC expressed itself on 28 February 1948, as a demonstration of ex-servicemen organized by the ex-serviceman's union paraded through Accra. To disperse the demonstrators, police fired on them killing three ex-servicemen and wounding sixty. Five days of violent disorder followed in Accra in response to the shooting and rioters broke into and looted the shops owned by Europeans and Syrians. Rioting also broke out in Kumasi and other towns across the Gold Coast. The Big Six including Nkrumah were imprisoned by the British authorities from 12 March to 12 April 1948. \nKwame Nkrumah broke with the UGCC publicly during its Easter Convention in 1949, and created his Convention People's Party (CPP) on 12 June 1949. After his brief tenure with the UGCC, the US- and British-educated Nkrumah broke with the organization over his frustration at the UGCC's weak attempts to solve the problems of the Gold Coast colony by negotiating another new conciliatory colonial constitution with the British colonial authority. Unlike the UGCC's call for self-government \"in the shortest possible time,\" Nkrumah and the CPP asked for \"self-government now\". The party leadership identified itself more with ordinary working people than with the UGCC and its intelligentsia. The politicized population consisted largely of ex-servicemen, literate persons, journalists, and elementary school teachers, all of whom had developed a taste for populist conceptions of democracy. A growing number of uneducated but urbanized industrial workers also formed part of the support group. By June 1949, Nkrumah had a mass following.\nThe constitution of 1 January 1951 resulted from the report of the Coussey Committee, created because of disturbances in Accra and other cities in 1948. In addition to giving the Executive Council a large majority of African ministers, it created an assembly, half the elected members of which were to come from the towns and rural districts and half from the traditional councils. Although it was an enormous step forward, the new constitution still fell far short of the CPP's call for full self-government. Executive power remained in British hands, and the legislature was tailored to permit control by traditionalist interests.\nWith increasing popular backing, the CPP in early 1950 initiated a campaign of \"Positive Action\" intended to instigate widespread strikes and nonviolent resistance. When some violent disorders occurred on 20 January 1950, Nkrumah was arrested and imprisoned for sedition. This merely established him as a leader and hero, building popular support, and when the first elections were held for the Legislative Assembly under the new constitution during 5\u201310 February 1951, Nkrumah (still in jail) won a seat, and the CPP won a two-thirds majority of votes cast winning 34 of the 38 elected seats in the Assembly. Nkrumah was released from jail on 11 February 1951, and the following day accepted an invitation to form a government. The start of Nkrumah's first term was marked by cooperation with the British governor. During the next few years, the government was gradually transformed into a full parliamentary system. The changes were opposed by the more traditionalist African elements, though opposition proved ineffective in the face of popular support for independence at an early date.\nOn 10 March 1952, the new position of Prime minister was created, and Nkrumah was elected to the post by the Assembly. At the same time the Executive Council became the Cabinet. The new constitution of 5 May 1954 ended the election of assembly members by the tribal councils. The Legislative Assembly increased in size, and all members were chosen by direct election from equal, single-member constituencies. Only defence and foreign policy remained in the hands of the Governor; the elected assembly was given control of virtually all internal affairs of the Colony. The CPP won 71 of the 104 seats in the 15 June 1954 election.\nThe CPP pursued a policy of political centralization, which encountered serious opposition. Shortly after the 15 June 1954 election, a new party, the Ashanti-based National Liberation Movement (NLM), was formed. The NLM advocated a federal form of government, with increased powers for the various regions. NLM leaders criticized the CPP for perceived dictatorial tendencies. The new party worked in cooperation with another regionalist group, the Northern People's Party. When these two regional parties walked out of discussions on a new constitution, the CPP feared that London might consider such disunity an indication that the colony was not yet ready for the next phase of self-government.\nThe British constitutional adviser, however, backed the CPP position. The governor dissolved the assembly in order to test popular support for the CPP demand for immediate independence. On 11 May 1956 the British agreed to grant independence if so requested by a 'reasonable' majority of the new legislature. New elections were held on 17 July 1956. In keenly contested elections, the CPP won 57 percent of the votes cast, but the fragmentation of the opposition gave the CPP every seat in the south as well as enough seats in Ashanti, the Northern Territories, and the Trans-Volta Region to hold a two-thirds majority by winning 72 of the 104 seats.\nOn 9 May 1956, a plebiscite was conducted under United Nations (UN) auspices to decide the future disposition of British Togoland and French Togoland. The British trusteeship, the western portion of the former German colony, had been linked to the Gold Coast since 1919 and was represented in its parliament. The dominant ethnic group, the Ewe people, were divided between the two Togos. A majority (58%) of British Togoland inhabitants voted in favour of union, and the area was absorbed into Ashantiland and Dagbon. There was, however, vocal opposition to the incorporation from the Ewe people (42%) in British Togoland.\nMoving toward independence.\nIn 1945 a Conference (known as the 5th Pan-African Congress) was held in Manchester to promote Pan-African ideas. This was attended by Nkrumah of Ghana, Nnamdi Azikiwe of Nigeria and I. T. A. Wallace-Johnson of Sierra Leone. The Indian and Pakistani independence catalysed this desire. There was also the rejection of African culture to some extent. Some external forces also contributed to this feeling. African-Americans such as W. E. B. Du Bois and Marcus Garvey (Afro-Jamaican) raised strong Pan-African conscience.\nSir Alan Burns' constitution of 1946 established a new legislative council consisting of the Governor as the President, 6 government officials, 6 nominated members and 18 elected members. The executive council was not responsible to the legislative council. They served in an advisory capacity only, and the governor did not have to take notice of their advice.\nThese forces made Dr J. B. Danquah form the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC) in 1947, and Nkrumah was invited to be this party's general secretary. Their aim was independence for Ghana. They rejected the Burns constitution amendment of a number of its clauses. It also granted a voice to chiefs and their tribal councils by providing for the creation of regional assemblies. No bill amending the entrenched clauses of the constitution or affecting the powers of the regional bodies or the privileges of the chiefs could become law except by a two-thirds vote of the National Assembly and by simple majority approval in two-thirds of the regional assemblies. When local CPP supporters gained control of enough regional assemblies, however, the Nkrumah government promptly secured passage of an act removing the special entrenchment protection clause in the constitution, a step that left the National Assembly with the power to effect any constitutional change the CPP deemed necessary.\nThe electoral victory of the CPP in 1951 ushered in five years of power-sharing with the British. The economy prospered, with a high global demand and rising prices for cocoa. The efficiency of the Cocoa Marketing Board enabled the large profits to be spent on development of the infrastructure. There was a major expansion of schooling and modernizing projects such as the new industrial city at Tema. Favored projects by Nkrumah included new organizations such as the Young Pioneers, for young people, and the Builder's Brigades for mechanization of agriculture. There were uniforms, parades, new patriotic songs, and the presentation of an ideal citizenship in which all citizens learned that there their primary duty was to the state.\nIndependence.\nOn 3 August 1956, the new assembly passed a motion authorizing the government to request independence within the British Commonwealth. On 18 September 1956 the British set 6 March 1957, the 113th anniversary of the Bond of 1844, as the date that the Gold Coast, Ashanti, the Northern Territories and British Togoland would together become a unified, independent country within the British Commonwealth of Nations under the name Ghana. Kwame Nkrumah continued as prime minister, and Queen Elizabeth II as head of state, represented by the Governor-General of Ghana, Sir Charles Noble Arden-Clarke. Ghana remained a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy until 1960, when after a national referendum, Ghana was declared a republic.\nThe Second Development Plan of 1959\u20131964 followed the Soviet model, and shifted away from expanding state services toward raising productivity in the key sectors. Nkrumah believed that colonialism had twisted personalities, imposing a competitive, individualistic and bourgeois mentality that had to be eliminated. Worldwide cocoa prices began to fall, budgets were cut, and workers were called upon for more and more self sacrifice to overcome neocolonialism. Nkrumah drastically curtailed the independence of the labor unions, and when strikes resulted he cracked down through the Preventive Detention Act.\nOn the domestic front, Nkrumah believed that rapid modernization of industries and communications was necessary and that it could be achieved if the workforce were completely Africanized and educated. Expansion of secondary schools became a high priority in 1959\u20131964, along with expansion of vocational programs and higher education.\nEven more important, however, Nkrumah believed that this domestic goal could be achieved faster if it were not hindered by reactionary politicians\u2014elites in the opposition parties and traditional chiefs\u2014who might compromise with Western imperialists. Indeed, the enemies could be anywhere and dissent was not tolerated. Nkrumah's regime enacted the Deportation Act of 1957, the Detention Acts of 1958, 1959 and 1962, and carried out parliamentary intimidation of CPP opponents, the recognition of his party as the sole political organization of the state, the creation of the Young Pioneer Movement for the ideological education of the nation's youth, and the party's control of the civil service. Government expenditure on road building projects, mass education of adults and children, and health services, as well as the construction of the Akosombo Dam, were all important if Ghana were to play its leading role in Africa's liberation from colonial and neo-colonial domination.\nPan-Africanist dream.\nThe pan-Africanist movement sought unity among people of African descent and also improvement in the lives of workers who, it was alleged, had been exploited by capitalist enterprises in Africa. According to Nkrumah, his government, which represented the first black African nation to win Independence, had an important role to play in the struggle against capitalist interests on the continent. As he put it, \"the independence of Ghana would be meaningless unless it was tied to the total liberation of Africa.\"\nOn the continental level, Nkrumah sought to unite Africa so that it could defend its international economic interests and stand up against the political pressures from East and West that were a result of the Cold War. His dream for Africa was a continuation of the pan-Africanist dream as expressed at the Manchester conference. The initial strategy was to encourage revolutionary political movements in Africa. The CIA believed that Nkrumah's government provided money and training for pro-socialist guerrillas in Ghana, aided after 1964 by the Chinese Communist government. Several hundred trainees passed through this program, administered by Nkrumah's Bureau of African Affairs, and were sent on to countries such as Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique, Niger and Congo. Politically, Nkrumah believed that a Ghana, Guinea, and Mali union would serve as the psychological and political impetus for the formation of a United States of Africa. When Nkrumah was criticized for paying little attention to Ghana or for wasting national resources in supporting external programmes, he reversed the argument and accused his opponents of being short-sighted.\nTax protests.\nThe heavy financial burdens created by Nkrumah's development policies and pan-African adventures created new sources of opposition. With the presentation in July 1961 of the country's first austerity budget, Ghana's workers and farmers became aware of and critical of the cost to them of Nkrumah's programmes. Their reaction set the model for the protests over taxes and benefits that were to dominate Ghanaian political crises for the next thirty years.\nCPP backbenchers and UP representatives in the National Assembly sharply criticized the government's demand for increased taxes and, particularly, for a forced savings programme. Urban workers began a protest strike, the most serious of a number of public outcries against government measures during 1961. Nkrumah's public demands for an end to corruption in the government and the party further undermined popular faith in the national government. A drop in the price paid to cocoa farmers by the government marketing board aroused resentment among a segment of the population that had always been Nkrumah's major opponent.\nGrowth of opposition to Nkrumah.\nNkrumah's complete domination of political power had served to isolate lesser leaders, leaving each a real or imagined challenger to the ruler. After opposition parties were crushed, opponents came only from within the CPP hierarchy. Among its members was Tawia Adamafio, an Accra politician. Nkrumah had made him general secretary of the CPP for a brief time. Later, Adamafio was appointed minister of state for presidential affairs, the most important post in the president's staff at Flagstaff House, which gradually became the centre for all decision making and much of the real administrative machinery for both the CPP and the government. The other leader with an apparently autonomous base was John Tettegah, leader of the Trade Union Congress. Neither, however, proved to have any power other than that granted to them by the president.\nBy 1961, however, the young and more radical members of the CPP leadership, led by Adamafio, had gained ascendancy over the original CPP leaders like Gbedemah. After a bomb attempt on Nkrumah's life in August 1962, Adamafio, Ako Adjei (then minister of foreign affairs), and Cofie Crabbe (all members of the CPP) were jailed under the Preventive Detention Act. The first Ghanaian Commissioner of Police, E. R. T Madjitey, from Asite in Manya-Krobo was also relieved of his post. The CPP newspapers charged them with complicity in the assassination attempt, offering as evidence only the fact that they had all chosen to ride in cars far behind the president's when the bomb was thrown.\nThe accused were brought to trial before the three-judge court for state security, headed by the chief justice, Sir Arku Korsah. When the court acquitted the accused, Nkrumah used his constitutional prerogative to dismiss Korsah. Nkrumah then obtained a vote from the parliament that allowed retrial of Adamafio and his associates. A new court, with a jury chosen by Nkrumah, found all the accused guilty and sentenced them to death. These sentences, however, were commuted to twenty years' imprisonment.\nCorruption had highly deleterious effects. It removed money from the active economy and put it in the hands of the political parties, and Nkrumah's friends and family, so it became an obstacle to economic growth. The new state companies that had been formed to implement growth became instruments of patronage and financial corruption; civil servants doubled their salaries and politicians purchase supporters. Politically, allegations and instances of corruption in the ruling party, and in Nkrumah's personal finances, undermined the very legitimacy of his regime and sharply decreased the ideological commitment needed to maintain the public welfare under Ghanaian socialism.\nPolitical scientist Herbert H. Werlin Has examined the mounting economic disaster:\nNkrumah left Ghana with a serious balance-of-payments problem. Beginning with a substantial foreign reserve fund of over $500 million at the time of independence, Ghana, by 1966, had a public external debt of over $800 million...there was no foreign exchange to buy the spare parts and raw materials required for the economy. While inflation was rampant, causing the price-level to rise by 30 per cent in 1964\u201365, unemployment was also serious...Whereas between 1955 and 1962 Ghana's GNP increased at an average annual rate of nearly 5 per cent, there was practically no growth at all by 1965...Since Ghana's estimated annual rate of population growth was 2.6 per cent, his economy was obviously retrogressing. While personal per capita consumption declined by some 15 per cent between 1960 and 1966, the real wage income of the minimum wage earner declined by some 45 per cent during this period.\nIn early 1964, in order to prevent future challenges from the judiciary and after another national referendum, Nkrumah obtained a constitutional amendment allowing him to dismiss any judge. Ghana officially became a one-party state and an act of parliament ensured that there would be only one candidate for president. Other parties having already been outlawed, no non-CPP candidates came forward to challenge the party slate in the general elections announced for June 1965. Nkrumah had been re-elected president of the country for less than a year when members of the National Liberation Council (NLC) overthrew the CPP government in a military coup on 24 February 1966. At the time, Nkrumah was in China. He took up asylum in Guinea, where he remained until he died in 1972.\nSince 1966.\nLeaders of the 1966 military coup justified their takeover by charging that the CPP administration was abusive and corrupt, that Nkrumah's involvement in African politics was overly aggressive, and that the nation lacked democratic practices. They claimed that the military coup of 1966 was a nationalist one because it liberated the nation from Nkrumah's dictatorship. All symbols and organizations linked to Nkrumah and he quickly vanished, such as the Young Pioneers. Despite the vast political changes that were brought about by the overthrow of Kwame Nkrumah, many problems remained, including ethnic and regional divisions, the country's economic burdens, and mixed emotions about a resurgence of an overly strong central authority. A considerable portion of the population had become convinced that effective, honest government was incompatible with competitive political parties. Many Ghanaians remained committed to nonpolitical leadership for the nation, even in the form of military rule. The problems of the Busia administration, the country's first elected government after Nkrumah's fall, illustrated the problems Ghana would continue to face. It has been argued that the coup was supported by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency;\nThe National Liberation Council (NLC), composed of four army officers and four police officers, assumed executive power. It appointed a cabinet of civil servants and promised to restore democratic government as quickly as possible. These moves culminated in the appointment of a representative assembly to draft a constitution for the Second Republic of Ghana. Political parties were allowed to operate beginning in late 1968. In Ghana's 1969 elections, the first competitive nationwide political contest since 1956, the major contenders were the Progress Party (PP), headed by Kofi Abrefa Busia, and the National Alliance of Liberals (NAL), led by Komla A. Gbedemah. The PP gained 59 per cent of the popular vote and 74 per cent of the seats in the National Assembly.\nGbedemah, who was soon barred from taking his National Assembly seat by a Supreme Court decision, retired from politics, leaving the NAL without a strong leader. In October 1970, the NAL absorbed the members of three other minor parties in the assembly to form the Justice Party (JP) under the leadership of Joseph Appiah. Their combined strength constituted what amounted to a southern bloc with a solid constituency among most of the Ewe and the peoples of the coastal cities.\nPP leader Busia became prime minister in September 1970. After a brief period under an interim three-member presidential commission, the electoral college chose as president Chief Justice Edward Akufo-Addo, one of the leading nationalist politicians of the UGCC era and one of the judges dismissed by Nkrumah in 1964.\nTwo early measures initiated by the Busia government were the expulsion of large numbers of non-citizens from the country and a companion measure to limit foreign involvement in small businesses. The moves were aimed at relieving the unemployment created by the country's precarious economic situation. The policies were popular because they forced out of the retail sector of the economy those foreigners, especially Lebanese, Asians, and Nigerians, who were perceived as unfairly monopolizing trade to the disadvantage of Ghanaians. Many other Busia moves, however, were not popular. Busia's decision to introduce a loan programme for university students, who had hitherto received free education, was challenged because it was interpreted as introducing a class system into the country's highest institutions of learning. Some observers even saw Busia's devaluation of the national currency and his encouragement of foreign investment in the industrial sector of the economy as conservative ideas that could undermine Ghana's sovereignty.\nThe ruling PP emphasized the need for development in rural areas, both to slow the movement of population to the cities and to redress regional imbalance in levels of development. The JP and a growing number of PP members favoured suspension of payment on some foreign debts of the Nkrumah era. This attitude grew more popular as debt payments became more difficult to meet. Both parties favoured creation of a West African economic community or an economic union with the neighboring West African states.\nDespite broad popular support garnered at its inception and strong foreign connections, the Busia government fell victim to an army coup within twenty-seven months. The crucial causes were the country's continuing economic difficulties, both those stemming from the high foreign debts incurred by Nkrumah and those resulting from internal problems. The PP government had inherited US$580\u00a0million in medium- and long-term debts, an amount equal to 25 per cent of the gross domestic product of 1969. By 1971 the US$580\u00a0million had been further inflated by US$72\u00a0million in accrued interest payments and US$296\u00a0million in short-term commercial credits. Within the country, an even larger internal debt fueled inflation.\nGhana's economy remained largely dependent upon the often difficult cultivation of and market for cocoa. Cocoa prices had always been volatile, but exports of this crop normally provided about half of the country's foreign currency earnings. Beginning in the 1960s, however, a number of factors combined to limit severely this income. These factors included foreign competition (particularly from neighbouring C\u00f4te d'Ivoire), a lack of understanding of free-market forces (by the government in setting prices paid to farmers), accusations of bureaucratic incompetence in the Cocoa Marketing Board, and the smuggling of crops into C\u00f4te d'Ivoire. As a result, Ghana's income from cocoa exports continued to fall dramatically.\nAusterity measures imposed by the Busia administration, although wise in the long run, alienated influential farmers, who until then had been PP supporters. These measures were part of Busia's economic structural adjustment efforts to put the country on a sounder financial base. The austerity programmes had been recommended by the International Monetary Fund. The recovery measures also severely affected the middle class and the salaried work force, both of which faced wage freezes, tax increases, currency devaluations, and rising import prices. These measures precipitated protests from the Trade Union Congress. In response, the government sent the army to occupy the trade union headquarters and to block strike actions\u2014a situation that some perceived as negating the government's claim to be operating democratically.\nAs the leader of the anti-Busia coup declared on 13 January 1972, even those amenities enjoyed by the army during the Nkrumah regime were no longer available. Knowing that austerity had alienated the officers, the Busia government began to change the leadership of the army's combat elements. This, however, was the last straw. Lieutenant Colonel Ignatius Kutu Acheampong, temporarily commanding the First Brigade around Accra, led a bloodless coup that ended the Second Republic.\nNational Redemption Council years, 1972\u201379.\nDespite its short existence, the Second Republic was significant in that the development problems the nation faced came clearly into focus. These included uneven distribution of investment funds and favouritism toward certain groups and regions. Important questions about developmental priorities remained unanswered, and after the failure of both the Nkrumah and the Busia regimes (one a one-party state, and the other a multi-party parliamentary democracy) Ghana's path to political stability was obscure.\nAcheampong's National Redemption Council (NRC) claimed that it had to act to remove the ill effects of the currency devaluation of the previous government and thereby, at least in the short run, to improve living conditions for individual Ghanaians. To justify their takeover, coup leaders leveled charges of corruption against Busia and his ministers. The NRC sought to create a truly military government and did not outline any plan for the return of the nation to democratic rule.\nIn matters of economic policy, Busia's austerity measures were reversed, the Ghanaian currency was revalued upward, foreign debt was repudiated or unilaterally rescheduled, and all large foreign-owned companies were nationalized. The government also provided price supports for basic food imports, while seeking to encourage Ghanaians to become self-reliant in agriculture and the production of raw materials. Any economic successes were overridden by other basic economic factors. Industry and transportation suffered greatly as oil prices rose in 1974, and the lack of foreign exchange and credit left the country without fuel. Basic food production continued to decline even as the population grew. Disillusionment with the government developed, and accusations of corruption began to surface.\nThe reorganization of the NRC into the Supreme Military Council (SMC) in 1975 saw military officers put in charge of all ministries and state enterprises down to the local level. Shortly after, the government sought to stifle opposition by issuing a decree forbidding the propagation of rumors and by banning a number of independent newspapers and detaining their journalists. Also, armed soldiers broke up student demonstrations, and the government repeatedly closed the universities, which had become important centres of opposition to NRC policies.\nThe SMC by 1977 found itself constrained by mounting non-violent opposition. Although the various opposition groups (university students, lawyers, and other organized civilian groups) called for a return to civilian constitutional rule, Acheampong and the SMC favoured a union government\u2014a mixture of elected civilian and appointed military leaders\u2014but one in which party politics would be abolished. University students and many intellectuals criticized the union government idea, but others, such as Justice Gustav Koranteng-Addow, who chaired the seventeen-member ad hoc committee appointed by the government to work out details of the plan, defended it as the solution to the nation's political problems. Supporters of the union government idea viewed multiparty political contests as the perpetrators of social tension and community conflict among classes, regions, and ethnic groups. Unionists argued that their plan had the potential to depoliticize public life and to allow the nation to concentrate its energies on economic problems.\nA national referendum was held in March 1978 to allow the people to accept or reject the union government concept. A rejection of the union government meant a continuation of military rule. Given this choice, it was surprising that so narrow a margin voted in favour of union government. Opponents of the idea organized demonstrations against the government, arguing that the referendum vote had not been free or fair. The Acheampong government reacted by banning several organizations and by jailing as many as 300 of its opponents.\nThe agenda for change in the union government referendum called for the drafting of a new constitution by an SMC-appointed commission, the selection of a constituent assembly by November 1978, and general elections in June 1979. The ad hoc committee had recommended a nonparty election, an elected executive president, and a cabinet whose members would be drawn from outside a single-house National Assembly. The military council would then step down, although its members could run for office as individuals.\nIn July 1978, in a sudden move, the other SMC officers forced Acheampong to resign, replacing him with Lieutenant General Frederick W. K. Akuffo. The SMC apparently acted in response to continuing pressure to find a solution to the country's economic dilemma. Inflation was estimated to be as high as 300 per cent that year. There were shortages of basic commodities, and cocoa production fell to half its 1964 peak. The council was also motivated by Acheampong's failure to dampen rising political pressure for changes. Akuffo, the new SMC chairman, promised publicly to hand over political power to a new government to be elected by 1 July 1979.\nDespite Akuffo's assurances, opposition to the SMC persisted. The call for the formation of political parties intensified. In an effort to gain support in the face of continuing strikes over economic and political issues, the Akuffo government at length announced that the formation of political parties would be allowed after January 1979. Akuffo also granted amnesty to former members of both Nkrumah's CPP and Busia's PP, as well as to all those convicted of subversion under Acheampong. The decree lifting the ban on party politics went into effect on 1 January 1979, as planned. The constitutional assembly that had been working on a new constitution presented an approved draft and adjourned in May. All appeared set for a new attempt at constitutional government in July, when a group of young army officers overthrew the SMC government in June 1979.\nRawlings era.\nOn 15 May 1979, less than five weeks before constitutional elections were to be held, a group of junior officers led by Flight Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings attempted a coup. Initially unsuccessful, the coup leaders were jailed and held for court-martial. On 4 June, however, sympathetic military officers overthrew the Akuffo regime and released Rawlings and his cohorts from prison fourteen days before the scheduled election. Although the SMC's pledge to return political power to civilian hands addressed the concerns of those who wanted civilian government, the young officers who had staged the 4 June coup insisted that issues critical to the image of the army and important for the stability of national politics had been ignored. Naomi Chazan, a leading analyst of Ghanaian politics, assessed the significance of the 1979 coup:\nUnlike the initial SMC II [the Akuffo period, 1978\u20131979] rehabilitation effort which focused on the power elite, this second attempt at reconstruction from a situation of disintegration was propelled by growing alienation. It strove, by reforming the guidelines of public behavior, to define anew the state power structure and to revise its inherent social obligations... In retrospect the most irreversible outcome of this phase was the systematic eradication of the SMC leadership... [Their] executions signaled not only the termination of the already fallacious myth of the nonviolence of Ghanaian politics, but, more to the point, the deadly serious determination of the new government to wipe the political slate clean.\nRawlings and the young officers formed the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (AFRC). The armed forces were purged of senior officers accused of corrupting the image of the military. Despite the coup and the subsequent executions of former heads of military governments, the planned elections took place, and Ghana had returned to constitutional rule by the end of September 1979. The AFRC position was that the nation's political leaders, at least those from within the military, had not been accountable to the people. The administration of Hilla Limann, inaugurated on 24 September 1979, at the beginning of the Third Republic, was thus expected to measure up to the new standard advocated by the AFRC.\nLimann's People's National Party (PNP) began the Third Republic with control of only seventy-one of the 140 legislative seats. As Limann himself observed, the ruling PNP included people of conflicting ideological orientations. They sometimes disagreed strongly among themselves on national policies. Many observers, therefore, wondered whether the new government was equal to the task confronting the state. The most immediate threat to the Limann administration, however, was the AFRC, especially those officers who organized themselves into the \"June 4th Movement\" to monitor the civilian administration. The government ordered Rawlings and several other army and police officers associated with the AFRC into retirement; nevertheless, Rawlings and his associates remained a latent threat, particularly as the economy continued its decline. The first Limann budget estimated the Ghanaian inflation rate at 70 per cent for that year, with a budget deficit equal to 30 per cent of the gross national product. A rash of strikes, many considered illegal by the government, resulted, each one lowering productivity and therefore national income. In September the government announced that all striking public workers would be dismissed. These factors rapidly eroded the limited support the Limann government enjoyed among civilians and soldiers. The government fell on 31 December 1981, in another Rawlings-led coup.\nRawlings and his colleagues suspended the 1979 constitution, dismissed the president and his cabinet, dissolved the parliament, and proscribed existing political parties. They established the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), initially composed of seven members with Rawlings as chairman, to exercise executive and legislative powers. The existing judicial system was preserved, but alongside it the PNDC created the National Investigation Committee to root out corruption and other economic offenses, the anonymous \"Citizens' Vetting Committee\" to punish tax evasion, and the Public Tribunals to try various crimes. The PNDC proclaimed its intent to allow the people to exercise political power through defence committees to be established in communities, workplaces, and in units of the armed forces and police. Under the PNDC, Ghana remained a unitary government.\nIn December 1982, the PNDC announced a plan to decentralize government from Accra to the regions, the districts, and local communities, but it maintained overall control by appointing regional and district secretaries who exercised executive powers and also chaired regional and district councils. Local councils, however, were expected progressively to take over the payment of salaries, with regions and districts assuming more powers from the national government. In 1984, the PNDC created a National Appeals Tribunal to hear appeals from the public tribunals, changed the Citizens' Vetting Committee into the Office of Revenue Collection and replaced the system of defence committees with Committees for the Defence of the Revolution.\nIn 1984, the PNDC also created a National Commission on Democracy to study ways to establish participatory democracy in Ghana. The commission issued a \"Blue Book\" in July 1987 outlining modalities for district-level elections, which were held in late 1988 and early 1989, for newly created district assemblies. One-third of the assembly members are appointed by the government.\nSecond coming of Rawlings: the first six years, 1982\u201387.\nThe new government that took power on 31 December 1981, was the eighth in the fifteen years since the fall of Nkrumah. Calling itself the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), its membership included Rawlings as chairman, Brigadier Joseph Nunoo-Mensah (whom Limann had dismissed as army commander), two other officers, and three civilians. Despite its military connections, the PNDC made it clear that it was unlike other soldier-led governments. This was immediately proved by the appointment of fifteen civilians to cabinet positions.\nOpposition to the PNDC administration developed nonetheless in different sectors of the political spectrum. The most obvious groups opposing the government were former PNP and PFP members. Further opposition came from the Ghana Bar Association (GBA), which criticized the government's use of people's tribunals in the administration of justice. Members of the Trade Union Congress were also angered when the PNDC ordered them to withdraw demands for increased wages. The National Union of Ghanaian Students (NUGS) went even farther, calling on the government to hand over power to the attorney general, who would supervise new elections. By the end of June 1982, an attempted coup had been discovered, and those implicated had been executed. Many who disagreed with the PNDC administration were driven into exile, where they began organizing their opposition.\nIn keeping with Rawlings's commitment to populism as a political principle, the PNDC began to form governing coalitions and institutions that would incorporate the populace at large into the machinery of the national government. Workers' Defence Committees (WDCs), People's Defence Committees (PDCs), Citizens' Vetting Committees (CVCs), Regional Defence Committees (RDCs), and National Defence Committees (NDCs) were all created to ensure that those at the bottom of society were given the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process. These committees were to be involved in community projects and community decisions, and individual members were expected to expose corruption and \"anti-social activities\". Public tribunals, which were established outside the normal legal system, were also created to try those accused of antigovernment acts. And a four-week workshop aimed at making these cadres morally and intellectually prepared for their part in the revolution was completed at the University of Ghana, Legon, in July and August 1983.\nVarious opposition groups criticized the PDCs and WDCs, however. The aggressiveness of certain WDCs, it was argued, interfered with management's ability to make the bold decisions needed for the recovery of the national economy. In response to such criticisms, the PNDC announced on 1 December 1984, the dissolution of all PDCs, WDCs, and NDCs, and their replacement with Committees for the Defence of the Revolution (CDRs). With regard to public boards and statutory corporations, excluding banks and financial institutions, Joint Consultative Committees (JCCs) that acted as advisory bodies to managing directors were created.\nThe public tribunals, however, despite their characterization as undemocratic by the GBA, were maintained. Although the tribunals had been established in 1982, the law providing for the creation of a national public tribunal to hear and determine appeals from, and decisions of, regional public tribunals was not passed until August 1984. Section 3 and Section 10 of the PNDC Establishment Proclamation limited public tribunals to cases of a political and an economic nature. The limitations placed on public tribunals by the government in 1984 may have been an attempt by the administration to redress certain weaknesses. The tribunals, however, were not abolished; rather, they were defended as \"fundamental to a good legal system\" that needed to be maintained in response to \"growing legal consciousness on the part of the people.\"\nAt the time when the foundations of these socio-political institutions were being laid, the PNDC was also engaged in a debate about how to finance the reconstruction of the national economy. The country had indeed suffered from what some described as the excessive and unwise, if not foolish, expenditures of the Nkrumah regime. The degree of decline under the NRC and the SMC had also been devastating. By December 1981, when the PNDC came to power, the inflation rate topped 200 per cent, while real GDP had declined by 3 per cent per annum for seven years. Not only cocoa production but even diamonds and timber exports had dropped dramatically. Gold production had also fallen to half its pre-independence level.\nAt the end of its first year in power, the PNDC announced a four-year programme of economic austerity and sacrifice that was to be the first phase of an Economic Recovery Programme (ERP). If the economy were to improve significantly, there was need for a large injection of capital\u2014a resource that could only be obtained from international financial institutions of the West. The PNDC recognized that it could not depend on friendly nations such as Libya to address the economic problems of Ghana. The magnitude of the crisis\u2014made worse by widespread bush fires that devastated crop production in 1983\u20131984 and by the return of more than one million Ghanaians who had been expelled from Nigeria in 1983, which had intensified the unemployment situation\u2014called for monetary assistance from institutions with bigger financial chests.\nPhase One of the ERP began in 1983. Its goal was economic stability. In broad terms, the government wanted to reduce inflation and to create confidence in the nation's ability to recover. By 1987 progress was clearly evident. The rate of inflation had dropped to 20 per cent, and between 1983 and 1987, Ghana's economy reportedly grew at 6 per cent per year. Official assistance from donor countries to Ghana's recovery programme averaged US$430\u00a0million in 1987, more than double that of the preceding years. The PNDC administration also made a remarkable payment of more than US$500\u00a0million in loan arrears dating to before 1966. In recognition of these achievements, international agencies had pledged more than US$575\u00a0million to the country's future programmes by May 1987. With these accomplishments in place, the PNDC inaugurated Phase Two of the ERP, which envisioned privatization of state-owned assets, currency devaluation, and increased savings and investment, and which was to continue until 1990.\nNotwithstanding the successes of Phase One of the ERP, many problems remained, and both friends and foes of the PNDC were quick to point them out. One commentator noted the high rate of Ghanaian unemployment as a result of the belt-tightening policies of the PNDC. In the absence of employment or redeployment policies to redress such problems, he wrote, the effects of the austerity programmes might create circumstances that could derail the PNDC recovery agenda.\nUnemployment was only one aspect of the political problems facing the PNDC government; another was the size and breadth of the PNDC's political base. The PNDC initially espoused a populist programme that appealed to a wide variety of rural and urban constituents. Even so, the PNDC was the object of significant criticism from various groups that in one way or another called for a return to constitutional government. Much of this criticism came from student organizations, the GBA, and opposition groups in self-imposed exile, who questioned the legitimacy of the military government and its declared intention of returning the country to constitutional rule. So vocal was the outcry against the PNDC that it appeared on the surface as if the PNDC enjoyed little support among those groups who had historically moulded and influenced Ghanaian public opinion. At a time when difficult policies were being implemented, the PNDC could ill afford the continued alienation and opposition of such prominent critics.\nBy the mid-1980s, therefore, it had become essential that the PNDC demonstrate that it was actively considering steps towards constitutionalism and civilian rule. This was true notwithstanding the recognition of Rawlings as an honest leader and the perception that the situation he was trying to redress was not of his creation. To move in the desired direction, the PNDC needed to weaken the influence and credibility of all antagonistic groups while it created the necessary political structures that would bring more and more Ghanaians into the process of national reconstruction. The PNDC's solution to its dilemma was the proposal for district assemblies.\nDistrict assemblies.\nAlthough the National Commission for Democracy (NCD) had existed as an agency of the PNDC since 1982, it was not until September 1984 that Justice Daniel F. Annan, himself a member of the ruling council, was appointed chairman. The official inauguration of the NCD in January 1985 signaled PNDC determination to move the nation in a new political direction. According to its mandate, the NCD was to devise a viable democratic system, utilizing public discussions. Annan explained the necessity for the commission's work by arguing that the political party system of the past lost track of the country's socio-economic development processes. There was the need, therefore, to search for a new political order that would be functionally democratic. Constitutional rules of the past were not acceptable to the new revolutionary spirit, Annan continued, which saw the old political order as using the ballot box \"merely to ensure that politicians got elected into power, after which communication between the electorate and their elected representative completely broke down.\"\nAfter two years of deliberations and public hearings, the NCD recommended the formation of district assemblies as local governing institutions that would offer opportunities to the ordinary person to become involved in the political process. The PNDC scheduled elections of the proposed assemblies for the last quarter of 1988.\nOnce in session, an assembly was to become the highest political authority in each district. Assembly members were to be responsible for deliberation, evaluation, coordination, and implementation of programmes accepted as appropriate for the district's economic development; however, district assemblies were to be subject to the general guidance and direction of the central government. To ensure that district developments were in line with national policies, one-third of assembly members were to be traditional authorities (chiefs) or their representatives; these members were to be approved by the PNDC in consultation with the traditional authorities and other \"productive economic groups in the district.\" In other words, a degree of autonomy may have been granted to the assemblies in the determination of programmes most suited to the districts, but the PNDC left itself with the ultimate responsibility of making sure that such programmes were in line with the national economic recovery programme.\nDistrict assemblies as outlined in PNDC documents were widely discussed. Some hailed the proposal as compatible with the goal of granting the people opportunities to manage their own affairs, but others (especially those of the political right) accused the government of masking its intention to remain in power. If the government's desire for democracy were genuine, a timetable for national elections should have been its priority rather than the preoccupation with local government, they argued. Some questioned the wisdom of incorporating traditional chiefs and the degree to which these traditional leaders would be committed to the district assembly idea, while others attacked the election guidelines as undemocratic and, therefore, as contributing to a culture of silence in Ghana. To such critics, the district assemblies were nothing but a move by the PNDC to consolidate its position.\nRawlings, however, responded to such criticism by restating the PNDC strategy and the rationale behind it:\nSteps towards more formal political participation are being taken through the district-level elections that we will be holding throughout the country as part of our decentralisation policy. As I said in my nationwide broadcast on December 31, if we are to see a sturdy tree of democracy grow, we need to learn from the past and nurture very carefully and deliberately political institutions that will become the pillars upon which the people's power will be erected. A new sense of responsibility must be created in each workplace, each village, each district; we already see elements of this in the work of the CDRs, the December 31 Women's Movement, the June 4 Movement, Town and Village Development Committees, and other organizations through which the voice of the people is being heard.\nRawlings's explanation notwithstanding, various opposition groups continued to describe the PNDC-proposed district assemblies as a mere public relations ploy designed to give political legitimacy to a government that had come to power by unconstitutional means. Longtime observers of the Ghanaian political scene, however, identified two major issues at stake in the conflict between the government and its critics: the means by which political stability was to be achieved, and the problem of attaining sustained economic growth. Both had preoccupied the country since the era of Nkrumah. The economic recovery programmes implemented by the PNDC in 1983 and the proposal for district assemblies in 1987 were major elements in the government's strategy to address these fundamental and persistent problems. Both were very much part of the national debate in Ghana in the late 1980s.\nEnd of one-party state.\nUnder international and domestic pressure for a return to democracy, the PNDC allowed the establishment of a 258-member Consultative Assembly made up of members representing geographic districts as well as established civic or business organizations. The assembly was charged to draw up a draft constitution to establish a fourth republic, using PNDC proposals. The PNDC accepted the final product without revision, and it was put to a national referendum on 28 April 1992, in which it received 92% approval.\nOn 18 May 1992, the ban on party politics was lifted in preparation for multi-party elections. The PNDC and its supporters formed a new party, the National Democratic Congress (NDC), to contest the elections. Presidential elections were held on 3 November and parliamentary elections on 29 December that year. Members of the opposition boycotted the parliamentary elections, however, which resulted in a 200-seat Parliament with only 17 opposition party members and two independents.\nFourth Republic (1993\u2013present).\nThe Constitution entered into force on 7 January 1993, to found the Fourth Republic. On that day, Rawlings was inaugurated as president and members of Parliament swore their oaths of office. In 1996, the opposition fully contested the presidential and parliamentary elections, which were described as peaceful, free, and transparent by domestic and international observers. Rawlings was re-elected with 57% of the popular vote. In addition, Rawlings' NDC party won 133 of the Parliament's 200 seats, just one seat short of the two-thirds majority needed to amend the Constitution, although the election returns of two parliamentary seats faced legal challenges.\nIn the presidential election of 2000, Jerry Rawlings endorsed his vice-president, John Atta-Mills, as the candidate for the ruling NDC. John Kufuor stood for the New Patriotic Party (NPP), won the election, and became the president on 7 January 2001. The vice president was Aliu Mahama. The presidential election of 2000 was viewed as free and fair. Kufuor won another term again in the presidential election in 2004.\nThe presidency of Kufuor saw several social reforms, such as the reform in the system of National Health Insurance of Ghana in 2003. In 2005 saw the start of the Ghana School Feeding Programme, in which a free hot meal per day was provided in public schools and kindergartens in the poorest areas. Although some projects were criticised as unfinished or unfunded, the progress of Ghana was noted internationally.\nPresident Kufuor soon gave up power in 2008. The ruling New Patriotic Party chose Nana Akufo-Addo, son of Edward Akufo-Addo, as their candidate while National Democratic Congress's John Atta Mills stood for the third time. After a run-off, John Atta Mills won the election.\nOn 24 July 2012, the president died. Power was then given to his vice-president, John Dramani Mahama. The National Democratic Congress won the 2012 election, making John Mahama rule again, his first term.\nJohn Atta Mills was sworn in as president on 7 January 2009 in a peaceful transition after Nana Akuffo Addo was narrowly defeated. Mills died and was succeeded by vice-president John Dramani Mahama on 24 July 2012.\nFollowing the Ghanaian presidential election, 2012, John Dramani Mahama became President-elect and was inaugurated on 7 January 2013. Ghana was a stable democracy.\nAs a result of the Ghanaian presidential election, 2016, Nana Akufo-Addo became President-elect and was inaugurated as the fifth President of the Fourth Republic of Ghana and eighth President of Ghana on 7 January 2017. In December 2020, President Nana Akufo-Addo was re-elected after a tightly contested election.\nAfter the Ghanaian presidential election, 2024, John Dramani Mahama was elected as the sixth president of the fourth republic of Ghana and was inaugurated on 7 January 2025. \nReferences.\nhttps://&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56900", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56900", "title": "Belmopan, Belize", "text": ""}
{"id": "56901", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56901", "title": "Telecommunications in Zimbabwe", "text": " \nCommunications in Zimbabwe refers to the communication services available in Zimbabwe.\nBackground.\nPostal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (POTRAZ) was established by the Postal and Telecommunications Act in 2000 and started its operations in March 2001. This legislation brought about a new institutional framework for telecommunications in Zimbabwe.\nTelephone system.\nThe phone system was once one of the best in Africa, but now suffers from poor maintenance; more than 100,000 outstanding requests for connection despite an equally large number of installed but unused main lines.\nMain lines in use: 356,000 (2011)\nThe domestic system consists of microwave radio relay links, open-wire lines, radiotelephone communication stations, fixed wireless local loop installations, and a substantial mobile cellular network; Internet connection is available in most major towns that includes Harare, Gweru Bulawayo, Mutare through fiber optic and other remote parts through satellite communication\nInternational: country code \u2013 263; satellite earth stations \u2013 2 Intelsat; two international digital gateway exchanges (in Harare and Gweru) (2010)\nMobile cellular: 9.2 million (2011)\nRadio.\nZimbabwe has 37 local radio stations. From the six that broadcast nationwide from the capital, four are state owned.\nThere are 10 provincial radio stations and 2 of those are state controlled. Out of the country\u2019s 10 administrative provinces, Midlands province has 3 provincial radio stations followed by Bulawayo province with 2. Matabeleland South, Mashonaland East and Mashonaland Central provinces do not have dedicated provincial radio stations, although the Bulawayo based Skyz Metro FM stretched its signal to reach greater parts of Matabeleland South province.\nThere are 14 community radio stations across the country and are mostly in rural and remote areas. The number of community radio stations is expected to grow as per government announcement.\nThere are 7 campus radio stations for the country\u2019s national tertiary institutions.\nTwo independent stations, ZiFM Stereo and Star FM were launched in 2012 and both broadcast nationally. 2016 saw the launch of 8 regional, private owned radio stations and in 2018, ZBC launched 2 more provincial stations, Khulumani FM in Bulawayo and 95.8 Central Radio in Gweru. The government went on to authorize licensing of community radio stations and campus radio stations in 2021.\nAs of 2013, Zimbabwean authorities have required all radio owners to obtain a \"listening licence\" from the state.\nTelevision.\nThere is 1 state-controlled television station, ZBC TV, formerly Rhodesia Television (RTV). The government has shut down and refuses to issue licenses to domestic independent broadcasters such as JoyTV in 2002. However satellite TV providers including DStv are available. In 2013, Zimbabwe saw the introduction of its first pay TV. In 2017, Kwes\u00e9 TV a subsidiary of Econet Global which was founded by Zimbabwean entrepreneur Strive Masiyiwa has been delayed license to operate in Zimbabwe by the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ). In November 2020, the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe granted free to air, national commercial TV broadcasting licences to 6 private companies after shortlisting 14 applicants, breaking the national broadcaster's 60 year old TV monopoly. The regulator gave the 6 successful applicants 18 months to begin broadcasting.\nTV stations that were awarded licences include the Bulawayo based FairTalk Communications' KeYona TV, ZimPapers Limited's ZTN (Zimpapers Television Network) (now known as ZTN Prime), Rusununguko Media's NRTV, Jester Media's 3K TV (now known as 3Ktv), Acacia Media Group's Kumba TV and Channel Dzimbahwe's Channel D. Unsuccessful applicants include AB Communications' Flex TV, Alpha Media Holdings' HStv, Blackbury Enterprises (Pvt) Ltd's Blackbury TV, Conduit Investments (Pvt) Ltd's Conduit TV Station, Just in Time TV (Pvt) Ltd's JIT TV, Medianet Productions (Pvt) Ltd's Sunrise TV and Meditation Investments (Pvt)'s Zim News Channel.\nMarket structure mobile.\nThere are three GSM mobile network operators, namely Econet, Net One and Telecel. The current subscriber base in June 2011 to these three mobile operators were 5,521,000 people for Econet, 1,297,000 for Net One, and 1,349,000 for Telecel. All of these operators are 100 percent digitalized and offer 2G, GPRS, EDGE, 3G and 4G LTE services.\nInternet.\nInternet hosts: 30,615 (2012)\nIn 2009, there were 1.423 million internet users. In June 2004, Mugabe asked ISPs to monitor \"all\" email traffic passing through their systems for \"anti-national activities\". ISPs protest that this is an impossible task.\nCountry code (Top level domain): .zw\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56903", "revid": "117878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56903", "title": "Transportationin Zimbabwe", "text": ""}
{"id": "56905", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56905", "title": "Khabarovsk, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "56906", "revid": "1215485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56906", "title": "Messier 45", "text": ""}
{"id": "56907", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56907", "title": "M 45", "text": ""}
{"id": "56908", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56908", "title": "Herat, Afghanistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "56909", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56909", "title": "Jalalabad, Afghanistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "56910", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56910", "title": "Kandahar, Afghanistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "56911", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56911", "title": "Kabul, Afghanistan", "text": ""}
{"id": "56912", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56912", "title": "Trans-Siberian Railway", "text": "Railway network spanning Russia\nThe Trans-Siberian Railway, historically known as the Great Siberian Route and often shortened to Transsib, is a large railway system that connects European Russia to the Russian Far East. Spanning a length of over , it is the longest railway line in the world. It runs from the city of Moscow in the west to the city of Vladivostok in the east.\nDuring the period of the Russian Empire, government ministers\u2014personally appointed by Alexander III and his son Nicholas II\u2014supervised the building of the railway network between 1891 and 1916. Even before its completion, the line attracted travelers who documented their experiences. Since 1916, the Trans-Siberian Railway has directly connected Moscow with Vladivostok. As of 2021[ [update]], expansion projects remain underway, with connections being built to Russia's neighbors Mongolia, China, and North Korea. Additionally, there have been proposals and talks to expand the network to Tokyo, Japan, with new bridges or tunnels that would connect the mainland railway via the Russian island of Sakhalin and the Japanese island of Hokkaido.\nRoute.\nThe railway is often associated with the main transcontinental Russian line that connects many large and small cities of the European and Asian parts of Russia. At a Moscow\u2013Vladivostok track length of , it spans a record eight time zones. Taking eight days to complete the journey, it was the third-longest single continuous service in the world, after the Moscow\u2013Pyongyang service and the former Kiev\u2013Vladivostok service , both of which also follow the Trans-Siberian for much of their routes.\nThe main route begins in Moscow at Yaroslavsky Vokzal, runs through Yaroslavl or Chelyabinsk, Omsk, Novosibirsk, Krasnoyarsk, Irkutsk, Ulan-Ude, Chita, and Khabarovsk to Vladivostok via southern Siberia. A second primary route is the Trans-Manchurian, which coincides with the Trans-Siberian east of Chita as far as Tarskaya (a stop east of Karymskoye, in Chita Oblast), about east of Lake Baikal. From Tarskaya the Trans-Manchurian heads southeast, via Harbin Harbin\u2013Manzhouli railway and Mudanjiang Harbin\u2013Suifenhe railway in China's Northeastern provinces (from where a connection to Beijing is used by one of the Moscow\u2013Beijing trains), joining the main route in Ussuriysk just north of Vladivostok.\nThe third primary route is the Trans-Mongolian Railway, which coincides with the Trans-Siberian as far as Ulan-Ude on Lake Baikal's eastern shore. From Ulan-Ude the Trans-Mongolian heads south to Ulaanbaatar before making its way southeast to Beijing. In 1991, a fourth route running further to the north was finally completed, after more than five decades of sporadic work. Known as the Baikal\u2013Amur Mainline (BAM), this recent extension departs from the Trans-Siberian line at Taishet several hundred miles west of Lake Baikal and passes the lake at its northernmost extremity. It crosses the Amur River at Komsomolsk-na-Amure (north of Khabarovsk), and reaches the Tatar Strait at Sovetskaya Gavan.\nHistory.\nDemand and design.\nIn the late 19th century, the development of Siberia was hampered by poor transport links within the region and with the rest of the country. Aside from the Great Siberian Route, roads suitable for wheeled transport were rare. For about five months of the year, rivers were the main means of transport. During winter, cargo and passengers traveled by horse-drawn sledges over the winter roads, many of which were the same rivers but frozen.\nThe first steamboat on the River Ob, Nikita Myasnikov's \"Osnova\", was launched in 1844. However, early innovation had proven to be difficult, and it was not until 1857 that steamboat shipping had begun major development on the Ob system. Steamboats began operation on the Yenisei in 1863, and on the Lena and Amur in the 1870s. While the comparative flatness of Western Siberia was served by good river systems, the major river systems Ob\u2013Irtysh\u2013Tobol\u2013Chulym of Eastern Siberia had difficulties. The Yenisei, the upper course of the Angara River below Bratsk which was not easily navigable because of the rapids, and the Lena, were mostly navigable only in the north\u2013south direction, making west\u2013east transportation difficult. An attempt to partially remedy the situation by building the Ob\u2013Yenisei Canal had not yielded great success. These issues in the region created the need for a railway to be constructed.\nThe first railway projects in Siberia emerged after the completion of the Saint Petersburg\u2013Moscow Railway in 1851. One of the first was the Irkutsk\u2013Chita project, proposed by the American entrepreneur Perry Collins and supported by Transport Minister Constantine Possiet with a view toward connecting Moscow to the Amur River, and consequently the Pacific Ocean. Siberia's governor, Nikolay Muravyov-Amursky, was anxious to advance Russian colonization of the now Russian Far East, but his plans were unfeasible due to colonists importing grain and food from China and Korea. It was on Muravyov's initiative that surveys for a railway in the Khabarovsk region were conducted.\nBefore 1880, the central government had virtually ignored these projects, due to weaknesses in Siberian enterprises, an inefficient bureaucracy, and financial risk. By 1880, there was a large number of rejected and upcoming applications for permission to construct railways in order to connect Siberia with the Pacific, but not Eastern Russia. This worried the government and made connecting Siberia with Central Russia a pressing concern. The design process lasted 10 years. Along with the actual route constructed, alternative projects were proposed:\nThe line was divided into seven sections, most or all of which was simultaneously worked on by 62,000 workers. With financial support provided by leading European financier, Baron Henri Hottinguer of the Parisian bankers Hottinger &amp; Cie, the total cost estimated at \u00a335 million was raised with the first section (Chelyabinsk to the River Ob) and finished at a cost of \u00a3900,000 lower than anticipated. Railwaymen argued against suggestions to save funds, such as installing ferryboats instead of bridges over the rivers until traffic increased.\nUnlike the rejected private projects that intended to connect the existing cities that required transport, the Trans-Siberian did not have such a priority. Thus, to save money and avoid clashes with land owners, it was decided to lay the railway outside the existing cities. However, due to the swampy banks of the Ob River near Tomsk (the largest settlement at the time), the idea to construct a bridge was rejected.\nThe railway was laid to the south (instead crossing the Ob at Novonikolaevsk, later renamed Novosibirsk); a dead-end branch line connected with Tomsk, depriving the city of the prospective transit railway traffic and trade.\nConstruction.\nOn 9 March 1891, the Russian government issued an imperial rescript in which it announced its intention to construct a railway across Siberia. Tsarevich Nicholas (later Tsar Nicholas II) inaugurated the construction of the railway in Vladivostok on 19 May that year.\nLake Baikal is more than long and more than deep. Until the Circum-Baikal Railway was built the line ended on either side of the lake. The ice-breaking train ferry built in 1897 and smaller ferry \"SS Angara\" built in about 1900 made the four-hour crossing to link the two railheads.\nThe Russian admiral and explorer Stepan Makarov (1849\u20131904) designed \"Baikal\" and \"Angara\" but they were built in Newcastle upon Tyne, by Armstrong Whitworth. They were \"knock down\" vessels; that is, each ship was bolted together in the United Kingdom, every part of the ship was marked with a number, the ship was disassembled into many hundreds of parts and transported in kit form to Listvyanka where a shipyard was built especially to reassemble them. Their boilers, engines and some other components were built in Saint Petersburg and transported to Listvyanka to be installed. \"Baikal\" had 15 boilers, four funnels, and was long. it could carry 24 railway coaches and one locomotive on the middle deck. \"Angara\" was smaller, with two funnels.\nCompletion of the Circum-Baikal Railway in 1904 bypassed the ferries, but from time to time the Circum-Baikal Railway suffered from derailments or rockfalls so both ships were held in reserve until 1916. \"Baikal\" was burnt out and destroyed in the Russian Civil War but \"Angara\" survives. It has been restored and is permanently moored at Irkutsk where it serves as an office and a museum.\nIn winter, sleighs were used to move passengers and cargo from one side of the lake to the other until the completion of the Lake Baikal spur along the southern edge of the lake. With the Amur River Line north of the Chinese border being completed in 1916, there was a continuous railway from Petrograd to Vladivostok that, to this day, is the world's second longest railway line. Electrification of the line, begun in 1929 and completed in 2002, allowed a doubling of train weights to . There were expectations upon electrification that it would increase rail traffic on the line by 40 percent.\nThe entire length of the Trans-Siberian Railway was double track by 1939.\nEffects.\nSiberian agriculture began to send cheap grain westwards beginning around 1869. Agriculture in Central Russia was still under economic pressure after the end of serfdom, which was formally abolished in 1861. To defend the central territory and prevent possible social destabilization, the Tsarist government introduced the Chelyabinsk tariff-break () in 1896, a tariff barrier for grain passing through Chelyabinsk, and a similar barrier in Manchuria. This measure changed the nature of export: mills emerged to produce bread from grain in Altai Krai, Novosibirsk and Tomsk, and many farms switched to corn (maize) production.\nThe railway immediately filled to capacity with local traffic, mostly wheat. From 1896 until 1913 Siberia exported on average (30,643,000 pood) of grain and flour annually. During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905, military traffic to the east disrupted the flow of civil freight.\nThe Trans-Siberian Railway brought with it millions of peasant-migrants from the Western regions of Russia and Ukraine. Between 1906 and 1914, the peak migration years, about four million peasants arrived in Siberia.\nHistorian Christian Wolmar argues that the railroad was a failure, because it was built for narrow political reasons, with poor supervision and planning. The costs were vastly exaggerated to enrich greedy bureaucrats. The planners hoped it would stimulate settlement, but the Siberian lands were too infertile and cold and distant. There was little settlement beyond from the line. The fragile system could not handle the heavy traffic demanded in wartime, so the Japanese in 1904 knew they were safe in their war with Russia. Wolmar concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The railway, which was single track throughout, with the occasional passing loop, had, unsurprisingly, been built to a deficient standard in virtually every way. The permanent way was flimsy, with lightweight rails that broke easily, insufficient ballast, and railroad ties often carved from green wood that rotted in the first year of use. The small bridges were made of soft pine and rotted easily. The embankments were too shallow and narrow, often just wide instead of the prescribed in the design, and easily washed away. There were vicious gradients and narrow curves that wore out the fringe flanges on the wheels of the rolling stock after as little as six weeks use.\nWar and revolution.\nIn the Russo-Japanese War (1904\u20131905), the strategic importance and limitations of the Trans-Siberian Railway contributed to Russia's defeat in the war. As the line was single-track, transit was slower as trains had to wait in crossing sidings for opposing trains to cross. This limited the capacity of the line and increased transit times. A troop train or a train carrying injured personnel traveling from east to west would delay the arrival of troops or supplies and ammunition in a train traveling from west to east. The supply difficulties meant the Russian forces had limited troops and supplies while Japanese forces with shorter lines of communication were able to attack and advance.\nAfter the Russian Revolution of 1917, the railway served as the vital line of communication for the Czechoslovak Legion and the allied armies that landed troops at Vladivostok during the Siberian Intervention of the Russian Civil War. These forces supported the White Russian government of Admiral Alexander Kolchak, based in Omsk, and White Russian soldiers fighting the Bolsheviks on the Ural front. The intervention was weakened, and ultimately defeated, by partisan fighters who blew up bridges and sections of track, particularly in the volatile region between Krasnoyarsk and Chita.\nThe leader of legions politician Milan Rastislav Stefanik traveled from Moscow to Vladivostok in March to August 1918, on his journey to Japan and the United States of America.\nThe Trans-Siberian Railway also played a very direct role during parts of Russia's history, with the Czechoslovak Legion using heavily armed and armored trains to control large amounts of the railway (and of Russia itself) during the Russian Civil War at the end of World War I. As one of the few fighting forces left in the aftermath of the imperial collapse, and before the Red Army took control, the Czechs and Slovaks were able to use their organization and the resources of the railway to establish a temporary zone of control before eventually continuing onwards towards Vladivostok, from where they emigrated back to Czechoslovakia.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, the Trans-Siberian Railway played an important role in the supply of the powers fighting in Europe. In 1939\u20131941 it was a source of rubber for Germany thanks to the USSR-Germany pact. While Germany's merchant shipping was shut down, the Trans-Siberian Railway (along with its Trans-Manchurian branch) served as the essential link between Germany and Japan, especially for rubber. By March 1941, of this material would, on average, traverse the Trans-Siberian Railway every day on its way to Germany.\nAt the same time, a number of Jews and anti-Nazis used the Trans-Siberian Railway to escape Europe, including the mathematician Kurt G\u00f6del and Betty Ehrlich L\u00f6wenstein, mother of British actor, director and producer Heinz Bernard. Several thousand Jewish refugees were able to make this trip thanks to the Cura\u00e7ao visas issued by the Dutch consul Jan Zwartendijk and the Japanese visas issued by the Japanese consul, Chiune Sugihara, in Kaunas, Lithuania. Typically, they took the TSR to Vladivostok, then by ship to US. Until June 1941, pro-Nazi ethnic Germans from the Americas used the TSR to go to Germany.\nThe situation reversed after 22 June 1941. By invading the Soviet Union, Germany cut off its only reliable trade route to Japan. Instead, it had to use fast merchant ships and later large oceanic submarines to evade the Allied blockade. On the other hand, the USSR received Lend-Lease supplies from the US. Even after Japan went to war with the US, despite German complaints, Japan usually allowed Soviet ships to sail between the US and Vladivostok unmolested. As a result, the Pacific Route \u2013 via northern Pacific Ocean and the TSR \u2013 became the safest connection between the US and the USSR.\nAccordingly, it accounted for as much freight as the North Atlantic\u2013Arctic and Iranian routes combined, though cargoes were limited to raw materials and non-military goods. From 1941 to 1942 the TSR also played an important role in relocating Soviet industries from European Russia to Siberia in the face of the German invasion. The TSR also transported Soviet troops west from the Far East to take part in the Soviet counter-offensive in December 1941.\nIn 1944\u201345 the TSR was used to prepare for the Soviet\u2013Japanese War of August 1945; see Pacific Route. When an Anglo-American delegation visited Moscow in October 1944 to discuss the Soviet Union joining the war against Japan, Alanbrooke was told by General Antonov and Stalin himself that the line capacity was 36 pairs of trains per day, but only 26 could be counted on for military traffic; see Pacific Route. The capacity of each train was from 600 to 700 tons.\nAlthough the Japanese estimated that an attack was not likely before Spring 1946, \"Stavka\" had planned for a mid-August 1945 offensive, and had concealed the buildup of a force of 90 divisions; many had crossed Siberia in their vehicles to avoid straining the rail link.\nPost World War II.\nA trainload of containers can be taken from Beijing to Hamburg, via the Trans-Mongolian and Trans-Siberian lines in as little as 15 days, but typical cargo transit times are usually significantly longer and typical cargo transit time from Japan to major destinations in European Russia was reported as around 25 days.\nAccording to a 2009 report, the best travel times for cargo block trains from Russia's Pacific ports to the western border (of Russia, or perhaps of Belarus) were around 12 days, with trains making around per day, at a maximum operating speed of . In early 2009; however, Russian Railways announced an ambitious \"Trans-Siberian in Seven Days\" plan. According to this plan, $11 billion will be invested over the next five years to make it possible for goods traffic to cover the same distance in just seven days. The plan will involve increasing the cargo trains' speed to in 2010\u20132012, and, at least on some sections, to by 2015. At these speeds, goods trains will be able to cover per day.\nCrime.\nFrom February to May 1993, a number of Beijing-based gangs routinely robbed, beat, and raped railway passengers.\nThe criminals took advantage of the fact that Chinese police disembarked the train before the border crossing into Mongolia, but no Mongolian police ever boarded to replace them, and Russian authorities did not board until the train had been in Siberia for an entire day. During the interim, there was no effective security on the trains, and no practical resistance to criminals armed with knives, sticks, and cattle prods.\nDevelopments in shipping.\nOn January 11, 2008, China, Mongolia, Russia, Belarus, Poland, and Germany agreed to collaborate on a cargo train service between Beijing and Hamburg.\nThe railway can typically deliver containers in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 of the time of a sea voyage, and in late 2009 announced a 20% reduction in its container shipping rates. With its 2009 rate schedule, the Trans-Siberian Railway will transport a forty-foot container to Poland from Yokohama for $2,820, or from Busan for $2,154.\nRoutes.\nTrans-Siberian line.\nA commonly used main line route is as follows. Distances and travel times are from the schedule of train No. 002M, Moscow\u2013Vladivostok.\nThere are many alternative routings between Moscow and Siberia. For example:\nDepending on the route taken, the distances from Moscow to the same station in Siberia may differ by several tens of km (a few dozen miles).\nTrans-Manchurian line.\nThe Trans\u2013Manchurian line, as e.g. used by train No.020, Moscow\u2013Beijing follows the same route as the Trans-Siberian between Moscow and Chita and then follows this\nroute to China:\nThe express train (No. 020) travel time from Moscow to Beijing is just over six days. There is no direct passenger service along the entire original Trans-Manchurian route (i.e., from Moscow or anywhere in Russia, west of Manchuria, to Vladivostok via Harbin), due to the obvious administrative and technical (gauge break) inconveniences of crossing the border twice. Assuming sufficient patience and possession of appropriate visas, however, it is still possible to travel all the way along the original route, with a few stopovers (e.g. in Harbin, Grodekovo and Ussuriysk).\nSuch an itinerary would pass through the following points from Harbin east:\nTrans-Mongolian line.\nThe Trans\u2013Mongolian line follows the same route as the Trans-Siberian between Moscow and Ulan Ude, and then follows this route to Mongolia and China:\nHighest point.\nThe highest point of Trans\u2013Siberian Railroad is at Yablonovy pass at an altitude of 1070m situated in the Yablonoi Mountains, in Transbaikal (mainly in Zabaykalsky Krai), Siberia, Russia. The Trans\u2013Siberian Railroad passes the mountains at Chita and runs parallel to the range before going through a tunnel to bypass the heights.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56913", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56913", "title": "Moscow, Russia", "text": ""}
{"id": "56914", "revid": "29154597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56914", "title": "Moskva (disambiguation)", "text": "Moskva is a transliteration of \"\", meaning Moscow in the Russian language.\nMoskva may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56915", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56915", "title": "Trans-Siberian railway", "text": ""}
{"id": "56916", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56916", "title": "Maribor, Slovenia", "text": ""}
{"id": "56917", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56917", "title": "List of cities in the Netherlands by province", "text": "There are no formal rules in the Netherlands to distinguish cities from other settlements. Smaller settlements are usually called , comparable with villages in English speaking countries. The Dutch word for city is (plural: ). The intermediate category of town does not exist in Dutch, but (small city in the province) comes close.\nHistorically, there existed systems of city rights, granted by the territorial lords, which defined the status of a place: a or . Cities were self-governing and had several privileges. In 1851 the granting of city rights and all privileges and special status of cities were abolished. Since then, the only local administrative unit is the municipality. Regardless of this legal change, many people still use the old city rights as a criterion: certain small settlements proudly call themselves a because they historically had city rights, while other, newer towns may not get this recognition. Yet the old and third largest urban center of The Hague, has the status of the seat of the national government, but never received city rights for deliberate historical reasons. \nGeographers and policy makers can distinguish between places with respect to the number of inhabitants or the economic and planological functions within a larger area. Hence, settlements can be considered a city if they function as an urban centre in a rural area; while larger population centres in densely populated areas are often neither considered a village nor a city and are usually referred to with the generic word (place). Inhabitants may also base their choice of words just on the subjective way they experience life at a certain place. \nList of cities by province.\nWhen discussing cities, the distinction is sometimes made between the cities in two urban networks.\nThe largest urban network is known as Randstad, including the largest four cities in the Netherlands: Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht. Of these, 3 have historic city rights: Utrecht from 1122; Amsterdam from 1306; and Rotterdam from 1340. The second urban network in the Netherlands is known as Brabantstad, a partnership of the Brabant \"Big 5\": Eindhoven, Tilburg, Breda, 's-Hertogenbosch and Helmond. In addition, there are several medium-sized cities in the Netherlands without an urban network. Groningen, notably, is a medium-sized city (sixth-largest city in the Netherlands), without an urban network."}
{"id": "56918", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56918", "title": "Haifa, Israel", "text": ""}
{"id": "56920", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56920", "title": "Athens, Greece", "text": ""}
{"id": "56921", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56921", "title": "History of Uganda", "text": "The history of Uganda comprises the history of the people who inhabited the territory of present-day Uganda before the establishment of the Republic of Uganda, and the history of that country once it was established. Evidence from the Paleolithic era shows humans have inhabited Uganda for at least 50,000 years. The forests of Uganda were gradually cleared for agriculture by people who probably spoke Central Sudanic languages. The Empire of Kitara grew out of the Urewe culture in the 10th century. Following the migration and invasion of Luo peoples in about the 15th century, Kitara collapsed, and from the ashes rose various Biito kingdoms such as Bunyoro alongside Buganda.\nIn 1894, Uganda became a protectorate of the British Empire, and in 1962, the United Kingdom granted independence to Uganda, making Sir Edward Muteesa Walugembe the first President of Uganda and Kabaka of Buganda. Idi Amin deposed Milton Obote to became ruler of Uganda in 1971, a position he would occupy for eight years until he was ousted in 1979 as a result of the Uganda\u2013Tanzania War. After a series of other leaders since Amin's fall, Yoweri Museveni came to power in 1986 and has led Uganda since then.\nPre-colonial period.\nPaleolithic evidence of human activity in Uganda goes back to at least 50,000 years, and perhaps as far as 100,000 years, as shown by the Acheulean stone tools recovered from the former environs of Lake Victoria, which were exposed along the Kagera River valley, chiefly around Nsonezi.\nThe cultivators who gradually cleared the forest were probably Bantu-speaking people, whose slow but inexorable expansion gradually took over most of sub-Saharan Africa. They also raised goats and chickens, and they probably kept some cattle by 400 BCE. Their knowledge of agriculture and use of iron-forging technology permitted them to clear the land and feed ever larger numbers of settlers. They displaced small bands of indigenous hunter-gatherers, who relocated to the less accessible mountains.\nMeanwhile, by the first century CE and possibly as early as the fourth century BCE in Western Tanzania, certain related Bantu-speaking metallurgists were perfecting iron smelting to produce medium grade carbon steel in pre-heated forced-draught furnaces. Although most of these developments were taking place southwest of modern Ugandan boundaries, iron was mined and smelted in many parts of the country not long afterward.\nProtectorate (1894\u20131961).\nIn the 1890s, 32,000 labourers from British India were recruited to East Africa under indentured labour contracts to construct the Uganda Railway. Most of the surviving Indians returned home, but 6,724 decided to remain in East Africa after the line's completion. Subsequently, some became traders and took control of cotton ginning and sartorial retail.\nFrom 1900 to 1920, a sleeping sickness epidemic in the southern part of Uganda, along the north shores of Lake Victoria, killed more than 250,000 people. British administrators like George Wilson CB attempted to address the serious scale of the public health crisis in the intervening years.\nEarly independent Uganda (1962\u201371).\nUganda was granted its independence in 1962, although elections leading to internal self-governance were held on 1 March 1961. Benedicto Kiwanuka of the Democratic Party became the first chief minister. Milton Obote was elected Prime Minister in April 1962 and Uganda became a republic in October 1962, maintaining its Commonwealth membership.\nIn succeeding years, supporters of a centralized state vied with those in favor of a loose federation and a strong role for tribally-based local kingdoms. Political maneuvering climaxed in February 1966, when Milton Obote, the Prime Minister, suspended the constitution and assumed all government powers, removing the positions of president and vice president. In September 1967, a new constitution proclaimed Uganda a republic, gave the president even greater powers, and abolished the traditional kingdoms.\nUganda under Idi Amin (1971\u201379).\nAfter a military coup on 25 January 1971, Obote was deposed from power and the dictator Idi Amin seized control of the country. Amin ruled Uganda with the military for the next eight years\nIn 1972, under the so-called \"Africanization\" policy under Idi Amin, about 40,000 ethnic Indians with British passports were forced to leave Uganda. As an example of this exodus, 27,000 ethnic Indians emigrated to the United Kingdom and the 2006 census reported 3,300 people of Ugandan origin in Canada. The loss of the entrepreneurial Indian minority left the country's economy in ruins.\nIdi Amin's rule of Uganda became a synonym for barbarity, with a death toll estimated by the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva to be between 80,000 and a more likely 300,000, the latter figure cited at the end of the 2006 movie \"The Last King of Scotland\". Another estimate, compiled by exile organisations with the help of Amnesty International, put the number killed at 500,000. Amin's atrocities were also graphically recounted in the 1977 book, \"A State of Blood,\" written by one of his former ministers after he fled the country, Henry Kyemba. The Acholi and Langi ethnic groups in northern Uganda were particular objects of Amin's political persecution because they had supported Obote and made up a large part of the army. In the perspective of history, Idi Amin will go down as one who damaged the cause of African nationalism.\nAmin's rule ended after the Uganda-Tanzania War in which Tanzanian forces aided by Ugandan exiles invaded Uganda. The conflict started with a border altercation involving Ugandan exiles who had a camp close to the Ugandan border near Mutukula. This resulted in an attack by the Ugandan Army into Tanzania. In October 1978, the Tanzanian Armed Forces repulsed this incursion and, backed by Ugandan exiles, invaded Uganda. Amin's troops were assisted by Libyan soldiers. On 11 April 1979, the capital Kampala was captured and Amin fled with his remaining forces to Libya.\nUganda since 1979.\nAfter Amin's removal, the Uganda National Liberation Front formed an interim government with Yusuf Lule as president and Jeremiah Lucas Opira as the Secretary-General of the UNLF. This government adopted a ministerial system of administration and created a quasi-parliamentary organ known as the National Consultative Commission (NCC). The NCC and the Lule cabinet reflected widely differing political views. In June 1979, following a dispute over the extent of presidential powers, the NCC replaced Lule with Godfrey Binaisa.\nIn a continuing dispute over the powers of the interim presidency, Binaisa was removed in May 1980. Thereafter, Uganda was ruled by a military commission chaired by Paulo Muwanga. The December 1980 elections returned the UPC to power under Milton Obote's leadership, with Muwanga serving as vice president. Under Obote, the security forces had one of the world's worst human rights records. In their efforts to stamp out an insurgency led by Yoweri Museveni, they laid waste to a substantial section of the country, especially in the Luwero area north of Kampala.\nThe insurgency, the so-called \"bush war\", was conducted by the National Resistance Army (NRA), under the leadership of Yoweri Museveni, and other rebel groups including the Federal Democratic Movement led by Andrew Kayiira and another led by John Nkwaanga. During the conflict the army carried out mass killings of non-combatants.\nObote was overthrown on 27 July 1985, when an army brigade, composed mostly of ethnic Acholi troops and commanded by Lt. Gen. Bazilio Olara-Okello, took Kampala and proclaimed a military government. Obote fled to exile in Zambia. The new regime, headed by former defense force commander Gen. Tito Okello (no relation to Lt. Gen. Olara-Okello), opened negotiations with Museveni's insurgent forces and pledged to improve respect for human rights, end tribal rivalry, and conduct free and fair elections. In the meantime, massive human rights violations continued as the Okello government carried out a brutal counter-insurgency in an attempt to destroy the NRA's support.\nNegotiations between the Okello government and the NRA were conducted in Nairobi in autumn 1985, with Kenyan President Daniel arap Moi seeking a ceasefire and a coalition government in Uganda. Although agreeing in late 1985 to a ceasefire, the NRA continued fighting and seized Kampala and the country in late January 1986, forcing Okello's forces to flee north into Sudan. Museveni's forces organized a government with Museveni as president.\nAfter assuming power, the government dominated by the political grouping created by Museveni and his followers, the National Resistance Movement (NRM or the \"Movement\"), largely put an end to the human rights abuses of earlier governments, initiated substantial political liberalization and general press freedom, and instituted broad economic reforms after consultation with the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and donor governments.\nHowever, from 1986 to 1994, a variety of rebel groups waged a civil war against the Ugandan government of President Museveni. Most of the fighting took place in the country's north and east, although the western and central regions were also affected. The most important insurgent factions were the Uganda People's Democratic Army (UPDA), the Uganda People's Army (UPA), Alice Auma's Holy Spirit Movement (HSM), and Joseph Kony's army (which later became the Lord's Resistance Army). For further details see War in Uganda (1986\u20131994).\nIn 1996, Uganda was a key supporter of the overthrow of Zairean President Mobutu Sese Seko in the First Congo War in favor of rebel leader Laurent-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Kabila.\n21st century.\nBetween 1998 and 2003, the Ugandan Army was involved in the Second Congo War in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Uganda continues to support rebel groups there such as the Movement for the Liberation of Congo and some factions of the Rally for Congolese Democracy.\nAugust 2005, Parliament voted to change the constitution to lift presidential term limits, allowing Museveni to run for a third term if he wished to do so. In a referendum in July 2005, 92.5 percent of voters supported the restoration of multiparty politics, thereby scrapping the no-party or \"movement\" system. Kizza Besigye, Museveni's political rival, returned from exile in October 2005 and was a presidential candidate during the 2006 elections. In the same month, Obote died in South Africa. Museveni won the February 2006 presidential election.\nIn 2009, the Anti-Homosexuality Bill was proposed and under consideration. It was proposed on 13 October 2009 by Member of Parliament David Bahati and, had it been enacted, would have broadened the criminalization of homosexuality in Uganda; introduced the death penalty for people who have previous convictions, are HIV-positive, or engage in sexual acts with those under 18; introduced extradition for those engaging in same-sex sexual relations outside Uganda; and, penalized individuals, companies, media organizations, or non-governmental organizations who supported LGBT rights.\nOn 11 July 2010, al-Shabaab bombers killed 74 people in Kampala. On 13 September 2014, the Ugandan security and intelligence services, with the assistance of the United States, identified and foiled a major terrorist attack in Kampala. They recovered suicide vests, improvised explosive devices, and small arms, and they arrested 19 people who were suspected to have had links to al-Shabaab. This attack could have been as substantial as the attack in Nairobi during the previous year at Westgate Mall. Instead, it was a failure for al-Shabaab.\nThe 2016 Ugandan general election was held in Uganda on 18 February 2016 to elect the president and parliament. Polling day was declared a national holiday. Ahead of the election, Museveni described the formation of an East African Federation uniting Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, and South Sudan as \"the number one target that we should aim at.\" In September 2018 a committee was formed to begin the process of drafting a regional constitution, and a draft constitution for a confederation is set to be written by 2021, with implementation of the confederacy by 2023.\nThe 2021 Ugandan general election re-elected president Museveni to a sixth term, but international observers complained of government violence and disinformation, suppression of independent media and opposition campaigning, the arrest of opposition leaders, the shutdown of the Internet, and harassment of observers. According to official results, Museveni won the elections with 58% of the vote while popstar-turned-politician Bobi Wine had 35%. The opposition challenged the result because of allegations of widespread fraud and irregularities.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56922", "revid": "47033785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56922", "title": "Geography of Uganda", "text": " \nUganda is located in Eastern Africa, West of Kenya, South of South Sudan, East of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and North of Rwanda and Tanzania. While much of its border is on lakeshores, Uganda is landlocked with no access to the sea port but it is a fertile and well-watered country that consists of many lakes and rivers including the largest, Lake Victoria. The country sits in the heart of the Great Lakes region, with Lake Edward, Lake George and Lake Albert on its Western border, Lake Kyoga in the Eastern part of Uganda. It is found in Central Saharan Africa and receives reliable rainfall throughout the year. Rivers are River Nile the longest river in Africa, River Kagera, River Katonga, River Semiliki and River Sezibwa.\nThe climate is tropical and equatorial as well with two dry spells (December to February, June to August). While the Northeast of the country is semiarid and Districts falling prey include Moroto, Kabong, Nakapiripiriti, Karenga. The terrain of Uganda mostly consist of plateaus surrounded by a rim of mountains including the Rwenzori mountain range. Notable national parks include Bwindi, Rwenzori Mountains which has snow on its peak, Margherita, Kibale, Mgahinga National Park, Mount Elgon National game Park, Kidepo National game Park and Queen Elizabeth National game Park, with thick forests to modify climate and to mention; Uganda's plant cover is Savannah.However, Forests also act as a source of Herbal Medicine.\nSome geographical places like Jinja and Kapchorwa have water Springs like Muchsion falls, Bujagali falls, karuma falls and Sipii falls that aids Hydro Electric Power Generation and to cite out; Bujagali falls generates 5 MW that is exported to our physically disadvantaged neighbourhood in the names Rwanda and Burundi.\nInselbergs are common features in the geography of Uganda. The inselbergs are commonly made of granite, sometimes of gneiss and never of amphibolite or volcanic rock. Protruding quartzite hills tend to form ridges rather than \"true inselbergs\".\nStatistics.\nArea:\n\"total:\" \n\"land:\" \n\"water:\" \n* Australia comparative: slightly larger than Victoria\n* Canada comparative: slightly less than half the size of the Yukon\n* United States comparative: slightly smaller than Wyoming\n* EU comparative: slightly larger than Romania\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\" \n\"border countries:\" Democratic Republic of the Congo , Kenya , South Sudan , Tanzania , Rwanda \nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\" Albert Nile at border with South Sudan\n\"highest point:\" Margherita Peak on Mount Stanley\nNatural resources:\ncopper, cobalt, hydropower, limestone, salt, arable land, gold\nLand use: (2012) \n\"arable land:\" () 34.41%\n\"permanent crops:\" () 11.22%\n\"forest cover:\" () 14.01%\n\"other:\" 40.36%\nIrrigated land: (2012)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n (2011) or (2012)\nEnvironment \u2014 current issues:\ndraining of wetlands for agricultural use, deforestation, overgrazing, soil erosion, water hyacinth infestation in Lake Victoria, widespread poaching\nEnvironment \u2014 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\n\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nGeography \u2014 note: Uganda is one of six African states that lies on the equator. Most of Uganda lies north of the equator.\nClimate.\nUganda has a warm tropical climate with temperatures falling in the range on an average. The months from December to February are the hottest, but even during this season the evenings can be pleasant with temperatures in the range.\nMost of Uganda receives an annual rainfall of . The rainy seasons are from March to May and from September to November. During these months, heavy rains can make roads and terrains hard to traverse. The period from January to February and again from June to August are dry. In the north, there is only one rainy season from March to November, and a dry season from December to February.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56923", "revid": "3665380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56923", "title": "Demographics of Uganda", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Uganda include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and others.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 5,158,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2015 was 48.1 percent, 49.4 percent was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.5 percent was 65 years or older.\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 27.VIII.2014):\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Based on the results of the 2014 Population Census.):\nUnited Nations population projections.\nNumbers are in thousands.\nRefugee population.\nBy October 2025, Uganda hosted roughly 1.95 million refugees, more than any other country in Africa. Most are rural groups mainly from South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as from Somalia, Burundi, and Rwanda. From 2023, more than 90,000 refugees fleeing the civil war in Sudan have entered.\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of births and deaths in Uganda is not yet complete. The Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs prepared the following estimates.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR)(Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nFertility data as of 2011 and 2016 (DHS Program):\nEthnic groups.\nSouth Asians and Arabs.\nDuring the Uganda Protectorate period, the British colonialists used South Asian immigrants as intermediaries. Following independence they constituted the largest non-indigenous ethnic group in Uganda, at around 80,000 people, and they dominated trade, industry, and the professions. This caused resentment among the native African majority, which was exploited by post-Independence leaders.\nAfter Idi Amin came to power in 1971, he declared \"economic war\" on the Indians, culminating in the Expulsion of Asians in Uganda in 1972. Since Amin's overthrow in 1979 some Asians have returned. There are between 15,000 and 25,000 in Uganda today, nearly all in the capital Kampala.\nLanguages.\nEnglish (official national language, taught in grade schools, used in courts of law and by most newspapers and some radio broadcasts), Swahili (recently made second official language, important regionally but spoken by very few people in Uganda), Luganda (most widely used of the Niger\u2013Congo languages, preferred for native language publications in the capital and may be taught in school), other Bantu languages, Nilo-Saharan languages and Arabic.\n Protestant 45.1%\n Anglican 32.0%\n Pentecostal/Born Again/Evangelical 11.1%\n Seventh Day Adventist 1.7%\n Baptist .3%\n Roman Catholic 39.3%\n Muslim 13.7%\n other 1.6%\n none 0.2% (2014 est.)\nReligion.\nUganda is a religiously diverse nation with Christianity being the most widely professed religion. According to the 2014 census, over 84 percent of the population was Christian while about 14 percent of the population adhered to Islam, making it the largest minority religion. In 2009, the northern and west Nile regions were dominated by Roman Catholics, and Iganga District in the east of Uganda had the highest percentage of Muslims, about 53% population.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56924", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56924", "title": "Economy of Uganda", "text": "The economy of Uganda has great potential and appears poised for rapid growth and development. Uganda is endowed with significant natural resources, including ample fertile land, regular rainfall, and mineral deposits.\nChronic political instability and erratic economic management since the implementation of self-rule has produced a record of persistent economic decline that has left Uganda among of the world's poorest and least-developed countries. The national energy needs have historically exceeded the domestic energy generation, though large petroleum reserves have been found in the country's west.\nAfter the turmoil of the Amin period, the country began a program of economic recovery in 1981 that received considerable foreign assistance. From mid-1984 onward, overly expansionist fiscal and monetary policies and the renewed outbreak of civil strife led to a setback in economic performance.\nThe economy has grown since the 1990s; real gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of 6.7% annually during the period 1990\u20132015, whereas real GDP per capita grew at 3.3% per annum during the same period. During this period, the Ugandan economy experienced economic transformation: the share of agriculture value added in GDP declined from 56% in 1990 to 24% in 2015; the share of industry grew from 11% to 20% (with manufacturing increasing at a slower pace, from 6% to 9% of GDP); and the share of services went from 32% to 55%.\nInternational trade and finance.\nSince assuming power in early 1986, Museveni's government has taken important steps toward economic rehabilitation. The country's infrastructure, notably its transport and communications systems which were destroyed by war and neglect, is being rebuilt. Recognizing the need for increased external support, Uganda negotiated a policy framework paper with the IMF and the World Bank in 1987. Uganda subsequently began implementing economic policies designed to restore price stability and sustainable balance of payments, improve capacity utilization, rehabilitate infrastructure, restore producer incentives through proper price policies, and improve resource mobilization and allocation in the public sector. These so-called Structural Adjustment Programs greatly improved the shape of the Ugandan economy, but did not lead to economic growth in the first decade after their implementation. Since 1995, Uganda has experienced rapid economic growth, but it is not clear to what extent this positive development can be attributed to Structural Adjustment. Uganda has been a member of the World Trade Organization, since January 1st 1995 and a member of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, since October 25th 1962.\nCurrency.\nUganda began issuing its own currency in 1966 through the Bank of Uganda.\nAgriculture.\nAgricultural products supply a significant portion of Uganda's foreign exchange earnings, with coffee alone, of which Uganda is Africa's second largest producer after Ethiopia, accounting for about 17% of the country's exports in 2017 and earning the country US$545 million. Exports of apparel, hides, skins, vanilla, vegetables, fruits, cut flowers, and fish are growing, while cotton, tea, and tobacco continue to be mainstays.\nUganda produced in 2018:\nIn addition, there are smaller productions of other agricultural products, like cotton (87 thousand tons), tea (62 thousand tons), tobacco (35 thousand tons) and cocoa (27 thousand tons).\nTransportation.\nAs of 2017, Uganda had about of roads, with approximately (4 percent) paved. Most paved roads radiate from Kampala, the country's capital and largest city.\nAs of 2017, Uganda's metre gauge railway network measures about in length. Of this, about 56% (), is operational. A railroad originating at Mombasa on the Indian Ocean connects with Tororo, where it branches westward to Jinja, Kampala, and Kasese and northward to Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Gulu, and Pakwach. The only railway line still operating, however, is the one to Kampala.\nUganda's important link to the port of Mombasa is now mainly by road, which serves its transport needs and also those of neighboring Rwanda, Burundi, parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and South Sudan.\nAn international airport is at Entebbe on the northern shores of Lake Victoria, about south of Kampala. In January 2018, the government of Uganda began the construction of Kabalega International Airport, in the Western Region of Uganda. This will be Uganda's second international airport, which is planned to facilitate the construction of an oil refinery and boost tourism.\nThe transport union Amalgamated Transport and General Workers Union (ATWGU) is one of the more powerful trade unions in the country with about 100,000 members, many of whom are informal workers.\nCommunications.\nThe Uganda Communications Commission regulates communications, primarily \"delivered through an enabled private sector.\" The companies it regulates include television networks, radio stations, mobile network operators, and fixed-line telephone companies.\nMining and petroleum.\nUganda's predominant mineral occurrences are gold, tungsten, tin, beryl, and tantalite in the south; tungsten, clay, and granite between latitude zero and two degrees north; and gold, mica, copper, limestone, and iron in the north.\nIn late 2012, the government of Uganda was taken to court over value added tax that it placed on goods and services purchased by Tullow Oil, a foreign oil company operating in the country at the time. The court case was heard at an international court based in the United States. The Ugandan government insisted that Tullow could not claim taxes on supplies as recoverable costs before oil production starts. Sources from within the government reveal that the main concern at present is the manner in which millions of dollars have been lost in the past decade, money that could allegedly have stayed in Uganda for investment in the public sector; a Global Financial Integrity report recently revealed that illicit money flows from Uganda between 2001 and 2012 totalled $680 million. Tullow Oil was represented in the court case by Kampala Associated Advocates, whose founder is Elly Kurahanga, the President of Tullow Uganda. A partner at Kampala Associated Advocates, Peter Kabatsi, was also Uganda's solicitor general between 1990 and 2002, and he has denied claims that he negotiated contracts with foreign oil firms during his time in this role.\nIn June 2015, the Ugandan government and Tullow Oil settled a longstanding dispute regarding the amount of certain capital gains taxes that the company owed to the government. The government claimed that the company owed US$435 million. The claim, however, was settled for US$250 million.\nIn April 2018, the government signed agreements with Albertine Graben Refinery Consortium, an International consortium led by General Electric of the United States, to build a 60,000 barrels-per-day Uganda Oil Refinery in Western Uganda. The cost of the development is budgeted at about US$4 billion.\nGDP per capita.\nGDP per capita (PPP) according to Madisson.\nHistorical evolution of GDP per capita (PPP) of Uganda during the period 1950-2005 (expressed in dollars)\nSource: Maddison Historical Statistics Project \nHistorical evolution of GDP per capita (PPP) of Uganda during the period 1985-2040 (expressed in dollars)\nSource: Maddison Historical Statistics Project \nWomen in the economy.\nThe informal economy, which is predominantly female, is broadly defined as a group of vulnerable individuals without protections in regards to their work. Women face a plethora of barriers specific to gender when attempting to access the formal economy of Uganda, and research revealed prejudice against lending to women in the informal sector. The agriculture sector of the Ugandan economy, which composes roughly 40% of the country's GDP, is largely fulfilled by women laborers, especially in managing products, marketing, and the crop sub-sector. 76% of women work in the agriculture sector and roughly 66% of men do, and women provide for 80% of food crops and 60% of traditional exports such as coffee or tea. In the formal, non-agricultural economy, men constitute 61% of the workforce, whereas women predominate the informal economy, and this can be attributed to the lack of equity between men and women in the country. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics reported, when looking at the urban workforce in 2015, 88.6% of women were employed informally, and 84.2% of men were. Women are unable to enter into certain sectors, especially in the formal economy, due to the inability to provide substantial initial funding, and remain in the trade and service sectors of the economy. Comparatively, men dominate the more profitable sectors, such as manufacturing. Women traders make up 70% of those in markets and 40% in shops in addition to dominating other sectors such as the service industry, crafts, and tailoring.\nWomen are often undervalued in data compilation, particularly when considering their role in their domestic home lives. For example, women commonly match the contribution of their husbands to their familial income, if not provide more, when taking into consideration the value of their labor and the profits made from selling excess food. Urban women on average earn between 50% and 70% of a household's income. Women are also discredited in data collection due to biases of data collectors resulting in inaccurate reports, as well as income being measured per house, rather than separating by gender. The barriers women face in furthering their entrepreneurial careers are different from those faced by men; this is inherent in the biased culture and institutions plaguing Uganda despite the passing of somewhat progressive policies, especially with the 1985 transition of government to the National Resistance Movement party.\nData.\nSource: IMF\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56925", "revid": "1282200108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56925", "title": "Communications in Uganda", "text": " \nThere are a number of systems of communication in Uganda, including a system of telephony, radio and television broadcasts, internet, mail, and several newspapers. The use of phones and the internet in Uganda has rapidly increased in the last few years.\nHistory.\n1900\u20131970.\nThe postal service of for the protectorates of British East Africa and Uganda was called East Africa and Uganda Protectorates, and operated from 1 April 1903, to 22 July 1920. From 1948 to 1977, postal service in Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda was provided by the East African Posts and Telecommunications Corporation. With the decolonization of Africa, Uganda took over control of its postal system, although until 1961 stamps from the colonial postal system were being issued alongside Uganda's stamps.\n1990s\u2013present.\nThe Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation had a monopoly over Uganda's communications sector until the Uganda Communications Act was enacted in 1997. The act created the Uganda Communications Commission, the current regulator of communications in Uganda.\nTelephone.\nAs of June 2018[ [update]], the telephone communications system was described by the CIA factbook as \"developed through private partnerships\", with \"over of fiber optics\", and 4G network available in most major cities and national parks, and 3G service available in second-tier urban centers. \n As of 2004[ [update]], Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL), Celtel and MTN Uganda Limited were the three telecommunications operators licensed by the Uganda Communications Commission.\nIn 2018 there were 368,243 main telephone lines in use in Uganda, making Uganda 108th in the world. In 2016, there were 23 million mobile telephones in use; 54th in the world. This was an increase from 2006 when there were 108,600 main telephone lines in use in Uganda, and from 2007 when there were 4.195\u00a0million mobile telephones in use. By June 2018, the total number of mobile telephone users in Uganda, was 23.6\u00a0million, or 57.6% of the 41\u00a0million population, according to the Uganda Communications Commission.\nAs of March 2010[ [update]] telephone traffic within is carried by wire. Microwave \"radi relay\", and radiotelephone communication stations are used in domestic telecommunications as well, and fixed and mobile cellular systems are used for short range traffic.\nAs of March 2010[ [update]] international telephone communication is catered for by an Intelsat and an Inmarsat satellite earth station, along with analog links to Kenya and Tanzania. The international calling code is 256.\nInternet.\nThe top-level domain for Uganda is \".ug\".\nIn 2018 Uganda had 18.149\u00a0million Internet users, or 45.9% of the population (52nd in the world). This is up from 2.5\u00a0million users in 2008 (64th in the world).\nIn 2012, Uganda had 36,332 fixed broadband subscriptions (119th in the world) or 0.1% of the population (165th in the world) and 2.5\u00a0million wireless broadband subscriptions (58th in the world) or 7.6% of the population (99th in the world).\nThe first high speed commercial internet service in Uganda (and Africa) was constructed by international satellite internet backbone provider NSN Network Services of Avon, CO and its Ugandan ISP client, Infomail Uganda Ltd. This service was switched online on the morning of 5 August 1995.\nInfomail was linked by satellite from Kampala to NSN's United States east-coast satellite gateway at the USEI teleport in New Jersey and from there linked by a leased terrestrial connection to NSN's satellite gateway and peering routers which were co-located at the Giga-ring at MAE-WEST, at NASA's jet propulsion laboratory in California.\nThe actual satellite linking the two continents was leased by NSN from the Russian Space Communications Corporation (RSCC), a C-Band satellite in geostationary orbit over the mid-Atlantic Ocean.\nInfomail Uganda began operations with 16 customer dial up lines served by 16 USR 19,200 baud rack mounted modems. A Sun Sparc \"Pizzabox\" Server on-site in Kampala managed all local internet services and user accounting.\nThe original satellite link in Kampala used a 5-meter Andrew antenna. The initial link speed was 64\u00a0kbit/s, almost immediately upgraded to 1.5\u00a0Mbit/s in January 2006 when the RF amplifiers in Kampala were upgraded from 5 Watts to 20 Watts.\nInfomail Uganda Ltd was founded and managed by Dr. Jean Paul Minet in partnership with Kampala radio broadcaster Patrick Quarcoo (Capital FM) and William Pike, editor/publisher of The Nation newspaper. The backbone satellite system was designed and assembled / installed in Kampala by NSN's VP of Engineering Bill Sepmeier, NSN co-founder and engineer John Morris, and local Kampala engineer Terah Kagwah.\nNSN was sold in 1997 to JACOR/Clear Channel Communications and its remaining network operations in Denver were acquired by LinkUp Communications in 2021.\nBy the end of 2006 Uganda had 18 Internet service providers. Mobile network operators provide internet services to Ugandans alongside fixed-line internet providers.\nMTN was the first mobile operator to offer Internet services in Uganda via GPRS, but Orange (France Telecom) was the first to popularize mobile Internet by offering 3G services after joining the market in 2009. Orange eventually divested from many anglophone markets in Africa, and their Uganda operating company was purchased by Africell Uganda in 2014.\nMTN later deployed 3G mobile internet services following decreasing revenues in traditional voice and SMS services. Warid, Zain, UTL, and others later followed suit. Vodafone later entered the market as Uganda's first MVNO.\nFixed-line internet providers have also increased in Uganda. These mainly offer premium dedicated internet services to business customers. Some of the notable ISPs for business include Echotel Uganda formerly iWayAfrica, Roke Telkom, Datanet, Liquid Telecom, Simbanet, Gilat, BCS Uganda, C-Squared Uganda, Seacom UG, among others and this infrastructure is complimented with an exchange point UIXP and a carrier neutral Datacentre Raxio Uganda. These offer high speed internet services for enterprise services with speeds ranging from 0.5\u00a0Mbit/s to 10\u00a0Gbit/s offering 4G Satellite, LTE, Wimax, Microwave, Fibre connectivity solutions.\nIn December 2015 Google launched its first wi-fi network in Kampala.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nIn September 2009 the OpenNet Initiative found little or no evidence of Internet filtering in all four areas (political, social, conflict/security, and Internet tools) for which it tests.\nThough Uganda has made great technological strides in recent years, the country still faces a number of challenges in obtaining affordable, reliable Internet bandwidth. This, rather than a formal government-sponsored filtering regime, is the major obstacle to Internet access. Just prior to the presidential elections in February 2006, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) blocked the anti-government Web site RadioKatwe in the only internationally reported case of Internet filtering in Uganda to that date.\nDuring the 2016 parliamentary elections, the government ordered the blocking of social media for 72 hours (18\u201321 February).\nIn July 2018 Uganda instituted a tax on \"over the top\" messaging and voice services, which includes social networks. Users must may a fee of USh\u00a0200/ (approx US$0.06) daily to use these services. The stated purpose of the law is to provide additional government revenue, and to control \"gossip\" being spread over these platforms. VPN services have also been blocked, after they were used by citizens to circumvent the tax. Amnesty International condemned the tax as being \"a clear attempt to undermine the right to freedom of expression\". Internet usage fell significantly after the tax was introduced.\nIn January 2021 the government ordered a complete Internet shutdown during the presidential election, that lasted 4 days.\nPostal Service.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], Uganda Post Limited was the only postal service licensed by the Uganda Communications Commission in Uganda. As of 2010[ [update]], Uganda Post Limited had changed its name to Posta Uganda.\nRadio and television.\nThe Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is the public broadcasting station. The 2004 Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Act stated that the UBC should be funded by the levying of a television licence fee. Collection of a licence fee set at 20,000/ (around \u20ac8.40 or US$10.80) started in 2005. However, collection was subsequently halted by President Yoweri Museveni. There has since been pressure to reinstate the licence fee to maintain UBC's independence.\nNewspapers.\nDaily newspapers in Uganda include \"The New Vision\", \"Sunday Vision\", \"The Daily Monitor\", \"The Sunday Monitor\", \"The Red Pepper\", \"The Sunday Pepper\", \"The Uganda Observer\", and \"The East African Business Week\" in the Northern Region of Uganda. \"The East African Procurement News\" is a weekly business newspaper.\nBlogs in Uganda.\nBlogs are increasingly being used as a medium of communication in Uganda. Affordable data rates, increasing internet penetration and free blogging platforms such as Wordpress and Blogger are making internet users turn to blogging platforms to creatively express themselves, comment on current affairs, inform the public among other reasons.\nBlog sites in Uganda include Mbu, Techjaja, Nymy Net, Dignited, Mugibson, and Pulse Uganda."}
{"id": "56926", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56926", "title": "Baikal\u2013Amur Mainline", "text": "Russian rail road route\nThe Baikal\u2013Amur Mainline (, , , ) is a broad-gauge railway line in Russia. Traversing Eastern Siberia and the Russian Far East, the -long BAM runs about north of and parallel to the Trans-Siberian Railway.\nThe Soviet Union built the BAM as a strategic alternative route to the Trans\u2013Siberian Railway, seen as vulnerable especially along the sections close to the border with China. The BAM cost $14 billion, and it was built with special, durable tracks since much of it ran over permafrost. Due to the severe terrain, weather, length and cost, Soviet general secretary Leonid Brezhnev described BAM in 1974 as \"the construction project of the century\".\nIf the permafrost layer that supports the BAM railway line were to melt, the railway would collapse and sink into peat bog layers that cannot bear its weight. In 2016 and 2018 there were reports about climate change and damage to buildings and infrastructure as a result of thawing permafrost.\nRoute.\nThe BAM departs from the Trans-Siberian railway at Tayshet, then crosses the Angara River at Bratsk and the Lena River at Ust-Kut, proceeds past Severobaikalsk at the northern tip of Lake Baikal, past Tynda and Khani, crosses the Amur River at Komsomolsk-on-Amur and finally reaches the Pacific Ocean at Sovetskaya Gavan. There are 21 tunnels along the line, with a total length of . There are also more than 4,200 bridges, with a total length of over .\nOf the whole route, only the western Tayshet-Taksimo sector of is electrified. The route is largely single-track, although the reservation is wide enough for double-tracking for its full length, in the case of eventual duplication. The unusual thing about the railway is that it is electrified with a 27.5 kV, 50\u00a0Hz catenary minimum height at above top of the rails to suit double-stacking under the overhead wires on the Russian gauge tracks, which requires rolling stock to be modified for service on the railway.\nAt Tynda the route is crossed by the Amur\u2013Yakutsk Mainline, which runs north to Neryungri and Tommot, with an extension to Nizhny Bestyakh opened in 2019. The original section of the AYaM connecting the Trans-Siberian at Bamovskaya with the BAM at Tynda is also referred to as the \"Little BAM\".\nDuring the winter the passenger trains go from Moscow past Tayshet and Tynda to Neryungri and Tommot and there are also a daily trains from Tynda to Komsomolsk-on-Amur and from Komsomolsk-on-Amur to Sovetskaya Gavan on the Pacific Ocean via Vanino (\"Vladivostok-Sovetskaya Gavan\" train No.351\u042d). Travel time from Tayshet to Tynda is 48 hours. Travel time from Tynda to Komsomolsk-on-Amur is 36 hours. Travel time from Komsomolsk-on-Amur to Sovetskaya Gavan is 13 hours.\nThere are ten tunnels along the BAM railway, totaling of route. They include:\nThese are among the longest tunnels in Russia.\nIn addition, the route crosses 11 full-flowing rivers (including the Lena, Amur, Zeya, Vitim, Olyokma, Selemdzha and Bureya). In total, 2230 large and small bridges were built on it.\nHistory.\nEarly plans and start of construction.\nThe route of the present-day BAM first came under consideration in the 1880s as an option for the eastern section of the planned Trans-Siberian railway.\nIn the 1930s, labor-camp inmates, in particular from the Bamlag camp of the Gulag system, built the section from Tayshet to Bratsk. In a confusing transfer of names, the label \"BAM\" applied from 1933 to 1935 to the project to double-track the Trans-Siberian east of Lake Baikal, constructed largely using forced labor.\n1945 saw the finalisation of plans for upgrading the BAM for diesel or electric instead of steam traction, and for the heavier axle-loads of eight-axle oil tankers to carry new-found oil from Western Siberia. The upgrading required 25 years and 3,000 surveyors and designers, although much of the redesign work (particularly as regards the central section) took place between 1967 and 1974.\nConstruction project of the century.\nIn March 1974, Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev proposed that the BAM would be one of the two major projects in the Tenth Five Year Plan (1976\u201380). He famously stated that \"BAM will be constructed with clean hands only!\" and firmly rejected the suggestion to again use prison labor. A few weeks later, he challenged the Young Communist League (Komsomol) to join in \"the construction project of the century\". The 17th Komsomol congress (held in April 1974) announced the BAM as a Komsomol shock construction project, created the central Komsomol headquarters of BAM construction, and appointed Dmitry Filippov the chief of the headquarters.\nBy the end of 1974, perhaps 50,000 young people of the 156,000 young people who applied had moved to the BAM service area. In 1975 and 1976, 28 new settlements were inaugurated and 70 new bridges, including the Amur and Lena bridges, were erected. And while of track was laid, the track-laying rate would have needed to nearly triple to meet the 1983 deadline.\nIn September 1984, a \"golden spike\" was hammered into place, connecting the eastern and western sections of the BAM. The Western media was not invited to attend this historic event as Soviet officials did not want any comments about the line's operational status. In reality, only one third of the BAM's track was fully operational for civilians, due to military reasons.\nThe BAM was again declared complete in 1991. By then, the total cost to build the line was US$14 billion (RU\u20bd106 trillion).\nCrisis.\nBeginning in the mid-1980s, the BAM project attracted increasing criticism for having been poorly planned. Infrastructure and basic services like running water were often not in place when workers arrived. At least 60 boomtowns developed along the route, but today many of these places are deserted ghost towns and unemployment in the area is high. The building of the BAM has also been criticised for its complete lack of environmental protection.\nWhen the Soviet Union was dissolved, numerous mining and industrial projects in the region were cancelled and the BAM was greatly underutilized until the late 1990s, running at a large operational deficit.\nIn 1996, the BAM as a single operational body was dissolved, with the western section from Tayshet to Khani becoming the East Siberian Railway and the rest transferred to the management of the Far Eastern Railway.\nDuring the Russo-Ukrainian War, on November 30, 2023, an explosion occurred in the Severomuysky Tunnel. A second explosion happened soon thereafter on the bypass used as backup for the tunnel. The Security Service of Ukraine claimed responsibility for the explosions.\nCurrent situation and future prospects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA major improvement was the opening of the Severomuysky Tunnel on 5 December 2003. It is up to 1.5\u00a0kilometres (nearly 1 mile) deep. Construction took 27 years to complete. Prior to this, the corresponding route segment was long, with heavy slopes necessitating the use of auxiliary bank engine locomotives.\nWith the resources boom of recent years and improving economic conditions in Russia, use of the line is increasing. Plans exist for the development of mining areas such as \"Udokanskoye\" and \"Chineyskoye\" near Novaya Chara, as well as one of Eurasia's largest coal deposits at Elginskoye (Elga) in the Sakha Republic (Yakutia). In connection with this, a number of branch lines have been built or are under construction.\nIn January 2012 the Russian mining company Mechel completed the construction of the 320-kilometre-long branch line to Elginskoye, branching from the BAM station Ulak, west of the Zeya River crossing in northwestern Amur Oblast. The branch line connects the Elginskoye coal mine to the Russian railroad network.\nCurrently under discussion is the construction of a bridge or tunnel under the Strait of Tartary to Sakhalin Island, with the possibility of the further construction of a bridge or tunnel from Sakhalin to Japan. A tunnel from the mainland to Sakhalin was previously begun under Joseph Stalin, but was abandoned after his death. A second attempt in 2003 was also postponed during construction. Current economic conditions make the short-term completion of the tunnel doubtful, although Russian president Dmitry Medvedev announced in November 2008 his support for a revival of this project.\nThe BAM now also attracts the interest of Western railway enthusiasts, with some tourist activity on the line.\nAlso, the BAM itself extension from Komsomolsk-on-Amur to Magadan (Okhotsk coastal route), full length electrification, full length track doubling, and double-stacking under the overhead wires on the Russian gauge tracks (with well cars to make 6.15m height) are proposed.\nAlong the BAM.\nTayshet to Lake Baikal :\nLake Baikal to Tynda :\nTynda to Komsomolsk :\nKomsomolsk to Sovetskaya Gavan :\nThis section was completed by prisoners during World War II, except for the section east of Komsomolsk which was completed in 1974.\nIn April 2008 the state-owned Bamtonnelstroy corporation started work on the new single-track Kuznetsovsky Tunnel to bypass an older tunnel built in 1943\u20131945. It was opened in December 2012. The old tunnel had difficult gradients; building the new tunnel relieved a bottleneck on the BAM. The 59.8 bn roubles (about $1.93 bn) project included of new track. In 2010, Yakunin had said, the stretch between Komsomolsk and Sovetskaya Gavan was the weakest link on the BAM, which, he said, could be carrying 100 million tons of freight a year in 2050.\nThe BAM road.\nRunning approximately alongside the railway track is the BAM road, a railway service track. It is said to be in a very poor state, with collapsed bridges, dangerous river crossings, severe potholes and \"unrelenting energy-sapping bogs\". The narrow, dilapidated Vitim River Bridge (aka Kuandinsky Bridge) that crosses the Vitim river has attracted attention since its first appearance on social media in 2009. The passage of the bridge is forbidden since 2016 but remains a common road for individuals to reach the town of Koanda.\nThe road is passable only by the most extreme off-road vehicles and adventure motorcycles. In 2009, a group of three experienced motorcycle riders took a whole month to travel from Komsomolsk (in the east) to Lake Baikal.\nHonors.\nMain belt asteroid 2031 BAM, discovered in 1969 by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Chernykh, is named in honor of the builders of the BAM.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56927", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56927", "title": "Transportation of Uganda", "text": ""}
{"id": "56928", "revid": "50599441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56928", "title": "Uganda People's Defence Force", "text": "Armed forces of Uganda\nThe Uganda People's Defence Force (UPDF), previously known as the National Resistance Army (NRA), is the armed forces of Uganda. From 2007 to 2011, the International Institute for Strategic Studies estimated the UPDF had a total strength of 40,000\u201345,000, consisting of land forces and an air wing. Recruitment to the forces is done annually.\nAfter Uganda achieved independence in October 1962, British officers retained most high-level military commands. Ugandans in the rank and file claimed this policy blocked promotions and kept their salaries disproportionately low. These complaints eventually destabilized the armed forces, already weakened by ethnic divisions. Each post-independence regime expanded the size of the army, usually by recruiting from among people of one region or ethnic group, and each government employed military force to subdue political unrest.\nHistory.\nThe origins of the Ugandan armed forces can be traced to 1902, when the Uganda Battalion of the King's African Rifles was formed. Ugandan soldiers fought as part of the King's African Rifles during the First World War and Second World War. As Uganda moved toward independence, the army stepped up recruitment, and the government increased the use of the army to quell domestic unrest. The army became more closely involved in politics, setting a pattern that continued after independence. In January 1960, for example, troops were deployed to Bugisu and Bukedi districts in the east to quell political violence. In the process, the soldiers killed 12 people, injured several hundred, and arrested more than 1,000. A series of similar clashes occurred between troops and demonstrators, and in March 1962 the government recognized the army's growing domestic importance by transferring control of the military to the Ministry of Home Affairs.\nFirst post-independence military, 1962\u20131971.\nOn 9 October 1962, Uganda became independent from the United Kingdom, with the 4th Battalion, King's African Rifles, based at Jinja, becoming the Uganda Rifles. The traditional leader of the Baganda, Edward Mutesa, became president of Uganda. Milton Obote, a northerner and longtime opponent of autonomy for the southern kingdoms including Buganda, was prime minister. Mutesa recognized the seriousness of the rank-and-file demands for Africanising the officer corps, but was more concerned about the potential northern domination of the military, a concern that reflected the power struggle between Mutesa and Obote. Mutesa used his political power to protect the interests of his Baganda constituency and refused to support demands for Africanisation of the officer ranks.\nOn 1 August 1962, the Uganda Rifles was renamed the \"Uganda Army\". The armed forces more than doubled, from 700 personnel to 1,500, and the government created the 2nd Battalion stationed at the northeastern town of Moroto on 14 November 1963. Omara-Otunnu wrote in 1987 that \"a large number of men had been recruited into the Army to form this new battalion, and ... the new recruits were not given proper training\" because the Army was already heavily committed to its various operations.\nIn January 1964, following a mutiny by Tanganyikan soldiers in protest over their own Africanisation crisis, unrest spread throughout the Uganda Army. On 22 January 1964, soldiers of the 1st Battalion in Jinja mutinied to press their demands for a pay raise and a Ugandan officer corps. They also detained their British officers, several non-commissioned officers, and Minister of Interior Felix Onama, who had arrived in Jinja to represent the government's views to the rank and file. Obote appealed for British military support, hoping to prevent the mutiny from spreading to other parts of the country. About 450 British soldiers from the 2nd Battalion, The Scots Guards and Staffordshire Regiment (elements of the 24th Infantry Brigade) responded. They surrounded the First Battalion barracks at Jinja, seized the armory, and quelled the mutiny. The government responded two days later by dismissing several hundred soldiers from the army, several of whom were subsequently detained.\nAlthough the authorities later released many of the detained soldiers and reinstated some in the army, the mutiny marked a turning point in civil\u2013military relations. The mutiny reinforced the army's political strength. Within weeks of the mutiny, the president's cabinet also approved a military pay raise retroactive to 1 January 1964, more than doubling the salaries of those in private to staff-sergeant ranks. Additionally, the government raised defense allocations by 400 percent. The number of Ugandan officers increased from 18 to 55. Two northerners, Shaban Opolot and Idi Amin, assumed command positions in the Uganda Army and later received promotions to Brigadier and commander in chief, and army chief of staff, respectively.\nFollowing the 1964 mutiny, the government remained fearful of internal opposition. Obote moved the army headquarters approximately from Jinja to Kampala. He also created a secret police force, the General Service Unit (GSU) to bolster security. Most GSU employees guarded government offices in and around Kampala, but some also served in overseas embassies and other locations throughout Uganda. When British training programs ended, Israel started training Uganda's army, air force, and GSU personnel. Several other countries also provided military assistance to Uganda.\nDecalo writes:\nusing classic 'divide and rule' tactics, he [Obote] appointed different foreign military missions to each battalion, scrambled operational chains of command, played the police off against the army, encouraged personal infighting between his main military 'proteges' and removed from operational command of troops officers who appeared unreliable or too authoritative.\nWhen Congolese aircraft bombed the West Nile villages of Paidha and Goli on 13 February 1965, Obote again increased military recruitment and doubled the army's size to more than 4,500. Units established included a third battalion at Mubende, a signals squadron at Jinja, and an antiaircraft detachment. On 1 July 1965, six units were formed: a brigade reconnaissance, an army ordnance depot (seemingly located at Magamaga), a brigade signals squadron training wing, a records office, a pay and pensions office, and a Uganda army workshop.\nTensions rose in the power struggle over control of the government and the army and over the relationship between the army and the Baganda people. During Obote's absence on 4 February 1966, a motion opposing him was introduced to parliament by Grace Ibingira, which called to suspend Amin and investigate Obote and three others (including Amin) for supposedly accepting gold and ivory from Congolese rebels. On 22 February, Obote arrested Ibingira and four other ministers, essentially dismantling opposition to himself in the Ugandan People's Congress. Later, Amin was appointed Chief of the Army and Air Force Staff, while Brigadier Opolot was demoted to the Ministry of Defence as Chief of the Defence Staff. On 24 May 1966, Obote ousted Mutesa, assumed his office as president and commander in chief, suspended the 1962 constitution, and consolidated his control over the military by eliminating several rivals. In October 1966 Opolot was dismissed from the army and detained under the emergency regulations then in force.\nAt about the same time, Obote abrogated the constitution, revoked Buganda's autonomous status, and instructed the Army to attack the Kabaka's palace, forcing the Kabaka to flee. Elections were cancelled. Political loyalty rather than military skill became critical amongst both officers and men. Many educated southern officers were court-martialled or dismissed in 1966 and 1967, and ethnicity became the key factor in recruitment and promotions.\nIn 1970, the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) assessed the Ugandan armed forces to consist of 6,700 personnel, constituting an army of 6,250 with two brigade groups, each of two battalions, plus an independent infantry battalion, with some Ferret armoured cars, and BTR-40 and BTR-152 armoured personnel carriers, plus an air arm of 450 with 12 Fouga Magister armed jet trainers, and seven MiG-15s and MiG-17s.\nUganda Army of Idi Amin, 1971\u20131979.\nIn January 1971, Amin and his followers within the army seized power in a coup d'\u00e9tat.\nShortly after the expulsion of Asians in 1972, Idi Amin launched a small invasion across the Tanzanian border into south-western Uganda. His small army contingent in 27 trucks set out to capture the southern Ugandan military post at Masaka but instead settled down to await a general uprising against Amin, which did not occur. A planned seizure of the airport at Entebbe by soldiers in an allegedly hijacked East African Airways passenger aircraft was aborted when Obote's pilot blew out the aircraft's tires, causing it to remain in Tanzania. Amin was able to mobilize his more reliable Malire Mechanised Regiment and expel the invaders.\nIn 1976, during Operation Entebbe, the Israeli military destroyed 12 MiG-21s and three MiG-17s based at Entebbe Airport to prevent pursuit.\nIn 1977, before the Uganda\u2013Tanzania War, the Ugandan armed forces were reported by IISS as consisting of 20,000 land forces personnel, with two four-battalion brigades and five other battalions of various types, plus a training regiment. There were a total of 35 T-34, T-55, and M-4 Sherman medium tanks. SIPRI assessed decades later that ten T-34s had been supplied from Libya in 1975\u201376. An air arm was 1,000 strong with 21 MiG-21 and 10 MiG-17 combat aircraft. The IISS noted that the Uganda Army collapsed in the face of the Tanzanian onslaught and the serviceable aircraft were removed to Tanzania. Its remnants fled into exile in Zaire and Sudan, from where they launched an insurgency. Meanwhile, pro-Tanzanian rebel groups were reorganized to become Uganda's new regular military.\nUNLA, 1979\u20131986.\nAfter the Uganda\u2013Tanzania War, fighters available to the new government included only the fewer than 1,000 troops who had fought alongside the Tanzanian People's Defence Force (TPDF) to expel Amin. The army was back to the size of the original army at independence in 1962. Titularly, Colonel Tito Okello served as army commander and Colonel David Oyite Ojok as chief of staff, leading the Uganda National Liberation Army (UNLA).\nBut in 1979, in an attempt to consolidate support for the future, leaders such as Yoweri Museveni and Major General (later Chief of Staff) Ojok began to enroll thousands of recruits into what were rapidly becoming their private armies. Museveni's 80 original soldiers grew to 8,000; Ojok's original 600 became 24,000. When then-President Godfrey Binaisa sought to curb the use of these militias, which were harassing and detaining political opponents, he was overthrown in a military coup on 10 May 1980. The coup was engineered by Ojok, Museveni, and others acting under the general direction of Paulo Muwanga, Obote's right-hand man and chair of the Military Commission. The TPDF was still providing necessary security while Uganda's police force\u2014which had been decimated by Amin\u2014was rebuilt, but President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania refused to help Binaisa retain power. Many Ugandans claimed that although Nyerere did not impose his own choice on Uganda, he indirectly facilitated the return to power of his old friend and ally, Obote. In any case, the Military Commission headed by Muwanga effectively governed Uganda during the six months leading up to the national elections of December 1980.\nA Commonwealth Military Training Team - Uganda assisted the UNLA in the early 1980s.\nAfter the Museveni government was formed in 1986, an NRA code of conduct, originally formulated in the bush in 1982, was made public. This was later formalized as Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 (Amendment), and served as a basis for relations among soldiers and between the NRA and the public. After the MRM victory steps were taken to institutionalize the NRA, including the setting-up of a bureaucracy; uniforms; regimental colours; training programmes; ranks; and pay and privileges. A number of key Rwanda Patriotic Front personnel became part of the National Resistance Army that became Uganda's new national armed forces. Fred Rwigyema was appointed deputy minister of defense and deputy army commander-in-chief, second only to Museveni in the military chain of command for the nation. Paul Kagame was appointed acting chief of military intelligence. Other Tutsi refugees were highly placed: Peter Baingana was head of NRA medical services and Chris Bunyenyezi was the commander of the 306th Brigade. Tutsi refugees formed a disproportionate number of NRA officers for the simple reason that they had joined the rebellion early and thus had accumulated more experience.\nUganda Peoples' Defence Force, 1995 to present.\nThe NRA had been successful in its war, and its senior military officers held key political positions in the NRM. It was reduced in size under pressure from donors, unwilling to fund either an outsize army or civil service. Between 1990 and 1996 the army was reduced from 100,000 to 40,000, and the civil service from 320,000 to 156,000. Yet the defence budget rose from $44 million in 1991 as far as $200 million in 2004. Somerville ascribes the budget rise to the rebellion in the north, Uganda's military intervention in the Congo, and \"massive corruption\" - 'ghost soldiers' who did not exist, whose (real) salaries were claimed by senior officers.\nThe National Resistance Army was renamed the Uganda People's Defence Force following the enactment of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda.\nUPDF's primary focus was the conflict with the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), a rebel group operating in the country's northern region. Since March 2002, UPDF has been granted permission to carry out operations against LRA bases across the border in South Sudan. These raids, collectively known as Operation Iron Fist, have resulted in the repatriation of many abducted children being held by the rebels as child soldiers or sex slaves. The LRA has fled Uganda and been pushed deep into the jungles of the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) (principally Orientale Province).\nThe UPDF has also been the subject of controversy for having a minimum age for service of 13. Many international organizations have condemned this as being military use of children. This has created an image problem for the UPDF and may have impacted the international aid Uganda receives. Western nations have sent a limited level of military aid to Uganda. \"Between 1990 and 2002, the army payroll had at least 18,000 ghost soldiers, according to a report by General David Tinyefuza.\"\nThe problem continued in 2003, when there was a severe problem of \"ghost\" soldiers within the UPDF. As of 2008, these personnel problems has been exacerbated by the surge of UPDF troops resigning to work with the Coalition Forces in Iraq. They mostly work as an additional guard force at control points and dining facilities, for example.\nPrior to 2000, the United States armed forces trained together with the UPDF as part of the African Crisis Response Initiative. This cooperation was terminated in 2000 because of Uganda's incursion into the DRC. Following the June 2003 UPDF withdrawal of troops from the DRC, limited nonlethal military assistance has restarted. The UPDF participates in the African Contingency Operations Training and Assistance programme with the United States.\nAfter several interventions in the Congo, the UPDF was involved in a further incursion there, from December 2008 stretching into February 2009, against the LRA in the Garamba area. UPDF special forces and artillery, supported by aircraft, were joined by the DRC's armed forces and elements of the Sudan People's Liberation Army. Called \"Operation Lightning Thunder\" by the UPDF, it was commanded by Brigadier Patrick Kankiriho, commander of the 3rd Division.\nIn February 2023, President Museveni warned the UPDF against brutality towards civilians, and corruption.\nRecent operations.\nAfrican Union Mission in Somalia.\nThe UPDF has more than 6,200 soldiers serving with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The AMISOM force commander is Kenyan Lieutenant General Jonathan Rono. The force commander in 2009, Ugandan Major General Nathan Mugisha, was wounded in a car bomb attack on 17 September 2009 that left nine soldiers dead, including Burundian Major General Juvenal Niyoyunguruza, the second in command.\nThe USA has provided extensive training for UPDF contingents headed for Somalia. During 2010, United States Army Reserve Civil Affairs operators from the 411th Civil Affairs Battalion (United States) taught Civil-military operations to UPDF personnel at Camp Kesenyi on the shores of Lake Victoria. In the first half of 2012, Force Recon Marines from Special Purpose Marine Air-Ground Task Force 12 (SPMAGTF-12) trained soldiers from the UPDF.\nIn addition, a significant amount of support to AMISOM has been provided by private companies. \"Bancroft Global Development, headquartered on Washington's Embassy Row, employs about 40 South African and European trainers who work with [AMISOM's] Ugandan and Burundian troops.\" Bancroft director Michael Stock told \"The EastAfrican\" that these mentors are embedded with AMISOM units in Mogadishu and southern and central Somalia. They coach commanders on how to predict and defeat the tactics which foreign fighters bring from outside East Africa and teach to al-Shabaab.\nOn 12 August 2012, two Ugandan Mil Mi-24s flying from Entebbe across Kenya to Somalia crashed in rugged terrain in Kenya. They were found two days later, burned out, with no likely survivors from the ten Ugandan servicemen on board the two helicopters. Another aircraft from the same flight crashed on Mount Kenya, and all seven Ugandan servicemen on board were rescued a day later. The aircraft were supporting AMISOM in the ongoing Somali Civil War. An accompanying Mil Mi-17 transport helicopter landed without problems in the eastern Kenyan town of Garissa near the Somali border for a scheduled refuelling stop.\nIn August 2014, AMISOM launched Operation Indian Ocean against al-Shabaab in Lower Shabelle and other coastal areas of southcentral Somalia. On 1 September 2014, a U.S. drone strike carried out as part of the broader mission killed Al-Shabaab leader Moktar Ali Zubeyr. According to Pentagon spokesperson Admiral John Kirby, the Ugandan AMISOM forces had informed U.S. intelligence about where Godane and other Al-Shabaab leaders were meeting and provided information on a convoy of vehicles in which he was traveling.\nAl-Shabaab subsequently threatened an attack in Uganda for the UPDF contingent's role within AMISOM and the strike on Godane. The Ugandan security services, with the assistance of the U.S. military and intelligence, then identified and foiled a major Al-Shabaab terrorist attack in the Ugandan capital Kampala. They recovered suicide vests, other explosives, and small arms and detained Al-Shabaab operatives.\nOn 10 August 2021 Ugandan AMISOM soldiers were ambushed by Al-Shabab near Golweyn in Lower Shabelle. A gunfight ensued in which one UPDF soldier died. But \"after\" the gunfight with the insurgents the Ugandan troops allegedly killed 7 Somali civilians. AMISOM immediately launched an investigation that will report its findings on 6 September 2021.\nAfrican Union Regional Task Force.\nIn November 2011, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU) authorized a Regional Co-operation Initiative (RCI) for eliminating the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). The LRA had been forced out of Uganda and was roaming remote areas of (what is now) South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and the Central African Republic (CAR). The RCI was planned to consist of three elements: a Joint Co-ordination Mechanism chaired by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security and made up of the Ministers of Defence of the four affected countries (Uganda, South Sudan, the DRC, and the CAR); a Regional Task Force Headquarters; and, the Regional Task Force (RTF) of up to 5,000 troops from the four countries.\nUnited States special forces were already assisting Ugandan forces in their operations against the LRA in the DRC and the CAR. In 2014, these forces were still assisting the RTF.\nThe RTF started to take form in September 2012. By February 2013, the RTF had 3,350 soldiers and had finished deploying to the three sectors envisioned, with bases at Dungu, Obo, and Nzara (South Sudan).\nThe RTF headquarters is at Yambio in South Sudan. The first Force Commander was Ugandan Colonel Dick Olum and the Deputy Force Commander was Colonel Gabriel Ayok Akuok.\nRTF operations, however, were plagued with difficulties, including the fact that Ugandan forces were restricted from operating in the DRC.\nIn October 2014, RTF Commander Brigadier Sam Kavuma was deployed to Somalia and his place taken by Brigadier Lucky Kidega By March 2016, the Ugandan RTF Commander was Colonel Richard Otto.\nDuring January 2016, UPDF 11 Battalion was based with the RTF in the CAR. In mid-2016, it was reported that Uganda would withdraw its contribution to the RTF by the end of the year.\nSouth Sudan Civil War.\nDecember 2013: Uganda reportedly deploys troops to Juba to evacuate Ugandan nationals following outbreak of fighting.\n13 January 2014: President Museveni speaks of battle 90\u00a0km south of Bor involving UPDF.\n16 January 2014: Colonel Kayanja Muhanga announced as UPDF force commander in South Sudan.\nJanuary 2014: Ambush and battle reported at Tabakeka, a few kilometres outside Bor, with nine UPDF fatalities and 46 wounded.\n22 January 2014: Updated casualty report says nine UPDF dead and a dozen wounded, including: Captain Celistine Egau, Sergeant Santos Ochen, Private Richard Oyaka and Private Arthur Mbagira.\n9 February 2014: Colonel Kayanja Muhanga, Officer Commanding \"Zulu Task Force\", promoted to Brigadier.\n21 October 2015: First re-deployment of troops out of South Sudan, from forward base in Bor, about 190\u00a0km north of Juba.\n9 December 2015: Mention of c. 3000 men from South Sudan in seven battalions registering late for upcoming Ugandan election.\n14-18 July 2016: Ugandan forces under Brigadier Kayanja Muhanga undertake Operation Okoa Wanaichi in South Sudan, \"successfully evacuating up to 40,000 Ugandans and 100 other nationalities who were fleeing the fighting.\"\nUN Guard Unit, Somalia.\nThe UN Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) was established on 3 June 2013 by UN Security Council Resolution 2102 and works alongside AMISOM in Somalia. In 2014 it was decided the mission needed a guard unit to secure and protect UN personnel and their installations in Somalia. Uganda has provided this unit, initially of 410 personnel, since 2014. The United Nations Guard Unit, or UNGU, is based at Mogadishu Airport.\nUganda Military Training and Mentoring Team, Equatorial Guinea.\nDuring February 2017 Uganda deployed a UPDF team to Equatorial Guinea to assist in the training of that country's armed forces. The second contingent of 248 personnel was welcomed back in Uganda in January 2019 when a third team was dispatched. The foreign mission is known as the Uganda Military Training and Mentoring Team, abbreviated as UMTMT.\nCommand and organisation.\nTraining schools.\nThe UPDF has the following training schools:\nLand Force.\nThe organisation of the land force was reported in 2015 to be as follows:\nDivisions.\nThe divisions are:\nArmy equipment.\nAir defense.\nPrevious equipment included the M4 Sherman tank. SIPRI trade registers indicated transfer of at least 12 vehicles, and in 1999, another source listed 3 Shermans in service.\nAir Force.\nThe Uganda Army Air Force (UAAF) was established in 1964 with Israeli aid. Its first aircraft was consequently of Israeli origin, and its initial pilots trained in Israel. As Uganda's government forged closer links with the Eastern Bloc, the UAAF began to acquire more aircraft as well as support in training from the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Libya. Israeli aid initially continued as well.\nBy late 1978, the UAAF was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Christopher Gore and consisted of several dozen MiG-21MFs, MiG-21UMs, MiG-17s, and MiG-15UTIs. Some of the available aircraft were not combat-ready, however, and were abandoned during the Uganda\u2013Tanzania War without seeing action. The lack of spare parts especially affected the MiG-15s and MiG-17s. The UAAF was split into three fighter squadrons. However the force was effectively wiped out during the 1978-1979 air campaign of the Uganda-Tanzania War.\nThere are conflicting reports on what aircraft the Ugandan Air Force has in service as of 2019\u20132020. Lieutenant General Charles Lwanga Lutaaya, is the commander.\nIn 2011, Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, the central bank governor, caused large volatility in the Ugandan shilling when he told the \"Financial Times\" that President Museveni had ignored technical advice against using Uganda's small foreign exchange reserves to buy new Sukhoi Su-30 fighter aircraft.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56929", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56929", "title": "Foreign relations of Uganda", "text": "Uganda has formal diplomatic relations with many countries, some accredited. Since the colonial era and after independence Uganda has grown to be one of the most important African countries. Uganda has diplomatic relations with many countries throughout Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe and Oceania. Uganda is a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations since 1962.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Uganda maintains diplomatic relations with:\nInternational organisations.\nUganda has been a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations since independence in 1962.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56930", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56930", "title": "List of national parks of Uganda", "text": ""}
{"id": "56931", "revid": "1262173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56931", "title": "The Munsters", "text": "American television series (1964\u20131966)\nThe Munsters is an American sitcom about the home life of a family of benign monsters that aired from 1964 to 1966 on CBS. The series stars Fred Gwynne as Herman Munster (Frankenstein's monster), Yvonne De Carlo as his vampire wife Lily, Al Lewis as Grandpa (Count Dracula), Beverley Owen (later replaced by Pat Priest) as their niece Marilyn, and Butch Patrick as their werewolf-like son Eddie. The family pet, named \"Spot\", was a fire-breathing dragon.\nProduced by the creators of \"Leave It to Beaver\", the series was a satire of American suburban life, the wholesome television family fare of the era and traditional monster movies. It achieved higher Nielsen ratings than did the similarly macabre-themed \"The Addams Family,\" which aired concurrently on ABC.\nIn 1965, \"The Munsters\" was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series but lost to \"The Rogues\". In the 21st century, it received several TV Land Award nominations, including one for Most Uninsurable Driver (Herman Munster).\nThe series originally aired on Thursdays at 7:30\u00a0p.m. from September 24, 1964 to May 12, 1966. Seventy episodes were produced. The show was canceled after ratings had dropped to a series low in the face of competition from ABC's \"Batman\". Patrick said, \"I think \"Batman\" was to blame. \"Batman\" just came along and took our ratings away.\" However, \"The Munsters\" found a large audience in syndication. A spinoff series ensued, as well as several films, including one with a theatrical release and several more recent attempts to reboot it.\nPremise.\nThe Munsters are a Transylvanian-American family living at 1313 Mockingbird Lane in the fictional city of Mockingbird Heights. The series' running gag is that the odd-looking family with strange tastes considers itself to be an average American family. Herman is the family's sole wage-earner, although Lily and Grandpa make short-lived attempts to earn money from time to time. While Herman is the head of the household, Lily also makes many decisions. According to episode 44 (\"Happy 100th Anniversary\"), they were married in 1865.\nOther than Marilyn, the characters' costumes and appearances were based on the classic monsters of Universal Studios films of the 1930s and 1940s, including the iconic version of Frankenstein's monster developed by Jack Pierce for the 1931 Universal film \"Frankenstein\". As Universal jointly produced \"The Munsters\", the show was able to employ the copyrighted designs. Makeup for the series was credited to Bud Westmore, who pioneered many other makeup effects and designs for the studio's monsters after Pierce.\nThe show satirized the typical family sitcom formula of the era: the well-meaning father, the nurturing mother, the eccentric live-in relative, the na\u00efve teenager and the precocious child. The show also references several real sitcoms. In episode 45, \"Operation Herman\", Lily tells Herman to have a father-son talk with Eddie because \"a thing like this is up to the father. Anyone who's watched \"Father Knows Best\" for nine years ought to know that,\" to which Herman replies, \"All right. But Donna Reed always handles things on \"her\" show.\" In episode 47, \"John Doe Munster\", Grandpa describes \"My Three Sons\" as being about a \"crazy, mixed-up family that's always having weird adventures.\"\nAl Lewis explained, \"We can do a lot of satirical pointed things on society that you couldn't do on an ordinary show.\" Lewis also said, \"Philosophically, the format is that in spite of the way people look to you physically, underneath there is a heart of gold.\n\"The Munsters\" reflected changes in social attitudes during the civil-rights era, and in 2020 a speech that Herman makes to Eddie in the 1965 episode \"Eddie's Nickname\" went viral: \"The lesson I want you to learn is that it doesn't matter what you look like. You can be tall or short; or fat or thin; ugly or handsome\u2014like your father\u2014or you can be black, or yellow or white, it doesn't matter. What does matter is the size of your heart and the strength of your character.\"\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nThe idea of a family of comical monsters was first suggested to Universal Studios by animator Bob Clampett, who developed the idea from 1943 to 1945 as a series of cartoons. The project did not make progress until mid-1963 when a similar idea was submitted by \"The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends\" writers Allan Burns and Chris Hayward. The proposal was later handed to writers Norm Liebman and Ed Haas, who wrote a pilot script, \"Love Thy Monster\".\nAccording to Burns, \"We sort of stole the idea from Charles Addams and his \"New Yorker\" cartoons... Because Universal owned the Frankenstein character and the Dracula character for movie rights, they decided to take their characters instead of the characters we had written.\"\nWhile some executives believed that the series should be animated, others who argued for live action prevailed. In 1964, a live-action pilot titled \"My Fair Munster\" was filmed in color by MCA Television for CBS. Fred Gwynne and Al Lewis were the first to be cast early in February 1964. They had recently completed the series \"Car 54, Where Are You?\" and had good chemistry together. Beverly Owen was signed to play Marilyn, Joan Marshall was cast as Herman's wife Phoebe and \"Happy\" Nate Derman was cast as Eddie. A second pilot was ordered in April 1964 with Yvonne De Carlo replacing Marshall, and the character renamed Lily. For a third pilot, Derman was replaced by Butch Patrick. CBS liked both De Carlo and Patrick, but ordered a fourth pilot in which Eddie was less spoiled.\nThe show was produced by Joe Connelly and Bob Mosher, who were already known for creating the \"Leave It to Beaver\" television series. Prior to that, they had written many episodes of \"Amos 'n' Andy\", a popular network radio program, during its half-hour comedy era.\nFilming.\nOver the course of Season 1, the makeup for Herman, Lily and Grandpa was adjusted. Lily's hair originally had a large white streak, which was reduced in later episodes. Her necklace featured a bat instead of a star, and her eyebrows were angled more. Grandpa's makeup was exaggerated, including heavier eyebrows, and Herman's face was widened for a dopier and less human appearance. Gwynne also added a stutter whenever Herman was angry or wanted to make a point, and he frequently left his mouth open, adding to the effect of a goofy, less frightening figure.\nSets.\nThe Munsters' home was a decaying Second Empire Victorian Gothic-style mansion. At one point the address was supposed to be 43 Mockingbird Lane, Camelot, New Jersey, but was changed to 1313 Mockingbird Lane in the city of Mockingbird Heights (state unknown) when filming began. In later incarnations of the series the location is described as a small town outside Los Angeles. \nThe Munster home was on the Universal Studios back lot. It was originally constructed with two other houses on Stage 12, the studio's largest soundstage, for the 1946 film \"So Goes My Love\". After that film was completed, the sets were put in storage until 1950, when they (along with other house sets built from stock units) were reassembled on \"River Road\" along the north edge of the back lot. All three houses appeared in many television shows and films, including \"Leave It to Beaver.\"\nIn 1964, the house was redressed and distressed to portray the Munster home, and a stone wall was added around the property. After \"The Munsters\" ended its run, the house was restored. It was the home of the family in \"Shirley\" (NBC, 1979\u201380).\nIn 1981, all of the houses on River Road were moved from the north end of the lot to their present location. The former Munster house was used in \"Coach\" and, after another remodel, \"Desperate Housewives.\"\nThe interiors of the Munsters' mansion were filmed on Stages 30 and 32 at Universal Studios. The interior was riddled with dust, smoke and cobwebs. (When Lily \"dusted\" the house, her Electrolux emitted clouds of dust, which she applied to surfaces that would normally be cleaned.) As a running gag, parts of the house would often be damaged, mostly by Herman's tantrums or clumsiness, but the damage would not last.\nProps.\nIn the fourth episode (\"Rock-A-Bye Munster\"), Lily buys a hot rod and a hearse from a used-car dealership and has them customized into one car (the Munster Koach) as Herman's birthday present. The Munster Koach and DRAG-U-LA (built by Grandpa in episode 36, \"Hot Rod Herman\") were designed by Tom Daniel and built by auto customizer George Barris for the show. The Munster Koach was a hot rod built on a lengthened 1926 Ford Model T chassis with a custom hearse body. It was 18 feet long and cost almost $20,000 to build. Barris also built the DRAG-U-LA, a dragster built from a coffin (according to Barris, a real coffin was purchased for the car), which Grandpa used to win back the Munster Koach after Herman lost it in a race.\nTheme song.\nThe instrumental theme song, titled \"The Munsters' Theme\", was composed by composer/arranger Jack Marshall. Described by writer Jon Burlingame as a \"Bernard-Herrmann-meets-Duane-Eddy sound\", the theme was nominated for a Grammy Award in 1965. The song's lyrics, which were written by coproducer Bob Mosher, were never aired on CBS.\nEpisodes.\nPitch episode.\nThe first presentation was filmed in color and ran 16 minutes (later cut to just over 13 minutes). It was used to pitch the series to CBS and its affiliates. (The episode is available on the first season of \"The Munsters\" DVDs.) It never aired, but the script was reused as the basis for Episode 2, \"My Fair Munster\". The cast in the title sequence included Joan Marshall as Phoebe (instead of Lily), Beverley Owen as Marilyn, Nate \"Happy\" Derman as Eddie, Al Lewis as Grandpa and Fred Gwynne as Herman. Although the same house exterior was used, it was later changed to appear spookier for the series. This included adding the tower deck and Marilyn's deck, a new coat of paint and enlarging the living room. Although Grandpa had the same dungeon, Gwynne did not wear padding in the pitch episode, had a more protruding forehead, and was broad but thin. The most noticeable difference was his somber expression rather than his comic silliness during the series. Except for Marilyn, the family had a blue-green tint to their skin. The biggest character difference was that Eddie was portrayed by Derman as a nasty brat. Eddie, as played by Patrick, was mostly respectful.\nThe pilot title sequence had light, happy music borrowed from the Doris Day movie \"The Thrill of It All\" instead of the instrumental rock theme. It was also decided that Marshall too closely resembled Morticia Addams and that Derman was too nasty as Eddie, so both were replaced. On the basis of the first presentation, the new series, still not completely cast, was announced by CBS on February 18, 1964. A second black-and-white presentation was filmed with DeCarlo and Patrick. In this version, Eddie appeared with a more normal look, although his hairstyle was later altered to include a pronounced widow's peak.\n\"Marineland Carnival\" (1965 Easter special).\nDuring the first season, the Munster family appeared in an Easter special when they visited Marineland of the Pacific in Palos Verdes, California, to get a new pet for Eddie. Shot on videotape, the episode aired just once on CBS on April 18, and was long thought lost until a copy was donated to the Paley Center in New York in 1997.\nSyndication.\nThe series entered syndication on local stations after its original run. In the 1990s, it aired on Nick at Nite and on TV Land from 1995 to 1998. In October 2011, the series was picked up by Cartoon Network's sister channel Boomerang and ran through the entire month of October that year for Halloween along with \"The Addams Family\".\nOn October 5, 2015, Cozi TV began airing the series on weeknights and in a two-hour block on Sunday evenings. The show made its debut on FETV on September 29, 2025, currently airing weekdays at 2pm ET and Saturdays at 7:40am ET.\nTV appearances in character.\nFred Gwynne and Al Lewis appeared in full makeup and costumes riding in the Munster Koach in the 1964 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade. Gwynne made solo appearances in character on \"The Red Skelton Show\" in April 1965, in the special \"Murray The K \u2013 It's What's Happening, Baby\" in June 1965 and on and \"The Danny Kaye Show\" in April 1966.\nFranchise.\nFilm.\nSeveral Munsters movies were released. Two featuring original cast members include \"Munster, Go Home!\" (1966), and \"The Munsters' Revenge\" (1981). A television film titled \"Here Come the Munsters\" aired in 1995, and \"The Munsters' Scary Little Christmas\" was released in 1996. A feature film titled \"The Munsters\" was released on September 22, 2022.\nTV.\n\"The Mini-Munsters\".\nIn 1973, ABC aired an animated one-hour special, \"The Mini-Munsters\", based on characters from the original series.\n\"The Munsters Today\".\nA first-run syndication television series titled \"The Munsters Today\" ran from 1988 to 1991 and lasted for 72 episodes. The unaired pilot episode, written by Lloyd J. Schwartz, explained the 22-year gap with an accident in Grandpa's lab that put the family to sleep. They awake in the late 1980s and must adapt to their new surroundings. The show features John Schuck (Herman), Lee Meriwether (Lily), Howard Morton (Grandpa) and Jason Marsden (Eddie). Marilyn was portrayed by Mary-Ellen Dunbar in the unaired pilot and by Hilary Van Dyke thereafter.\n\"Mockingbird Lane\".\nA reboot by \"Pushing Daisies\" creator Bryan Fuller was developed for NBC as a one-hour drama with \"spectacular visuals.\" NBC ordered a pilot episode, and announced in January 2012 that it would be called \"Mockingbird Lane\", a reference to the Munsters' address. NBC ultimately did not proceed with plans for \"Mockingbird Lane\" as a weekly series, but later announced that the pilot episode would air in late October 2012 as a Halloween special. NBC passed on the series over disagreements about the show's dark nature and inconsistent tone.\nMusic.\nIn 1998, Rob Zombie released the single \"Dragula\". Its title was taken from the name of Grandpa's dragster \"DRAG-U-LA\". The music video mimics, in parts, the Munsters taking a ride in the car.\nIn 2003 the American band Type O Negative released their sixth album, Life Is Killing Me. The first song is a short instrumental titled Thir13teen. The song is based on short pieces of music from the show that is played when one scene transitions to another. The band credits Jack Marshall as the songwriter. \nA sample of the show's theme-song guitar riff was used in the song \"Uma Thurman\" by Fall Out Boy.\nHome media.\nBetween 2004 and 2008, Universal Studios Home Entertainment released the entire series on DVD in Regions 1 &amp; 2.\nThe \"Family Portrait\" episode in color, which was absent from the Season 1 and 2 standalone box sets, was released on a standalone Region 1 DVD on October 7, 2008.\nMerchandise.\nGold Key Comics produced a \"Munsters\" comic book that ran for 16 issues from 1965 to 1968 and featured photo covers from the TV series. When the series first appeared, the Comics Code Authority still forbade the appearance of vampires in comic books. However, because Gold Key was not a member of the Comics Magazine Association of America, it was not obligated to conform to the Comics Code, and Lily and Grandpa appeared in the comics without controversy.\nOther merchandise included a set of rubber squeaky toys, Colorforms, and an Aurora model kit of the living room and family. AMT produced model kits of the Munster Koach and DRAG-U-LA. The Aurora model of the living room featured Herman in his electric chair, Eddie squatting in front of the fire, Lily knitting and Grandpa hanging in a bat-like manner from the rafters. Marilyn was not included. ERTL later produced a very detailed 1:18 scale diecast of the Munster Koach. Mattel issued two Herman Munster dolls: one was a talking doll and the other was a hand puppet (both with rings that could be pulled to make them talk utilizing Gwynne's actual voice) that were issued from 1964 until around 1968.\nA video game based on \"The Munsters\" was published by Again, Again (a division of Alternative Software) in 1989. It was available for the Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, Amiga, Atari ST, MSX, and MS-DOS, but it was criticized by the gaming press because of its short length and lackluster gameplay.\nIn 1990, Atari Corporation released \"Midnight Mutants\" for the Atari 7800, featuring Al Lewis' likeness in his Grampa Munster character on the box and label. However, as Atari had reached an agreement with Universal, they could not call him Grampa Munster, so he was simply called Grampa.\nIn 1966, a three-reel View-Master set featuring \"The Munsters\" episode \"The Most Beautiful Ghoul in the World\" was released, accompanied by a booklet containing drawings and additional text. The set is notable because the photographs provide rare color views of the characters and sets, including house interiors, Grandpa's dungeon laboratory and the characters' heavy greenish-white facial makeup.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56932", "revid": "45127626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56932", "title": "Transport in Uganda", "text": "Transport in Uganda refers to the transportation structure in Uganda. The country has an extensive network of paved and unpaved roads.\nRoadways.\nAs of 2017, according to the Uganda Ministry of Works and Transport, Uganda had about of roads, with approximately (4 percent) paved. Most paved roads radiate from Kampala, the country's capital and largest city.\nInternational highways.\nThe Lagos-Mombasa Highway, part of the Trans-Africa Highway and aiming to link East Africa and West Africa, passes through Uganda. This is complete only eastwards from the Uganda\u2013DR Congo border to Mombasa, linking the African Great Lakes region to the sea. In East Africa, this roadway is part of the Northern Corridor.\nIt cannot be used to reach West Africa because the route westwards across DR Congo to Bangui in the Central African Republic (CAR) is impassable after the Second Congo War and requires reconstruction. An alternative route (not part of the Trans-African network) to Bangui based on gravel roads and earth roads runs from Gulu in northern Uganda via Nimule and Juba, South Sudan and Obo in south-east CAR. This is used by trucks but sections are impassable after rain.\nThe route has been closed at times during war and conflict in northern Uganda (the Lord's Resistance Army rebellion) and South Sudan, but up to July 2007 had not been affected by the Darfur conflict and was the only usable road between East and West Africa. The security situation should be checked with authorities in northern Uganda, South Sudan and south-eastern CAR before use.\nRailways.\nAs of 2017, Uganda's railway network measures about in length. Of this, about 56% (), is operational. \nAll existing railway is metre gauge. A new standard gauge rail network is planned.\nA railroad originating at Mombasa on the Indian Ocean connects with Tororo, where it branches westward to Jinja, Kampala, and Kasese and northward to Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Gulu, and Pakwach. The only railway line still operating, however, is the Malaba\u2013Kampala line. \nPlans.\nStandard Gauge Railway.\nThe six countries of the East African Community are in the process of constructing railway lines with standard gauge tracks. Kenya had, by June 2018, completed the construction of the Mombasa\u2013Nairobi section of its Standard Gauge Railway (SGR), which cost US$4.47 billion (original budget was US$3.2 billion), borrowed from the Exim Bank of China. The country now plans to extend he SGR line to Nakuru, Kisumu and Malaba, when funds become available.\nUganda plans to construct a total of four SGR lines, totaling , at an estimated cost of US$12.6 billion. Uganda's SGR is planned to link it to four neighboring countries, including Kenya, Rwanda, DR Congo and South Sudan. \nThe Rift Valley Consortium.\nBetween 2006 and 2017, a company known as Rift Valley Railways (RVRC) managed the Kenya Railways Corporation's and the Uganda Railways Corporation's metre gauge railway systems, under a 25-year concession.\nIn August 2017, the government of Kenya terminated the RVRC concession, citing failure by RVRC to perform as stipulated in the concession agreement. In October 2017, Uganda followed suit, but RVRC ran to court to stop the termination. In February 2018, Uganda Railways Corporation finally took possession of the concession assets and resumed operating the metre-gauge railway system in Uganda. \nWaterways.\nLake Victoria is the principal waterway with commercial traffic. In conjunction with train services, the railway companies of Uganda and Tanzania operate train ferries on the lake between railhead ports of the two countries and Kenya. These ferries load rail coaches and wagons. Jinja and Port Bell, on a branch line from Kampala, are the railheads for Uganda, connecting to Mwanza, Tanzania and Kisumu, Kenya.\nThe Port Bell ferry wharf is visible on high-resolution Google Earth photos at latitude 0.2885\u00b0 longitude 32.653\u00b0. Other ferries serve non-railhead ports on the lake. There are dry dock facilities at Port Bell (Luzira), which were under renewed use as of June 2018.\nA new inland port, Bukasa Inland Port is under development on the northern shores of Lake Victoria, at Bukasa, in Wakiso District, about , by road, south-east of the central business district of Kampala, the capital and largest city of Uganda. When completed the inland port is designed to handle up to 5.2 million tonnes of freight annually. The port will facilitate movement of goods from the Tanzanian ports of Dar es Salaam and Tanga, via rail to the port of Mwanza on Lake Victoria. Barges would then bring the cargo over the lake to Bukasa. This would reduce Uganda's near-total dependence on the port of Mombasa, Kenya.\nLake Kyoga and the Victoria Nile south of the lake constitute the second most important commercial waterway. There used to be a steamboat service between Namasagali, a railhead port on the Nile, going as far as Masindi-Port on the other side of Lake Kyoga. Other waterways such as Lake Albert, Lake George, Lake Edward, and the Albert Nile do not carry commercial traffic to any great extent.\nAirports.\nEntebbe International Airport is Uganda's largest and busiest airport, servicing in excess of 1.5 million arrivals annually, as of 2015. In February 2015, the Government of Uganda began a three-phase expansion and upgrade of Entebbe Airport planned to last from 2015 until 2035.\nIn January 2018, SBC Uganda Limited, a joint venture company between Colas Limited of the United Kingdom and SBI International Holdings of Uganda, started construction of Kabaale International Airport in Hoima District. The first phase of construction, including the runway and cargo-handling facilities, is expected to be ready in 2020. This phase is primarily to support construction of the Uganda Oil Refinery. The second phase of construction, focused on the facilitation of passengers and boosting tourism and business, is expected to conclude in 2022.\nAs of June 2018, according to the CIA Factbook, Uganda had 47 airports, five of which had paved runways, namely Entebbe Airport, Gulu Airport, Soroti Airport, Nakasongola Airport and Jinja Airport.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56933", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56933", "title": "Telecommunications in Vietnam", "text": " \nCommunications in Vietnam include the use of telephones, radio, television and Internet.\nTelephones.\nVietnam is putting considerable effort into modernization and expansion of its telecommunication system. Domestically, all provincial exchanges are digitalized and connected to Hanoi, Da Nang and Ho Chi Minh City by fiber optic cable or microwave radio relay networks. Main lines have been substantially increased, and the use of mobile telephones is growing rapidly. As of 2012, there were 134 million mobile phone subscribers, making Vietnam's rank 6th in the world.\nTwo satellite earth stations are in use: Intersputnik (Indian Ocean region).\nThe incumbent operator is the Vietnam Posts and Telecommunications Group, which spun off from the Department General of Posts and Telecommunications after the separation of regulatory and commercial functions of the latter in 1990. Following the creation of a separate regulatory entity, market segments were opened to competition, starting with mobile services in 1995. The international services market, considered the most lucrative, was opened to other providers in 2000.\nMobile networks.\nAt the beginning of 2013, S-Fone and Beeline services are temporarily shut down due to hard competitions with other mobile operators. Beeline, a mobile operator found by Global Telecommunications Corporation or G-Tel and VimpelCom came to the market in 2009. A company with cooperation between companies from Vietnam and Russia ended its service by the end of the year 2012 as a result of G-Tel became the owner of Beeline after VimpelCom sold all stocks to its partner. Earlier in 2010, SK Telecom decided to pull out of the Vietnam mobile market when stopping cooperation with SPT - Saigon Postel Corp. in S-Fone.\nBroadcast media.\nThe government controls all broadcast media exercising oversight through the Ministry of Information and Communication. The government-controlled national TV provider, Vietnam Television, operates a network of 9 channels with several regional broadcasting centers. The programming is relayed nationwide via a network of provincial and municipal TV stations. Vietnam law limits access to satellite TV, but many households are able to access foreign programming via home satellite equipment.\nInternet.\nAlthough basic Internet services had existed in Vietnam since the early nineties, the first commercial Internet Service Provider (ISP) opened for business in 1997. Since 1997 Vietnam has been connected by two gateways: one in Hanoi which connects with Hong Kong and Australia, and the other in Ho Chi Minh City, which connects with the United States by Sprint.\nVietnam ranks 16th in the world in terms of number of internet users.\nThere are five ISPs operating: Netnam Company, Vietnam Data Communication Company (VDC), Corporation for Finance and Promoting Technology (FPT), Saigon Post and Telecommunications Services Corporation (Saigon Postel Corporation, SPT) and Viettel Company. In the large cities, fiber service is widely available.\nIn March 2025, Vietnam's Prime Minister Pham Minh Chinh committed to fast-tracking Starlink\u2019s licensing under a pilot program, following new rules allowing full foreign ownership of satellite internet providers. This move aims to boost infrastructure and strengthen trade ties with the U.S.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "56934", "revid": "47707072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56934", "title": "Transport in Vietnam", "text": "Transportation in Vietnam is improving rapidly in terms of both quantity and quality. Road traffic is growing rapidly but the major roads are dangerous and slow to travel on due to outdated design and an inappropriate traffic mix. In recent years, the construction of expressways has accelerated. Air travel is also important for long-distance travel. The two major metropolises of Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City operate metro networks which are currently being expanded.\nRoad transport.\nThe total length of the Vietnamese road system is about 222,179\u00a0km with 19.0% paved, mainly national roads and provincial roads (source: Vietnam Road Administration, 2004). The national road system length is 17,295\u00a0km with 27.6% of its length paved. The provincial road system comprises 27,762\u00a0km of roads with 23.6% paved. The road network is relatively well developed, but in poor condition. Due to congestion and lack of safety, the average speed on the national roads is a mere .\nRoad financing comes from a number of sources including the government, overseas donors such as the Asian Development Bank, World Bank, JBIC and business organizations. Road investment recovery is mainly through tolls collected on bridges and roads, in accordance with laws mentioned above.\nVietnam's road system is classified according to the administrative hierarchy. Each classification is assigned a milestone color and abbreviation.\nExpressways.\nExpressways are a rather new concept for Vietnam. Traffic is growing rapidly but the major roads are dangerous due to inappropriate design and an inappropriate traffic mix. Expressways would solve these problems along the key corridors, by separating high speed traffic from slower, local traffic.\nVietnam currently recognizes two classes of expressway. Both have a minimum of two lanes in each direction, but Class A has grade separated interchanges, while Class B has at-grade intersections. There are 4 design-speed categories: 60, 80, 100 and 120\u00a0km/h. Generally all cars, buses and trucks are permitted on the expressway but \"c\u00f4ng n\u00f4ng\" (agricultural vehicles) and all types of motorcycles are not.\nRoad vehicles.\nVietnam is renowned for its motorbike culture. In 1995, over 90% of trips in both Hanoi and Saigon were done by motorcycle. In 2017, 79% of Vietnamese reported using a motorbike regularly. With 45 million registered motorbikes on a 92 million population headcount, Vietnam has one of the highest motorbike ownership rates worldwide. Vietnam is the 4th largest market for motorbike sales, after China, India and Indonesia. 87% of Vietnamese households own a motorbike, a number only surpassed by Thailand.\nIn recent years, the government has expressed the desire to reduce the number of motorbikes in an effort to curb congestion.\nAs of 2015, 2 million passenger cars were registered.\nCar prices are kept high by import taxes and sales tax, which put Vietnam as one of the most expensive countries to buy a car, with up to 2 or 3 times the final price consisting of taxes and fees. In 2016, a Lexus LX was priced at 7.3 billion VND (US$315,000), a Toyota Innova at 800 million VND (US$35,000), Despite this, car sales are growing at double digit rates each year.\nWater transport.\nFerries.\nMost river crossings have long been replaced by bridges, however ferry crossings still operate for vehicles not allowed on expressways.\nPorts and harbors.\nVietnam has 17,702\u00a0km of waterways; 5,000\u00a0km of which are navigable by vessels up to 1.8 m draft.\nAir transport.\nAir travel is rapidly increasing in importance. The route between Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City has been world's 7th busiest airline route by seat capacity since 2016.\nAirports.\nVietnam operates 37 civil airports, including three international gateways: Noi Bai serving Hanoi, Da Nang serving Da Nang City, and Tan Son Nhat serving Ho Chi Minh City. Tan Son Nhat is the largest, handling 75 percent of international passenger traffic. A new airport is currently being built, Long Thanh International Airport, also serving Ho Chi Minh City. Vietnam Airlines, the national airline, has a fleet of 82 aircraft that link Vietnam with 49 foreign cities. The second largest domestic carrier is VietJet Air, serving 16 domestic destinations and 31 international destinations, and the third largest is Bamboo Airways (with eight and six destinations respectively).\nAirports with civil service\nHeliports\nRailways.\nThe Vietnamese railway network has a total length of , dominated by the single track North\u2013South Railway running between Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. The national railway network uses mainly , although there are several and mixed gauge lines in the North of the country. There were 278 stations on the Vietnamese railway network as of 2005, most of which are located along the North\u2013South line. The Vietnamese railway network is owned and operated by the state-owned enterprise Vietnam Railways (VNR), which operates a number of different subsidiaries involved in construction, communications, training, and other activities connected to railway maintenance.\nThe overall condition of railway infrastructure in Vietnam varies from poor to fair; most of the network remains in need of rehabilitation and upgrading, having received only temporary repair from damages suffered during decades of war. A joint Japanese-Vietnamese evaluation team found that the poor state of railway infrastructure was the fundamental cause for most railway crashes and derailments, of which the most common types are train collisions involving vehicles and pedestrians, especially at illegal level crossings; derailments caused by failure to decrease speed was also noted as a common cause of collisions.\nInternational railway links.\nTwo railways connect Vietnam to the People's Republic of China: the western Yunnan\u2013Vietnam Railway, from Haiphong to Kunming, and the eastern railway from Hanoi to Nanning. The railway into Yunnan is a metre-gauge line, the only such line to operate inside China; it may, however, be converted to standard gauge. Railway service along the Chinese portion of the route is currently suspended. Cross-border service was available until 2002, when floods and landslides, which frequently caused delays along the route, caused serious damage to the tracks on the Chinese side. Hanoi\u2013\u0110\u1ed3ng \u0110\u0103ng Railway access to Nanning is done through the border at \u0110\u1ed3ng \u0110\u0103ng, in L\u1ea1ng S\u01a1n province. Regular service generally entails stopping at the border, changing from a Vietnamese metre-gauge train to a Chinese standard-gauge train, and continuing on to Nanning.\nThe Yunnan\u2013Vietnam Railway will form the Chinese part of the Singapore\u2013Kunming Rail Link, which is expected to be completed in 2015.\nThere are currently no railway connections between Vietnam and Cambodia or Laos. As part of plans established by ASEAN, however, two new railways are under development: Saigon\u2013L\u1ed9c Ninh Railway connecting Ho Chi Minh City to Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and one connecting the North\u2013South Railway to Thakhek in Laos. The Vietnamese portion of the Phnom Penh railway would begin with a junction of the North\u2013South Railway at D\u0129 An railway station, and would end in L\u1ed9c Ninh, B\u00ecnh Ph\u01b0\u1edbc province, close to the Cambodian border, linking up with a similar project on the Cambodian side. According to the plan established by ASEAN, this stretch is scheduled for completion by 2020; it will form part of the Kunming\u2013Singapore railway project, overseen by the ASEAN\u2013Mekong Basin Development Cooperation (AMBDC). Vientiane \u2013 V\u0169ng \u00c1ng Railway would run between Vung Ang, a port in H\u00e0 T\u0129nh province, to connect with the North\u2013South Railway at T\u00e2n \u1ea4p railway station in Qu\u1ea3ng B\u00ecnh province, then crossing through the M\u1ee5 Gi\u1ea1 Pass towards Thakhek. According to plans established by ASEAN, the line may then be extended via Thakhek all the way to the Laotian capital Vientiane. Both Laos and Thailand have expressed interest in the project as a shorter export gateway to the Pacific Ocean.\nHigh-speed rail.\nNational railway company Vietnam Railways has proposed a high-speed rail link between Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, capable of running at speeds of . Once completed, the high-speed rail line\u2014using Japanese Shinkansen technology\u2014would allow trains to complete the Hanoi\u2013Ho Chi Minh City journey in less than six hours, compared to around 30 hours taken on the existing railway. Vietnamese prime minister Nguy\u1ec5n T\u1ea5n D\u0169ng had originally set an ambitious target, approving a line to be completed by 2013, with 70 percent of funding (initially estimated at US$33 billion) coming from Japanese ODA, and the remaining 30 percent raised through loans. Later reports raised estimated costs to US$56 billion (almost 60 percent of Vietnam's GDP in 2009) for a completion date in the mid-2030s. On June 19, 2010, after a month of deliberation, Vietnam's National Assembly rejected the high speed rail proposal due to its high cost; National Assembly deputies had asked for further study of the project.\nIn 2018 a new feasibility study was submitted and based on that the government wants to reconsider the cost-benefit of the project. Plans show the first phase of construction to build sections between Hanoi and Vinh, and simultaneously between Ho Chi Minh City and Nha Trang both to be finished by 2032 with the entire north\u2013south link to be finished by 2045.\nAnother high-speed rail has been proposed to connect Ho Chi Minh City to Southeast Vietnam and C\u1ea7n Th\u01a1.\nMetro.\nThe two biggest cities in Vietnam have operating metro systems. After years of delays, the Hanoi metro system began operations on November 6, 2021, with line 2A. This was followed by the partial opening of Hanoi Metro Line 3 on August 8, 2024. On December 22, 2024, Line 1 of the HCMC Metro opened to service, which also saw the opening of the country's first underground stations.\nPipelines.\nIn April 1995, a 125-kilometer natural gas pipeline connecting Bach Ho with a power plant near V\u0169ng T\u00e0u went into operation. With the subsequent addition of compressors, the volume pumped rose to more than 1 billion cubic meters per year. In 2005 a 399-kilometer underwater pipeline, the world's longest, began to carry natural gas onshore from the Nam C\u00f4n S\u01a1n basin. The pipeline's anticipated capacity is 2 billion cubic meters per year, while the basin has an estimated 59 billion cubic meters of natural gas reserves. Vietnam has 28\u00a0km of condensate pipeline, 10\u00a0km of condensate/gas pipeline, 216 of natural gas line, and 206\u00a0km of pipeline for refined products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56935", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56935", "title": "Munsters", "text": ""}
{"id": "56936", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56936", "title": "Electrical engineer", "text": ""}
{"id": "56938", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56938", "title": "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers", "text": "American professional association\nThe Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is an American 501(c)(3) charitable professional organization for electrical engineering, electronics engineering, and related disciplines. Today, it is a global network of more than 486,000 engineering and STEM professionals across a variety of disciplines whose core purpose is to foster technological innovation for the benefit of humanity.\nThe IEEE has a corporate office in New York City and an operations center in Piscataway, New Jersey. The IEEE was formed in 1963 as an amalgamation of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers and the Institute of Radio Engineers.\nHistory.\nThe IEEE traces its founding to 1884 and the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. In 1912, the rival Institute of Radio Engineers was formed. Although the AIEE was initially larger, the IRE attracted more students and was larger by the mid-1950s. The AIEE and IRE merged in 1963.\nThe IEEE is headquartered in New York City, but most business is done at the IEEE Operations Center in Piscataway, New Jersey, opened in 1975.\nThe Australian Section of the IEEE existed between 1972 and 1985, after which it split into state- and territory-based sections.\nPublications.\nIEEE claims to produce over 30% of the world's literature in the electrical, electronics, and computer engineering fields, publishing approximately 200 peer-reviewed journals and magazines. IEEE publishes more than 1,700 conference proceedings every year.\nThe published content in these journals as well as the content from several hundred annual conferences sponsored by the IEEE are available in the IEEE Electronic Library (IEL) available through IEEE \"Xplore\" platform, for subscription-based access and individual publication purchases.\nIn addition to journals and conference proceedings, the IEEE also publishes tutorials and standards that are produced by its standardization committees. The organization also has its own IEEE paper format.\nPublishing standards.\nThe IEEE provides \"IEEE Editorial Style Manual for Authors\" style guide for article authors and basic templates in Microsoft Word and LaTeX file formats. It is based on The Chicago Manual of Style and doesn't cover \"Grammar\" and \"Usage\" styles which are provided by Chicago style guideline\".\"\nIn April 2024, the IEEE banned the use of Lenna test images in its journals and stated that they would decline papers containing them.\nTechnical societies.\nIEEE has 39 technical societies, each focused on a certain knowledge area, which provide specialized publications, conferences, business networking and other services.\nGlobal reach.\nIEEE consists of 10 global regions, each serving its members and volunteers respectively. Each region consists of sections that directly serve its members and volunteers. \nA region alignment is proposed to happen with effect from January\u00a01, 2028, merging Region\u00a01 and 2 together as just Region\u00a02, while carving out a separate Region\u00a011 from the existing Region\u00a010.\nOther bodies.\nIEEE Global History Network.\nIn September 2008, the \"IEEE History Committee\" founded the \"IEEE Global History Network\",&lt;ref name=\"ieeexplore/5385936\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"ethw/Oral-Nebeker\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; which now redirects to Engineering and Technology History Wiki.&lt;ref name=\"ethw/About\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIEEE Foundation.\nThe IEEE Foundation is a charitable foundation established in 1973 to support and promote technology education, innovation, and excellence. It is incorporated separately from the IEEE, although it has a close relationship to it. Members of the Board of Directors of the foundation are required to be active members of IEEE, and one third of them must be current or former members of the IEEE Board of Directors.\nInitially, the role of the IEEE Foundation was to accept and administer donations for the IEEE Awards program, but donations increased beyond what was necessary for this purpose, and the scope was broadened. In addition to soliciting and administering unrestricted funds, the foundation also administers donor-designated funds supporting particular educational, humanitarian, historical preservation, and peer recognition programs of the IEEE. As of the end of 2014, the foundation's total assets were nearly $45 million, split equally between unrestricted and donor-designated funds.\nMembership Geographic Activities.\nIEEE's Membership Geographic Activities (MGA) is focused on supporting and meeting the members' needs and IEEE membership recruitment and retention strategies and implementation. MGA supports members by creating opportunities for volunteers to attend conferences, create technical, STEM, and humanitarian events through platforms like vTools.\nControversies.\nHuawei ban.\nIn May 2019, IEEE restricted Huawei employees from peer reviewing papers or handling papers as editors due to the \"severe legal implications\" of U.S. government sanctions against Huawei. As members of its standard-setting body, Huawei employees could continue to exercise their voting rights, attend standards development meetings, submit proposals and comment in public discussions on new standards. The ban sparked outrage among Chinese scientists on social media. Some professors in China decided to cancel their memberships.\nOn June 3, 2019, IEEE lifted restrictions on Huawei's editorial and peer review activities after receiving clearance from the United States government.\nPosition on the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nOn February 26, 2022, the chair of the IEEE Ukraine Section, Ievgen Pichkalov, publicly appealed to the IEEE members to \"freeze [IEEE] activities and membership in Russia\" and requested \"public reaction and strict disapproval of Russia's aggression\" from the IEEE and IEEE Region\u00a08. On March\u00a017, 2022, an article in the form of a Q&amp;A interview with IEEE Russia (Siberia) senior member Roman Gorbunov titled \"A Russian Perspective on the War in Ukraine\" was published in \"IEEE Spectrum\" to demonstrate \"the plurality of views among IEEE members\" and the \"views that are at odds with international reporting on the war in Ukraine\". On March\u00a030, 2022, activist Anna Rohrbach created an open letter to the IEEE in an attempt to have them directly address the article, stating that the article used \"common narratives in Russian propaganda\" on the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and requesting the IEEE Spectrum to acknowledge \"that they have unwittingly published a piece furthering misinformation and Russian propaganda\". A few days later a note from the editors was added on April\u00a06 with an apology \"for not providing adequate context at the time of publication\", though the editors did not revise the original article.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56940", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56940", "title": "Seneca County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nSeneca County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 33,814. The primary county seat is Waterloo, moved there from the original county seat of Ovid in 1819. It became a two-shire county in 1822, which currently remains in effect and uses both locations as county seats although the majority of Seneca County administrative offices are located in Waterloo. Therefore, most political sources list only Waterloo as the county seat. The county's name comes from the Seneca Nation of the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois), who occupied part of the region. The county is part of the Finger Lakes region of the state.\nSeneca County comprises the Seneca Falls, NY Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Rochester-Batavia-Seneca Falls, NY Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe area covered by Seneca County straddles the prehistoric territories of both Seneca and Cayuga Nations of the Haudenosaunee. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In the fall of 1779 on orders from commander-in-chief General George Washington the Sullivan Expedition conducted a scorched earth campaign against the Iroquois who sided with the Loyalists in the Revolutionary War. Sullivan's path destroyed Cayuga and Seneca villages along the east shore of Seneca Lake.\nIn 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County in honor of the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Ontario County. The actual area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present Ontario County, also including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and parts of Schuyler and Wayne counties.\nHerkimer County was one of three counties split off from Montgomery County (the others being Otsego and Tioga counties) in 1791.\nOnondaga County was formed in 1794 by the splitting of Herkimer County.\nCayuga County was formed in 1799 by the splitting of Onondaga County. This county was, however, much larger than the present Cayuga County. It then included the present Seneca and Tompkins counties and part of Wayne County.\nIn 1804, Seneca County was formed by the splitting of Cayuga County.\nIn 1817, Seneca County was reduced in size by combining portions of Seneca and the remainder of Cayuga County to form Tompkins County. Part of this territory, the current towns of Covert and Lodi, were returned to Seneca County in 1819.\nThe original county seat of Seneca County was located in Ovid, where a court house was constructed in 1806. After southern portions of the county were removed in 1817 to become part of Tompkins County, the seat was moved to Waterloo as the village was more geographically centered at the time. In 1823, northern portions of the county were removed to form part of Wayne County. This put Waterloo in the same situation as Ovid with being on one end of Seneca County. A compromise was made to use both locations as county seats, becoming a two-shire county. It included the constitution of two county courts and jury districts under Chapter 137 of the New York State Laws of 1822. In 1895, the Seneca County Board of Supervisors voted to abolish the setup of two jury districts. It later voted to remove the two-shire county system in 1921, making Waterloo the only county seat, but was reinstated two years later. At least once a year, the County Board of Supervisors holds its monthly meeting in Ovid to maintain the two-shire status.\nIn 1823, Seneca County was reduced in size by combining portions of Seneca and Ontario counties to form Wayne County.\nOn April 6, 1830, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints was founded in Seneca County. The event took place at the log home of a local farmer, Peter Whitmer. Although church headquarters moved out of the area shortly thereafter, a historical visitor's center is still operated at that location.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (17%) is water.\nSeneca County is in the western part of New York in the Finger Lakes Region, bounded on the east by Cayuga Lake and on the west by Seneca Lake.\nThe Finger Lakes National Forest is in the south part of the county.\nBoth the New York State Thruway and the Erie Canal cross the northern part of the county.\nThe former Seneca Army Depot occupies a portion of land between Cayuga and Seneca Lakes. The former Willard Drug Treatment Center and Five Points Correctional Facility are two New York State prisons located in the county. Sampson State Park is located next to the former Army base.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 35,251 people, 13,393 households, and 8,762 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 14,794 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.7% White, 5.1% African American, 0.8% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.9% from other races, and 1.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.7% of the population. 18.9% were of Italian, 16.7% German, 14.6% English, 13.4% Irish and 8.9% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 95.3% spoke English and 1.6% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 12,630 households, out of which 31.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.60% were married couples living together, 10.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.70% were non-families. 25.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 2.99.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.80% under the age of 18, 7.50% from 18 to 24, 28.80% from 25 to 44, 23.80% from 45 to 64, and 15.10% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 100.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.50 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,140, and the median income for a family was $45,445. Males had a median income of $32,512 versus $24,320 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,630. About 8.00% of families and 11.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.80% of those under age 18 and 7.30% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe county is governed by a fourteen-member board of supervisors, composed of the town supervisor representing each of the ten towns in Seneca County along with four additional at-large members from the towns of Waterloo and Seneca Falls (two per township). The board normally meets every 2nd Tuesday of the month at the Seneca County Office Building in Waterloo with at least one meeting per year held at the old Seneca County Courthouse Complex in Ovid as honor of the two-shire system. Each supervisor has a weighted vote based on the population of the town they represent.\nHistorically a Republican-voting county, Seneca has become more competitive in recent years and is now a swing county in Presidential elections. With the exception of 2000 and 2020, when Al Gore and Donald Trump, respectively, carried the county, voters here have opted for the winner of every Presidential election since 1980. In 2024, Donald Trump carried the county by over 55%, the highest percentage for any candidate from either party since Reagan in 1984.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n\u2020 - County Seat\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\nSeneca county has a number of unincorporated communities. Most are considered hamlets."}
{"id": "56941", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56941", "title": "Schuyler County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nSchuyler County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 17,898, making it the second-least populous county in New York. The county seat is the village of Watkins Glen. The name is in honor of General Philip Schuyler, one of the four major generals in the Continental Army in the American Revolutionary War. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in New York State in 1683, the present Schuyler County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). Tryon County's eastern boundary was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, Tryon County's name was changed to Montgomery County in honor of the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Ontario County was split off from Montgomery. The actual area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present county, also including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties.\nHerkimer and Tioga counties were two of three counties split off from Montgomery County (the other being Otsego County) in 1791.\nIn 1794, Onondaga County was formed by the splitting of Herkimer County. This county was larger than the present Onondaga County, however, including the present Cayuga, Seneca, and Tompkins counties.\nOn March 8, 1796, Steuben County was created, split off from Ontario County. It was larger than the present county, however.\nIn 1798, Chemung County was formed from Tioga County, but the county at that time was rather larger than the present county, containing a portion of what would later become Schuyler County.\nIn 1799, Cayuga County was formed by the splitting of Onondaga County. This county was, however, much larger than the present Cayuga County. It then included the present Seneca and Tompkins counties, as well as part of what would become Schuyler County.\nIn 1804, Seneca County was formed by the splitting of Cayuga County. Then in 1817, in turn, a portion of Seneca County was combined with a piece of the remainder of Cayuga County to form Tompkins County.\nIn 1823, Steuben County was reduced in size by the combination of a portion of the county with a portion of Ontario County to form Yates County.\nOn April 17, 1854, portions of Steuben, Chemung and Tompkins counties were combined to form Schuyler County.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (4.1%) is water.\nSchuyler County is in the western part of New York State, west of Ithaca at the southern end of Seneca Lake.\nThe Finger Lakes National Forest is in the north part of the county.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 19,224 people, 7,374 households, and 5,191 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 9,181 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 96.48% White, 1.45% African American, 0.40% Native American, 0.29% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.36% from other races, and 0.99% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.22% of the population. 17.3% were of German, 15.5% English, 13.9% Irish, 11.8% American and 11.4% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 97.1% spoke English and 1.1% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 7,374 households, out of which 32.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.70% were married couples living together, 9.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.60% were non-families. 23.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 2.96.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 25.30% under the age of 18, 7.90% from 18 to 24, 26.60% from 25 to 44, 25.40% from 45 to 64, and 14.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 100.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.60 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $36,010, and the median income for a family was $41,441. Males had a median income of $31,549 versus $21,928 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,039. About 8.80% of families and 11.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.10% of those under age 18 and 6.20% of those age 65 or over.\nTransportation.\nSchuyler County has eight private airstrips and its nearest major airport is Elmira Corning Regional Airport. Schuyler County Transit provides bus service. The county's Highway Department is headquartered in Watkins Glen and is charged with maintaining roads, including:\nEach town and village within Schuyler County maintains its own highway department.\nMajor roadways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe former Chemung Canal was partially located in Schuyler County. The former New York State Route 419 and New York State Route 962C were located in Schuyler County.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\nAll larger settlements are villages\n\u2020 - County Seat\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nSchuyler County is strongly Republican, having backed the Republican presidential candidate in all but two elections since the Civil War, with 1964 and 1996 being the sole exceptions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Gubernatorial elections results"}
{"id": "56942", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56942", "title": "Telecommunications in Zambia", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Zambia includes radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nThe state-owned Zambia National Broadcasting Corporation (ZNBC) operates three radio networks. Roughly two dozen private radio stations are operating. Relays of at least two international broadcasters are accessible in Lusaka and Kitwe.\nZNBC operates one television station, and is the principal local-content provider. There is also several private TV stations. Multi-channel subscription TV services are available.\nTelephones.\nFacilities are among the best in sub-Saharan Africa. High-capacity microwave radio relay connects most larger towns and cities. Several cellular telephone services are in operation and network coverage is improving. A domestic satellite system is being installed to improve telephone service in rural areas. Very small aperture terminal (VSAT) networks are operated by private firms.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nInternet access is not restricted and individuals and groups freely express their views via the Internet, however the government frequently threatens to deregister critical online publications and blogs. In October 2012 the government attempted to deregister the blog Zambian Watchdog, but was unsuccessful because the blog was hosted abroad and therefore outside government control.\nThe constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, however the government uses provisions contained in the law to restrict these freedoms. The government is sensitive to opposition and other criticism and has been quick to prosecute critics using the legal pretext that they had incited public disorder. Libel laws are used to suppress free speech and the press.\nThe constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, but the government frequently does not respect these prohibitions. The law requires a search or arrest warrant before police may enter a home, except during a state of emergency or when police suspect a person has committed an offense such as treason, sedition, defamation of the president, or unlawful assembly. Police routinely enter homes without a warrant. The law grants the Drug Enforcement Commission (DEC), the Zambia Security Intelligence Service (ZSIS), and police authority to monitor communications using wiretaps with a warrant issued on the basis of probable cause, and authorities generally respect this requirement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56943", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56943", "title": "Transport in Zambia", "text": "This article is about the Transport in Zambia.\nRailway.\nThere is a total of 2,157\u00a0km (2008) of railway track in Zambia.\nProposed extensions.\n2007.\non 25 August 2007.\n2006.\nZambia's North-West Extension \u2013 8 February 2006 \u2013 Preparatory work is going forward on Zambia's proposed new north-western extension railway from Chingola to Solwezi, estimated to cost about $US235m. The area has excellent mining potential which cannot be exploited effectively without rail facilities. The route has been surveyed and the implications of compensating land owners are being worked out.\nAustralian and American interests are examining the project and the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) may help with finance. The United States Trade and Development Agency (USTDA), another prospective source of funding, is also looking at the scheme. Hopes have been expressed that the new line might eventually be extended to Mwinilunga and even to join Angola's Benguela Railway without relying on the DR Congo link, to restore what was until the 1970s Zambia's main route for exporting copper and other metals. In April 2012, according to newspaper reports, the Zambian government \"has issued a permit to North-West Railway Company (NWR) for construction of the 554\u00a0km railway line from Chingola to Jimbe on the Angolan border\".\nThe Angolan transport ministry plans to build a line branching off the Benguela Railway at Luacano and entering Zambia from Macango, thus avoiding DR Congo territory. The establishment of this direct link was also subject of talks during the visit of an Angolan delegation to Lusaka in May 2012. \"The Benguela Railway will improve relations between the two countries as well as transportation of goods. It is encouraging that the railway on the Angolan side will reach the border by next year,\" said Keith Mukata, Zambian Deputy Minister for Commerce, Trade, and Industry.\nTrade corridors.\nAs a landlocked minerals producer, Trade Corridors are vital to Zambia. In Zambia's case these are road and/or rail routes which cross international borders to ports and which are the subject of international agreements on planning, use and management. They are not separate from the road and rail networks listed above, but are entities superimposed on those networks for strategic economic and trade development. They are:\nCorridors 1 to 6 may also be used by southeastern DR Congo though Zambia.\nWater transport.\nAlthough none of the major urban centres are located on usable waterways, Zambia is a relatively well-watered country but is mainly flat, meaning there are many navigable rivers, lakes and channels through swamps, which together reach a large proportion of the rural population. These offer a minimum-maintenance rural transport alternative. In the cases of Bangweulu and Mweru Wantipa in particular, there are permanent and seasonal fishing communities for whom the only access is by boat or canoe.\nAir transport.\nZambia has four international airports, five airstrips and five secondary airfields that serve the domestic and international flights. The main airport is Lusaka Kenneth Kaunda International Airport. Other smaller airports include Livingstone and Mfuew, Ndola along with secondary airfields including Kasama, Kitwe, Chipata, Mongi, Mansa and Solwezi.\nZambia has an 'open skies' policy since the state-owned national carrier failed. Before its demise, Zambian Airways was the only Zambia-based scheduled carrier. As of 2022, there are several scheduled carriers based in Zambia: Zambia Airways, Proflight Zambia, Royal Zambian Airlines, and Mahogany Air.\nOnly six of Zambia's airports see scheduled commercial flights: Chipata Airport, Harry Mwanga Nkumbula International Airport, Kenneth Kaunda International Airport, Mfuwe Airport, Simon Mwansa Kapwepwe International Airport, and Solwezi Airport. Zambia's three international airports offer passenger flights to Dar es Salaam, Johannesburg, Mbombela, Dubai, Harare, Addis Ababa, Nairobi, Lilongwe, Doha, Kigali, Gaborone, and Cape Town.\nAirports \u2013 With Paved Runways.\n\"Total:\" 8\"Over 3,047 m:\" 1\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 3\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 3\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 1 (2012)\nAirfields \u2013 with unpaved runways.\n\"Total:\" 80\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 1\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 5\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 53\"under 914 m:\" 21 (2012)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56944", "revid": "371566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56944", "title": "Tompkins County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nTompkins County is a county located in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 105,740. The county seat is Ithaca. The name is in honor of Daniel D. Tompkins, who served as Governor of New York and Vice President of the United States. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.\nTompkins County comprises the Ithaca Metropolitan Statistical Area. It is home to Cornell University, Ithaca College and Tompkins Cortland Community College.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in the British Province of New York in 1683, the present Tompkins County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County in honor of the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting off of Ontario County. The actual area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present county, also including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties.\nHerkimer County was one of three counties split off from Montgomery County (the others being Otsego and Tioga counties) in 1791.\nOnondaga County was formed in 1794 by the splitting of Herkimer County.\nCayuga County was formed in 1799 by the splitting of Onondaga County. This county was, however, much larger than the present Cayuga County. It also included the territory of the present Seneca and Tompkins counties.\nIn 1804, Seneca County was formed by the splitting of Cayuga County.\nOn April 7, 1817, Tompkins County was created by combining portions of Seneca and the remainder of Cayuga County. The county was named after then vice-president (to President James Monroe) and former New York Governor Daniel Tompkins. Tompkins almost certainly never visited the county named for him.\nIn 1854, the county lost the town of Hector and the west line of lots in Newfield to the newly formed Schuyler County, New York.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.4%) is water.\nTompkins County is in the west central part of New York State, south of Syracuse and northwest of Binghamton. It is usually geographically grouped with the Finger Lakes region, but some locals consider themselves to be part of Central New York or the Southern Tier.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 96,501 people, 36,420 households, and 19,120 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 38,625 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 85.50% White, 3.64% African American, 0.28% Native American, 7.19% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 1.09% from other races, and 2.26% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.08% of the population. 12.4% were of German, 11.7% English, 11.1% Irish, 9.2% Italian and 6.0% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 2.85% of the population reported speaking Spanish at home, while 1.86% speak Chinese, 1.07% Korean, and 1.00% French.\nThere were 36,420 households, out of which 25.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.20% were married couples living together, 8.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 47.50% were non-families. 32.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.93.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 19.00% under the age of 18, 26.00% from 18 to 24, 26.20% from 25 to 44, 19.30% from 45 to 64, and 9.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29 years. For every 100 females there were 97.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.20 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,272, and the median income for a family was $53,041. Males had a median income of $35,420 versus $27,686 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,659. About 6.80% of families and 17.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.00% of those under age 18 and 5.40% of those age 65 or over.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 County seat\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets/Villages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment and politics.\nTompkins County was once a reliably Republican county. From 1856 to 1980, the only Democratic candidates to carry it in a presidential election were Woodrow Wilson in 1912 and Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964. However, Democrats have won Tompkins County in every presidential election since 1984, starting with Walter Mondale's 2.92% victory margin over then-president Ronald Reagan. The dominant presence of Cornell University in Ithaca is a crucial factor in Democrats' success in the county. In 2008, Tompkins County was the only county in New York State in which Senator Barack Obama beat Senator Hillary Clinton in the Democratic primary. In the 2008 United States presidential election, Obama won the county by a 41% margin over John McCain, with Obama winning by 25.5% statewide. It was his highest percentage by county in upstate New York. In 2016 the county strongly supported Clinton over Trump (67.7% to 24.3%). \nIt swung even further to Joe Biden in 2020, who took 73.5% to 24.3% for Trump, the highest voteshare it has given any candidate since 1956 when incumbent president Dwight D. Eisenhower won the county with 78.3% of the vote. In 2024, it was one of only two counties in New York State where Kamala Harris performed better than Biden had. In this election it was the second-most Democratic out of all New York counties, only bested by Manhattan, due to the rightward shifts of Brooklyn and The Bronx. Harris had the best performance by a Democratic nominee in the county's history.\nThe Tompkins County Legislature consists of fifteen members, each from a single-member district. In November 2014, the Tompkins County legislature unanimously adopted a resolution recognizing freedom from domestic violence as a fundamental human right. In doing so, Tompkins County became the first rural county in the United States to pass such a resolution.\nEducation.\nThere are three institutions of higher education in Tompkins County:\nThe county is served by several school districts: (the largest being Ithaca City School District)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe county is served by several public libraries including the Tompkins County Public Library, the Southworth Library and the Ulysses Philomathic Library.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56945", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56945", "title": "Sullivan County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nSullivan County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 78,624. The county seat is Monticello. The county's name honors Major General John Sullivan, who was labeled at the time as a hero in the American Revolutionary War in part due to his successful campaign against the Iroquois (see Sullivan Expedition). The county is part of the Hudson Valley region of the state.\nThe county was the site of hundreds of Borscht Belt hotels and resorts, which had their heyday from the 1920s through the 1970s.\nIn 2010, the state's center of population was at the southern edge of Sullivan County.\nHistory.\nWhen the Province of New York established its first twelve counties in 1683, the present Sullivan County was part of Ulster County. In 1809, Sullivan County was split from Ulster County.\nIn the late 19th century, the Industrial Revolution and the advent of factories driven by water power along the streams and rivers led to an increase in population attracted to the jobs. Hamlets enlarged into towns. As industry restructured, many of those jobs left before the middle of the twentieth century. The economy changed again after that, shifting to a more tourist-based variety and benefiting from resorts established by European Jewish immigrants and their descendants in what became called the Borscht Belt of the 20th century. Resort hotels featured a wide variety of entertainers, some nationally known. At the beginning of this period, visitors traveled to the area by train, and later by automobile. The area's natural resources also provided a setting for numerous summer camps frequented by the children of immigrants and their descendants.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.9%) is water.\nSullivan County is in the southern part of New York State, southeast of Binghamton and southwest of Albany. It is separated from Pennsylvania along its southwest boundary by the Delaware River.\nThe county, which starts about 70 miles northwest of New York City, is in the Catskill Mountains. Its northeastern corner is within the Catskill Park.\nThe highest point in the county is a peak unofficially known as Beech Mountain, near Hodge Pond, a subsidiary summit to Mongaup Mountain across the Ulster County line. The lowest point is along the Delaware River.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 73,966 people, 27,661 households, and 18,311 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 44,730 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 85.31% White, 8.51% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 1.12% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 2.89% from other races, and 1.87% from two or more races. 9.25% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.6% were of German, 13.9% Irish, 12.5% Italian, 7.3% American and 6.2% English ancestry according to 2000 census. 86.6% spoke English, 7.4% Spanish and 1.0% German as their first language. A small population of Russians, late twentieth-century immigrants, live in the villages. There are a few persons in Sullivan and nearby counties who are of mixed Dutch and Mohawk or Lenni-Lenape ancestry in this region of upstate New York, the legacy of indigenous peoples in the region and the New Netherlands colonial era in the 17th century.\nThere were 27,661 households, out of which 31.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.10% were married couples living together, 11.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.80% were non-families. 27.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.05.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.90% under the age of 18, 7.30% from 18 to 24, 28.10% from 25 to 44, 25.40% from 45 to 64, and 14.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $36,998, and the median income for a family was $43,458. Males had a median income of $36,110 versus $25,754 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,892. About 11.60% of families and 17.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.60% of those under age 18 and 10.70% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nSullivan County is a swing county, backing the national winner in all but three presidential elections from 1952 to the present. In 2004, Republican George W. Bush defeated Democrat John Kerry by a margin of 49.47% to 48.55%, or a difference of 285 votes. In 2008, however, it was won by Democrat Barack Obama over Republican John McCain by a margin of 54% to 45%. The margin remained virtually the same in 2012, as Obama won the county again over Republican Mitt Romney by 54-45%. But then, in 2016, the county swung to Republican Donald Trump over Democrat Hillary Clinton by a margin of 53% to 42%. In 2020, the county didn't back the winner nationally for the first time since 2000. Incumbent Republican President Donald Trump won the county with 54% of the votes that year compared to the national winner Democrat Joe Biden's 45%.\nThere are thirty-six town and village courts in Sullivan County.\nLegislative authority is vested in the county legislature which consists of nine members, each elected from single member districts. Currently, there are five Democrats and four Republicans.\nTransportation.\nSullivan County has services provided by Short Line to New York City. It also has some local service provided by the county itself, as well as community organizations.\nSullivan County International Airport is located in Bethel and is used frequently for general aviation purposes.\nMajor roadways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTourism.\nSullivan County has been a popular vacation spot since the 19th century, with mountain climbing, boating, and other outdoor activities, as well as the Monticello Raceway being among the attractions. The majority of the tourism occurs in the summer months. It was the site of the hundreds of resort complexes of the Borscht Belt (with their golf courses, social events, and entertainers), between the 1920s and 1970s.\nBorscht Belt hotels, bungalow colonies, summer camps, and \"kuchaleyns\" (a Yiddish name for self-catered boarding houses) proliferated. The bungalows usually included \n\"a kitchen/living room/dinette, one bedroom, and a screened porch\" with entertainment being simple: bingo or a movie. The \"kuchaleyns\" were also visited often by middle and working-class Jewish New Yorkers. Because of the many Jewish guests, this area was nicknamed the Jewish Alps and \"Solomon County\" (a modification of Sullivan County) by many people who visited there.\nMany famous comedians tested their material and performed regularly at Borscht Belt hotels, including Milton Berle, Mel Brooks, and Henny Youngman. Eddie Fisher performed often at Grossinger's, where in 1955 he married Debbie Reynolds.\nBy the late 1950s, many began closing with most gone by the 1970s, but some major resorts continued to operate, a few into the 1990s. Grossinger's Catskill Resort Hotel closed in 1986 and the Concord Resort Hotel struggled to stay open until 1998. By that time, the business owed millions in back taxes to Sullivan County, but the property was sold \"for $10.5 million\" and a new resort was eventually built.\nSullivan County was the site of the 1969 Woodstock Festival located at the present-day Bethel Woods Center for the Arts. During the period August 15\u201318, 1969, approximately 500,000 people gathered in Sullivan County's Town of Bethel at Max Yasgur's farm to attend the Woodstock Festival. The entertainers included The Who; the Grateful Dead; Jefferson Airplane; The Band; Canned Heat; Joan Baez; Arlo Guthrie; Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young; Janis Joplin; Santana; Sly and the Family Stone; Blood, Sweat and Tears; Jimi Hendrix; and Richie Havens. The state and the town of Bethel council subsequently passed laws prohibiting future mass event types of festivals. In 2019, a 50th celebration of Woodstock was organized: \"Sullivan County ... finally embracing the ultimate symbol of peace and love, the 1969 Woodstock festival\". The \"Woodstock 50\" festival, scheduled for August, was canceled months earlier so it did not take place. The Bethel Woods Center for the Arts did organize of weekend of \"low-key\" concerts.\nBethel Woods Center for the Arts, which also includes a museum of the sixties and Woodstock, holds many concerts and other events throughout the year.\nOther notable cultural destinations include the CAS Arts Center, a multi-arts exhibit space and education center run by the Catskill Art Society in Livingston Manor, New York, the NaCl Theatre, a professional regional theater company focusing on experimental work in Highland Lake, and the Delaware Valley Arts Alliance (DVAA) which serves as the Arts Council for Sullivan County and is located in Narrowsburg. DVAA offers two art galleries, performing arts and cultural programming, grant opportunities for artists and nonprofits, the Big Eddy Film Festival, and Riverfest.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56946", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56946", "title": "Diseases", "text": ""}
{"id": "56950", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56950", "title": "Wayne County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nWayne County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 91,283. The county seat is Lyons. The name honors General Anthony Wayne, an American Revolutionary War hero and American statesman. The county is part of the Finger Lakes region of the state.\nWayne County is less than 50 miles west of Syracuse. Wayne County has been considered to be part of the Rochester, New York metropolitan area and lies on the south shore of Lake Ontario, forming part of the northern border of the United States with Canada.\nIts location during the early westward expansion of the United States, on an international border and in a fertile farming region, has contributed to a rich cultural and economic history. Two world religions sprung from within its borders, and its inhabitants played important roles in abolitionism in the years leading up to the American Civil War. Nineteenth century War of 1812 skirmishes, Great Lakes sailing ship commerce and Erie Canal barge traffic have yielded to contemporary recognition as one of the world's most productive fruit growing regions. Wayne County ranks as New York's top apple producing county.\nHistory.\nPrior to the arrival of Europeans, the land Wayne County encompasses was originally part of the Iroquois Confederacy, which had existed from around August 31, 1142. When counties were established in New York State on November 1, 1683, it became part of Albany County.\nOn April 11, 1823, Wayne County was formed by combining portions of Seneca and Ontario counties.\nWestward expansion.\nThe first settlers of European extraction came to the region located along the Ganargua River, just west of present-day Palmyra. In 1788 the area became part of the Phelps and Gorham Purchase, a tract of land sold to Oliver Phelps and Nathaniel Gorham by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Sir William Pulteney, a British baronet and English land speculator, along with his partners in the Pulteney Association, purchased a of the former Phelps and Gorham Purchase in 1790.\nThe first westward road was one coming from near Utica to Geneva, and, with the building of the Cayuga Bridge in 1800, was the road chosen by nearly all of the westward travelers. This highway left the future Wayne County region somewhat isolated and settlers desiring to locate there came by way of streams and lakes lying to the north of the road. It was only a few years after that the \"new road\" came west, passing through the county, opening up the fertile Ganargua lands to easier settlement.\nThe first permanent settlement was started by John Swift and Col. John Jenkins in March 1789, about from Palmyra. In May of that year a small colony made up of the Stansell and Featherly families located at the junction of Ganargwa and the Canandaigua Outlet, calling the place Lyons, from a \"fancied likeness of that city's location on the Rhone\".\nWhile Phelps and Gorham sold some land to settlers, they were unable to make payments on their land and much of the land in the Phelps Gorham purchase either reverted to Massachusetts and was resold or conveyed directly to Robert Morris, a major financier of the Revolutionary War and signer of the US Declaration of Independence. In 1792, he in turn sold approximately to The Pulteney Association owned by Sir William Pulteney and two other minor partners. The Pulteney Purchase, or the Genesee Tract as it was also known, comprised all of the present-day counties of Ontario, Steuben and Yates, as well as portions of Allegany, Livingston, Monroe, Schuyler and Wayne. After Pulteney's death in 1805 the land was known as the Pulteney Estate.\nSir William Pulteney selected Charles Williamson as land agent to develop the purchased . In 1792, Williamson, a Scotsman, came to the unsettled wilderness in upstate New York to develop the land by building roads, selecting sites for towns, dividing land into lots, and building gristmills, taverns, stores and houses. Williamson selected Sodus Bay on Lake Ontario as the point for a future commercial center, with the idea that the lake and the Saint Lawrence River would be the outlet for the products of the region. In 1794 he had roads built from Palmyra to Phelpstown (present-day Phelps). Sodus was surveyed by Joseph Colt in lots of a quarter acre (1,000 m2), a hotel was built, and $20,000 was expended in the first two years in improvements. Sodus quickly passed from having an uncertain future to the head of the towns of the region.\nWar of 1812.\nTwo small skirmishes were fought in the county during the War of 1812: one in Sodus in June 1813, and the other in Williamson a year later. In May 1814, British troops under the command of Sir James Yeo landed in the Williamson hamlet of Pultneyville. Yeo's fleet had already successfully raided Oswego to the east and unsuccessfully attacked Rochester to the west before attempting to obtain stores from Pultneyville. An agreement with the hamlet's residents was made, permitting the invaders to seize supplies without resistance. A dispute broke out, however, and weapons fire began on both sides, including cannon bombardment from Lake Ontario. A few citizens were killed or wounded and two were taken prisoner as the British fled.\nGreat Lakes commerce.\nUntil the opening of the Erie Canal in 1823, Pultneyville, New York, at the mouth of Salmon Creek, was Wayne County's only port. From about 1811 through the 1890s (when the customs office closed), shipping in this small hamlet extended to the Atlantic Ocean and the world via the Saint Lawrence River. During the early years of the 19th century, activity in Pultneyville focused on agricultural commerce from the surrounding region (as far south as Canandaigua) and the maritime trade on the Great Lakes. In 1865, it was home to nearly 30 lake captains, and many sailors from both Pultneyville and Sodus Bay crewed on whalers around the world. In 1874 the first railroad appeared when the Lake Shore Railroad line opened and the center of trade moved south to Williamson and Pultneyville's significance as a commerce center sharply declined.\nReligion: Wayne County and the Second Great Awakening.\nWayne County played host to key events in the development of significant American religions during the country's Second Great Awakening period of the early 19th century. The Fox Sisters heard rappings from a dead peddler in Hydesville and spawned a movement that eventually garnered a million followers at its peak.\nPalmyra became the birthplace of the Latter Day Saint movement in the 1820s.\nShakers in Wayne County.\nSodus Bay also was the site of a community of Shakers from 1826 to 1836. The site provided convenient access to travel by water on the Great Lakes Ontario and Erie, for visits to Shakers who lived in Ohio. This site might also have been useful for abolitionists moving former slaves to freedom in Canada via the Underground Railroad.\nThe first Shaker leadership team, Elders Jeremiah Talcott and Eldress Polly Lawrence, along with their assistants John Lockwood and Lucy Brown, came to Sodus from the Shakers' parent community at New Lebanon, New York. With 72 converts during their first year, they soon had 200 acres under cultivation. By 1835, the community had grown to almost 150.\nHowever, they learned in 1835 that a canal had been proposed to be dug through their land, and by New York state law, the canal company had the right to seize the property it chose. The Shakers responded by selling their land and 23 buildings to the canal company and moving inland to the 1,700 acres they purchased at Groveland, in Livingston County, New York. However, the canal was never built; two years later, the Shakers were asked to take their property back, but, having reestablished their village elsewhere, and knowing that the land could later be taken for the same purpose, they refused.\nSeveral diaries and journals describing the Shakers' early years at Sodus and Groveland can be found at the Western Reserve Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio. These manuscripts are available on microfilm at more than 20 locations throughout the U.S.\nLatter-day Saints (Mormons).\nWayne County is the birthplace of the Latter Day Saint movement and Mormonism. Founder Joseph Smith, whose family lived on a farm that straddled the line between Palmyra and Manchester, claimed to have been visited by God the Father and Jesus Christ in 1820, an event known as the First Vision. In 1830 the Book of Mormon was first published in the village of Palmyra by E.B. Grandin, in the present Book of Mormon Historic Publication Site.\nSpiritualism and the Fox sisters.\nSpiritualists often set March 31, 1848, as the beginning of their movement. On that date, Kate and Margaret Fox, of Hydesville, reported that they had made contact with the spirit of a murdered peddler. What made this an extraordinary event was that the spirit communicated through audible rapping noises, rather than simply appearing to a person in a trance. The evidence of the senses appealed to practical Americans, and the Fox sisters became a sensation. Demonstrations of mediumship (seances and automatic writing, for example) proved to be a profitable business, and soon became popular forms of entertainment and spiritual catharsis. The Foxes earned a living this way, as did many others.\nCivil War and Underground Railroad.\nDuring the American Civil War Wayne County inhabitants were active in support of the Underground Railroad due to the area's proximity to slavery-free Canada. Wayne County also raised companies for multiple volunteer Union regiments, including the 33rd New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, the 98th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, the 111th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, and the 9th New York Heavy Artillery Regiment.\nDuring the Civil War, men from Wayne served in the 111th New York Infantry, under Colonel Clinton D. MacDougall.\nThe 111th New York was present at, among others, the Battle of Gettysburg, the Battle of the Wilderness, the Battle of Cold Harbor and the Appomattox Campaign. During the Battle of Gettysburg, the 111th took the second highest casualties as a regiment of the entire battle.\nThroughout the war, the regiment took a total of 1803 casualties, of which 158 were Killed in action, 557 were Wounded in action (490 of whom recovered to some extent), and 1088 Missing in action.\nErie Canal.\nThe Erie Canal transits the southern edge of the county. The villages of Clyde, Lyons, Newark, Palmyra and Macedon all became homes to canal locks when the Albany to Rochester section of the canal opened on September 10, 1823. On that day these communities became part of a direct water-link between the eastern seaboard metropolises of New York City and Baltimore and America's expanding western frontier.\nHoffman essays.\nWayne County high school seniors are offered the opportunity to win a scholarship by The Augustus L. and Jennie D. Hoffman Foundation Scholarship Essay Program. Established in 1954 to encourage the study of local history, students research and write essays on some aspect of Wayne County history or civic affairs. Between its inception and 2007 over 600 essays have been submitted.\nNuclear power.\nOn June 1, 1970, the Robert E. Ginna Nuclear Power Plant started commercial operation on the shores of Lake Ontario, just over the Monroe County line in the Town of Ontario.\nThe Ginna plant was the site of a minor nuclear accident when, on January 25, 1982, a small amount of radioactive steam leaked into the air after a steam-generator tube ruptured. The leak which lasted 93 minutes led to the declaration of a site emergency. The rupture was caused by a small pie-pan-shaped object left in the steam generator during an outage. This was not the first time a tube rupture had occurred at an American reactor but following on so closely behind the Three Mile Island accident caused considerable attention to be focused on the incident at the Ginna plant. In total, 485.3 curies of noble gas and 1.15 millicuries of iodine-131 were released to the environment.\nHistorical societies.\nIn addition to the county historical society, there are a number of other historical preservation organizations. Most of these are town or village based.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLaw, government and politics.\nThe county is governed by a Board of Supervisors, composed of the town supervisors from each of the county's fifteen towns. The board's chairman is selected from amongst the supervisors. The 2007 county budget was $154 million (~$ in 2024).\nThe county seat is the town of Lyons and bi-weekly board meetings are held in the Wayne County Court House in the hamlet. In August 2010, the board made history by convening outside of Lyons for the first time\u2014at the Wayne County fairgrounds in Palmyra.\nThe Wayne Supreme &amp; County Court (7th Judicial District) sits in Lyons and hears felony cases as well as a few civil cases; the Wayne County Drug Treatment Court also provides an opportunity for recovering drug addicts to work with each other and improve their lifestyles. Vehicle and traffic matters, small claims, evictions, civil matters and criminal offenses in Wayne County are heard in locally-funded town and village courts (collectively known as the Justice Courts).\nPolitics.\nAs of November 2013, Wayne County had a total of 56,589 voters registered (53,891 active, 2,698 inactive). Of those totals: 14,339 were registered as Democrats (13,574 active, 765 inactive); 23,144 as Republicans (22,338 active, 806 inactive); 3,035 as Independence (2,831 active, 204 inactive); 1,517 as Conservative (1,454 active, 63 inactive); and the rest as Greens, Libertarians, and other minor parties. In the 2010 gubernatorial election, Wayne County cast 12,126 Democratic votes for Andrew M. Cuomo, 9,552 Republican votes for Carl Paladino, 1,153 Independence votes for Cuomo, 2,489 Conservative votes for Paladino, 490 Working Families Party votes for Cuomo, and 401 Taxpayers Party votes for Paladino.\nWayne County has only voted for the Democratic presidential candidate once since the Republican Party was founded in 1854.\nIn the 2014 gubernatorial election, Wayne County cast 5,874 Democratic votes for Andrew M. Cuomo, 12,460 Republican votes for Rob Astorino, 306 Independence votes for Cuomo, 2,709 Conservative votes for Astorino, 289 Working Families Party plus 141 Women's Equality Party votes for Cuomo, and 642 Stop Common Core Party votes for Astorino.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (56%) is water.\nWayne County is in the western part of New York State, east of Rochester and northwest of Syracuse, on the south shore of Lake Ontario. Sodus Bay is located on the north shoreline of the county. Wayne is bounded by five other New York counties: the northern boundary is Lake Ontario with Canada on the opposite shore; the western boundary is Monroe County; and the eastern boundary is Cayuga County; the south boundary is shared with Ontario and Seneca counties.\nThe Clinton Formation, a band of red hematite across the county, led to a thriving iron industry during the 19th century. Furnaces were located in the Towns of Ontario and Wolcott.\nWayne County is included in the Eastern Great Lakes and Hudson Lowlands ecoregion, which extends along the south shores of Lake Erie and Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence River to Lake Champlain, and south down the Hudson River. This region was glaciated during the last ice age, and contains prominent glacial features including till and drumlins, as well as the valleys containing the Finger Lakes. Part of the area was covered by Glacial Lake Iroquois, while regions further to the east were flooded under the Champlain Sea. At one point during the melting of the glaciers, the Great Lakes drained down the Hudson River to the Atlantic Ocean.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 93,772 people, 36,585 households, and 25,304 families residing in the county. The population density was .\nThere were 36,585 households, out of which 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.0% were married couples living together, 11.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.8% were non-families. 24.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 2.99.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.2% under the age of 20, 5.1% from 20 to 24, 23.8% from 25 to 44, 30.7% from 45 to 64, and 14.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.3 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $52,601, and the median income for a family was $62,677. Males had a median income of $47,056 versus $35,684 for females. The per capita income for the county was $25,327. About 7.8% of families and 11.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.4% of those under age 18 and 6.9% of those age 65 or over.\nRecent racial/ethnic makeup.\nAs of the 2013 American Community Survey, the racial makeup of the county was 93.3% White alone, 3.6% African American alone, 0.3% Native American, 0.7% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, and 1.4% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.8% of the population, while white alone, not Hispanic or Latino, constituted 94.6% of the population.\nHousing.\nThere were 41,057 housing units at an average density of . 10.9% of housing units were vacant.\nThere were 36,585 occupied housing units in the town. 28,106 were owner-occupied units (76.8%), while 8,479 were renter-occupied (23.2%). The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.5% of total units. The rental unit vacancy rate was 9.4%.\nEarlier demographic statistics.\nFamilies made up 70 percent of the households in Wayne County in 2005. This figure includes both married-couple families (59 percent) and other families (12 percent). Non-family households made up 30 percent of all households. Most of these households were people living alone, but some were composed of people living in households in which no one was related to the householder. Source: American Community Survey, 2005 18.0% were of German, 12.8% Italian, 12.6% English, 11.6% Dutch, 11.4% Irish and 8.9% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 95.7% spoke English as their first language, 2.2% Spanish, 1.8% spoke French and 0.2% spoke another language.\nEconomy.\nAccording to the Wayne County Industrial Development Agency, there are over 150 manufacturing firms in Wayne County, including several Fortune 500 companies located in the county based on market access, a modern transportation network, and favorable industrial conditions. These companies benefit from a skilled workforce including graduates from some of the colleges and universities located within an hour's drive of Wayne County including the University of Rochester, Cornell University, Colgate University and Syracuse University. From its location midway between Rochester and Syracuse, Wayne County is part of the Finger Lakes region (which includes Cayuga, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Ontario, Orleans, Seneca, Wayne, Wyoming, and Yates counties) whose businesses annually export an estimated $16 billion in goods.\nThe Finger Lakes region made $1.2 billion (~$ in 2024) in agricultural sales in 2007, which represented 27.9 percent of the total farm sales in New York. In 2007, there were 6,417 farms and of farmland in the Finger Lakes. Wayne County was the State's top producer of fruits, tree nuts, and berries. Apples are a major crop in Wayne\u2014the county was the State's top producer of apples and ranked third in the nation in 2007.\nThe following quick facts apply to Wayne County businesses:\nEducation.\nWayne County does not have a single unified school district to deliver K-12 education, but multiple central school districts. Each district is governed by a locally-elected board of education, run by a hired superintendent, and funded largely through property taxes, as well as state and federal aid. These districts include:\nAs with all educational activities in New York State, Wayne County's school systems are ultimately answerable to the New York State Board of Regents and the New York State Education Department, as well as their local communities. These districts also participate in the Wayne Finger Lakes Board of Cooperative Educational Services (BOCES), a state-established organization which shares common educational resources and has its own elected board and superintendent.\nWayne County also has several private, parochial/religiously-based schools, including:\nWayne County is not home to any regionally-accredited institutions of higher learning, but has a satellite campus of Finger Lakes Community College in Newark to serve the associate degree-level learner and has access to many excellent public and private colleges and universities in immediately adjacent counties (such as SUNY Brockport, SUNY Oswego, University of Rochester, and Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Cayuga Community College to name just a few).\nCulture.\nWayne County is home to several festivals and parades, most from late spring through early fall due to the Upstate New York climate. Some of the more notable, listed in order of occurrence, include:\nAlso, many of Wayne County's volunteer fire departments host \"firemen's carnivals\" throughout the summer, with parades, rides, food, fireworks, and attractions which become a centerpiece of the summer social circuit.\nCommunities.\nThe county has no cities. There are 15 towns and seven villages.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther communities.\nWayne county has a number of unincorporated communities. Most are considered hamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56951", "revid": "2766075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56951", "title": "Bight", "text": "The word bight is derived from Old English \"byht\" (\u201cbend, angle, corner; bay, bight\u201d). In modern English, bight may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "56952", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56952", "title": "Ulster County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nUlster County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. It is situated along the Hudson River. As of the 2020 census, the population was 181,851. The county seat is Kingston. The county is named after the Irish province of Ulster. The county is part of the Hudson Valley region of the state.\nHistory.\nFounding and formation.\nWhen part of the New Netherland colony, Dutch traders first called the area of present-day Ulster County \"Esopus\", a name borrowed for convenience from a locality on the opposite side of the Hudson. \"Esopus\" meant \"land of flowing water and high banks,\" or \"small brook.\" There is also a town named Esopus located within Ulster County.\nThe local Lenape indigenous people called themselves Waranawanka, but soon came to be known to the Dutch as the \"Esopus Indians\" because they were encountered around the settlement known as Esopus. In 1652, Thomas Chambers, a freeholder from the Manor of Rensselaerswyck, purchased land at Esopus. He and several others actually settled and began farming by June 1653. The settlements grew into the village of Wiltwijck, which the English later named Kingston. In 1683, the Duke of York created 12 counties in his province, one of which was Ulster County, named after Prince James, Duke of York (later King James II of England) whose subsidiary titles included Earl of Ulster. Its boundaries at that time included the present Sullivan County and parts of the present Delaware, Orange, and Greene counties.\nIn 1777, the first state capital of the independent New York State was established at Kingston. The official records of Ulster County were removed to safety to a stone house in Kerhonkson when it became evident that the British would burn Kingston.\nIn 1797, parts of Otsego and Ulster counties were split off to create Delaware County.\nIn 1798, Ulster County's southernmost towns were moved into Orange County to compensate Orange for breaking away its southernmost part to form Rockland County.\nIn 1800, portions of Albany and Ulster counties were split off to create Greene County.\nIn 1809, Sullivan County was split off from Ulster County.\nCivil War.\nDuring the American Civil War, volunteers were recruited from the county and formed the majority of the following regiments:\nOther regiments with at least one company from the county included:\nTwentieth century.\nThe Lake Mohonk Mountain House on Shawangunk Ridge was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1986.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (3.1%) is water.\nUlster County is in southeastern New York State, south of Albany, immediately west of the Hudson River. Much of it is within the Catskill Mountains and the Shawangunk Ridge. Ulster County has Minnewaska State Park Preserve, Mohonk Preserve, Sundown State Park, VerNooykill State Forest, Witches Hole State Forest, and Shawangunk Ridge State Forest. The Sam's Point section of Minnewaska includes rare dwarf pine trees and Verkeerder Kill falls.\nThe county's highest point is Slide Mountain, at approximately above sea level. The lowest point is sea level along the Hudson River.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 Census.\nAs of the 2020 census the population of Ulster County is 181,851. The population density was . The county's racial makeup, as of 2020, was 75.16% non-Hispanic white, 5.8% black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 2.1% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 5.4% from other races or from two or more races. 11.61% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, the county had 181,440 people, 67,499 households, and 43,536 families. The population density was . There were 77,656 housing units at an average density of . The county's racial makeup, as of 2008, was 83.2% white, 6.50% black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 1.7% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 2.15% from other races, and 1.70% from two or more races. 7.6% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 19.2% were of Italian, 16.8% Irish, 15.5% German, 6.8% English, and 4.7% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 90.3% spoke English, 4.5% Spanish, 1.2% Italian, and 1.0% German as their first language.\nThere were 67,499 households, of which 30.70% had children under age 18 living with them, 49.20% were married couples living together, 10.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.50% were non-families. Of all households, 27.90% were made up of individuals, and 10.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.03.\n23.50% of the county's population was under age 18, 8.70% was from age 18 to 24, 29.70% was from age 25 to 44, 24.70% was from age 45 to 64, and 13.30% was age 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.60 males.\nThe county's median household income was $42,551, and the median family income was $51,708. Males had a median income of $36,808 versus $27,086 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,846. About 7.20% of families and 11.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.00% of those under age 18 and 8.70% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment and politics.\nFor most of the 20th century, Ulster County voted for the Republican nominees for president. Republicans regularly got over 60% of the vote, the high point coming when Dwight D. Eisenhower won 76% in 1956. The Democratic nominee won only in 1912, when Theodore Roosevelt and his Progressive Party split the Republican vote and gave a plurality to Woodrow Wilson, and in 1964, when Lyndon B. Johnson won every county in New York and carried Ulster County by 19.8 percentage points.\nMore recently, Ulster County has voted Democratic. In 1992, 1996, and 2000, the party won a plurality, due to strong showings from third parties. In 2004, John Kerry defeated George W. Bush, 54%\u201343%; in 2008, Barack Obama defeated John McCain, 61%\u201337%; in 2012, Obama defeated Mitt Romney, 60%\u201337%; in 2016, Hillary Clinton defeated Donald Trump, 52%\u201341%; in 2020, Joe Biden defeated Trump, 60%\u201339%; and in 2024, Kamala Harris defeated Trump, 58%\u201340%.\nAs of 2025, Ulster County is divided between 2 United States House of Representatives districts. The more populated eastern half of the county is in New York's 18th congressional district, represented by Democrat Pat Ryan. The less populated western half of the county is in New York's 19th congressional district, represented by Democrat Josh Riley. Ulster County had no U.S. representative after Antonio Delgado resigned on May 25, 2022, to become lieutenant governor of New York. Ryan won a special election on August 23 against Marc Molinaro, and was sworn in on September 13. Ryan ran in the 18th congressional district in the 2022 general election after redistricting put most of Ulster County in that district. Ryan was narrowly reelected against New York Assembly member Colin Schmitt. Molinaro ran in the 19th district and narrowly defeated Riley, before narrowly losing to Riley in a rematch in 2024.\nCounty government.\nFor a long time, Ulster County had a county-scale version of a council-manager government, with the county legislature hiring a county administrator to handle executive functions. The chair of the legislature had a great deal of power and was accountable only to the voters of their district. The only countywide elected officials were the county clerk, district attorney, and sheriff.\nIn 2006, voters approved the first-ever county charter, changing to an elected executive branch. Two years later, Michael P. Hein, the last appointed county administrator, became Ulster's first elected county executive. In early 2019, Hein resigned to accept Governor Andrew Cuomo's appointment as commissioner of the state Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance. Deputy County Executive Adele Reiter succeeded him as acting county executive until a special election was held in April 2019.\nOn April 30, 2019, Democrat Patrick K. Ryan was elected in a special election by a margin of 74%-26%. He was sworn in as Ulster County's second County Executive on June 7, 2019. On September 9, 2022, Ryan stepped down as county executive after winning election to the United States House of Representatives, and Johanna Contreras was sworn in as an acting county executive.\nDemocrat Jen Metzger, a former New York State Senator, defeated Republican Jim Quigley in the 2022 election to replace Ryan. For the election, 14-year-old Hudson Rowan designed the Ulster County \"I Voted\" sticker, which went viral for its weird design. Metzger took office in 2023.\nLegislative authority is vested in the County Legislature, which consists of 23 members elected from individual districts, as directed by a county charter reapportionment mandate starting in late 2010. Of the members of the 2024-2025 County Legislature, 14 are part of the Democratic Caucus (all 14 are affiliated with the Democratic Party), and 9 are part of the Republican Caucus (all 9 are affiliated with the Republican Party).\nRecreation.\nUlster County contains a large part of Catskill Park and the Catskill Forest Preserve. The former Delaware and Hudson Canal brought Pennsylvania coal to Kingston on the Hudson. Former Orleans band member John Hall served in the Ulster County legislature before moving to the 19th Congressional District to run for Congress.\nUlster County has continued to be a popular vacation destination for many decades. The county is home to many outdoor landscapes, including the Catskill Mountains, the Hudson River, Minnewaska State Park, Catskill Park, Shawangunk Mountains, Bear Hill Preserve, and the Shawangunk Ridge. Each offers various recreation opportunities, including hiking, bicycling, skiing, horseback riding, kayaking, rock climbing, hunting and fishing.\nThe county also includes more than of rail trails along the Hudson Valley Rail Trail, Wallkill Valley Rail Trail, and O&amp;W Rail Trail. The Walkway Over the Hudson, the world's longest pedestrian and bicycle bridge which spans the Hudson River, is connected within Ulster County trails.\nUlster County has also played a role in some significant moments in U.S. history. The Senate House State Historic Site in Kingston, New York, is where, in early 1777, American colonists met to ratify the New York Constitution.\nThe Ulster County Fair has been held in New Paltz for many years and is promoted as \"The Best Six Days of Summer\". County-run recreation areas include the Ulster County Pool in New Paltz and the Ulster Landing Park in Saugerties.\nSince 2016, Kingston Stockade FC, a semi-professional soccer team that plays in the National Premier Soccer League (NPSL), has been based in Kingston and plays its home matches at Dietz Stadium.\nAlso since 2015, the Saugerties Stallions, a collegiate summer baseball league team that plays in the Perfect Game Collegiate Baseball League (PGCBL), have been based in Saugerties and play their home games at Cantine Field. The Stallions won the 2021 PGCBL Championship.\nTransportation.\nPublic transportation in Ulster County is provided by Trailways of New York to and from New York City and Albany, and along Routes 28 and 32, by Ulster County Area Transit on major state and U.S. road corridors in the county.\nAs of 2025, there is no rail service in Ulster County. However, there are several stations nearby, including Rhinecliff station , Poughkeepsie station, Beacon station, and Port Jervis station.\nMajor roadways.\nThe New York State Thruway (I-87) runs north\u2013south through the county, carrying traffic between New York City and Albany and its surroundings. NY 55, NY 52, and NY 28 are all major east\u2013west highways that run through the county, and US 209, US 9W, and NY 32 are major north\u2013south highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\n \nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamlets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe State University of New York at New Paltz is located in New Paltz.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56955", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56955", "title": "Wyoming County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nWyoming County is a county in the U.S. state of New York in the state's western area. As of the 2020 census, the population was 40,531. The county seat is Warsaw. The name is modified from a Lenape (Delaware) Native American word meaning \"broad bottom lands\". Wyoming County was formed from Genesee County in 1841. Wyoming County is one of New York's mostly agricultural counties. With an estimated 47,500 dairy cows in the county, there are more cattle in Wyoming County than people. The county is part of the Finger Lakes region of the state.\nHistory.\nAs with the rest of Western New York, Wyoming County was part of disputed territory throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, claimed by the Massachusetts Bay Colony, Connecticut Colony, Province of Pennsylvania, New York Colony, and New France. New York's claims were not recognized until the Treaty of Hartford was ratified in 1786 and were not actively asserted until the Holland Purchase.\nIn regard to New York's claim, as of 1683 the present Wyoming County was part of Albany County of the Province of New York. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in the state of Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to Montgomery County in order to honor the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nIn 1789, Ontario County was split off from Montgomery as part of the establishment of the Morris Reserve.\nAlmost all of the land west of the Genesee River, including all of present-day Wyoming County, was part of the \"Holland Land Purchase\" in 1793. It was sold privately to settlers through the Holland Land Company's office in Batavia, starting in 1801.\nGenesee County was created by a splitting of Ontario County in 1802 to govern the land acquired in the Holland Purchase. This territory was much larger than the present Genesee County. It was reduced in size in 1806 by creating Allegany County; again in 1808 by creating Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, and Niagara counties. Niagara County at that time also included the present Erie County.\nIn 1821, portions of Genesee County were combined with portions of Ontario County to create Livingston and Monroe counties.\nGenesee County was further reduced in size in 1824 by creating Orleans County.\nFinally, in 1841, Wyoming County was created from the southern half of Genesee County, the northwest corner of Allegany County, and a small portion of the northeast corner of Cattaraugus County.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water.\nWyoming County is in the western part of New York State, east of Buffalo and slightly west of due south of Rochester. The county is in the Holland Purchase Region.\nThe county is largely rural, dotted with small towns. Even the county seat, Warsaw is quite small. The land surface is generally broken and hilly, and the soil fertile. Much of the area is wooded, used for timber. Some that are predominantly maple are tapped each spring for the production of maple syrup. Agriculture dominates the county economy. Apple orchards were once a major agricultural endeavor, but only a few are left. The area is also well known for outdoor sports, being an excellent area for fishing, hunting, and snowmobiling.\nAn active geologic fault runs down the Dale valley through Linden, to the east of Batavia and into Lake Ontario. Movement of the fault is an occasional source of minor earthquakes, which, at most, have toppled a couple chimneys. The Dale Valley has been developed as a source of salt by way of brine wells, for the chemical industry. A pipeline moves the brine to Niagara Falls.\nThe county is bounded on the southeast by the Genesee River, and drained by tributaries of that stream, as well as Tonawanda, Buffalo, and other creeks. An important tributary of the Genesee River, Oatka Creek, has its source in the Town of Gainesville within the county.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 census, there were 43,424 people, 14,906 households and 10,717 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 16,940 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 91.84% White, 5.52% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.37% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.32% from other races, and 0.67% from two or more races. 2.94% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 31.7% were of German, 12.5% English, 10.9% Irish, 10.2% Polish, 9.3% American and 7.7% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 97.1% spoke English and 1.8% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 14,906 households, of which 34.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.30% were married couples living together, 9.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.10% were non-families. 23.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.08.\nAge distribution was 24.10% under the age of 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 32.80% from 25 to 44, 22.80% from 45 to 64, and 12.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 118.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 122.40 males.\nThe median household income was $39,895, and the median family income was $45,088. Males had a median income of $31,973 versus $22,252 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,248. About 5.80% of families and 8.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.60% of those under age 18 and 5.80% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nWyoming County is somewhat unusual among New York counties in that it remains governed by a 16-member Board of Supervisors, consisting of the town supervisor of each town in its territory.\nState and federal government.\nWyoming County is part of:\nPolitics.\nWyoming County is extremely conservative. In state and national politics, Wyoming County is one of the most Republican counties in New York, a state that characteristically votes Democratic. In both the 2004 and 2008 U.S. presidential elections, it was the second-reddest county in New York, behind Hamilton County. In fact, the only Democrat to carry the county since the Civil War has been Lyndon Baines Johnson in 1964, during an election when no county in the Empire State supported Republican Barry Goldwater. In 2004, George W. Bush carried Wyoming County by a 30.9 percent margin over John Kerry, with Kerry carrying the state by an 18.3 percent margin. However, Senator Chuck Schumer concurrently won the county very narrowly; this was the last time that Wyoming County voted Democratic in a statewide federal election. In 2008, John McCain won the county by a 26.1 percent margin over Barack Obama, with Obama defeating McCain statewide by 26.7 percent. In New York's 2006 U.S. Senatorial election, Wyoming County voted for John Spencer by a 4% margin over Hillary Clinton, with Clinton being re-elected by a 36% margin over Spencer. In 2010, Wyoming County was one of only three counties to favor Republican Jay Townsend over Schumer. In the Senate Special election that same year, the county favored Republican Joe DioGuardi over the Democratic incumbent, Kirsten Gillibrand. In 2012, Wyoming County again selected a Republican for this seat, being one of only two counties (the other being neighboring Allegany County) to vote in favor of Republican candidate Wendy Long rather than Gillibrand. In 2016, Wyoming County once again favored Long as she lost statewide to Schumer. In 2018, the county once again rejected Gillibrand by favoring Republican Chele Farley. From 2012 onward, Wyoming has been the most Republican out of all New York's counties at the federal level; in 2024, Donald Trump won the county with over 73% of the vote, the best Republican performance since Dwight Eisenhower in 1956.\nIn 2017 Jon Campbell of the \"Democrat &amp; Chronicle\" wrote that the county \"is solid Trump Country.\"\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56956", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56956", "title": "Yates County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nYates County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 Census, the population was 24,774, making it the third-least populous county in New York. The county seat is Penn Yan. The name is in honor of Joseph C. Yates, who as Governor of New York signed the act establishing the county. The county is part of the Finger Lakes region of the state.\nYates County is included in the Rochester, New York Metropolitan Area.\nFormation of the county.\nWhen counties were established in New York State in 1683, the present Yates County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and again on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County now includes 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Canada. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the name of Tryon County was changed to honor the general, Richard Montgomery, who had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec, replacing the name of the hated British governor.\nOn January 27, 1789, of Montgomery County was split off to create Ontario County, including the lands of the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, and Yates counties, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties.\nOn March 18, 1796, of Ontario County was partitioned to form Steuben County.\nOn April 3, 1801, Ontario County exchanged land with Cayuga County, and lost as a result.\nOn March 30, 1802, Ontario County lost of land through the partition of Genesee County, including the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Niagara, Orleans and Wyoming counties and parts of Livingston and Monroe counties.\nIn 1821, Ontario County was reduced in size by combining portions of Genesee and Ontario counties to create Livingston and Monroe counties.\nOn February 5, 1823, Yates County was formed from of Ontario County, including the area that included Vine Valley, Middlesex, Penn Yan, and Dresden, New York.\nOn January 1, 1826, of Steuben County was partitioned and added to Yates, which included Starkey, Dundee, and Lakemont, New York.\nOn April 15, 1828, was partitioned from Yates, and passed to Seneca and Tompkins counties, mostly in the forest.\nOn March 17, 1860, Ontario County was authorized to gain land from Yates, but it was never put into effect.\nOn April 18, 1946, Yates gained from Schuyler and Seneca counties, which produced the current borders of Yates County.\nHistory.\nIn 1790 the Public Universal Friend and their society moved to the area from their original base in Rhode Island, forming a community at New Jerusalem, south west of Penn Yan, where The Friend's house can still be seen.\nIn 1974 a new Mennonite settlement was started in Yates County. It grew quickly and steadily and with a population of more than 3,000 in 2015 it was almost as large as the Lancaster County, Pennsylvania settlement.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (10%) is water.\nYates County is in the western part of New York State, northwest of\nIthaca and southeast of Rochester. It is in the Finger Lakes Region.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe most reported ancestries in 2020 were:\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 24,621 people, 9,029 households, and 6,284 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 12,064 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.90% White, 0.56% African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.36% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.93% of the population. 21.3% were of English, 16.5% German, 11.4% Irish, 10.7% American, 5.3% Danish and 5.3% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000.\n5.46% of the population over 5 years old, mostly Wenger Old Order Mennonites, report speaking Pennsylvania Dutch, German, or Dutch at home, a further 1.54% speak Spanish.\nThere were 9,029 households, out of which 31.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.00% were married couples living together, 9.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.40% were non-families. 24.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.59 and the average family size was 3.08.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.70% under the age of 18, 9.30% from 18 to 24, 24.70% from 25 to 44, 23.90% from 45 to 64, and 15.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 95.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.30 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $34,640, and the median income for a family was $40,681. Males had a median income of $29,671 versus $21,566 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,781. About 8.90% of families and 13.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.90% of those under age 18 and 7.10% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nKeuka College is in this county.\nTransportation.\nYates County has one private airstrip and two public-use airports:\nYates Transit Service provides bus service to Yates County. The county's Highway Department is headquartered in Penn Yan and is charged with maintaining roads, including:\nEach town and village within Yates County maintains its own highway department.\nMajor roadways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe former New York State Route 961H was located in Yates County.\nCommunities.\n\u2020 - County Seat\n\u2021 - Not Wholly in this county\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nYates County has been a Republican bastion, voting for a Democrat only twice since 1856. Although Mitt Romney won the county by only 3.3% in 2012, Donald Trump had won the county by a decisive 19.9% in 2016. In 2020, however, Trump won by a slightly lower margin, of 18.5%. In 2024, Trump won again, but by a reduced margin of 15.9%, bucking the national trend. "}
{"id": "56957", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56957", "title": "Lavon affair", "text": ""}
{"id": "56959", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56959", "title": "Geography of Portugal", "text": " \nPortugal is a coastal nation in western Europe, located at the western end of the Iberian Peninsula, bordering Spain (on its northern and eastern frontiers: a total of ). The Portuguese territory also includes a series of archipelagos in the Atlantic Ocean (the Azores and Madeira), which are strategic islands along the North Atlantic. The extreme south is not too far from the Strait of Gibraltar, leading to the Mediterranean Sea. In total, the country occupies an area of of which is land and water.\nDespite these definitions, the Portugal-Spain border remains an unresolved territorial dispute between the two countries. Portugal does not recognise the border between Caia and Ribeira de Cuncos River deltas, since the beginning of the 1801 occupation of Olivenza by Spain. This territory, though under \"de facto\" Spanish occupation, remains a \"de jure\" part of Portugal, consequently no border is henceforth recognised in this area.\nPhysical.\nPortugal is located on the western coast of the Iberian Peninsula and plateau, that divides the inland Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean. It is located on the Atlantic coast of this plateau and crossed by several rivers which have their origin in Spain. Most of these rivers flow from east to west disgorging in the Atlantic; from north to south, the primary rivers are the Minho, Douro, Mondego, Tagus and the Guadiana.\nCoastline.\nThe Portuguese continental shelf has an area of , although its width is variable from in the north to in the south. Its strong relief is marked by deep submarine canyons and the continuation of the main rivers. The Estremadura Spur separates the Iberian Abyssal and Tagus Abyssal Plains, while the continental slope is flanked by sea-mounts and abuts against the prominent Gorringe Bank in the south. Currently, the Portuguese government claims jurisdiction to a sea depth of , or to the depth of exploitation.\nThe Portuguese coast is extensive; in addition to approximately along the coast of continental Portugal, the archipelagos of the Azores (667\u00a0km) and Madeira (250\u00a0km) are primarily surrounded by rough cliff coastlines. Most of these landscapes alternate between rough cliffs and fine sand beaches; the region of the Algarve is recognized for its sandy beaches popular with tourists, while at the same time its coastline around Cape St. Vincent is well known for steep and forbidding cliffs. An interesting feature of the Portuguese coast is the Ria Formosa with some sandy islands and a mild and pleasant climate characterized by warm, but not very hot, summers and generally mild winters.\nIn contrast, the Ria de Aveiro coast (near Aveiro, referred to as \"The Portuguese Venice\") is formed by a delta approximately long with a maximum width of , rich in fish and seabirds. Four main channels flow through several islands and islets at the mouth of the Vouga, Antu\u00e3, Boco, and Font\u00e3o Rivers. Since the 16th century, this formation of narrow headlands formed a lagoon, which allowed the formation and production of salt. It was also recognized by the Romans, whose forces exported its salt\u2014then a precious resource\u2014to Rome.\nThe Azores are sprinkled with both black-sand and boulder-lined beaches; only as a rare exception are there white-sand beaches (such as on the island of Santa Maria in Almagreira). The island of Porto Santo has one of the few extensive dune beaches in Portugal, located in the archipelago of Madeira.\nTidal gauges along the Portuguese coast have identified a rise in sea levels, causing large estuaries and inland deltas in some major rivers to overflow.\nAs a result of its maritime possessions and long coastline, Portugal has an Exclusive Economic Zone of . This is the third largest EEZ of all countries in the European Union and the 20th in the world. This sea-zone, over which Portugal exercises special territorial rights over the economic exploration and use of marine resources, encircles an area of (divided as: Continental Portugal 327,667\u00a0km2, Azores Islands 953,633\u00a0km2, Madeira Islands 446,108\u00a0km2).\nContinent.\nThe Portuguese territory came into existence during the history of Gondwana and became aligned with European landforms after the super-continent Pangea began its slow separation into several smaller plates. The Iberian plate was formed during the Cadomian Orogeny of the late Neoproterozoic (about 650-550\u00a0Ma), from the margins of the Gondwana continent. Through collisions and accretion a group of island arcs (that included the Central Iberian Plate, Ossa-Morena Plate, South Portuguese Plate) began to disintegrate from Gondwana (along with other European fragments). These plates never separated substantially from each other since this period. By the Mesozoic, the three \"Portuguese plates\" were a part of the Northern France Armoric Plate until the Bay of Biscay began to separate. Following the separation of the Iberian Abyssal Plain, Iberia and Europe began to drift progressively from North America, as the Mid-Atlantic fracture zone pulled the three plates away from the larger continent. Eventually, Iberia collided with southern France attaching the region into a peninsula of Europe (during the Cenozoic). Since the late Oligocene, the Iberian plate has been moving as part of the Eurasian plate, with the boundary between Eurasia and Africa situated along the Azores\u2013Gibraltar fracture zone.\nThe Iberian peninsula, defined by its coastline, is due to a fragment of the Variscan tectonic fracture zone, the Iberian-Hesperian Massif, which occupies the west-central part of the plateau. This formation is crossed by the Central System, along an east-northeast to west-southwest alignment, parallel to the European Baetic Chain (an aspect of the Alpine Chain). The Central Cordillera is itself divided into two blocks, while three main river systems drain the differing geomorphological terrains: \nTo the north the landscape is mountainous in the interior areas with plateaus, cut by four breakings lines that allow the development of more fertile agricultural areas.\nThe south down as far as the Algarve features mostly rolling plains with a climate somewhat warmer and drier than the cooler and rainier north. Other major rivers include the Douro, the Minho and the Guadiana, similar to the Tagus in that all originate in Spain. Another important river, the Mondego, originates in the Serra da Estrela (the highest mountains in mainland Portugal at 1,993\u00a0m). A full list of rivers is available in List of rivers of Portugal.\nNo large natural lakes exist in Continental Portugal, and the largest inland water surfaces are dam-originated reservoirs, such as the Alqueva Reservoir, which is the largest artificial lake in Europe, with 83 kilometers in length and 250 square kilometres in area. However, there are several small freshwater lakes in Portugal, the most notable of which are located in Serra da Estrela, Lake Comprida (\"Lagoa Comprida\") and Lake Escura (\"Lagoa Escura\"), which were formed from ancient glaciers. Pateira de Fermentelos is a small natural lake near Aveiro, it is one of the largest natural lakes in the Iberian Peninsula and is rich in wildlife. In the Azores archipelago lakes were formed in the caldera of extinct volcanoes. Lagoa do Fogo and Lagoa das Sete Cidades (two small lakes connected by a narrow way) are among the site lakes in S\u00e3o Miguel Island.\nLagoons in the shores of the Atlantic exist. For instance, the Albufeira Lagoon and \u00d3bidos Lagoon (near Foz do Arelho, \u00d3bidos).\nArchipelagos.\nIn addition to continental Europe, Portugal consists of two Autonomous Regions in the Atlantic Ocean, consisting of the archipelagos of Madeira and Azores. Madeira is located on the African Tectonic Plate, and comprises the main island of Madeira, Porto Santo and the smaller Savage Islands. The Azores, which are located between the junction of the African, European and North American Plates, straddle the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. There are nine islands in this archipelago, usually divided into three groups (Western, Central and Eastern) and several smaller Formigas (rock outcroppings) located between S\u00e3o Miguel and Santa Maria Islands. Both island groups are volcanic in nature, with historic volcanology and seismic activity persisting to the present time. In addition, there are several submarine volcanos in the Azores (such as Dom Jo\u00e3o de Castro Bank), that have erupted historically (such as the Serrata eruption off the coast of Terceira Island). The last major volcanic event occurred in 1957-58 along the western coast of Faial Island, which formed the Capelinhos Volcano. Seismic events are common in the Azores.\nThe Azores are occasionally subject to very strong earthquakes, as is the continental coast. Wildfires occur mostly in the summer in mainland Portugal and extreme weather in the form of strong winds and floods also occurs mainly in winter. The Azores are occasionally stricken by tropical cyclones such as Hurricane Jeanne (1998) and Hurricane Gordon (2006).\nClimate.\nMost of Portugal has a Mediterranean climate according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"\"Csa\" (or hot-summer Mediterranean climate) in most of the lands south of the Tagus River, inland Douro Valley in the Norte Region, eastern Azores and the Madeira archipelago. The \"Csb\" warm-summer Mediterranean pattern can be found north of that same river and in Costa Vicentina in coastal Southern Portugal. Most of the Azores have a humid subtropical climate or \"Cfa\", while a small region in inland Alentejo has \"BSk\" or semi-arid climate. The Savage Islands are the only region to have an arid climate or \"BWh\"\". The sea surface temperatures in these islands vary from in winter to in the summer, occasionally reaching .\nThe annual average temperature in mainland Portugal varies from in the mountainous interior north to in the south (in general the south is warmer and drier than the north). The Madeira and Azores archipelagos have a narrower temperature range. Funchal is the warmest city in Portugal, with an average annual temperature of . Extreme temperatures occur in the mountains in the interior North and Centre of the country in winter, where they may fall below or in rare occasions below , particularly in the higher peaks of Serra da Estrela, and in southeastern parts in the summer, sometimes exceeding . &lt;br&gt;The official absolute extreme temperatures are in Penhas da Sa\u00fade on 4 February 1954 and Miranda do Douro, and in Amareleja in the Alentejo region, on 1 August 2003. There are, however, unofficial records of on 4 August 1881 in Riodades, S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o da Pesqueira and on 6 July 1949 in Figueira da Foz in an apparent heat burst (see the Highest temperature recorded on Earth). Such temperatures are not validated since these were measured in enclosures that were much more susceptible to solar radiation and/or in enclosed gardens which tend to heat up a lot more than in the open where temperatures should be measured. There are also records of from a Polytechnic Institute in Bragan\u00e7a, and below in Serra da Estrela, which have no official value since they were not recorded by IPMA. &lt;br&gt;The annual average rainfall in continental Portugal varies from around in a few mountain tops in the north at Peneda-Ger\u00eas National Park to around in inland parts of Alentejo. In Macaronesia however, Pico Island holds the record with upwards of in the higher altitudes and the Savage Islands around . Portugal as a whole is amongst the sunniest areas in Europe, with around 2300\u20133200 hours of sunshine a year, an average of 4-6h in winter and 10-12h in the summer. The sea surface temperature is higher in the south coast where it varies from in January to in August, occasionally reaching ; on the west coast the sea surface temperature is around in winter and in the summer.\nClimate change.\nClimate change in Portugal is causing rising temperatures and longer-lasting heat waves, decreases in average rainfall and increases in the number of extremely rainy days (causing droughts and floods), and rising sea levels which will threaten the country's many coastal populations. Portugal is among the countries worst affected by wild fires.\nIn 2023 Portugal emitted around 339 million tonnes of greenhouse gases (about 5 tonnes per person), equivalent to around 1% of global total emissions. As a EU member state, Portugal is part of their joint plan to reduce emissions by a minimum of 55% by 2030, compared to the level of emissions in 1990. Portugal has committed to carbon neutrality and net zero by 2050. As of 2023, oil made up 44% of Portugal's total energy supply. However the country phased out coal-fired generation in 2021 and has been developing renewable energies such as hydopower and wind power and investing in public transport and electric vehicles.\nWhole year UV Index table.\nSource:\nEnvironment.\nEnvironment - current issues:\nsoil erosion; air pollution caused by industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution, especially in coastal areas\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands\n&lt;br&gt;\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nAir Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Environmental Modification, Nuclear Test Ban\nTerrain:\nMountainous and hilly north of the Tagus River, rolling plains in south\nElevation extremes:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest point:\"\nAtlantic Ocean 0 m\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest point:\"\nPonta do Pico (Pico or Pico Alto) on Ilha do Pico in the Azores 2,351 m\nNatural resources:\nfish, forests (cork), tungsten, iron ore, uranium ore, marble, arable land, hydroelectric power\nLand use:\n&lt;br&gt;\"arable land:\"\n26%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent crops:\"\n9%\n&lt;br&gt;\"permanent pastures:\"\n9%\n&lt;br&gt;\"forests and woodland:\"\n36%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n20% (1993 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n6,300\u00a0km2 (1993 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56960", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56960", "title": "Demographics of Portugal", "text": " \nDemographic features of the population of Portugal include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population. As of 2024, Portugal had an estimated population of 10,749,635 inhabitants. Its population density, at , is slightly higher than that of most EU countries, moderately surpassing the EU average of .\nHigh fertility and birth rates persisted until the 1980s, after which they started to dramatically decline, leading to rapid population aging. At the end of the first decade of the 21st century, almost one in five Portuguese was over 65 years old. Lately, Portugal has been experiencing a short growth in birth rates. The total fertility rate has climbed from an all-time low of 1.21 children per woman in 2013 to 1.43 in 2022, still well below replacement level.\nPortugal is a fairly linguistically and religiously homogeneous country. Ethnically, the Portuguese people form a big majority of the total population in Portugal. The Portuguese people are mainly a combination of ancient paleolithic populations, and the proto-Celtic, Celtic, and the para-Celtic Lusitanians. Some other groups, like the Romans, Germanic (Visigoths, Suevi, Buri, Alans and Vandals) and later the Moorish (Arabs and Berber), Sephardic Jewish, and the French also passed through the country.\nToday, Brazilians, Britons, Indians, Italians, French, Ukrainians, Nepalis and countries members of PALOP (Portuguese-speaking African countries) are the main immigrants and form the major foreign communities in the country. \nPortuguese is spoken throughout the country, with only some villages near the northern municipality of Miranda do Douro speaking Mirandese, locally recognised as a co-official language.\nPopulation.\nDue to a decrease in emigration and an increase in immigration during the late 1990s and early 2000s, Portugal's population grew steadily, reaching a peak of 10,573,479 in December 2009. However, following the 2008 financial crisis, emigration surged and immigration declined, and these trends, combined with persistently low birth rates and an aging population, led to a gradual population decline. By 2018, the population had decreased by about 2.27% from its 2009 peak. From then onwards, however, net migration became positive again, supported by a renewed influx of immigrants and a slight rise in birth rates. As a result, Portugal's population resumed growth and, by 2023, had already surpassed the 2009 peak.\nThe distribution of the population is widely uneven; the most densely populated areas are the Lisbon metropolitan area (which contains well above a quarter of the country's population), the metropolitan areas of Porto and the Atlantic coast, while other vast areas are very sparsely populated, like the plateaus of Alentejo, the Tr\u00e1s-os-Montes and Serra da Estrela highlands, and the lesser islands of the Azores archipelago.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nNote: Crude migration change (per 1000) is a trend analysis, an extrapolation based average population change (current year minus previous) minus natural change of the current year (see table vital statistics). As average population is an estimate of the population in the middle of the year and not end of the year.\nThe population of the country almost doubled during the twentieth century (+91%), but the pattern of growth was extremely uneven due to large-scale internal migration from the rural North to the industrial cities of Lisbon and Porto, a phenomenon which happened as a consequence of the robust economic growth and structural modernisation, owing to a liberalisation of the economy of the 1960s. \nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n10,749,635 (2024 official INE estimate)\n2024 official INE estimate:\n* 0-14 years: 12.65% (male 697,309 /female 662,180)\n* 15-64 years: 63.02% (male 3,312,757 /female 3,462,045)\n* 65 years and over: 24.33% (male 1,130,210/female 1,485,134)\n* total: 47.3 years (2024 official INE data)\n* male: 45.5 years\n* female: 48.9 years\n7.9 births/1,000 population (2024 official INE estimate)\n11.2 deaths/1,000 population (2024 official INE estimate)\n1.40 children born/woman (2024 official INE estimate)\n13.40 net migrant(s)/1,000 population (2024 official INE estimate)\n+ 1.03 % (2024 official INE estimate)\n30.3 years (2024 official INE estimate)\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\n2022 official INE estimate:\n* total: 2.59 deaths/1,000 live births. Country comparison to the world: 216th\n* male: 2.75 deaths/1,000 live births\n* female: 2.43 deaths/1,000 live births (2022 official INE estimate)\n2022 official INE estimate:\n* total dependency ratio: 58.4\n* youth dependency ratio: 20.44\n* elderly dependency ratio: 37.96 \n* potential support ratio: 2.63 (2022 INE estimate)\nurban population: 73.38% of total population (2020 official INE estimate)\nrate of urbanization: 0.44% annual rate of change (2020-25 est.)\n2022 official INE estimate:\n* at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female\n* under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female\n* 15\u201364 years: 0.96 male(s)/female\n* 65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female\n* total population: 0.90 male(s)/female\nVital statistics.\nVital statistics since 1890.\nSource:\nNotable events in Portuguese demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Statistics Portugal, in the year 2024 56,691 children (67%) were born to Portuguese-born mothers, while 27,951 (33%) were born to foreign-born mothers. Compared to the year 2015, this represents a significant decrease in children born to Portuguese-born mothers (71,462 or 83.6% in 2015) and, conversely, an increase in children born to foreign-born mothers (14,038 or 16.4%), despite the roughly similar overall number of live births (85,500 in 2015 and 84,642 in 2024).\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Official Census 2021): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Population Estimate 2024): \nTotal fertility rate.\nBy region.\nSource:\nTotal fertility rate from 1850 to 1899.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\ntotal: 21.8%. Country comparison to the world: 5th\nmale: 21.2%\nfemale: 22.4% (2024 est.)\nUrban organization.\nMetropolitan areas and agglomerations.\nAs of 2024, Portugal had two significant agglomerations: the political metropolitan areas of Lisbon and Porto \u2013 \"Grande \u00c1rea Metropolitana de Lisboa\" (3.0 million) and \"Grande \u00c1rea Metropolitana do Porto\" (1.8 million). Together they host 44.87% of the total population.\nLargest urban areas.\nWhen considering the number of inhabitants in consistent single urban areas, de facto cities in mainland Portugal, per the new with increased density of human-created structures, and excluding suburban and rural areas, Portugal has two cities with about one million inhabitants each (Lisbon and Porto), ten others with more than 50,000 inhabitants and 14 cities with populations between 20,000 and 40,000 inhabitants.\nLargest cities.\nPortugal has 151 localities with national city status (\"cidade\"). Every city is included into a municipality (\"munic\u00edpio\"). This is a list of population by city, which means that it refers to the number of inhabitants in the city proper, excluding inhabitants from the same municipality but living outside the urban area of the city in other civil parishes (\"freguesias\") of the municipality. In some cases (e.g. Lisbon), the entire municipality and the city proper cover the same territory.\nLargest municipalities by population.\nThe following table lists the largest Portuguese municipalities by population as of 2024. The land area is expressed in km2 and only municipalities with populations of over 100,000 inhabitants are listed. The 26 listed municipalities account for 46.15% of the country's population and for only 5.14% of its total land area.\n\"noun:\" Portuguese (singular and plural)\n\"adjective:\" Portuguese\nPeople.\nImmigration.\nIn 1992, 1.3% of the population was foreign, by 2024 the number had grown to more than 14% or 1,543,697 people.\nSince the independence of the former African colonies, Portugal saw a steady immigration from Africa, most notably Cape Verde, Angola and Guinea-Bissau, but also S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, Mozambique and former Portuguese India in Asia.\nPortugal saw migration waves due to labor shortages since 1999, first from Eastern Europe (1999\u20132002), in two distinctive groups, a \"Slav\" (Ukraine, Russia and Bulgaria) and an \"East Latin\" (Romania and Moldova), that stopped and started declining as the labour market became saturated.\nSince 2003, most of the immigrants came from Brazil, China and the Indian subcontinent. Family reunification was seen as important for a successful integration in the country, thus the government eased it, and in 2006, more than 6 in 10 new immigrants were family members of legal foreign residents in the country.\nThere is also a significant number of elderly Western European residents in search of quality of life, namely from the United Kingdom, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.\nMore recently, there is significant migration from the former Portuguese colony of Brazil, as since 2017 more than 30,000 Brazilians immigrate to Portugal annually.\nBelow is a summary table of the main foreign nationalities present in Portugal according to the latest AIMA data. As of December 31, 2024, there were 1,543,697 legally resident people in Portugal with foreign citizenship (14.36% of the population). These include both citizens born in Portugal with foreign citizenship and foreign immigrants. Descendants of immigrants are excluded (Portugal, like many European countries, does not collect data on ethnicity) and those who, regardless of place of birth or citizenship at birth, were Portuguese citizens (\"see also Portuguese nationality law\"). Among the latter are also naturalized citizens whose data are reported in the next table.\nBelow is a summary table of Portuguese citizenship acquisitions by foreigners residing in the country recorded between 2008 and 2023 for countries having recorded at least 1,000 naturalizations during the given timespan. During this period, 359,378 people (3.34% of the current Portuguese population) obtained Portuguese citizenship according to the latest Eurostat data. These people are not counted among foreigners (see above table) as they are Portuguese citizens in all respects.\nEthnic minorities and persons with disabilities.\nPortugal does not collect ethnicity or racial data of its population.\nAnti-racism laws prohibit and penalize racial discrimination in housing, business, and health services.\nDiscrimination against persons with disabilities in employment, education, access to health care, or the provision of other state services is illegal. The law mandates access to public buildings and to newly built private buildings for such persons.\nLanguages.\nThe main language spoken as first language by the overwhelming majority of the population is Portuguese. \nOther autochthonous languages spoken include:\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe great majority of the Portuguese population belongs to the Catholic Church. Religious observance remains strong in northern areas, while the population of Lisbon and southern areas are generally less devout.\nReligious minorities include a little over 400,000 Protestants and Mormons (3.84% of the total population).\nThere are also about 100,000 Muslims (1%) and 45,000 Hindus (0.43%), most of whom came from Goa, a former Portuguese colony on the west coast of India (Some Muslims also came from former two Portuguese African colonies with important Muslim minorities: Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique).\nThere are also about 1,500 Jews, 2,000 Baha'i and 35,000 Sikhs (0.34%).\nPortugal is also home to about 17,000 Buddhists, mostly Chinese from Macau and a few Indians from Goa.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], Portugal is one of the most religious countries in Europe; most Portuguese believe with certainty in the existence of God, and religion plays an important role in the life of most Portuguese. According to the Pew Research Center, 40% of Portuguese Catholics pray daily.\nReligious map of Portuguese municipalities.\nReligion by municipality according with the 2021 Census.\nEducation.\nLiteracy.\n\"definition: age 15 and over can read and write (2021 official INE estimate)\"\ntotal population: 96.92%\nmale: 97.90%\nfemale: 96.04%\ntotal: 17 years\nmale: 17 years\nfemale: 17 years (2020)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56961", "revid": "21609265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56961", "title": "Politics of Portugal", "text": " \nPolitics in Portugal operates as a unitary multi-party semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the Prime Minister of Portugal is the head of government, and the President of Portugal is the non-executive head of state which, although it is a somewhat ceremonial figure, has some significant political powers they exercise often. Executive power is exercised by the Government, whose leader is the prime minister. Legislative power is primarily vested in the Assembly of the Republic (the Portuguese parliament), although the government is also able to legislate on certain matters. The Judiciary of Portugal is independent of the executive and the legislature. The President exerts a sort of \"moderating power\", not easily classified into any of the traditional three branches of government.\nSince 1975, the party system has been dominated by the Socialist or Social Democratic Socialist Party and the liberal-conservative Social Democratic Party, but in the 2025 snap elections, the nationalist far-right Chega managed to achieve 23% of the popular vote and got 60 seats in the Assembly of the Republic, leading the opposition.\nAccording to the V-Dem Democracy Indices Portugal was, in 2023, the 20th most electoral democratic country in the world.\nPolitical background.\nThe national and regional governments are dominated by two political parties, the centre-left Socialist Party (PS), a social-democratic party, and the centre-right, liberal-conservative Social Democratic Party (PSD), which have similar basic policies in some respects: both are pro-European, support NATO membership, welfare state and market economy. Other parties with seats in parliament are Chega, the Portuguese Communist Party, the Left Bloc, LIVRE, the Liberal Initiative and People-Animals-Nature. The Communists and the Ecologist Party \"The Greens\" run in a coalition as the Unitary Democratic Coalition.\nIn the Portuguese legislative election of 2011, the PSD won enough seats to form a majority government with the Christian democratic People's Party (CDS-PP). The coalition, led by Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho, was supported by a majority in the Parliament, with 132 of the 230 MPs. The major opposition party was the Socialist Party (the party of the former prime minister Jos\u00e9 S\u00f3crates, in office 2005\u20132011) with 74 MPs. Also represented were the Portuguese Communist Party (14 MPs), \"The Greens\" (2 MPs) and the Left Bloc (8 MPs), all to the left of the governing coalition.\nIn the 2015 elections, which the PSD and CDS-PP contested as a coalition, Portugal Ahead, the government lost its absolute majority. The left-wing parties, the Socialist Party, Portuguese Communist Party, Ecologist Party \"The Greens\", and Left Bloc, argued that as they were willing to form a coalition which would have a majority in the assembly, they ought to be invited to form the government, while Portugal Ahead, as the largest grouping, argued that they should be invited to form the government. After three weeks of uncertainty, the President designated Passos Coelho as prime minister, which was followed by the formation of a minority government. However, the plan was rejected by the Parliament. It was the shortest-lived Portuguese national government since the Carnation Revolution. After that, the left-wing parties supported a minority government led by the Socialist Party (PS). Ant\u00f3nio Costa's first government was formed on 26 November 2015.\nIn the Portuguese legislative of 2019, the centre-left PS of incumbent Prime Minister Costa obtained the largest share of the vote, and the most seats. On 26 October 2019, there was established a new PS minority government led by Prime Minister Ant\u00f3nio Costa. In the snap 2022 election the ruling PS won an outright majority. Following the Operation Influencer police searches, in November 2023, Ant\u00f3nio Costa resigned and snap elections were called for 10 March 2024, which were won by the Democratic Alliance.\nHistory.\nThe first constitution was created in 1822 (following the Liberal Revolution of 1820), followed by a second in 1826, followed by a third in 1838 (after the Liberal Wars), a fourth in 1911 (following the 5 October 1910 revolution), and a fifth 1933 (after the 28 May 1926 coup d'\u00e9tat).\nPortugal's 25 April 1976 constitution reflected the country's 1974\u201376 move from authoritarian rule to provisional military government to a representative democracy with some initial Communist and left-wing influence. The military coup in 1974, which became known as the Carnation Revolution, was a result of multiple internal and external factors like the colonial wars that ended in removing the dictator, Marcelo Caetano, from power. The prospect of a communist takeover in Portugal generated considerable concern among the country's NATO allies. The revolution also led to the country abruptly abandoning its colonies overseas and to the return of an estimated 600,000 Portuguese citizens from abroad. The 1976 constitution, which defined Portugal as a \"Republic... engaged in the formation of a classless society,\" was revised in 1982, 1989, 1992, 1997, 2001, and 2004.\nThe 1982 revision of the constitution placed the military under strict civilian control, trimmed the powers of the president, and abolished the Revolutionary Council (a military body with legislative veto and quasi-judicial powers). The country joined the European Union in 1986, beginning a path toward greater economic and political integration with its richer neighbors in Europe. The 1989 revision of the constitution eliminated much of the remaining Marxist rhetoric of the original document, abolished the communist-inspired \"agrarian reform\", and laid the groundwork for further privatization of nationalized firms and the government-owned communications media. The 1992 revision made it compatible with the Maastricht Treaty.\nThe current Portuguese constitution provides for progressive administrative decentralization and calls for future reorganization on a regional basis. The Azores and Madeira archipelagos have constitutionally mandated autonomous status. A regional autonomy statute promulgated in 1980 established the Government of the Autonomous Region of the Azores; the Government of the Autonomous Region of Madeira operates under a provisional autonomy statute in effect since 1976. Apart from the Azores and Madeira, the country is divided into 18 districts, each headed by a governor appointed by the Minister of Internal Administration. Macau, a former dependency, reverted to Chinese sovereignty in December 1999.\nI and II Constitutional Governments (1976\u20131978).\nThe Socialist Party, under the leadership of M\u00e1rio Soares, rose to power after the 1976 legislative elections and formed the I Constitutional Government. However, this government faced a lot of problems due to the country's economic situation, losing a vote of confidence in 1977, and in 1978, the II Constitutional Government, a coalition between the Socialists and the Democratic and Social Centre, was sworn in. The coalition only lasted eight months and M\u00e1rio Soares resigned.\nIII, IV and V Constitutional Governments (1978\u20131980).\nPresident Eanes then nominated the III Constitutional Government, under the leadership of Alfredo Nobre da Costa, which was sworn in on late August 1978, but lasted just three months as it failed to gain Parliamentary support.\nThe IV Constitutional Government, under the leadership of Carlos Mota Pinto, was sworn in on late November 1978, but, like the previous government, lasted very little, eight months, due to its failure to pass policies in Parliament.\nThe president then swore in the V Constitutional Government, under the leadership of Maria de Lourdes Pintasilgo, the first and still only female prime minister in Portuguese history. The government managed the country until the early elections of December 1979.\nVI, VII, VIII Constitutional Governments (1980\u20131983).\nThe Democratic Alliance, under the leadership of Francisco S\u00e1 Carneiro, won the 1979 legislative elections by a big margin and the VI Constitutional Government was sworn in in January 1980. S\u00e1 Carneiro's tenure was short lived as he died in a tragic plane crash in December 1980.\nIn January 1981, the Social Democratic Party, the main party within the Democratic Alliance, elected Francisco Pinto Balsem\u00e3o as leader and the VII Constitutional Government was sworn in. Internal issues within the Alliance forced a new government to take office, the VIII Constitutional Government, in September 1981, also led by Pinto Balsem\u00e3o. Balsem\u00e3o resigned in late 1982.\nIX Constitutional Government (1983\u20131985).\nThe Socialist Party, under the leadership of M\u00e1rio Soares, returned to power after the 1983 legislative election and formed a Central Bloc government, the IX Constitutional Government, between the two main parties, the Socialists and the Social Democrats. Soares resigned in June 1985 after the Social Democrats withdrew from government.\nX, XI and XII Constitutional Governments (1985\u20131995).\nThe Social Democratic Party, under the leadership of An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva, rose to power after the 1985 legislative elections and formed a minority government. However, the government lost the confidence of Parliament in April 1987 after losing a non-confidence vote. After this, President M\u00e1rio Soares called an early election for July 1987.\nThe 1987 early elections were held on 19 July and resulted in a landslide majority government for the Social Democrats, the first time a party won a majority on its own in democracy. The XI Constitutional Government, the first one to finish a full 4-year term in democracy, was sworn in on 17 August 1987. During this term, the PSD government initiated a big program of liberalization and privatization of several sectors of the economy.\nIn the 1991 election the Social Democrats were returned again to power and, also, with an absolute majority. It was the third consecutive election victory for the PSD, a record in democracy. The XII Constitutional Government was sworn in on 31 October 1991. After 1992, the economy fell into a recession and despite the recession being over by mid 1994, the government was badly hit and Cavaco Silva decided to not run for a fourth term as prime minister. Cavaco Silva's 10-year tenure as prime minister is the longest, so far, in democracy.\nXIII and XIV Constitutional Governments (1995\u20132002).\nThe Socialist Party, under the leadership of Ant\u00f3nio Guterres, came to power following the October 1995 legislative elections. The Socialists later won a new mandate by winning exactly half the parliamentary seats in the October 1999 election, and constituting then the XIV Constitutional Government. Socialist Jorge Sampaio won the February 1996 presidential elections with nearly 54% of the vote. Sampaio's election marked the first time since the 1974 revolution that a single party held the prime ministership, the presidency, and a plurality of the municipalities. Local elections were held in December 1997.\nPrime Minister Guterres continued the privatization and modernization policies initiated by his predecessor, An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva (in office 1985\u20131995) of the Social Democratic Party. Guterres was a vigorous proponent of the effort to include Portugal in the first round of countries to collaborate and put into effect the euro in 1999. In international relations, Guterres pursued strong ties with the United States and greater Portuguese integration with the European Union while continuing to raise Portugal's profile through an activist foreign policy. One of his first decisions as prime minister was to send 900 troops to participate in the IFOR peacekeeping mission in Bosnia. Portugal later contributed 320 troops to SFOR, the follow-up Bosnia operation. Portugal also contributed aircraft and personnel to NATO's Operation Allied Force in Kosovo. Guterres resigned in December 2001 after a disappointing result in the local elections.\nXV Constitutional Government (2002\u20132004).\nFollowing the results of the 2002 early election, the XV Constitutional Government, led by Jos\u00e9 Manuel Dur\u00e3o Barroso, leader of the Social Democratic Party, in coalition with the People's Party, whose leader, Paulo Portas, became Minister of Defence, was sworn in in April 2002. This government lasted two years because, in June 2004, Dur\u00e3o Barroso announced his resignation in order to become President of the European Commission.\nXVI Constitutional Government (2004\u20132005).\nAfter Jos\u00e9 Manuel Dur\u00e3o Barroso accepted the invitation to be the next European Commission President, a new government had to be formed. Though opposition parties called for general elections, President Jorge Sampaio named Pedro Santana Lopes, the new Social Democratic Party leader, as prime minister, who thus formed a new government, in coalition with the People's Party. However, in December 2004, due to several controversies involving the government, the President dissolved the parliament and called for early elections. Santana Lopes resigned after the announcement of the President's decision.\nXVII and XVIII Constitutional Governments (2005\u20132011).\nIn the elections on 20 February, the Socialist Party obtained its largest victory ever, achieving an absolute majority for the first time in the party's history. Prime Minister Jos\u00e9 S\u00f3crates was sworn in by President Jorge Sampaio on 12 March. To many's surprise, S\u00f3crates formed a cabinet made up of roughly half senior members of the Socialist Party and half independents, notably including Diogo Freitas do Amaral, founder of the right wing People's Party, who assumed office as Ministry of Foreign Affairs (he later resigned due to personal issues).\nIn the elections on 27 September 2009, The Socialist Party, led by incumbent Prime Minister Jos\u00e9 S\u00f3crates, won the largest number of seats, but did not repeat the overall majority they gained in 2005. S\u00f3crates was reconducted but lost his majority. The 2010 European debt crisis led Portugal to ask for a bailout from the IMF and the European Union. This situation led to the resignation of Jos\u00e9 S\u00f3crates as prime minister and the President dissolved parliament and called an early election for June 2011.\nXIX and XX Constitutional Governments (2011\u20132015).\nIn the elections held on 5 June 2011, the Social Democratic Party won enough seats to form a majority government with the People's Party. The Government was led by Pedro Passos Coelho. It had 11 ministers and was sworn in on 21 June.\nThe Portuguese legislative election of 2015 was held on 4 October. The results display a relative victory of the right-wing coalition, but they also display a combined victory of the left-wing parties (including the Socialist Party), with a hung parliament (a right-wing single winner and a left-wing majority parliament). After the election, the XX Constitutional Government of Portugal had Pedro Passos Coelho (PSD) as the prime minister and lasted from 30 October 2015 to 26 November 2015. However, the Government Programme was rejected by the Parliament. It was the shortest-lived Portuguese national government since the Carnation Revolution.\nXXI, XXII and XXIII Constitutional Governments (2015\u20132024).\nThe 21st cabinet of the Portuguese government since the establishment of the current constitution. It was established on 26 November 2015 as a Socialist Party (PS) minority government led by Prime Minister Ant\u00f3nio Costa.\nThe Portuguese legislative election of 2019 was held on 6 October 2019. The centre-left Socialist Party (PS) of incumbent Prime Minister Costa obtained the largest share of the vote, and the most seats. The XXII Constitutional Government of Portugal was sworn in on 26 October 2019 as a Socialist Party (PS) minority government led by Prime Minister Ant\u00f3nio Costa. In October 2021, the budget proposed by the government was rejected by Parliament, leading President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa to call an early election for January 2022.\nThe 2022 early elections were held on 30 January 2022. The election resulted in an absolute majority for the Socialist Party, the second in its history. However, the government swearing in was postponed because of a rerun in the overseas constituency of Europe, and the XXIII Constitutitional Government, led by Prime Minister Ant\u00f3nio Costa, was only sworn in on 30 March 2022. Ant\u00f3nio Costa resigned on 7 November 2023, following the Operation Influencer police searches into government contracts surrounding lithium and hydrogen businesses. The President dissolved parliament and called early elections.\nXXIV and XXV Constitutional Governments (2024\u2013).\nIn the elections held on 10 March 2024, the Democratic Alliance (AD), alliance between the Social Democratic Party, People's Party and the People's Monarchist Party, won enough seats to form a minority government. The Government led by Lu\u00eds Montenegro has 17 ministers and was sworn in on 2 April 2024. The government fell after losing a vote of confidence in March 2025, and the President dissolved Parliament and called an early election for 18 May 2025. The AD coalition won again, with a stronger mandate albeit still a minority, with the XXV Constitutional Government taking office on 5 June 2025.\nPolitical powers.\nGovernment in Portugal is made up of three branches originally envisioned by enlightenment philosopher Baron de Montesquieu: executive, legislative, and judicial. Each branch is separate and is designed to keep checks and balances on the others. The President's powers, however, do not fall into either of the traditional three, forming instead a sort of \"moderating power\" over the government and the legislature.\nThe four main organs of the national government are the President, the Government (which includes the prime minister and the Council of Ministers), the Assembly of the Republic (Parliament), and the judiciary, made up of different hierarchies of courts (the Supreme Court of Justice and its lower courts, the Supreme Administrative Court and its lower courts, the Constitutional Court and the Court of Auditors).\nPresident.\nThe President, elected to a 5-year term by direct, universal suffrage, is also commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Presidential powers include appointing the prime minister and Council of Ministers, in which the President must be guided by the assembly election results; dismissing the prime minister; dissolving the assembly to call early elections; vetoing legislation, which may be overridden by the assembly; and declaring a state of war or siege, only with the approval of the assembly and on government advice.\nThe Council of State, a presidential advisory body, is composed of:\nThe president, according to the election results, names the party that shall form a government, whose leader is appointed prime minister. The prime minister names the Council of Ministers, and the ministers name their Secretaries of State. A new government is required to define the broad outline of its policy in a program and present it to the assembly for a mandatory period of debate. Failure of the assembly to reject the program by a majority of deputies confirms the government in office.\nLegislative branch.\nLegislative power is exercised by the Assembly of the Republic, which is the parliament of Portugal, although the Government also has a more limited ability to legislate on some matters (on others, Parliament has exclusive legislative competence). It is also the body which holds the Government accountable and has the means to remove it from office at any time, as described earlier, primarily through a motion of no confidence, although alternative methods exist.\nThe Assembly of the Republic is a unicameral body composed of 230 deputies (that is, members of parliament). Elected by universal suffrage according to a system of proportional representation, deputies serve terms of office of 4 years, unless the president dissolves the assembly and calls for new elections. According to the constitution, members of the assembly represent the entire country, not the constituency from which they are elected.\nExecutive branch.\nExecutive power is exercised by the Government of Portugal. The Government is formed after the President appoints the prime minister based on election results, as described earlier\u00a0\u2013 traditionally, the leader of the most voted party.\nThe Government can only remain in place for as long as the Parliament allows: the Parliament can remove the Government at the beginning by approving a motion of rejection to the introductory Government programme, or at any time by approving a motion of no confidence, either of which is achieved by a simple majority; the Government may also, of its own initiative, choose to present at any time a motion of confidence, which acts as the opposite of a motion of no confidence: if rejected, the Government is removed. Finally, the Government also relies on Parliament to approve the state budget, which also allows Parliament to indirectly force the Government to resign by rejecting its budget proposal. Thus, the Government, although not directly elected, is held accountable before Parliament, which is proportionally representative of the people. Typically, once the Government is removed from office, the President will call a snap election (also known as an early election).\nCurrent government composition:\nJudicial branch.\nThe national Supreme Court is the court of last appeal in civil and criminal matters, which is described by the Constitution as \"the senior organ in the hierarchy of the courts of law\". There is a separate system of courts for administrative and fiscal matters, for which the court of last appeal is the Supreme Administrative Court. During war time, the law provides for there being military courts. \nA thirteen-member Constitutional Court reviews the constitutionality of legislation. There is also a Court of Auditors.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThere are two autonomous regions (\"regi\u00f5es aut\u00f3nomas\", singular \"regi\u00e3o aut\u00f3noma\") with limited legislative powers besides the administrative ones: Azores and Madeira.\nAs purely administrative divisions, there are 18 districts (\"distritos\"), 308 municipalities (\"munic\u00edpios\") and 3,091 civil parishes (\"freguesias\").\nThe districts are Aveiro, A\u00e7ores (Azores)*, Beja, Braga, Bragan\u00e7a, Castelo Branco, Coimbra, \u00c9vora, Faro, Guarda, Leiria, Lisboa, Madeira*, Portalegre, Porto, Santar\u00e9m, Set\u00fabal, Viana do Castelo, Vila Real and Viseu.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
