{"id": "55794", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55794", "title": "Medicaid", "text": "United States social health care program\nMedicaid is a government program in the United States that provides health insurance for adults and children with limited income and resources. The program is partially funded and primarily managed by state governments, which also have wide latitude in determining eligibility and benefits, but the federal government sets baseline standards for state Medicaid programs and provides a significant portion of their funding. States are not required to participate in the program, although all have since 1982.\nMedicaid was established in 1965, part of the Great Society set of programs during President Lyndon B. Johnson's Administration, and was significantly expanded by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), which was passed in 2010. In most states, any member of a household with income up to 138% of the federal poverty line qualifies for Medicaid coverage under the provisions of the ACA. A 2012 Supreme Court decision established that states may continue to use pre-ACA Medicaid eligibility standards and receive previously established levels of federal Medicaid funding, which led some Republican-controlled states to not expand Medicaid coverage. The 2025 One Big Beautiful Bill Act established requirements that will begin in 2027 for most able-bodied adult Medicaid enrollees to work or volunteer for 80 hours per month in order to maintain coverage.\nMedicaid is the largest source of funding for medical and health-related services for people with low income in the United States, providing taxpayer-funded health insurance to 85 million low-income and disabled people as of 2022; in 2019, the program paid for half of all U.S. births. In 2023, the total (federal and state) annual cost of Medicaid was $870 billion, with an average cost per enrollee of $7,600 for 2021. 37% of enrollees were children, but they only accounted for 15% of the spending, ($3,000 per person) while seniors and disabled persons accounted for 21% of enrollees and 52% of spending (more than $18,000 per person). In general, Medicaid recipients must be U.S. citizens or qualified non-citizens, and may include low-income adults, their children, and people with certain disabilities. Medicaid also covers long-term services and supports, including both nursing home care and home- and community-based services, for those with low incomes and minimal assets. Of the 7.7 million Americans who used long-term services and supports in 2020, about 5.6 million were covered by Medicaid.\nAlong with Medicare, Tricare, ChampVA, and CHIP, Medicaid is one of the several Federal Government-sponsored medical insurance programs in the United States. Medicaid covers healthcare costs for people with low incomes; Medicare is a universal program providing health coverage for the elderly; and the CHIP program covers uninsured children in families with incomes that are too high to be covered by Medicaid. Medicaid offers elder care benefits not normally covered by Medicare, including nursing home care and personal care services. There are also dual health plans for people who have both Medicaid and Medicare.\nResearch shows that existence of the Medicaid program improves health outcomes, health insurance coverage, access to health care, and recipients' financial security and provides economic benefits to states and health providers. In American politics, the Democratic Party tends to support Medicaid while the Republican Party is divided on reductions in Medicaid spending.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFeatures.\nBeginning in the 1980s, many states received waivers from the federal government to create Medicaid managed care programs. Under managed care, Medicaid recipients are enrolled in a private health plan, which receives a fixed monthly premium from the state. The health plan is then responsible for providing for all or most of the recipient's healthcare needs. Today, all but a few states use managed care to provide coverage to a significant proportion of Medicaid enrollees. As of 2014, 26 states have contracts with managed care organizations (MCOs) to deliver long-term care for the elderly and individuals with disabilities. The states pay a monthly capitated rate per member to the MCOs, which in turn provide comprehensive care and accept the risk of managing total costs. Nationwide, roughly 80% of Medicaid enrollees are enrolled in managed care plans. Core eligibility groups of low-income families are most likely to be enrolled in managed care, while the \"aged\" and \"disabled\" eligibility groups more often remain in traditional \"fee for service\" Medicaid.\nBecause service level costs vary depending on the care and needs of the enrolled, a cost per person average is only a rough measure of actual cost of care. The annual cost of care will vary state to state depending on state approved Medicaid benefits, as well as the state specific care costs. A 2014 Kaiser Family Foundation report estimates the national average per capita annual cost of Medicaid services for children to be $2,577, adults to be $3,278, persons with disabilities to be $16,859, aged persons (65+) to be $13,063, and all Medicaid enrollees to be $5,736.\nHistory.\nThe Social Security Amendments of 1965 created Medicaid by adding Title XIX to the Social Security Act. Under the program, the federal government provided matching funds to states to enable them to provide Medical Assistance to residents who met certain eligibility requirements. The objective was to help states assist residents whose income and resources were insufficient to pay the costs of traditional commercial health insurance plans.\nBy 1982, all states were participating. The last state to do so was Arizona.\nThe Medicaid Drug Rebate Program and the Health Insurance Premium Payment Program (HIPP) were created by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA-90). This act helped to add Section 1927 to the Social Security Act of 1935 and became effective on January 1, 1991. This program was formed due to the costs that Medicaid programs were paying for discount price outpatient drugs.\nThe Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA-93) amended Section 1927 of the Act, bringing changes to the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program. It requires states to implement a Medicaid estate recovery program to recover from the estate of deceased beneficiaries the long-term-care-related costs paid by Medicaid, and gives states the option of recovering all non-long-term-care costs, including full medical costs.\nMedicaid also offers a Fee for Service (Direct Service) Program to schools throughout the United States for the reimbursement of costs associated with the services delivered to students with special education needs. Federal law mandates that children with disabilities receive a \"free appropriate public education\" under Section 504 of The Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Decisions by the United States Supreme Court and subsequent changes in federal law require states to reimburse part or all of the cost of some services provided by schools for Medicaid-eligible disabled children.\nExpansion under the Affordable Care Act.\nThe Affordable Care Act (ACA), passed in 2010, substantially expanded the Medicaid program. Before the law was passed, some states did not allow able-bodied adults to participate in Medicaid, and many set income eligibility far below the Federal poverty level. Under the provisions of the law, any state that participated in Medicaid would need to expand coverage to include anyone earning up to 138% of the Federal poverty level beginning in 2014. The costs of the newly covered population would initially be covered in full by the Federal government, although states would need to pay for 10% of those costs by 2020.\nHowever, in 2012, the Supreme Court held in \"National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius\" that withdrawing all Medicaid funding from states that refused to expand eligibility was unconstitutionally coercive. States could choose to maintain pre-existing levels of Medicaid funding and eligibility, and some did; over half the national uninsured population lives in those states. As of March 2023, 40 states have accepted the Affordable Care Act Medicaid extension, as has the District of Columbia, which has its own Medicaid program; 10 states have not. Among adults aged 18 to 64, states that expanded Medicaid had an uninsured rate of 7.3% in the first quarter of 2016, while non-expansion states had a 14.1% uninsured rate.\nThe Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) estimated that the cost of expansion was $6,366 per person for 2015, about 49 percent above previous estimates. An estimated 9 to 10 million people had gained Medicaid coverage, mostly low-income adults. The Kaiser Family Foundation estimated in October 2015 that 3.1 million additional people were not covered in states that rejected the Medicaid expansion.\nIn some states that chose not to expand Medicaid, income eligibility thresholds are significantly below 133% of the poverty line. Some of these states do not make Medicaid available to non-pregnant adults without disabilities or dependent children, no matter their income. Because subsidies on commercial insurance plans are not available to such individuals, most have few options for obtaining any medical insurance. For example, in Kansas, where only non-disabled adults with children and with an income below 32% of the poverty line were eligible for Medicaid, those with incomes from 32% to 100% of the poverty level ($6,250 to $19,530 for a family of three) were ineligible for both Medicaid and federal subsidies to buy insurance.\nStudies of the impact of Medicaid expansion rejections calculated that up to 6.4 million people would have too much income for Medicaid but not qualify for exchange subsidies. Several states argued that they could not afford the 10% contribution in 2020. Some studies suggested that rejecting the expansion would cost more due to increased spending on uncompensated emergency care that otherwise would have been partially paid for by Medicaid coverage.\nA 2016 study found that residents of Kentucky and Arkansas, which both expanded Medicaid, were more likely to receive health care services and less likely to incur emergency room costs or have trouble paying their medical bills. Residents of Texas, which did not accept the Medicaid expansion, did not see a similar improvement during the same period. Kentucky opted for increased managed care, while Arkansas subsidized private insurance. Later, Arkansas and Kentucky governors proposed reducing or modifying their programs. From 2013 to 2015, the uninsured rate dropped from 42% to 14% in Arkansas and from 40% to 9% in Kentucky, compared with 39% to 32% in Texas.\nA 2016 DHHS study found that states that expanded Medicaid had lower premiums on exchange policies because they had fewer low-income enrollees, whose health, on average, is worse than that of people with higher income.\nThe Census Bureau reported in September 2019 that states that expanded Medicaid under ACA had considerably lower uninsured rates than states that did not. For example, for adults between 100% and 399% of poverty level, the uninsured rate in 2018 was 12.7% in expansion states and 21.2% in non-expansion states. Of the 14 states with uninsured rates of 10% or greater, 11 had not expanded Medicaid. A July 2019 study by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) indicated that states enacting Medicaid expansion exhibited statistically significant reductions in mortality rates.\nThe ACA was structured with the assumption that Medicaid would cover anyone making less than 133% of the Federal poverty level throughout the United States; as a result, premium tax credits are only available to individuals buying private health insurance through exchanges if they make more than that amount. This has given rise to the so-called Medicaid coverage gap in states that have not expanded Medicaid: there are people whose income is too high to qualify for Medicaid in those states, but too low to receive assistance in paying for private health insurance, which is therefore unaffordable to them.\nMedicaid work requirements.\nA federal judge blocked Medicaid work requirements in Arkansas and Kentucky on March 27, 2019, ruling that the mandates undermined Medicaid's core purpose of providing health care to the needy. U.S. District Judge James Boasberg found that the requirements created obstacles to coverage and had been improperly approved by federal officials.\n2025 Medicaid cuts in the second Trump administration.\nIn 2025, Republican Congressional leaders John Thune and Mike Johnson announced goals of cutting 1.5 to 2 trillion dollars of the US federal budget, with President Donald Trump stating that cuts to Medicaid would only include \"abuse or waste\". The 2025 budget resolution, which was passed by the House of Representatives with only Republicans votes, proposed cutting $880 billion from the Standing Committee for Energy and Commerce, which includes many areas, such as Medicaid and Medicare.\nOn July 4, 2025, President Donald Trump signed the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, intended in part to implement this resolution. The act cut Medicaid in a number of ways: while it did not repeal the ACA's Medicaid expansion, it mandated work requirements for able-bodied Medicaid recipients. It also requires Medicaid recipients above the federal poverty line to pay more fees for coverage; adds new verification requirements; increases the number of times states need to check the eligibility of their Medicaid expansion recipients; prohibits Medicaid from funding nonprofits that provide abortion care; makes it harder for illegal immigrants to use Medicaid; bans pharmacy benefit managers from using spread pricing; and puts limits on so-called \"provider taxes\" that states impose on healthcare providers to fund their portion of Medicaid spending. The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that it will reduce the number of people on Medicaid by several million.; the CBO estimates that the work requirements in particular will lead 11 million to lose their Medicaid coverage, many of whom already work or qualify for exemptions but will not be able to get through the red tape.\nThe bill prompted claims that undocumented immigrants are on Medicaid. Undocumented immigrants are already ineligible for full Medicaid benefits, and many undocumented immigrants access state-funded health programs rather than federal Medicaid. According to a CBO analysis, the bill's provisions could lead some states to cut back those state-funded health programs, potentially causing an estimated 1.4 million people to lose state-level health coverage, including undocumented immigrants. When commenting on the Trump administration's One Big Beautiful Bill Act and the impact of the Medicaid provisions on the economy, USDA Secretary Brooke Rollins stated that 34 million able-bodied adults on Medicaid should be working. According to the Government Accountability Office, roughly 70% of Medicaid recipients already work at least 35 hours per week but still qualify due to low wage.\nState implementations.\nStates may bundle together the administration of Medicaid with other programs such as the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), so the same organization that handles Medicaid in a state may also manage the additional programs. Separate programs may also exist in some localities that are funded by the states or their political subdivisions to provide health coverage for indigents and minors.\nState participation in Medicaid is voluntary; however, all states have participated since 1982. In some states Medicaid is subcontracted to private health insurance companies, while other states pay providers (i.e., doctors, clinics and hospitals) directly. There are many services that can fall under Medicaid and some states support more services than other states. The most provided services are intermediate care for mentally disabled, prescription drugs and nursing facility care for under 21-year-olds. The least provided services include institutional religious (non-medical) health care, respiratory care for ventilator dependent and PACE (inclusive elderly care).\nMost states administer Medicaid through their own programs. A few of those programs include:\nAs of January 2012, Medicaid and/or CHIP funds could be obtained to help pay employer health care premiums in Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Florida, and Georgia.\nDifferences by state.\nWhile states have significant autonomy in implementing the Medicaid program, their flexibility is bounded by federal requirements designed to ensure a baseline of coverage and access. For example, federal law mandates that certain services, such as inpatient and outpatient hospital services, laboratory and X-ray services, and physician services, must be covered by all state Medicaid programs. Additionally, states must adhere to federal guidelines regarding beneficiary protections and quality standards. Any state-initiated changes that seek to modify these fundamental aspects typically require approval through federal waivers, ensuring that state innovations align with national objectives and statutory requirements.\nEligibility and coverage.\nBroadly, the program provides health benefits to low-income individuals, including children, pregnant women, parents, seniors, and people with disabilities. The ACA expanded Medicaid eligibility to adults with incomes at or below 133% of the federal poverty level, though states have the option to implement this expansion.\nEligibility is primarily determined using the modified adjusted gross income system, which standardizes income calculations across Medicaid, CHIP, and health insurance marketplace subsidies. However, certain groups, such as seniors and individuals with disabilities, have their eligibility determined using Supplemental Security Income (SSI) rules, which may include asset tests. Medicaid also includes provisions for individuals with significant medical expenses who do not otherwise qualify financially, allowing them to \"spend down\" their income on medical costs to become eligible.\nIn addition to financial criteria, Medicaid applicants must meet non-financial requirements, including residency in the state where they apply and U.S. citizenship or qualifying non-citizen status. Some eligibility groups, such as children in foster care under Title IV-E and certain former foster youth, automatically qualify regardless of income. Coverage begins either on the date of application or the first day of the application month, with potential retroactive coverage for up to three months.\nStates also have the option to offer \"medically needy\" programs for individuals whose incomes exceed standard Medicaid limits but who have substantial medical expenses. Additional Medicaid policies address estate recovery, third-party liability, and spousal impoverishment protections for long-term care applicants. If an individual is denied Medicaid, they have the right to appeal the decision through state-administered processes.\nReimbursement for care providers.\nBeyond the variance in eligibility and coverage between states, there is a large variance in the reimbursements Medicaid offers to care providers; the clearest examples of this are common orthopedic procedures. For instance, in 2013, the average difference in reimbursement for 10 common orthopedic procedures in the states of New Jersey and Delaware was $3,047. The discrepancy in the reimbursements Medicaid offers may affect the type of care provided to patients.\nIn general, Medicaid plans pay providers significantly less than commercial insurers or Medicare would pay for the same care, paying around 67% as much as Medicare would for primary care and 78% as much for other services. This disparity has been linked to lower provider rates of participation in Medicaid programs vs Medicare or commercial insurance, and thus decreased access to care for Medicaid patients. One component of the Affordable Care Act was a federally-funded increase in 2013 and 2014 in Medicaid payments to bring them up to 100% of equivalent Medicare payments, in an effort to increase provider participation. Most states did not subsequently continue this provision.\nEnrollment.\nIn 2002, Medicaid enrollees numbered 39.9 million Americans, with the largest group being children (18.4 million or 46%). From 2000 to 2012, the proportion of hospital stays for children paid by Medicaid increased by 33% and the proportion paid by private insurance decreased by 21%. Some 43 million Americans were enrolled in 2004 (19.7 million of them children) at a total cost of $295 billion. In 2008, Medicaid provided health coverage and services to approximately 49 million low-income children, pregnant women, elderly people, and disabled people. In 2009, 62.9 million Americans were enrolled in Medicaid for at least one month, with an average enrollment of 50.1 million. In California, about 23% of the population was enrolled in Medi-Cal for at least 1 month in 2009\u201310. As of 2017, the total annual cost of Medicaid was just over $600 billion, of which the federal government contributed $375 billion and states an additional $230 billion. According to CMS, the Medicaid program provided health care services to more than 92 million people in 2022.\nLoss of income and medical insurance coverage during the Great Recession resulted in a substantial increase in Medicaid enrollment in 2009. Nine U.S. states showed an increase in enrollment of 15% or more, putting a heavy strain on state budgets.\nThe Kaiser Family Foundation reported that for 2013, Medicaid recipients were 40% white, 21% black, 25% Hispanic, and 14% other races.\nComparisons with Medicare.\nUnlike Medicaid, Medicare is a social insurance program funded at the federal level and focuses primarily on the older population. Medicare is a health insurance program for people age 65 or older, people under age 65 with certain disabilities, and (through the End Stage Renal Disease Program) people of all ages with end-stage renal disease. The Medicare Program provides a Medicare part A covering hospital bills, Medicare Part B covering medical insurance coverage, and Medicare Part D covering purchase of prescription drugs.\nMedicaid is a program that is not solely funded at the federal level. States provide up to half of the funding for Medicaid. In some states, counties also contribute funds. Unlike Medicare, Medicaid is a means-tested, needs-based social welfare or social protection program rather than a social insurance program. Eligibility is determined largely by income. The main criterion for Medicaid eligibility is limited income and financial resources, a criterion which plays no role in determining Medicare coverage. Medicaid covers a wider range of health care services than Medicare.\nSome people are eligible for both Medicaid and Medicare and are known as Medicare dual eligible or medi-medis. In 2001, about 6.5 million people were enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid. In 2013, approximately 9 million people qualified for Medicare and Medicaid.\nBenefits.\nThere are two general types of Medicaid coverage. \"Community Medicaid\" helps people who have little or no medical insurance. Medicaid nursing home coverage helps pay for the cost of living in a nursing home for those who are eligible; the recipient also pays most of his/her income toward the nursing home costs, usually keeping only $66.00 a month for expenses other than the nursing home.\nSome states operate a program known as the Health Insurance Premium Payment Program (HIPP). This program allows a Medicaid recipient to have private health insurance paid for by Medicaid. As of 2008 relatively few states had premium assistance programs and enrollment was relatively low. Interest in this approach remained high, however.\nIncluded in the Social Security program under Medicaid are dental services. Registration for dental services is optional for people older than 21 years but required for people eligible for Medicaid and younger than 21. Minimum services include pain relief, restoration of teeth and maintenance for dental health. Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) is a mandatory Medicaid program for children that focuses on prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. Oral screenings are not required for EPSDT recipients, and they do not suffice as a direct dental referral. If a condition requiring treatment is discovered during an oral screening, the state is responsible for paying for this service, regardless of whether or not it is covered on that particular Medicaid plan.\nDental.\nChildren enrolled in Medicaid are individually entitled under the law to comprehensive preventive and restorative dental services, but dental care utilization for this population is low. The reasons for low use are many, but a lack of dental providers who participate in Medicaid is a key factor. Few dentists participate in Medicaid \u2013 less than half of all active private dentists in some areas. Cited reasons for not participating are low reimbursement rates, complex forms and burdensome administrative requirements. In Washington state, a program called Access to Baby and Child Dentistry (ABCD) has helped increase access to dental services by providing dentists higher reimbursements for oral health education and preventive and restorative services for children. After the passing of the Affordable Care Act, many dental practices began using dental service organizations to provide business management and support, allowing practices to minimize costs and pass the saving on to patients currently without adequate dental care.\nMental Health Coverage.\nMedicaid is the largest source of funding for mental health services in the United States. The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act requires Medicaid managed care plans to provide mental health benefits equal to physical health benefits. Medicaid covers about 15 million adults with mental illness. Medicaid covers a broad range of mental health services, including inpatient hospitalization, outpatient counseling/therapy, prescription medications, mobile crisis services, and peer support programs. States that expanded Medicaid under the ACA saw improvements in access to mental health care and treatment continuity. In 2024, Medicaid covered about 41% of psychiatric inpatients at a sample of 680 hospitals, based on data analyzed for KFF Health News, demonstrating its role in financing mental health care.\nEligibility.\nWhile Congress and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) set out the general rules under which Medicaid operates, each state runs its own program. Under certain circumstances, an applicant may be denied coverage. As a result, the eligibility rules differ significantly from state to state, although all states must follow the same basic framework.\nAs of 2013, Medicaid is a program intended for those with low income, but a low income is not the only requirement to enroll in the program. Eligibility is \"categorical\"\u2014that is, to enroll one must be a member of a category defined by statute; some of these categories are: low-income children below a certain wage, pregnant women, parents of Medicaid-eligible children who meet certain income requirements, low-income disabled people who receive Supplemental Security Income and/or Social Security Disability (SSD), and low-income seniors 65 and older. The details of how each category is defined vary from state to state.\nPPACA income test standardization.\nAs of 2019, when Medicaid has been expanded under the PPACA, eligibility is determined by an income test using Modified Adjusted Gross Income, with no state-specific variations and a prohibition on asset or resource tests.\nNon-PPACA eligibility.\nWhile Medicaid expansion available to adults under the PPACA mandates a standard income-based test without asset or resource tests, other eligibility criteria such as assets may apply when eligible outside of the PPACA expansion, including coverage for eligible seniors or disabled. These other requirements include, but are not limited to, assets, age, pregnancy, disability, blindness, income, and resources, and one's status as a U.S. citizen or a lawfully admitted immigrant.\nAs of 2015, asset tests varied; for example, eight states did not have an asset test for a buy-in available to working people with disabilities, and one state had no asset test for the aged/blind/disabled pathway up to 100% of the Federal Poverty Level.\nMore recently, many states have authorized financial requirements that will make it more difficult for working-poor adults to access coverage. In Wisconsin, nearly a quarter of Medicaid patients were dropped after the state government imposed premiums of 3% of household income. A survey in Minnesota found that more than half of those covered by Medicaid were unable to obtain prescription medications because of co-payments.\nThe Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (DRA) requires anyone seeking Medicaid to produce documents to prove that he is a United States citizen or resident alien. An exception is made for Emergency Medicaid where payments are allowed for the pregnant and disabled regardless of immigration status. Special rules exist for those living in a nursing home and disabled children living at home.\nSupplemental Security Income beneficiaries.\nOnce someone is approved as a beneficiary in the Supplemental Security Income program, they may automatically be eligible for Medicaid coverage (depending on the laws of the state they reside in).\nFive year \"look-back\".\nThe DRA has created a five-year \"look-back period.\" This means that any transfers without fair market value (gifts of any kind) made by the Medicaid applicant during the preceding five years are penalizable.\nThe penalty is determined by dividing the average monthly cost of nursing home care in the area or State into the amount of assets gifted. Therefore, if a person gifted $60,000 and the average monthly cost of a nursing home was $6,000, one would divide $6000 into $60,000 and come up with 10. 10 represents the number of months the applicant would not be eligible for Medicaid.\nAll transfers made during the five-year look-back period are totaled, and the applicant is penalized based on that amount after having already dropped below the Medicaid asset limit. This means that after dropping below the asset level ($2,000 limit in most states), the Medicaid applicant will be ineligible for a period of time. The penalty period does not begin until the person is eligible for Medicaid.\nElders who gift or transfer assets can be caught in the situation of having no money but still not being eligible for Medicaid.\nImmigration status.\nLegal permanent residents (LPRs) with a substantial work history (defined as 40 quarters of Social Security covered earnings) or military connection are eligible for the full range of major federal means-tested benefit programs, including Medicaid (Medi-Cal). LPRs entering after August 22, 1996, are barred from Medicaid for five years, after which their coverage becomes a state option, and states have the option to cover LPRs who are children or who are pregnant during the first five years. Noncitizen SSI recipients are eligible for (and required to be covered under) Medicaid. Refugees and asylees are eligible for Medicaid for seven years after arrival; after this term, they may be eligible at state option.\nNonimmigrants and unauthorized aliens are not eligible for most federal benefits, regardless of whether they are means tested, with notable exceptions for emergency services (e.g., Medicaid for emergency medical care), but states have the option to cover nonimmigrant and unauthorized aliens who are pregnant or who are children, and can meet the definition of \"lawfully residing\" in the United States. Special rules apply to several limited noncitizen categories: certain \"cross-border\" American Indians, Hmong/Highland Laotians, parolees and conditional entrants, and cases of abuse.\nAliens outside the United States who seek to obtain visas at U.S. consulates overseas or admission at U.S. ports of entry are generally denied entry if they are deemed \"likely at any time to become a public charge.\" Aliens within the United States who seek to adjust their status to that of lawful permanent resident (LPR), or who entered the United States without inspection, are also generally subject to exclusion and deportation on public charge grounds. Similarly, LPRs and other aliens who have been admitted to the United States are removable if they become a public charge within five years after the date of their entry due to causes that preexisted their entry.\nA 1999 policy letter from immigration officials defined \"public charge\" and identified which benefits are considered in public charge determinations, and the policy letter underlies current regulations and other guidance on the public charge grounds of inadmissibility and deportability. Collectively, the various sources addressing the meaning of public charge have historically suggested that an alien's receipt of public benefits, per se, is unlikely to result in the alien being deemed to be removable on public charge grounds.\nChildren and SCHIP.\nA child may be eligible for Medicaid regardless of the eligibility status of his parents. Thus, a child may be covered by Medicaid based on his individual status even if his parents are not eligible. Similarly, if a child lives with someone other than a parent, he may still be eligible based on its individual status.\nOne-third of children and over half (59%) of low-income children are insured through Medicaid or SCHIP. The insurance provides them with access to preventive and primary services which are used at a much higher rate than for the uninsured, but still below the utilization of privately insured patients. As of 2014, rate of uninsured children was reduced to 6% (5 million children remain uninsured).\nHIV.\nMedicaid provided the largest portion of federal money spent on health care for people living with HIV/AIDS until the implementation of Medicare Part D, when the cost of prescription drugs for those eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid was shifted to Medicare. Unless low income people who are HIV positive meet some other eligibility category, they are not eligible for Medicaid assistance unless they can qualify under the \"disabled\" category to receive Medicaid assistance \u2014 for example, if they progress to AIDS (T-cell count drops below 200). The Medicaid eligibility policy differs from Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) guidelines, which recommend therapy for all patients with T-cell counts of 350 or less and even certain patients with a higher T-cell count. Due to the high costs associated with HIV medications, many patients are not able to begin antiretroviral treatment without Medicaid help. It is estimated that more than half of people living with AIDS in the United States receive Medicaid payments. Two other programs that provide financial assistance to people living with HIV/AIDS are the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) and the Supplemental Security Income programs.\nUtilization.\nDuring 2003\u20132012, the share of hospital stays billed to Medicaid increased by 2.5%, or 0.8 million stays. As of 2019, Medicaid paid for half of all births in the United States.\nMedicaid super utilizers (defined as Medicaid patients with four or more admissions in one year) account for more hospital stays (5.9 vs.1.3 stays), longer lengths of stay (6.1 vs. 4.5 days), and higher hospital costs per stay ($11,766 vs. $9,032). Medicaid super-utilizers were more likely than other Medicaid patients to be male and to be aged 45\u201364 years. Common conditions among super-utilizers include mood disorders and psychiatric disorders, as well as diabetes, cancer treatment, sickle cell anemia, sepsis, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and complications of devices, implants, and grafts.\nBudget and financing.\nUnlike Medicare, which is solely a federal program, Medicaid is a joint federal-state program. Each state administers its own Medicaid system that must conform to federal guidelines for the state to receive Federal matching funds. Financing of Medicaid in the American Samoa, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands is instead implemented through a block grant. The Federal government matches state funding according to the Federal Medical Assistance Percentages. The wealthiest states only receive a federal match of 50% while poorer states receive a larger match.\nMedicaid funding has become a major budgetary issue for many states over the last few years, with states, on average, spending 16.8% of state general funds on the program. If the federal match expenditure is also counted, the program, on average, takes up 22% of each state's budget. Some 43 million Americans were enrolled in 2004 (19.7 million of them children) at a total cost of $295 billion. In 2008, Medicaid provided health coverage and services to approximately 49 million low-income children, pregnant women, elderly people, and disabled people. Federal Medicaid outlays were estimated to be $204 billion in 2008. In 2011, there were 7.6 million hospital stays billed to Medicaid, representing 15.6% (approximately $60.2 billion) of total aggregate inpatient hospital costs in the United States. At $8,000, the mean cost per stay billed to Medicaid was $2,000 less than the average cost for all stays.\nMedicaid does not pay benefits to individuals directly; Medicaid sends benefit payments to health care providers. In some states Medicaid beneficiaries are required to pay a small fee (co-payment) for medical services. Medicaid is limited by federal law to the coverage of \"medically necessary services.\"\nOn November 25, 2008, a new federal rule was passed that allows states to charge premiums and higher co-payments to Medicaid participants. This rule enabled states to take in greater revenues, limiting financial losses associated with the program. Estimates figure that states will save $1.1 billion while the federal government will save nearly $1.4 billion. However, this meant that the burden of financial responsibility would be placed on 13 million Medicaid recipients who faced a $1.3 billion increase in co-payments over 5 years. The major concern is that this rule will create a disincentive for low-income people to seek healthcare. It is possible that this will force only the sickest participants to pay the increased premiums and it is unclear what long-term effect this will have on the program.\nA 2019 study found that Medicaid expansion in Michigan had net positive fiscal effects for the state.\nMedicaid estate recovery.\nSince the Medicaid program was established in 1965, \"states have been permitted to recover from the estates of deceased Medicaid recipients who were over age 65 when they received benefits and who had no surviving spouse, minor child, or adult disabled child.\" In 1993, Congress enacted the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, which required states to attempt to recoup \"the expense of long-term care and related costs for deceased Medicaid recipients 55 or older.\" The Act allowed states to recover other Medicaid expenses for deceased Medicaid recipients 55 or older, at each state's choice. However, states were prohibited from estate recovery when \"there is a surviving spouse, a child under the age of 21 or a child of any age who is blind or disabled.\" The Act also carved out other exceptions for adult children who have served as caretakers in the homes of the deceased, property owned jointly by siblings, and income-producing property, such as farms.\" Each state now maintains a Medicaid estate recovery program, although the sum of money collected significantly varies from state to state, \"depending on how the state structures its program and how vigorously it pursues collections.\"\nEffects.\nCoverage gains.\nA 2019 review by Kaiser Family Foundation of 324 studies on Medicaid expansion concluded that \"expansion is linked to gains in coverage; improvements in access, financial security, and some measures of health status/outcomes; and economic benefits for states and providers.\"\nMortality and disability reduction.\nA 2021 study found that Medicaid expansion as part of the Affordable Care Act led to a substantial reduction in mortality, primarily driven by reductions in disease-related deaths. A 2018 study in the \"Journal of Political Economy\" found that upon its introduction, Medicaid reduced infant and child mortality in the 1960s and 1970s. The decline in the mortality rate for nonwhite children was particularly steep. A 2018 study in the \"American Journal of Public Health\" found that the infant mortality rate declined in states that had Medicaid expansions (as part of the Affordable Care Act) whereas the rate rose in states that declined Medicaid expansion. A 2020 \"JAMA\" study found that Medicaid expansion under the ACA was associated with reduced incidence of advanced-stage breast cancer, indicating that Medicaid accessibility led to early detection of breast cancer and higher survival rates. A 2020 study found no evidence that Medicaid expansion adversely affected the quality of health care given to Medicare recipients. A 2018 study found that Medicaid expansions in New York, Arizona, and Maine in the early 2000s caused a 6% decline in the mortality rate: \"HIV-related mortality (affected by the recent introduction of antiretrovirals) accounted for 20% of the effect. Mortality changes were closely linked to county-level coverage gains, with one life saved annually for every 239 to 316 adults gaining insurance. The results imply a cost per life saved ranging from $327,000 to $867,000 which compares favorably with most estimates of the value of a statistical life.\"\nA 2016 paper found that Medicaid has substantial positive long-term effects on the health of recipients: \"Early childhood Medicaid eligibility reduces mortality and disability and, for whites, increases extensive margin labor supply, and reduces receipt of disability transfer programs and public health insurance up to 50 years later. Total income does not change because earnings replace disability benefits.\" The government recoups its investment in Medicaid through savings on benefit payments later in life and greater payment of taxes because recipients of Medicaid are healthier: \"The government earns a discounted annual return of between 2% and 7% on the original cost of childhood coverage for these cohorts, most of which comes from lower cash transfer payments.\" A 2019 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found that when Hawaii stopped allowing Compact of Free Association (COFA) migrants to be covered by the state's Medicaid program that Medicaid-funded hospitalizations declined by 69% and emergency room visits declined by 42% for this population, but that uninsured ER visits increased and that Medicaid-funded ER visits by infants substantially increased. Another NBER paper found that Medicaid expansion reduced mortality.\nA 2021 \"American Economic Review\" study found that early childhood access to Medicaid \"reduces mortality and disability, increases employment, and reduces receipt of disability transfer programs up to 50 years later. Medicaid has saved the government more than its original cost and saved more than 10 million quality adjusted life years.\"\nRural hospitals boosted revenue.\nA 2020 study found that Medicaid expansion boosted the revenue and operating margins of rural hospitals, had no impact on small urban hospitals, and led to declines in revenue for large urban hospitals. A 2021 study found that expansions of adult Medicaid dental coverage increasingly led dentists to locate to poor, previously underserved areas. A 2019 paper by Stanford University and Wharton School economists found that Medicaid expansion \"produced a substantial increase in hospital revenue and profitability, with larger gains for government hospitals. On the benefits side, we do not detect significant improvements in patient health, although the expansion led to substantially greater hospital and emergency room use, and a reallocation of care from public to private and better-quality hospitals.\"\nFinancial and health security increase.\nA 2017 survey of the academic research on Medicaid found it improved recipients' health and financial security. Studies have linked Medicaid expansion with increases in employment levels and student status among enrollees. A 2017 paper found that Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act \"reduced unpaid medical bills sent to collection by $3.4 billion in its first two years, prevented new delinquencies, and improved credit scores. Using data on credit offers and pricing, we document that improvements in households' financial health led to better terms for available credit valued at $520 million per year. We calculate that the financial benefits of Medicaid double when considering these indirect benefits in addition to the direct reduction in out-of-pocket expenditures.\" Studies have found that Medicaid expansion reduced rates of poverty and severe food insecurity in certain states. Studies on the implementation of work requirements for Medicaid in Arkansas found that it led to an increase in uninsured individuals, medical debt, and delays in seeking care and taking medications, without any significant impact on employment. A 2021 study in the \"American Journal of Public Health\" found that Medicaid expansion in Louisiana led to reductions in medical debt.\nPolitical participation increase.\nA 2017 study found that Medicaid enrollment increases political participation (measured in terms of voter registration and turnout).\nCrime reduction.\nStudies have found that Medicaid expansion reduced crime. The proposed mechanisms for the reduction were that Medicaid increased the economic security of individuals and provided greater access to treatment for substance abuse or behavioral disorders. A 2022 study found that Medicaid eligibility during childhood reduced the likelihood of criminality during early adulthood.\nOregon Medicaid health experiment and controversy.\nIn 2008, Oregon decided to hold a randomized lottery for the provision of Medicaid insurance in which 10,000 lower-income people eligible for Medicaid were chosen by a randomized system. The lottery enabled studies to accurately measure the impact of health insurance on an individual's health and eliminate potential selection bias in the population enrolling in Medicaid.\nA sequence of two high-profile studies by a team from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Harvard School of Public Health found that \"Medicaid coverage generated no significant improvements in measured physical health outcomes in the first 2 years ,\" but did \"increase use of health care services, raise rates of diabetes detection and management, lower rates of depression, and reduce financial strain.\"\nThe study found that in the first year:\nThe studies spurred a debate between proponents of expanding Medicaid coverage and fiscal conservatives challenging the value of this expansive government program.\nPolitical influences.\nSeveral political factors influence the cost and eligibility of tax-funded health care. According to a study conducted by Gideon Lukens, factors significantly affecting eligibility included \"party control, the ideology of state citizens, the prevalence of women in legislatures, the line-item veto, and physician interest group size.\" Lukens' study supported the generalized hypothesis that Democrats favor generous eligibility policies while Republicans do not. When the Supreme Court allowed states to decide whether to expand Medicaid or not in 2012, northern states, in which Democratic legislators predominated, disproportionately did so, often also extending existing eligibility.\nCertain states in which there is a Republican-controlled legislature may be forced to expand Medicaid in ways extending beyond increasing existing eligibility in the form of waivers for certain Medicaid requirements so long as they follow certain objectives. In its implementation, this has meant using Medicaid funds to pay for low-income citizens' health insurance; this private-option was originally carried out in Arkansas but was adopted by other Republican-led states. However, private coverage is more expensive than Medicaid and the states would not have to contribute as much to the cost of private coverage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55795", "revid": "57658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55795", "title": "National Environmental Protection Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55796", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55796", "title": "Full Employment Act", "text": "Full Employment Act may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55797", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55797", "title": "Trade Expansion Act", "text": "1962 US law on tariffs\nThe Trade Expansion Act of 1962 (Pub. L.\u00a0, 76\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, enacted , codified at ) is an American trade law.\nThe law was intended to maintain American economic influence in the wake of the creation of the European Economic Community.\nThe Trade Expansion Act granted the president of the United States unprecedented authority to negotiate tariff reductions of up to 50%. It paved the way for the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations, concluding on June 30, 1967, the last day before expiration of the Act.\nSection 232 of the act permits the president to impose tariffs based on a recommendation by the U.S. secretary of commerce if \"an article is being imported into the United States in such quantities or under such circumstances as to threaten or impair the national security.\" This section was used only in 1979 and 1982, and had not been invoked since the creation of the World Trade Organization in 1995, until President Trump cited it on March 8, 2018, to impose tariffs on steel and aluminum.\nBackground\nIn the early 1960's US politicians were worried about the growing influence of the European Economic Community and the ever-present influence of the Soviet Union. President John F. Kennedy determined that a loosening of trade restrictions would spark an increase in economic growth and keep the American economy competitive. Therefore, they began to champion a new trade act that would give the President the authority to revamp US trade policy. Republicans and some industry leaders were initially skeptical, however, and believed that a loosening of trade policy would cause significant harm to American domestic industries and workers, especially amidst a persistent unemployment issue.\nProvisions\nThe act's stated purpose is to stimulate the US economy through the lowering of trade barriers, with a focus on countering Communist economic influence. To accomplish this goal the act granted the President a 5-year authority to reduce or increase tariffs by a maximum of 50% the initial level. The President was also empowered to eliminate trade barriers on goods that the United States and EEC combined accounted for at least 80% of the market, with agricultural products being exempt to the 80% rule. A \"Tariff Commission\" would also be created that was tasked with advising the President on the economic effect of adjustments to tariff policy. The law also created the Office of the United States Trade Representative. This office would serve as the primary negotiator with foreign countries concerning trade. The President and the Tariff Commission would also be required to submit annual reports to congress on their activities under the act. Many, however, were concerned about negative impacts to domestic industries as a result of these adjustments, to soften the blow a system was created that would allow industry leaders, firms, and workers to submit petitions to the Tariff Commission for relief. In the event the Tariff Commission found that damage was done as a result of the new trade policies it would require the President to offer assistance. This could take many forms; The President could invoke the \"Escape Clause\" which allowed the president to rapidly raise tariffs again. The President could also provide monetary aid to businesses in the form of loans or tax-breaks. Workers could be eligible to receive unemployment aid or even retraining. Another avenue would be the imposing of international quotas to protect industries.\nLegislative Timeline\nThe act started its journey with a massive public relations campaign spearheaded by the Kennedy administration. The goal of the campaign was to frame the act as necessary in order to maintain national security. The campaign also sought to reach out to important interest groups, highlighting how they could benefit from the reforms in the proposed legislation.\nThe House.\nThe act was officially introduced in the House on August 8, 1961, and would remain in committee for the remainder of the year and into 1962. It passed through the House Committee on Ways and Means, and the House Committee on Rules, with the Ways and Means committee making modifications to the bill. The most important was the addition of an \"Escape Clause\" section. Which, In the event of economic damages, the President would be required to lower tariffs to compensate. Protectionists attempted to kill the bill on June 12, 1962, in committee by having it recommitted, but their attempt was unsuccessful. The act then passed the House on June 29, by a significant margin with no amendments made on the floor.\nThe Senate and Passage.\nThe Senate Committee on Finance deliberated for several weeks sent the bill to the floor on September 14th. The Finance committee version was similar to the House version, but it differed in that it restored the most favored nation status of Yugoslavia and the Polish People's Republic. This was previously added by the House as a means to combat Communist economic influence and would become a point of debate between the two branches. On the floor the legislation was subject to a lengthy amendment process before being passed by a wide margin on September 19. Both the Senate and House agreed to a conference committee to resolve their differences. The committee agreed to strip out the provision restoring the most favored nation status for Yugoslavia and Poland and revert other changes to the House version. The bill was then sent to Kennedy on October 4 and signed on October 11.\nRecent Developments.\nOn April 27, 2017, President Donald Trump ordered a review of the aluminum imports and threats to national security under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. On March 8, 2018, President Trump signed an order to impose the tariffs on steel and aluminum under Section 232 of the act and citing \"national security\" grounds.\nOn May 23, 2018, President Trump \"instructed Secretary Ross to consider initiating a Section 232 investigation into imports of automobiles, including trucks, and automotive parts to determine their effects on America's national security. Core industries such as automobiles and automotive parts are critical to our strength as a Nation.\"\nIn mid-February 2019, Commerce Department secretary Wilbur Ross delivered a confidential report to President Trump which concluded the Department's investigation under Section 232, that there was a legal rationale for the imposition of steep tariffs on the import of foreign automobiles, as these imports\u2014like steel and aluminum\u2014posed a threat to U.S. national security. According to a March 20, 2019, article in \"Politico\", the proposed tariffs could be as high as 25%. \"Politico\" also reported that as of March 20, the requests by the chair of the Senate Finance Committee\u2014Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) to access a copy of the confidential report, had been denied. The deadline for Trump's decision on the imposition of the tariffs is in mid-May, ninety days after the report's release.\nEarly in Trump's second term, he established tariffs on aluminum and steel imports under Section 232. While Trump had imposed other tariffs against all imports from several countries as part of his Liberation Day tariffs, claiming this power under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, at least two lower courts have ruled these unconstitutional, though the United States Supreme Court will hear the case \"Learning Resources v. Trump\" to review these rulings in November 2025. Alongside these challenges, Trump intended to add new tariffs on pharmaceuticals, semitrucks, and kitchen cabinets in September 2025. Section 232 tariffs are expected to be more difficult for courts to review as they typically defer to the executive branch for matters of national security, according to \"The New York Times\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55800", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55800", "title": "Landrum-Griffin Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55801", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55801", "title": "Operating systems", "text": ""}
{"id": "55802", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55802", "title": "File systems", "text": ""}
{"id": "55803", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55803", "title": "Hospital volunteers", "text": ""}
{"id": "55804", "revid": "6463349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55804", "title": "Thessaly", "text": "Administrative region of Greece\nThessaly ( ; ; ancient Thessalian: , ) is a traditional geographic and modern administrative region of Greece, comprising most of the ancient region of the same name. Before the Greek Dark Ages, Thessaly was known as Aeolia (, ), and appears in Homer's \"Odyssey\".\nThessaly became part of the modern Greek state in 1881, after four and a half centuries of Ottoman rule. Since 1987 it has formed one of the country's 13 regions and is further (since the Kallikratis reform of 2011) sub-divided into five regional units and 25 municipalities. The capital of the region is Larissa. Thessaly lies in northern central Greece and borders the regions of Macedonia to the north, Epirus to the west, Central Greece to the south, and the Aegean Sea to the east. The Thessaly region also includes the Sporades islands.\nName and etymology.\nThessaly is named after the \"Thessaloi\", an ancient Greek tribe. The meaning of the name of this tribe is unknown, and many theories have been made about its etymology. According to the Dutch linguist Robert S. P. Beekes, the name predates Greek presence in the region and could come from the Pre-Greek form reconstructed as *K\u02b7\u02b0e\u0165\u0165al-. The Greek linguist Georgios Babiniotis also assigns the origin of the name of the Thessalians to pre-Greek times, although he does not try to explain its etymology. In Aromanian it is referred to as .\nMythology.\nIn Homer's epic, the \"Odyssey\", the hero Odysseus visited Aeolia, the kingdom of Aeolus, which was the old name for Thessaly.\nThe Plain of Thessaly, which lies between Mount Oeta/Othrys and Mount Olympus, was the site of the battle between the Titans and the Olympians.\nAccording to legend, Jason and the Argonauts launched their search for the Golden Fleece from the Magnesia Peninsula.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThessaly was home to extensive Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures around 6000\u20132500 BC (see Cardium pottery, Dimini and Sesklo). Mycenaean settlements have also been discovered, for example at the sites of Iolcos, Dimini and Sesklo (near Volos). In Archaic and Classical times, the lowlands of Thessaly became the home of baronial families, such as the Aleuadae of Larissa or the Scopads of Crannon.\nIn the summer of 480 BC, the Persians invaded Thessaly. The Greek army that guarded the Vale of Tempe was alerted by Alexander I of Macedon and evacuated the road before the enemy arrived. Not much later, Thessaly surrendered to the Persians. The Thessalian family of Aleuadae joined the Persians subsequently. The following year, the Persians were decisively defeated at the Battle of Plataea and withdrew from all of their European possessions, including Thessaly.\nIn the 4th century BC, after the Greco-Persian Wars had long ended, Jason of Pherae transformed the region into a significant military power, recalling the glory of Early Archaic times. Shortly after, Philip II of Macedon was appointed \"Archon\" of Thessaly, and Thessaly was thereafter associated with the Macedonian Kingdom for the next centuries.\nThessaly later became part of the Roman Empire as part of the province of Macedonia; when that was broken up, the name resurfaced in two of its late Roman successor provinces: Thessalia Prima and Thessalia Secunda.\nByzantine period.\nThessaly remained part of the East Roman \"Byzantine\" Empire after the collapse of Roman power in the west, and subsequently suffered many invasions, such as by the Slavic tribe of the Belegezites in the 7th century AD. The Avars had arrived in Europe in the late 550s. They asserted their authority over many Slavs, who were divided into numerous petty tribes. Many Slavs were made into an effective infantry force, by the Avars. In the 7th century the Avar-Slav alliance began to raid the Byzantine Empire, laying siege to Thessalonica and even the imperial capital Constantinople itself.\nBy the 8th century, Slavs had occupied most of the Balkans from Austria to the Peloponnese, and from the Adriatic to the Black seas, with the exception of the coastal areas and certain mountainous regions of the Greek peninsula. Relations between the Slavs and Greeks were probably peaceful apart from the (supposed) initial settlement and intermittent uprisings. Being agriculturalists, the Slavs probably traded with the Greeks inside towns. It is likely that the re-Hellenization had already begun by way of this contact. This process would be completed by a newly reinvigorated Byzantine Empire.\nWith the abatement of Arab-Byzantine Wars, the Byzantine Empire began to consolidate its power in those areas of mainland Greece occupied by Proto-Slavic tribes. Following the campaigns of the Byzantine general Staurakios in 782\u2013783, the Byzantine Empire recovered Thessaly, taking many Slavs as prisoners. Apart from military expeditions against Slavs, the re-Hellenization process begun under Nicephorus I involved (often forcible) transfer of peoples.\nMany Slavs were moved to other parts of the empire such as Anatolia and made to serve in the military. In return, many Greeks from Sicily and Asia Minor were brought to the interior of Greece, to increase the number of defenders at the Emperor's disposal and dilute the concentration of Slavs.\nLate Medieval period.\nIn 977 Byzantine Thessaly was raided by the Bulgarian Empire. In 1066 dissatisfaction with the taxation policy led the Aromanian and Bulgarian population of Thessaly to revolt against the Byzantine Empire under the leadership of a local lord, Nikoulitzas Delphinas. The revolt, which began in Larissa, soon expanded to Trikala and later northwards to the Byzantine-Bulgarian border. In 1199\u20131201 another unsuccessful revolt was led by Manuel Kamytzes, son-in-law of Byzantine emperor Alexios III Angelos, with the support of Dobromir Chrysos, the autonomous ruler of Prosek. Kamytzes managed to establish a short-lived principality in northern Thessaly, before he was overcome by an imperial expedition.\nFollowing the siege of Constantinople and the dissolution of the Byzantine Empire by the Fourth Crusade in April 1204, Thessaly passed to Boniface of Montferrat's Kingdom of Thessalonica in the wider context of the \"Frankokratia\". With his Greek ties, Boniface won the support of the Greek population and of various important Greek families. In 1212, Michael I Komnenos Doukas, ruler of Epirus, led his troops into Thessaly. Larissa and much of central Thessaly came under Epirote rule, thereby separating Thessalonica from the Crusader principalities in southern Greece. Michael's work was completed by his half-brother and successor, Theodore Komnenos Doukas, who by 1220 completed the recovery of the entire region, and assigned \"pronoiai\" to aristocratic Greek families.\nThe Vlachs (Aromanians) of Thessaly (originally a chiefly transhumant Romance-speaking population) first appear in Byzantine sources in the 11th century, in the \"Strategikon of Kekaumenos\" and Anna Komnene's \"Alexiad\". In the 12th century, the Jewish traveller Benjamin of Tudela records the existence of the district of \"Vlachia\" near Halmyros in eastern Thessaly, while the Byzantine historian Niketas Choniates places \"Great Vlachia\" () near Meteora. The term is also used by the 13th-century scholar George Pachymeres, and it appears as a distinct administrative unit in 1276, when the \"pinkernes\" Raoul Komnenos was its governor (\"kephale\").\nFrom 1271 to 1318 Thessaly was an independent despotate that extended to Acarnania and Aetolia, run by the dynasty founded by John I Doukas. John ruled from 1271 until his death in 1289 and was succeeded by his sons Constantine and Theodore. At this time, Thessaly came under Byzantine suzerainty, though it largely retained its independence. After Constantine's death in 1303, it was ruled by John II Doukas until his death in 1318. From 1306 to 1310, the Almogavars or Catalan Company of the East (\"Societas Catalanorum Magna\"), plundered Thessaly. In 1310, they occupied a series of forts in the south. From there they departed to the Duchy of Athens, called by the duke Walter I, whom they eventually killed in battle and took over the Duchy of Athens. In 1318, with the death of John II, Thessalian independence came to an end, and the Almogavars occupied Siderokastron and southern Thessaly (1319) and formed the Duchy of Neopatria. The other parts of Thessaly either came under Byzantine rule or were ruled by their own nobility. These local magnates eventually started fighting amongst themselves. Those in the south, such as the Melissenos family of Volos, sought the help of the Catalans, while those in the north, such as the Gavrilopoulos family of Trikala, turned towards Byzantium. At this time, some of Thessaly's ports came under Venetian rule. In 1332, most of Thessaly was taken by the Byzantines following a campaign by Andronikos III Paleologos. He left its administration to Michael Monomachos, who governed it for the next 10 years.\nGroups of Albanians moved into Thessaly as early as 1268 as mercenaries of Michael Doukas. The Albanian tribes of Bua, Malakasioi and Mazaraki were described as \"unruly\" nomads living in the mountains of Thessaly in the early 14th century in Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos\u2019 \u2018History\u2019. They numbered approximately 12,000. Kantakouzenos describes a pact they made to serve the Byzantine Emperor and pay tribute to him ca. 1332 in exchange for using the lowland areas of Thessaly in the summer months. Albanian groups were given military holdings Fanari in the 1330s and by the end of the 14th century and the Ottoman takeover of the region, they were an integral part of the military structures of Thessaly. Two of their military leaders known in Byzantine sources as Peter and John Sebastopoulos controlled the small towns of Pharsala and Domokos.\nIn 1348, Thessaly was invaded and occupied by the Serbian Empire of Stefan Du\u0161an, under the general Preljub. After the latter's death in 1356, the region was conquered by Nikephoros Orsini after he won the support of the local Greek population. After his death three years later, it was taken over by the self-proclaimed Serbian emperor Simeon Uro\u0161. Simeon's son John Uro\u0161 succeeded in 1370 but abdicated in 1373, and Thessaly was administered by the Greek Angeloi-Philanthropenoi clan until the Ottoman conquest c.\u00a01393.\nOttoman period.\nOttoman control began in the late 14th century with the capture of Larissa in 1392-93 and consolidated in the early 15th century. Nevertheless, Ottoman control was threatened throughout this era by groups of Greeks, Albanians and Aromanians who based themselves in the mountainous areas of Thessaly. At the time of the Ottoman conquest, the great Eastern plain of Thessaly was almost entirely depopulated as a result of the nearly continuous warfare of the previous decades. It was resettled by Turkish settlers from Western Anatolia and Greeks from Western Thessaly and the surrounding mountains. In the following decades, the population of this area grew very rapidly as a result of law and order. Thessaly was ruled through the Sanjak of Tirhala administrative division during the Ottoman period. In the 1520s, Muslims made up of 17.5% of the population of the Sanjak.\nFailed Greek uprisings occurred in 1600/1 and 1612, and during the Morean War (1684\u20131699) and the Orlov Revolt (1770).\nIn 1780, Ali Pasha of Ioannina took over control of Thessaly, and consolidated his rule after 1808, when he suppressed a local uprising. Heavy taxation, however, ruined the province's commerce, and coupled with the outbreak of the plague in 1813, reduced the population to some 200,000 by 1820. Rigas Feraios, the important Greek intellectual and forerunner of the Greek War of Independence was from the region. He was born in Velestino, near the ancient town of Pherae.\nWhen the Greek War of Independence broke out in 1821, Greek risings occurred in the Pelion and Olympus mountains as well as the western mountains around Fanari, but they were swiftly suppressed by the Ottoman armies under Mehmed Reshid Pasha and Mahmud Dramali Pasha. After the establishment of the independent Kingdom of Greece, Greek nationalist agitation continued, with further revolts in 1841, in 1854 during the Crimean War, and again during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u20131878. In 1880 Thessaly's population consisted of approximately 285,000 Greeks, 40,000 Turks, and 40,000 Jews.\nModern.\nThessaly became part of the modern Greek state in 1881, after the Convention of Constantinople except the area around the town of Elassona, which remained in Ottoman hands until 1912. It was briefly captured by Ottomans during the Greco-Turkish War of 1897. After the Treaty of Constantinople (1897), Greece was forced to cede minor border areas and to pay heavy reparations. The remaining part of Thessaly held by the Ottomans was finally regained by the Greeks during the First Balkan War in 1912. In 1923, the entire Muslim population was sent to Turkey following the population exchange between Greece and Turkey at the end of the Greco-Turkish War.\nDuring World War II, Thessaly was occupied by the Kingdom of Italy from April 1941 to September 1943. After the Armistice of Cassibile, Germany occupied Thessaly until October 1944. It became a major centre of the Greek Resistance, most famously seeing the desertion of the Italian Pinerolo Division to the guerrillas of EAM-ELAS in 1943.\nGeography.\nThessaly occupies the east side of the Pindus watershed, extending south from Macedonia to the Aegean Sea. The northern tier of Thessaly is defined by a generally southwest\u2013northeast spur of the Pindus range that includes Mount Olympus, close to the Macedonian border. Within that broken spur of mountains are several basins and river valleys.\nThe easternmost extremity of the spur extends southeastward from Mount Olympus along the Aegean coast, terminating in the Magnesia Peninsula that envelops the Pagasetic Gulf (also called the Gulf of Volos), and forms an inlet of the Aegean Sea. Thessaly's major river, the Pineios, flows eastward from the central Pindus Range just south of the spur, emptying into the Thermaic Gulf.\nThe Trikala and Larissa lowlands form a central plain which is surrounded by a ring of mountains. It has distinct summer and winter seasons, with summer rains augmenting the fertility of the plains. This has led to Thessaly occasionally being called the \"breadbasket of Greece\".\nThe region is well delineated by topographical boundaries. The Chasia and Kamvounia mountains lie to the north, the Mount Olympus massif to the northeast. To the west lies the Pindus mountain range, to the southeast the coastal mountains of \u00d3ssa and Pelion.\nSeveral tributaries of the Pineios flow through the region.\nClimate.\nMost of the province has a hot summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"), but also found is a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") including the capital Larissa (on its Mediterranean edge of category). Even in the north of Thessaly a rare humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") can be found, although it is different from a climate typically below or above the tropics, it also marks the limit of this rare \"Cf\" subtype on the European continent (e. g. the small village of Kalvia).\nDemographics.\nThe population of the region of Thessaly was 687,527 in 2021 census. The region has shrunk by 45,235 people between 2011 and 2021, experiencing a population loss of 6.2%.\nIn 2011, the population of the region of Thessaly was 732,762 and represented 6.8% of the total population of Greece. A 2.8% decrease in the population since 2001 was noted, but Thessaly remains Greece's third most populous region.\nThe population break-down is 44% urban, 40% agrarian, and 16% semi-urban. A decrease in the agrarian population has been accompanied by an increase in the semi-urban population.\nThe metropolitan area of Larissa, the capital of Thessaly, is home to more than 230,000 people, making it the biggest city of the region.\nAn Aromanian minority resides in Thessaly. This region, along with Epirus and Macedonia, are the regions with the biggest concentrations of Greek Aromanians. Another notable population group of Thessaly are the Karagounides, an ethnic Greek subgroup.\nLanguage.\nThe Aeolic dialect of Greek was spoken in Thessaly. This included several local varieties, in particular the variants of Pelasgiotis and Thessaliotis. The language was not written.\nApart from Greek, Aromanian is also spoken in Thessaly. Some Aromanian dialects from the region have some unique peculiarities of their own, such as that of Krania, which is one of the few with differential object marking (DOM) along with those dialects spoken at the west of Ohrid in North Macedonia.\nEconomy.\nThe alluvial soils of the Pineios Basin and its tributaries make Thessaly a vital agricultural area, particularly for the production of grain, cattle, and sheep. Modernization of agricultural practices in the mid-20th century has controlled the chronic flooding that had restricted agricultural expansion and diversification in the low-lying plains. Thessaly is the leading cattle-raising area of Greece, and Aromanian shepherds move large flocks of sheep and goats seasonally between higher and lower elevations.\nIn the last few decades, there has been a rise in the cultivation of dried nuts such as almonds, pistachios, and walnuts, especially in the region of Almyros. An increase in the number of olive oil trees has been also observed. The nearly landlocked Gulf of Pagasai provides a natural harbor at Volos for shipping agricultural products from the plains and chromium from the mountains.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 9.7 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 5.2% of Greek economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac16,100 or 53% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 65% of the EU average.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 20.6% in 2017.\nTransport.\nThere are a number of highways such as E75, and the main railway from Athens to Thessaloniki (Salonika) crosses Thessaly. The region is directly linked to the rest of Europe through the International Airport of Central Greece, which is located in Nea Anchialos, a small distance from Volos and Larisa. Charter flights link the region and bring tourists to the wider area, mainly in Pelion and Meteora. The new infrastructure includes a brand new terminal ready to serve 1500 passengers per hour and new airplanes.\nAdministration.\nAlthough the historical region of Thessaly extended south into Phthiotis and at times north into West Macedonia, today the term 'Thessaly' is identified with the modern Administrative Region which was established in the 1987 administrative reform. With the 2010 Kallikratis plan, the powers and authority of the region were redefined and extended.\nAlong with Central Greece, it is supervised by the Decentralized Administration of Thessaly and Central Greece, based at Larissa. The region of Thessaly is divided into five regional units (four were pre-Kallikratis prefectures), Karditsa, Larissa, Magnesia, the Sporades and Trikala, which are further subdivided into twenty-five municipalities.\nThe regional governor is Dimitris Kouretas, who was elected in the second round of the 2023 regional election and took office on 1 January 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55806", "revid": "77511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55806", "title": "Interstate highway", "text": ""}
{"id": "55807", "revid": "50676206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55807", "title": "Federal Housing Administration", "text": "U.S. government agency responsible for mortgage insurance\nThe Federal Housing Administration (FHA), also known as the Office of Housing within the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), is a United States government agency founded by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, established in part by the National Housing Act of 1934. Its primary function is to provide insurance for mortgages originated by private lenders for various types of properties, including single-family homes, multifamily rental properties, hospitals, and residential care facilities. FHA mortgage insurance serves to safeguard these private lenders from financial losses. In the event that a property owner defaults on their mortgage, FHA steps in to compensate the lender for the outstanding principal balance.\nUnder this insurance arrangement, lenders assume a diminished level of risk, thereby allowing them to offer a larger number of mortgages. The primary mission of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) is to facilitate access to reasonably priced mortgage financing, with a particular focus on individuals with low to moderate incomes and those embarking on their first home purchase. Furthermore, the FHA lends its support to the construction of both affordable and market-rate rental properties, along with the establishment of hospitals and residential care facilities, not only in communities throughout the United States but also in its territories.\nIt's important to distinguish the FHA from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), which oversees government-sponsored enterprises. Presently, the FHA is under the leadership of Assistant Secretary for Housing and Federal Housing Commissioner Designate, Frank Cassidy .\nHistory.\nThe Federal Housing Administration (FHA) was under the leadership of the Federal Housing Commissioner Raymond M. Foley from 1945 to 1947. and Franklin D. Richards from 1947-1952. In 1954 Norman P. Mason was appointed as the Federal Housing Commissioner.\nNew Deal origins.\nAmid the Great Depression, a period marked by numerous bank failures, there was a substantial decline in both the availability of home loans and the rate of home ownership. During this era, the majority of home mortgages were characterized by short-term durations, typically spanning from three to five years. These mortgages lacked amortization features and often featured balloon payment structures. Additionally, the loan-to-value (LTV) ratios for these mortgages generally remained below sixty percent. This situation posed a significant obstacle for many working and middle-class families, rendering home ownership financially unattainable. During the banking crisis of the 1930s, all lenders were compelled to call in their outstanding mortgages, leaving no room for refinancing. Consequently, numerous borrowers, who were now unemployed and grappling with financial hardships, found themselves unable to meet their mortgage obligations. This unfortunate circumstance led to a substantial number of homes being foreclosed upon, which, in turn, precipitated a sharp decline in the housing market.\nBanks, in the process of foreclosure, acquired the collateral in the form of foreclosed homes. However, the depressed property values at that time meant that these assets had limited value. In response to these challenges, a comprehensive restructuring of the federal banking system took place in 1934. This overhaul culminated in the enactment of the National Housing Act of 1934, which gave rise to the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). The FHA was established with the specific aim of regulating the interest rates and terms associated with insured mortgages.\nPrior to the establishment of the FHA, the prevailing mortgage landscape featured predominantly balloon mortgages, which necessitated substantial lump-sum payments at the conclusion of relatively short mortgage terms, typically spanning 5 to 10 years. Moreover, prospective homebuyers were required to make substantial down payments, often ranging from 30% to 50% of the property's value. With the advent of FHA-insured loans, the down payment requirement was significantly reduced, with borrowers now only needing to provide as little as 10% down. Furthermore, the mortgage repayment period was extended, spanning from 20 to 30 years.\nIn 1934, following its establishment, the FHA enlisted the expertise of Homer Hoyt as Chief Land Economist. His role was pivotal in formulating the initial underwriting criteria for FHA-insured mortgages, a process that ultimately led to the development of the Redlining policy.\nAppraisal criteria and race discrimination.\nIt is important to note that these innovative lending practices were, in some regions, exclusively available to white Americans. These practices effectively expanded the pool of white Americans who could manage both the initial down payment for a house and the ongoing monthly mortgage payments. Consequently, this expansion significantly enlarged the market for single-family homes. The FHA employed a specific methodology for assessing the appraisal value of properties, relying on eight distinct criteria. It instructed its agents, known as \"appraisers,\" to allocate more funding to projects with higher appraised values, up to a predetermined maximum limit. Among these criteria, the two most pivotal were \"Relative Economic Stability,\" accounting for 40% of the appraisal value, and \"protection from adverse influences,\" contributing an additional 20%.\nIn 1935, the FHA furnished its appraisers with an Underwriting Manual, which included the following directive: \"If a neighborhood is to retain stability it is necessary that properties shall continue to be occupied by the same social and racial classes. A change in social or racial occupancy generally leads to instability and a reduction of values.\" Appraisers were further instructed to assign superior property and zoning ratings in areas deemed to have \"protection against some adverse influences.\" The manual characterized these adverse influences as \"infiltration by inharmonious racial or nationality groups.\" Due to the FHA's appraisal criteria, which stipulated a whites-only occupancy requirement, racial segregation became an integral component of the federal mortgage insurance program. This occurred because the FHA often classified properties in racially mixed neighborhoods or those in close proximity to black neighborhoods as high-risk, effectively endorsing and enforcing racial segregation as an official requirement.\nFannie Mae and G.I. Bill.\nIn 1938, Congress established the Federal National Mortgage Association, commonly known as Fannie Mae. This creation played a pivotal role in setting up a secondary mortgage market, enabling banks and investors to buy and sell existing home loans. Following the enactment of the Serviceman's Readjustment Act, popularly known as the GI Bill, in 1944, the FHA orchestrated a system of long-term mortgages to facilitate the construction and sale of private homes.\nUnder the GI Bill, the Veteran's Administration introduced a home-loan guarantee program that allowed veterans to make a down payment of only one dollar, making homeownership more accessible to them. These transformative changes contributed significantly to a surge in American homeownership, with the percentage of families residing in owner-occupied homes increasing from 44% to 63% between 1934 and 1972.\nMajor housing projects.\nIn 1935, Colonial Village in Arlington County, Virginia, was the first large-scale, rental housing project erected in the United States that was Federal Housing Administration-insured. During World War\u00a0II, the FHA financed a number of worker's housing projects including the Kensington Gardens Apartment Complex in Buffalo, New York. During the Great Depression, Ohio Cities used federal government funds for building housing projects and first two of those projects completed in the United States were in Cincinnati and Cleveland.\nEstablishment of HUD.\nIn 1965, the Federal Housing Administration was integrated into the Department of Housing and Urban Development following the enactment of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965. With the integration of the FHA into HUD, it transformed into a distinct entity within the larger HUD framework. Under this arrangement, the FHA would be overseen by a Federal Housing Commissioner who concurrently held the position of Assistant Secretary. This Commissioner would be responsible for both FHA-specific functions and the administration of other HUD programs related to the private mortgage market.\nWhile the FHA and HUD share some commonalities, they also exhibit differences in their roles and responsibilities. The designated Commissioner would assume authority over all departmental programs pertaining to the private mortgage market, in addition to their dual roles as Assistant Secretary and head of the FHA. The FHA and HUD both help borrowers with bad credit and insufficient down payment to be able to buy or repair a house.\nSubprime mortgage crisis.\nIn the late 1990s, a new category of mortgage products known as subprime mortgages emerged and began to compete with the traditional mortgages that were financed by the FHA. These subprime products were often poorly underwritten, if they were underwritten at all, and offered higher profits for lenders. Consequently, lenders had a strong incentive to steer borrowers towards these subprime products, even when these borrowers qualified for FHA loans, which were considered safer.\nAs the subprime mortgage market experienced significant growth, the FHA's share of the mortgage market declined. For instance, in 2001, FHA-insured loans accounted for 14% of home-purchase mortgages. However, by 2005, this percentage had dropped to less than 3%. The surge in these unregulated subprime loans played a role in inflating the United States housing bubble, which ultimatelfy led to the subprime mortgage crisis and nearly caused the collapse of the housing market. Following the subprime mortgage crisis, The FHA, in conjunction with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, emerged as a substantial provider of mortgage financing in the United States. Notably, the proportion of home purchases funded through FHA mortgages saw a substantial increase, rising from a mere 2 percent to over one-third of all mortgages in the United States. This growth was in response to a contraction in conventional mortgage lending during a credit crunch period. By the year 2011, the FHA was responsible for backing approximately 40% of all home purchase loans in America. Since the year 2008, the FHA has supported more than 4 million loans and facilitated mortgage refinancing for 2.6 million families, resulting in reduced monthly payments. With the collapse of the private subprime market, many of the riskiest buyers borrowed from the FHA instead, exposing the FHA to substantial potential losses. At the time, these possible losses were estimate as up to $100\u00a0billion. The troubled loans weighed heavily on the FHA's capital reserve fund, which by early 2012 had fallen below its congressionally mandated minimum of 2%, in contrast to more than 6% two years earlier. By November 2012, the FHA was essentially bankrupt.\nMortgage insurance.\nSince its establishment in 1934, the FHA and HUD have collectively provided insurance for nearly 50 million home mortgages. Presently, the FHA holds a portfolio that includes approximately 8.5 million insured single-family mortgages, as well as more than 11,000 insured multifamily mortgages. Additionally, it encompasses over 3,900 mortgages dedicated to hospitals and residential care facilities.\nFHA down payment.\nA borrower has several options for sourcing their down payment. The 3.5% requirement can be met by using the borrower's personal funds or by receiving a qualified gift from a family member or another eligible source.\nFHA mortgage insurance.\nFHA insurance payments consist of two components: the upfront mortgage insurance premium (UFMIP) and the annual premium, which is paid monthly and referred to as the mutual mortgage insurance (MMI). The UFMIP is a mandatory payment that can be paid in cash at the time of closing or included in the loan amount. The annual Mortgage Insurance Premium (MIP) for FHA-insured mortgages varies depending on factors such as the base loan amount, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, and loan term. For a typical 30-year mortgage, the annual MIP rate ranges from 0.80% to 1.05%. Homebuyers who opt for a 15-year mortgage experience lower MIP rates, ranging from 0.45% to 0.95%. For loans with FHA Case Numbers assigned on or after June 3, 2013, the duration of MIP payments is determined by factors including loan term, LTV ratio, and previous payment history. The upfront mortgage insurance premium (UFMIP) is a fixed 1.75% of the base loan amount and is mandatory, payable in cash at closing or financed into the loan. These MIP payments are a fundamental component of FHA mortgage insurance, serving to protect lenders from potential losses.\nIn the present day, approximately 46% of first-time homebuyers in the United States utilize FHA loans for their home purchases. Notably, 1 in 16 FHA loan borrowers maintains a credit score below 600, while the average credit score among first-time FHA loan borrowers stands at 677. These first-time homebuyers account for 82% of all FHA purchase loans. Additionally, 23% of all homebuyers opt for an FHA loan, with 28% of those aged 37 or younger choosing this financing option. Among the challenges faced by homebuyers, 13% of all buyers and 24% of those under the age of 37 find the down payment requirement to be the most daunting task. On average, the down payment amount is $6,624. FHA borrowers have an average debt-to-income ratio of 40.34%, and the typical FHA loan amount is $191,650. It's worth noting that a minimum credit score of 580 with a down payment of 3.5% is required to qualify.\nLegacy.\nThe establishment of the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) had a significant impact on the housing market in the United States. Homeownership rates experienced a notable increase, rising from 40% in the 1930s to 61% and 65% by 1995. The peak of homeownership was nearly 69% in 2005, coinciding with the height of the US housing bubble. Within just four years of the FHA's inception in 1934, prospective homeowners could secure a house with a mere ten percent down payment, with the remaining ninety percent financed through a 25-year, self-amortizing, FHA-insured mortgage loan.\nFollowing World War\u00a0II, the FHA played a pivotal role in financing homes for returning white veterans and the families of white soldiers. Its assistance extended to the purchase of both single-family and multifamily homes. During the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, the FHA played a crucial role in catalyzing the construction of millions of privately owned apartments designed for elderly, handicapped, and lower-income Americans. In the 1970s, amid soaring inflation and energy costs that threatened the viability of numerous private apartment buildings, the FHA's emergency financing provided essential support to financially struggling properties. Additionally, during the 1980s, when economic conditions did not favor increased homeownership, the FHA helped stabilize falling property prices, enabling potential homeowners to secure financing, especially in regions where private mortgage insurers had withdrawn due to economic challenges, such as oil-producing states. The Federal Housing Administration (FHA) has had its most pronounced impact on minority populations and urban areas. In particular, nearly half of the FHA's business in metropolitan areas is concentrated in central cities, a significantly higher proportion than that observed with conventional loans. The FHA has also extended loans to a larger proportion of African Americans, Hispanic Americans, as well as younger borrowers with limited credit, playing a role in the growth of homeownership within these demographic groups. However, as the capital markets in the United States evolved over the course of several decades, the influence of the FHA waned. By 2006, FHA loans constituted less than 3% of all loans originated in the United States. In the fiscal year 2019, FHA-insured mortgages represented 11.41% of the total dollar volume for single-family residential mortgage originations. Notably, 82.84% of these FHA-insured single-family forward purchase transaction mortgages in fiscal year 2019 were availed by first-time homebuyers. Furthermore, minorities accounted for 36.24% of FHA purchase mortgage borrowers in the calendar year 2018, a significant contrast to the 19.94% observed through conventional lending channels.\nRedlining.\nThe Federal Housing Administration (FHA) implemented mortgage underwriting standards that had a discriminatory impact on minority neighborhoods. This discriminatory practice is evident in the fact that between 1945 and 1959, African Americans received less than 2 percent of all federally insured home loans. As subsidized mortgage insurance became increasingly significant in the housing market, property values in minority neighborhoods within inner cities experienced a sharp decline. Additionally, approval rates for mortgage loans among minority applicants remained exceedingly low. Beginning in 1935, the FHA instituted guidelines designed to discourage private mortgage investors from extending loans to properties in minority areas. This practice, known as redlining, was made illegal by the Fair Housing Act of 1968. Redlining has had long-lasting effects on minority communities. The legacy of redlining continues to exert its influence today in certain regions of the United States. Redlining has had a detrimental impact on the contemporary wealth gap between African Americans and White Americans.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55808", "revid": "1304727638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55808", "title": "Johnson Act", "text": "1934 United States legislation\nThe Johnson Act of 1934 (Foreign Securities Act, ch. 112, 48\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, \u00a0https://, 1934-04-13) prohibited foreign nations in debt from marketing their bond issues in the United States. The law was enacted on April 13, 1934, and although it was impacted by the Bretton-Woods Agreement, it was not repealed and continues to have the force of law.\nSenator Hiram Johnson sponsored the Act, which included a passage that forbade loans to nations in default on their debts, unless those nations joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. The act was a response to nonpayment of war debts from World War I. As it also banned token payments, payments from debtor countries stopped entirely following its passage, with the exception of Finland, which still continued to pay its debt.\nOn May 5, 1934, Attorney General Homer Stille Cummings rendered an opinion on the meaning of the terms \"default\" and \"partial default\" used in the Act. He held that Czechoslovakia, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Great Britain and Canada were not in default, despite the fact only Canada had paid its debts, and Soviet Russia was in default.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55809", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55809", "title": "Foreign Securities Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55810", "revid": "26161718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55810", "title": "Reciprocal Tariff Act", "text": "1934 United States tariff law\nThe Reciprocal Tariff Act (enacted June 12, 1934, ch. 474, 48\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, \u00a0https://) provided for the negotiation of tariff agreements between the United States and separate nations, particularly Latin American countries. The Act served as an institutional reform intended to authorize the president to negotiate with foreign nations to reduce tariffs in return for reciprocal reductions in tariffs in the United States up to 50%. \nIt resulted in a reduction of duties. This was the policy of the low tariff Democrats in response to the high tariff Republican program which produced the Smoot\u2013Hawley tariff of 1930 that raised rates and sharply reduced international trade. The Reciprocal Tariff Act was promoted heavily by Secretary of State Cordell Hull.\nReciprocal Tariff Act of 1934.\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (RTAA) into law in 1934. It gave the president power to negotiate bilateral, reciprocal trade agreements with other countries and enabled Roosevelt to liberalize American trade policy around the globe. It is widely credited with ushering in the era of liberal trade policy that persisted throughout the 20th century.\nTariffs in the United States were at historically high levels from the American Civil War to the 1920s. In response to the Great Depression, Congress accelerated its protectionist policies, culminating in the Smoot\u2013Hawley Act of 1930, a smorgasbord of high tariffs across many American industries. At the same time, European countries enacted protectionist policies.\nThe RTAA marked a sharp departure from the era of protectionism in the United States. American duties on foreign products declined from an average of 46% in 1934 to 12% by 1962.\nTrade agreements under RTAA.\nBetween 1934 and 1945, the United States signed 32 reciprocal trade agreements with 27 countries. Furthermore, the conclusion of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was made by the authority under the RTAA.\nHistory.\nThe authorization under the RTAA has been granted for three years from the day of enactment (June 12, 1934) the RTAA. The authorization was extended to in 1937, in 1940, in 1943, in 1945.\nThe extension law was not enacted by June 11, 1948, the due date of the extension in 1945, and the right of reduction was revoked. The extension law was established on November 26, 1949, and was extended until June 11, 1951, and then 1951. The year was extended by two years and revoked in 1953 and extended on August 7., also for one year until 1954. Met. The 1954 extension was also for one year, . The law, which was once revoked in 1958 but extended on 30 August 1960, was enacted.\nThe RTAA, which has been updated intermittently until 1961, is a multilateral trade negotiation in GATT and negotiations with new member states.\nThe power to cut down expired in 1961, but in November, President Kennedy advocated a new tariff reduction negotiations, which would be called Kennedy Round, and in response, the new tariff reduction, the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, was enacted, and the President was granted the power to reduce tariffs by June 30, 1967.\nFrom then on, rounds and free trade area negotiations in GATT (later WTO) included the negotiating powers of non-tariff measures in the respective legislation, such as the Trade Act of 1974, was granted to the President, but the power to reduce tariffs was generally similar to the RTAA.\nDifferences between RTAA and other trade agreements.\nBefore the RTAA, if Congress wanted to establish a lower tariff for particular imports, it would act unilaterally and tackle the foreign country's tariff rate as fixed. Congress would choose a tariff rate that was either a little higher or lower than the median preferred tariff, depending upon the composition of the Congress. Generally, a Republican-controlled Congress would prefer higher tariffs, and a Democratic-controlled Congress would prefer lower tariffs. Thus, tariffs were chosen based on US domestic politics. Individual members of Congress were under great pressure from industry lobbyists to raise tariffs to protect it from the negative effects of foreign imports.\nThe RTAA's novel approach freed Roosevelt and Congress to break that trend of tariff increases. It tied US tariff reductions to reciprocal tariff reductions with international partners. It also allowed Congress to approve the tariffs with a simple majority, as opposed to the two-thirds majority necessary for other treaties. Also, the President had the authority to negotiate the terms. The three innovations in trade policy created the political will and feasibility to enact a more liberal trade policy.\nReciprocity was an important tenet of the trade agreements brokered under RTAA because it gave Congress an incentive to lower tariffs. As more foreign countries entered into bilateral tariff reduction deals with the United States, exporters had more incentive to lobby Congress for even lower tariffs across many industries.\nBy giving the President the authority to negotiate the deals, the Congress effectively ceded a part of its power (authorized under US Constitution, Article I, Section VIII) to the executive branch. The President had to consider the welfare of all Americans, his foreign policy priorities, and what was feasible with other countries in making his decisions on tariffs. Those considerations generally left presidents more inclined to reduce tariffs than the Congress. Whether Roosevelt or Congress foresaw that result is a matter of historical debate.\nHistorical partisan divide over tariffs and the RTAA.\nAfter the Civil War, Democrats were generally for trade liberalization, and Republicans were generally for higher tariffs. The pattern was clear in congressional votes for tariffs from 1860 to 1930. Democrats were the congressional minority in the majority of Congresses between the Civil War and the election of Roosevelt. During their brief stints in the majority, Democrats passed several tariff reduction bills. Examples include the Wilson\u2013Gorman Act of 1894 and the Underwood Tariff Act of 1913. However, subsequent Republican majorities always undid the unilateral tariff reductions.\nBy the Great Depression, tariffs were at historic highs. Members of Congress commonly entered in informal \"quid pro quo\" agreements in which they voted for other members' preferred tariffs in order to secure support for their own. No one took into account the aggregate toll on American consumers or exporters. That practice is commonly referred to as logrolling. Roosevelt and key members of his administration were intent on stopping the practice.\nDemocrats voted for trade liberalization far more often than Republicans but were not uniform in their preferences. Democrats skeptical of reducing tariffs during the Depression included Representative Henry Rainey (D-IL) and members of Roosevelt's own administration: Rexford Tugwell, Raymond Moley, and Adolf Berle. However, the administration decided to take advantage of having a Democrat-controlled Congress and Presidency to push through the RTAA. In 1936 and 1940, the Republican Party ran on a platform of repealing the tariff reductions secured under the RTAA. However, when they won back Congress in 1946, they did not act to remove the tariffs. In the years since the enactment of the RTAA in 1934, the economies of Europe and East Asia had been decimated by the violence of World War II, which left a huge global production vacuum that was filled by American exporters. During the war, the United States had its highest positive account balance in its history. Republican preferences for tariffs started shifting, as exporters from home districts began to benefit from increased international trade. By the 1950s, there was no statistically significant difference between Republicans and Democrats on tariff policies, a change that has endured ever since.\nReciprocity.\nAnother key feature of the RTAA was that if Congress wanted to repeal a tariff reduction, it would take a two-thirds supermajority. That means that the tariff would have to be especially onerous, and the Congress would have to be especially protectionist. Once enacted, tariff reductions tended to stick.\nAs more American industries began to benefit from tariff reductions, some of them began to lobby Congress for lower tariffs. Until RTAA, Congress had been lobbied mostly by industries seeking to create or increase tariffs to protect their industry. That change also helped to lock in many of the gains in trade liberalization. In short, the political incentive to raise tariffs decreased, and the political incentive to lower tariffs increased.\nWorld changes caused by RTAA.\nAs American duties dropped off dramatically, global markets were also increasingly liberalized. World trade expanded rapidly. The RTAA was a US law but provided the first widespread system of guidelines for bilateral trade agreements. The United States and the European nations began avoiding beggar-thy-neighbour policies, which pursued national trade objectives at the expense of other nations. Instead, countries started to realize the gains from trade co-operation.\nLed by the United States and the United Kingdom, international co-operation flourished, and concrete institutions were created. In talks begun at the Bretton Woods Conference of 1944, the International Monetary Fund was created. By 1949, the first international board governing trade, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), had been established. In 1994, the GATT was replaced by the World Trade Organization (WTO), which still oversees international trade agreements.\nThe US Department of State also found good use of the expansion of free trade after World War II. Many in the State Department saw multilateral trade agreements as a way to engage the world in accordance with the Marshall Plan and the Monroe Doctrine. US trade policy became an integral part of US foreign policy. That pursuit of free trade as diplomacy intensified during the Cold War, as the US competed with the Soviet Union for relationships around the globe.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55811", "revid": "1317465427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55811", "title": "Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act", "text": "1934 U.S. federal law providing the Philippines with a process for independence\nThe Philippine Independence Act, or Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act (Pub. L.\u00a0, 48\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, enacted ), is an Act of Congress that established the process for the Philippines, then a US territory, to become an independent country after a ten-year transition period. Under the act, the 1935 Constitution of the Philippines was written and the Commonwealth of the Philippines was established, with the first directly elected president of the Philippines. (Direct elections to the Philippine Legislature had been held since 1907.) It also established limitations on Filipino immigration to the United States.\nThe act was authored in the 73rd United States Congress by Senator Millard Tydings (Dem.) of Maryland and Representative John McDuffie (Dem.) of Alabama, and signed into law by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.\nProvisions.\nThe Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act specified a procedural framework for the drafting of a constitution for the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines within two years of its enactment. The act specified a number of mandatory constitutional provisions, and required approval of the constitution by the U.S. president and by Filipinos. The act mandated U.S. recognition of independence of the Philippine Islands as a separate and self-governing nation after a ten-year transition period.\nPrior to independence, the act allowed the U.S. to maintain military forces in the Philippines and to call all military forces of the Philippine government into U.S. military service. The act empowered the U.S. president, within two years following independence, to negotiate matters relating to U.S. naval reservations and fueling stations in the Philippine Islands.\nImmigration.\nThe act reclassified all Filipinos, including those who were living in the United States, as aliens for the purposes of immigration to the United States. A quota of 50 immigrants per year was established. Before this act, Filipinos were classified as United States nationals, but not United States citizens, and while they were allowed to migrate relatively freely, they were denied naturalization rights within the US unless they were citizens by birth in the mainland US.\nHistory.\nAn attempt to set a final date for Philippine independence was first manifested in the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act of 1933. Though Congress passed it, overriding President Hoover's veto, it failed to create a concrete timeline for independence. Requiring the consent of the Philippine Senate for it to be implemented, the bill failed after the then-President of the Senate Manuel L. Quezon convinced it to reject the bill because of the act's provision that would have allowed for the U.S. to station military bases in the islands permanently. Thus, it was necessary for Congress to draft a new bill to address these complaints and finally establish a timeline for the colony's independence.\nIn 1934, Quezon headed a \"Philippine Independence mission\" to Washington, D.C. It lobbied Congress and secured the act's passage.\nIn 1935, under the provisions of the act, the 1935 Constitution of the Philippines was drafted and became law, establishing the Commonwealth of the Philippines with an elected executive, the president of the Philippines. The Commonwealth was to be a transitional government lasting for a period of ten years, with independence to be granted on July 4, 1946.\nAccordingly, President Harry S. Truman issued Proclamation 2695 of July 4, 1946, officially recognizing the independence of the Philippines.\nImmigration.\nThe immigration quota under the act was low, and immigration continued at levels much higher than the legal quota. This was due to the strength of agricultural lobbies, such as the Hawaiian sugar planters, which were able to successfully lobby the federal government to allow more male Filipino agricultural workers provided that they demonstrated a need. This further increased the Filipino population in Hawaii which had at one point been 25% of agricultural workers on the islands.\nThe act also led to the Filipino Repatriation Act.\nThis act extended the Asian-exclusion policy of the Immigration Act of 1924 to the soon-to-be-former territory. This policy hampered the domestic lives of many Filipinos within the US because any Filipino who wished to go to the Philippines and then return to the United States would be subject to the restrictions on Asian immigration to America and would likely never be allowed to return.\nIn 1946, the US decreased the tight restrictions of the Tydings\u2013McDuffie Act with the Luce\u2013Celler Act of 1946, which increased the quota of Filipino immigrants to 100 per year and gave Filipinos the right to become naturalized American citizens. Filipinos would have been barred from immigrating to the U.S. without the Act. Two days later, on July 4, 1946, the Philippines became independent with the signing of the Treaty of Manila.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55812", "revid": "603343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55812", "title": "Neutrality Act", "text": "Neutrality Act may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55813", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55813", "title": "Neutrality Acts of the 1930s", "text": "U.S. laws enacted before World War II\nThe Neutrality Acts were a series of acts passed by the US Congress in 1935, 1936, 1937, and 1939 in response to the growing threats and wars that led to World War II. They were spurred by the growth in isolationism and non-interventionism in the US following the US joining World War I, and they sought to ensure that the US would not become entangled again in foreign conflicts.\nThe legacy of the Neutrality Acts is widely regarded as having been generally negative since they made no distinction between aggressor and victim, treating both equally as belligerents, and limited the US government's ability to aid Britain and France against Nazi Germany. The Acts were largely repealed in 1941, in the face of the Lend-Lease Act.\nBackground.\nThe Nye Committee hearings between 1934 and 1936 and several best-selling books of the time, like H. C. Engelbrecht's \"The Merchants of Death\" (1934), supported the conviction of many Americans that the US entry into World War I had been orchestrated by bankers and the arms industry for profit reasons. That strengthened the position of isolationists and non-interventionists in the country.\nPowerful forces in the US Congress pushing for non-interventionism and strong Neutrality Acts were Republican Senators William Edgar Borah, Arthur H. Vandenberg, Gerald P. Nye, and Robert M. La Follette, Jr., but Congressional support for non-interventionism was not limited to the Republican Party. The Ludlow Amendment, requiring a public referendum before any declaration of war except in cases of defense against direct attack, was introduced several times without success between 1935 and 1940 by Democratic Representative Louis Ludlow.\nDemocratic President Franklin Roosevelt and especially Secretary of State Cordell Hull were critical of the Neutrality Acts for fear that they would restrict the administration's options to support friendly nations. Even though both the House and Senate had large Democratic majorities throughout these years, there was enough support for the Neutrality Acts among Democrats (especially Southerners) to ensure their passage. Although congressional support was insufficient to override a presidential veto, Roosevelt felt he could not afford to snub the South and anger public opinion, especially while he was facing re-election in 1936 and needed congressional co-operation on domestic issues. With considerable reluctance, Roosevelt signed the Neutrality Acts into law.\nNeutrality Act of 1935.\nRoosevelt's State Department had lobbied for embargo provisions that would allow the president to impose sanctions selectively. This was rejected by Congress. The 1935 act, passed by Congress on August 31, 1935, imposed a general embargo on trading in arms and war materials with all parties in a war. It also declared that American citizens traveling on warring ships traveled at their own risk. The act was set to expire after six months. When Congress passed the Neutrality Act of 1935, the State Department established an office to enforce the provisions of the Act. The Office of Arms and Munitions Control, renamed the Division of Controls in 1939 when the office was expanded, initially consisted of Joseph C. Green and Charles W. Yost.\nRoosevelt invoked the act after Italy's invasion of Ethiopia in October 1935, preventing all arms and ammunition shipments to Italy and Ethiopia. He also declared a \"moral embargo\" against the belligerents, covering trade not falling under the Neutrality Act.\nNeutrality Act of 1936.\nThe Neutrality Act of 1936, passed in February of that year, renewed the provisions of the 1935 act for another 14 months. It also forbade all loans or credits to belligerents.\nHowever, this act did not cover \"civil wars\", such as that in Spain (1936\u20131939), nor did it cover materials used in civilian life such as trucks and oil. U.S. companies such as Texaco, Standard Oil, Ford, General Motors, and Studebaker sold such items to the Nationalists under General Franco on credit. By 1939, Spain owed these and other companies more than $100,000,000.\nNeutrality Act of 1937.\nIn January 1937, Congress passed a joint resolution outlawing the arms trade with Spain. The Neutrality Act of 1937 was passed in May and included the provisions of the earlier acts, this time without expiration date, and extended them to cover civil wars as well. Furthermore, U.S. ships were prohibited from transporting any passengers or articles to belligerents, and U.S. citizens were forbidden from traveling on ships of belligerent nations.\nIn a concession to Roosevelt, a \"cash-and-carry\" provision that had been devised by his advisor Bernard Baruch was added: the president could permit the sale of materials and supplies to belligerents in Europe as long as the recipients arranged for the transport and paid immediately with cash, with the argument that this would not draw the U.S. into the conflict. Roosevelt believed that cash-and-carry would aid France and Great Britain in the event of a war with Germany, since they were the only countries that controlled the seas and were able to take advantage of the provision. The cash-and-carry clause was set to expire after two years.\nJapan invaded China in July 1937, starting the Second Sino-Japanese War. President Roosevelt, who supported the Chinese side, chose not to invoke the Neutrality Acts since the parties had not formally declared war. In so doing, he ensured that China's efforts to defend itself would not be hindered by the legislation: China was dependent on arms imports and only Japan would have been able to take advantage of cash-and-carry. This outraged the isolationists in Congress who claimed that the spirit of the law was being undermined. Roosevelt stated that he would prohibit American ships from transporting arms to the belligerents, but he allowed British ships to transport American arms to China. Roosevelt gave his Quarantine Speech in October 1937, outlining a move away from neutrality and toward \"quarantining\" all aggressors. He then imposed a \"moral embargo\" on exports of aircraft to Japan.\nNeutrality Act of 1939.\nEarly in 1939, after Nazi Germany had invaded Czechoslovakia, Roosevelt lobbied Congress to have the cash-and-carry provision renewed. He was rebuffed, the provision lapsed, and the mandatory arms embargo remained in place.\nIn September 1939, after Germany had invaded Poland, the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany. Roosevelt invoked the provisions of the Neutrality Act but came before Congress and lamented that the Neutrality Acts may give passive aid to an aggressor country. Congress was divided. Republican senator Gerald Nye wanted to broaden the embargo, and other isolationists like Vandenberg and Hiram Johnson vowed to fight \"from hell to breakfast\" Roosevelt's desire to loosen the embargo. An \"outstanding Republican leader\" who supported helping nations under attack, however, told H. V. Kaltenborn that the embargo was futile because a neutral country like Italy could buy from the US and sell its own weapons to Germany, while US companies would relocate factories to Canada.\nRoosevelt prevailed over the isolationists, and on November 4, he signed the Neutrality Act of 1939 into law, allowing for arms trade with belligerent nations (Great Britain and France) on a cash-and-carry basis, thus in effect ending the arms embargo. Furthermore, the Neutrality Acts of 1935 and 1937 were repealed, U.S. citizens and ships were barred from entering war zones designated by the president, and the National Munitions Control Board (which had been created by the 1935 Neutrality Act) was charged with issuing licenses for all arms imports and exports. Arms trade without a license became a federal crime.\nEnd of neutrality policy.\nThe end of neutrality policy came in September 1940 with the Destroyers-for-bases deal, an agreement to transfer 50 US Navy destroyers to the Royal Navy in exchange for land rights on British possessions. This was followed by the Lend-Lease Act of March 1941, which allowed the U.S. to sell, lend or give war materials to nations Roosevelt wanted to support: Britain, France, and China.\nAfter repeated incidents in the Atlantic between German submarines and U.S. ships, Roosevelt announced on September 11, 1941, that he had ordered the U.S. Navy to attack German and Italian war vessels in the \"waters which we deem necessary for our defense\". This order effectively declared naval war on Germany and Italy. Following the sinking of the U.S. destroyer while she dropped depth charges on German U-boats on October 31, many of the provisions of the Neutrality Acts were repealed on November 17, 1941. As a result, merchant vessels were allowed to be armed and to carry any cargoes to belligerent nations.\nOn December 4, 1941, the US press published Rainbow Five, a leaked plan outlining US war strategy. The U.S. formally declared war on Japan on December 8, 1941, following the attack on Pearl Harbor and the Japanese declaration of war of the previous day; Germany and Italy declared war on the U.S. on December 11, 1941, and the U.S. responded with a declaration of war on the same day.\nSubsequent application.\nThe provision against unlicensed arms trades of the 1939 act remains in force.\nIn 1948, Charles Winters, Al Schwimmer, and Herman Greenspun were convicted under the 1939 Act after smuggling B-17 Flying Fortress bombers from Florida to the nascent state of Israel during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Winters was sentenced to 18 months in prison and fined $5,000, while Schwimmer and Greenspun were each fined $10,000. Schwimmer was also stripped of his voting rights and veteran benefits.\nAll three received presidential pardons in subsequent decades. Greenspun was pardoned by John F. Kennedy in 1961, Schwimmer was pardoned by Bill Clinton in 2001, and Winters was pardoned by George W. Bush in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55814", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55814", "title": "Motor Carrier Act", "text": "Motor Carrier Act may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55815", "revid": "46302966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55815", "title": "Social Security Act", "text": "1935 U.S. law creating the Social Security program and unemployment insurance\nThe Social Security Act of 1935 is a law enacted by the 74th United States Congress and signed into law by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt on August 14, 1935. The law created the Social Security program as well as insurance against unemployment. The law was part of Roosevelt's New Deal domestic program.\nBy 1930, the United States was one of the few industrialized countries without any national social security system. Amid the Great Depression, the physician Francis Townsend galvanized support behind a proposal to issue direct payments to older people. Responding to that movement, Roosevelt organized a committee led by Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins to develop a major social welfare program proposal. Roosevelt presented the plan in early 1935 and signed the Social Security Act into law on August 14, 1935. The Supreme Court upheld the act in two major cases decided in 1937.\nThe law established the Social Security program. The old-age program is offset by payroll taxes, and over the ensuing decades, it contributed to a dramatic decline in poverty among older people, and spending on Social Security became a significant part of the federal budget. The Social Security Act also established an unemployment insurance program administered by the states and the Aid to Dependent Children program, which provided aid to families headed by single mothers. The law was later amended by acts such as the Social Security Amendments of 1965, which established two major healthcare programs: Medicare and Medicaid.\nBackground and history.\nIndustrialization and the urbanization in the 20th century created many new social problems and transformed ideas of how society and the government should function together because of them. As industry expanded, cities grew quickly to keep up with demand for labor. Tenement houses were built quickly and poorly, cramming new migrants from farms and Southern and Eastern European immigrants into tight and unhealthy spaces. Work spaces were even more unsafe.\nBy the 1930s, the United States was one of the few modern industrial countries in which people faced the Depression without any national system of social security, though a handful of states had poorly-funded old-age insurance programs. The federal government had provided pensions to veterans in the aftermath of the Civil War and other wars, and some states had established voluntary old-age pension systems, but otherwise, the United States had little experience with social insurance programs. For most American workers, retirement during old age was not a realistic option. By 1931, only 12 states had enacted old age pension laws, although that year fourteen state governors advocated that their legislatures enact measures related to pensions. In the 1930s, the physician Francis Townsend galvanized support for his pension proposal, which called for the federal government to issue direct $200-a-month payments to the elderly. Roosevelt was attracted to the general thinking behind Townsend's plan because it would provide for those no longer capable of working, stimulate demand in the economy, and decrease the supply of labor. In 1934, the Dill-Connery bill for federal funding of state pensions programs, passed the House of Representatives and came near passage in the Senate that May. According to one study, \u2018Roosevelt took \u2018no open stand on the bill, but called supporters to the White House and persuaded them to delay passage until the administration prepared its own, \"more comprehensive version.\u201d\u2019\nA similar delay took place in relation to unemployment insurance. Congress had, as noted by one study, \u201cbeen debating the issue since the Hoover administration, and by 1934, a majority of its members favored unemployment compensation in some form or other.\u201d In February 1934, the Wagner-Lewis bill was introduced, which sought to establish a system of unemployment insurance. The Wagner-Lewis bill was favored by Roosevelt, although Republicans and more conservative Democrats strongly opposed it and (as noted by one study) \u201cwas not pushed by the administration with any real vigor. Nevertheless, many close observers believed that had Roosevelt taken a decided stand in favor of the bill it would have been passed by Congress. As with the Dill-Connery bill, the Wagner-Lewis bill failed to pass. According to friends of Roosevelt\u2019s, \u201chis only purpose was to have the problems studied more carefully and that he believed public sentiment was not yet sufficiently crystallized in favor of such a program.\u201d\nIn 1934, Roosevelt charged the Committee on Economic Security, chaired by Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, with developing an old-age pension program, an unemployment insurance system, and a national health care program. The proposal for a national health care system was dropped, but the committee developed an unemployment insurance program that would be largely administered by the states. The committee also developed an old-age plan; at Roosevelt's insistence, it would be funded by individual contributions from workers.\nIn January 1935, Roosevelt proposed the Social Security Act, which he presented as a more practical alternative to the Townsend Plan. After a series of congressional hearings, the Social Security Act became law in August 1935. During the congressional debate over Social Security, the program was expanded to provide payments to widows and dependents of Social Security recipients. Job categories that were not covered by the act included workers in agricultural labor, domestic service, government employees, and many teachers, nurses, hospital employees, librarians, and social workers. As a result, 65 percent of the African American workforce was excluded from the initial Social Security program (as well as 27 percent of white workers). Many of these workers were covered only later on, when Social Security was expanded in 1950 and then in 1954.The program was funded through a newly established payroll tax, which later became known as the Federal Insurance Contributions Act tax. Social Security taxes would be collected from employers by the states, with employers and employees contributing equally to the tax. Because the Social Security tax was regressive, and Social Security benefits were based on how much each individual had paid into the system, the program would not contribute to income redistribution in the way that some reformers, including Perkins, had hoped. In addition to creating the program, the Social Security Act also established a state-administered unemployment insurance system and the Aid to Dependent Children, which provided aid to families headed by single mothers. Roosevelt believed that social security should cover everyone, stating that \u201cI see no reason why every child, from the day he is born, shouldn\u2019t be a member of the social security system. When he begins to grow up, he should know he will have old-age benefits direct from the insurance system to which he will belong all his life. If he is out of work, he gets a benefit. If he is sick or crippled, he gets a benefit\u2026.I don\u2019t see why not. Cradle to the grave-from the cradle to the grave they ought to be in a social insurance system.\u201d Compared with the social security systems in Western Europe, the Social Security Act of 1935 was rather conservative. However, it was the first time that the federal government took responsibility for the economic security of the aged, the temporarily unemployed, dependent children, and the handicapped.\nTitles.\nThe Social Security Act has been amended significantly over time. The initial act had ten major titles, with Title XI outlining definitions and regulations. More titles were added as the Social Security Act was amended.\nTitle I\u2014Old age.\nTitle I is designed to give money to states to provide assistance to aged individuals.\nTitle II\u2014Treasury account.\nTitle II establishes the Treasury account used to pay for Social Security benefits and gives the Secretary of the Treasury the authority to invest excess reserves from the account.\nTitle III\u2014Unemployment.\nTitle III concerns unemployment insurance.\nTitle IV\u2014Child aid.\nTitle IV concerns Aid to Families with Dependent Children.\nTitle V\u2014Child welfare.\nTitle V concerns maternal and child welfare.\nTitle VI\u2014Public health.\nTitle VI concerns public health services (investigation of disease and problems of sanitation). It grants the Surgeon General the power to distribute money to the States for that purpose with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury.\nTitle VII\u2014Social Security Board.\nTitle VII establishes the Social Security Board and outlines that it is to be composed of three appointees chosen by the President and approved by the Senate and serving for six years.\nTitle VIII\u2014Taxes with respect to employment.\nTitle VIII establishes a payroll tax used to fund Social Security. In the amendments of 1939, the tax was removed from the Social Security Act, placed in the Internal Revenue Code, and renamed the Federal Insurance Contributions Act. When Medicare was established in 1966, the FICA tax was increased to fund that program as well.\nTitle IX\u2014Tax on employers of eight or more.\nTitle IX establishes an excise tax to be paid on the first day of every year by employers proportional to the total wages of their employees. It also establishes the first federal unemployment insurance program in the United States.\nTitle X\u2014Blindness.\nTitle X concerns support for blind people.\nTitle XVI\u2014Supplemental Security Income for the Aged, Blind, and Disabled.\nTitle XVI establishes and concerns Supplemental Security Income (SSI).\nTitle XVIII\u2014Health Insurance for the Aged and Disabled.\nTitle XVIII establishes and concerns Medicare.\nTitle XIX\u2014Grants to States for Medical Assistance Programs.\nTitle XIX establishes and concerns Medicaid.\nTitle XX\u2014Block Grants to States for Social Services.\nTitle XX establishes the rules for state-specific shares of the federal cap according to a formula.\nTitle XXI\u2014State Children's Health Insurance Program.\nTitle XXI establishes and concerns CHIP.\nAmendments.\nSocial Security Act Amendments of 1939.\nH.R.6635 Approved, August 10, 1939,\nPublic Law 76-379\nExpansion of benefits.\nThe original Act provided for only one Federally-administered benefit: Old-Age Insurance, which was paid only to the insured worker. The 1939 Amendments transformed the very nature of the Social Security program. The Amendments created two new benefit categories under \u00a7202 of the Act:\nRetirement-aged wives, children under 16 (under 18 if attending school), widowed mothers caring for eligible children, and aged widows were all made eligible for dependents and survivors benefits.\nUnder select circumstances, parents of deceased insured workers were also made eligible for Survivors Insurance. To be eligible parents must be at least age 65, not entitled to Old-Age Insurance, wholly dependent upon the insured worker for income, and mustn't have married since the death of the insured worker. Furthermore, the parent(s) are not eligible if the deceased insured worker leaves a widow or unmarried surviving child under the age of 18.\nThe 1939 Amendments also increased benefit amounts and accelerated the start of monthly benefit payments from 1940 to 1942.\nAlteration of financing mechanisms.\nThe Old-Age Reserve Account previously established under \u00a7201 of the Act was replaced by the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund, administered by a Board of Trustees. The Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of Labor, and the Chairman of the Social Security Board were all ex-officio members. The composition of the Board of Trustees has been significantly altered since.\nWar Mobilization and Reconversion Act of 1944.\nS.2051 Approved, October 3, 1944\nPublic Law 78-458\nTitle XII\nSocial Security Act Amendments of 1946.\nH.R.7037 Approved, August 10, 1946\nPublic Law 79-719\nTitle XIII\nSocial Security Act Amendments of 1950.\nH.R.6000 Approved August 28, 1950\nPublic Law 81-734\nThese amendments raised benefits for the very first time and placed the program on the road to the virtually universal coverage it has today. Specifically it is the introduction of the cost-of-living adjustment (COLA).\nH.R.6291.\nApproved June 28, 1952\nPublic Law 82-420\nSocial Security Act Amendments of 1952.\nH.R.7800 Approved, July 18, 1952\nPublic Law 82-590\nSocial Security Act Amendments of 1954.\nH.R.9366 Approved September 1, 1954\nPublic Law 83-761\nH.R.9709.\nApproved September 1, 1954\nPublic Law 83-767\nTitle XV\nMaternal and Child Health and Mental Retardation Planning Amendments of 1963.\nH.R.7544 Approved, October 24, 1963\nPublic Law 88-156\nTitle XVII\nSocial Security Amendments of 1965.\nH.R.6675 Approved, July 30, 1965\nPublic Law 89-97\nTitle XVIII\nTitle XIX\nConstitutional litigation.\nIn the 1930s, the Supreme Court struck down many pieces of Roosevelt's New Deal legislation, including the Railroad Retirement Act. The Court threw out a centerpiece of the New Deal, the National Industrial Recovery Act, the Agricultural Adjustment Act, and New York State's minimum-wage law. President Roosevelt responded with an attempt to pack the court via the Judicial Procedures Reform Bill of 1937. On February 5, 1937, he sent a special message to Congress proposing legislation granting the President new powers to add additional judges to all federal courts whenever there were sitting judges age 70 or older who refused to retire. The practical effect of this proposal was that the President would get to appoint six new Justices to the Supreme Court (and 44 judges to lower federal courts), thus instantly tipping the political balance on the Court dramatically in his favor. The debate on this proposal lasted over six months. Beginning with a set of decisions in March, April, and May 1937 (including the Social Security Act cases), the Court would sustain a series of New Deal legislation.\nChief Justice Charles Evans Hughes played a leading role in defeating the court-packing by rushing these pieces of New Deal legislation through and ensuring that the court's majority would uphold it. In March 1937, Associate Justice Owen Roberts, who had previously sided with the court's four conservative justices, shocked the American public by siding with Hughes and the court's three liberal justices in striking down the court's previous decision in the 1923 case \"Adkins v. Children's Hospital\", which held that minimum wage laws were a violation of the Fifth Amendment's due process clause and were thus unconstitutional, and upheld the constitutionality of Washington state's minimum wage law in \"West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish.\" In 1936, Roberts joined the four conservative justices in using the \"Adkins\" decision to strike down a similar minimum wage law New York state enforced in \"Morehead v. New York ex rel. Tipaldo\" and his decision to reverse his previous vote in the \"Morehead\" decision would be known as the switch in time that saved nine. In spite of widespread speculation that Roberts only agreed to join the court's majority in upholding New Deal legislation, such as the Social Security Act, during the spring of 1937 because of the court packing plan, Hughes wrote in his autobiographical notes that Roosevelt's court reform proposal \"had not the slightest effect on our [the court's] decision\" in the \"Parrish\" case and that the delayed announcement of the decision created the false impression that the Court had retreated under fire. Following the vast support that was demonstrated for the New Deal through Roosevelt's re-election in 1936, Hughes persuaded Roberts to no longer base his decisions on political maneuvering and side with him in future cases that involved New Deal legislation\nRecords show Roberts had indicated his desire to overturn the \"Adkins\" decision two days after oral arguments concluded for the \"Parrish\" case on December 19, 1936. During this time, however, the court was divided 4-4 following the initial conference call because Associate Justice Harlan Fiske Stone, one of the three liberal justices who continuously voted to uphold New Deal legislation, was absent due to an illness; with this even division on the Court, the holding of the Washington Supreme Court, finding the minimum wage statute constitutional, would stand. As Hughes desired a clear and strong 5\u20134 affirmation of the Washington Supreme Court judgment, rather than a 4\u20134 default affirmation, he convinced the other justices to wait until Stone's return before both deciding and announcing the case.\nU.S. Supreme Court cases.\nTwo Supreme Court rulings affirmed the constitutionality of the Social Security Act.\nImpacts.\nIn 1940, Social Security benefits paid totaled $35 million and rose to $961 million in 1950, $11.2 billion in 1960, $31.9 billion in 1970, $120.5 billion in 1980, and $247.8 billion in 1990 (all figures in nominal dollars, not adjusted for inflation). In 2004, $492 billion of benefits were paid to 47.5 million beneficiaries. In 2009, nearly 51 million Americans received $650 billion in Social Security benefits.\nDuring the 1950s, those over 65 continued to have the highest poverty rate of any age group in the U.S. with the largest percentage of the nation's wealth concentrated in the hands of Americans under 35. By 2010, that figure had dramatically reversed itself with the largest percentage of wealth being in the hands of Americans 55\u201375 and those under 45 being among the poorest. Poverty among the elderly, once a normal sight, had thus become rare by the 21st century.\nReflecting the continuing importance of the Social Security Act, biographer Kenneth S. Davis described the Social Security Act as \"the most important single piece of social legislation in the entirety of American history.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55816", "revid": "11642524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55816", "title": "National Labor Relations Act of 1935", "text": "1935 U.S. federal labor law\nThe National Labor Relations Act of 1935, also known as the Wagner Act, is a foundational statute of United States labor law that guarantees the right of private sector employees to organize into trade unions, engage in collective bargaining, and take collective action such as strikes. Central to the act was a ban on company unions. The act was written by Senator Robert F. Wagner, passed by the 74th United States Congress, and signed into law by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.\nThe National Labor Relations Act seeks to correct the \"inequality of bargaining power\" between employers and employees by promoting collective bargaining between trade unions and employers. The law established the National Labor Relations Board to prosecute violations of labor law and to oversee the process by which employees decide whether to be represented by a labor organization. It also established various rules concerning collective bargaining and defined a series of banned unfair labor practices, including interference with the formation or organization of labor unions by employers. The act does not apply to certain workers, including supervisors, agricultural employees, domestic workers, government employees, and independent contractors.\nThe NLRA was strongly opposed by conservatives and members of the Republican Party, but it was upheld in the Supreme Court case of \"NLRB v. Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel Corp.\", decided April 12, 1937. The 1947 Taft\u2013Hartley Act amended the NLRA, establishing a series of labor practices for unions and granting states the power to pass right-to-work laws.\nBackground.\nThe act's origins may be traced to the bloody Colorado Fuel and Iron Strike of 1914. Colorado Fuel was a subsidiary of Standard Oil, and John D. Rockefeller Jr. sought expert advice from the new field of public relations to prolong the settlement of the strike. He also recruited the former Canadian Labour Secretary (and future Prime Minister) MacKenzie King to the Rockefeller Foundation to broker a solution to the prolonged strike. The settlement resulted in the establishment of a Management-Labor conciliation board, which evolved into a company union and template for settling labor disputes. Although a step forward in labor relations, the company union was effectively a public relations ploy that had the opposite impact of thwarting the organization of trade unions in the great organizing drives of the period.\nPresident Franklin Roosevelt signed the legislation into law on July 5, 1935.\nIt also has its roots in a variety of different labor acts previously enacted:\nContent.\nUnder section 1 (\u00a0https://) of the Act, the key principles and policy findings on which the Act was based are explained. The Act aims to correct the \"inequality of bargaining power between employees who, according to the Act's proponents, do not possess full freedom of association or actual liberty of contract and employers who are organized in the corporate or other forms of ownership association\". To achieve this, the central idea is the promotion of collective bargaining between independent trade unions, on behalf of the workforce, and the employer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;encouraging the practice and procedure of collective bargaining and by protecting the exercise by workers of full freedom of association, self-organization, and designation of representatives of their own choosing, for the purpose of negotiating the terms and conditions of their employment or other mutual aid or protection.\nVarious definitions are explained in section 2, (\u00a0https://) including 2(5) defining \"labor organization\" and 2(9) defining \"labor dispute\". The Act aims to protect employees as a group, and so is not based on a formal or legal relationship between an employer and employee.\nEnforcement.\nThe National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), which was established in NLRA 1935 sections 3 to 6 (\u00a0https://), is the primary enforcer of the Act. Employees and unions may act themselves in support of their rights, however because of collective action problems and the costs of litigation, the National Labor Relations Board is designed to assist and bear some of the costs. Under section 3, (\u00a0https://) the NLRB has two basic functions: overseeing the process by which employees decide whether to be represented by a labor organization and prosecuting violations. Those processes are initiated in the regional offices of the NLRB. The General Counsel of the National Labor Relations Board give legal advice. Sections 4 (\u00a0https://) and 5 (\u00a0https://) set out provisions on the officers of the Board and their expenses. Section 6 (\u00a0https://) empowers the Board to issue rules interpreting the labor legislation. This will generally be binding, unless a court deems it to have acted outside its authority.\nUnder section 10 (\u00a0https://) the NLRB is empowered to prevent unfair labor practices, which may ultimately be reviewed by the courts. Under section 11 it can lead investigations, collect evidence, issue subpoenas, and require witnesses to give evidence. Under section 12 (\u00a0https://) it is an offense for people to unduly interfere with the Board's conduct.\nIn practice, the act was often ignored when it suited political powers, most notably by Walt Disney in 1940 who formed a company union in violation of the law in order to prevent the Cartoon Unionists Guild, a Trade Union, from gaining a foothold in Disney Studios.\nCollectively bargaining.\nSection 7 (\u00a0https://) sets out the general principle that employees have the right to join a trade union and engage in collective bargaining.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Employees shall have the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, and shall also have the right to refrain from any or all of such activities except to the extent that such right may be affected by an agreement requiring membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment as authorized in section 8(a)(3).\nSpecific rules in support of collective bargaining are as follows.\nUnfair labor practices.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Employees shall have the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, and shall also have the right to refrain from any or all of such activities except to the extent that such right may be affected by an agreement requiring membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment as authorized in section 158 (a)(3) of this title.\"\nNational Labor Relations Act of 1935 \u00a7https://\nUnder section 8 (\u00a0https://) the law defines a set of prohibited actions by employers, employees, and unions, known as an unfair labor practice. The first five unfair labor practices aimed at employers are in section 8(a). These are,\nIn addition, added by the Taft\u2013Hartley Act, there are seven unfair labor practices aimed at unions and employees.\nElection of bargaining representatives.\nUnder section 9 (\u00a0https://) the people elected by a majority of the workforce have the right to become the exclusive representatives of workers in collective bargaining with the employer.\nExclusions.\nThe NLRA 1935 does not cover two main groups of employees: those working for the government and in the railway or airline industries. Section 2(2) (29 USC \u00a7152(2)) states that the Act does not apply to employees of the \"United States or any wholly owned Government corporation, or any Federal Reserve Bank, or any State or political subdivision thereof, or any person subject to the Railway Labor Act\". Under section 19 (\u00a0https://), people who have religious convictions against joining a trade union are entitled to not associate or financially support it.\nThe NLRA 1935 also does not include additional measures to protect the rights of racial minorities in the workplace. At the time, unions like the American Federation of Labor did not grant membership to black laborers while other unions like the CIO engaged in internal discrimination, providing more preferable jobs and seniority to its white members. Employers also engaged in discrimination against black union members by restricting their ability to organize and collectively bargain with white laborers. The NAACP urged Senator Robert Wagner to add a non-discrimination provision to the bill to protect against union and employee race discrimination. Despite pushes from the NAACP and National Urban League to correct discriminatory practices, the law was written without the inclusion of an anti-discrimination clause.\nThe act also excludes independent contractors, domestic workers, and farm workers. In recent years, advocacy organizations like the National Domestic Workers' Alliance have worked on the state level to pass a Domestic Workers' Bill of Rights, to extend to domestic workers the protections granted under the NLRA. Similar advocacy efforts are taking place on behalf of farm workers.\nReactions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Nothing in this subchapter, except as specifically provided for herein, shall be construed so as either to interfere with or impede or diminish in any way the right to strike, or to affect the limitations or qualifications on that right.\"\nWagner Act 1935 \u00a7https://\nThe act was bitterly opposed by the Republican Party and business groups. The American Liberty League viewed the act as a threat to freedom and engaged in a campaign of opposition in order to repeal these \"socialist\" efforts. This included encouraging employers to refuse to comply with the NLRB and supporting the nationwide filing of injunctions to keep the NLRB from functioning. This campaign continued until the NLRA was found constitutional by the Supreme Court in \"National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel Corporation\" (1937).\nLabor groups, while overwhelmingly supportive, expressed a set of reservations. The American Federation of Labor and some employers accused the NLRB of favoring the Congress of Industrial Organizations, particularly when determining whether to hold union elections in plant-wide, or wall-to-wall, units, which the CIO usually sought, or to hold separate elections in separate craft units, which the craft unions in the AFL favored. While the NLRB initially favored plant-wide units, which tacitly favored the CIO's industrial unionism, it retreated to a compromise position several years later under pressure from Congress that allowed craft unions to seek separate representation of smaller groups of workers at the same time that another union was seeking a wall-to-wall unit.\nMany accused the NLRB of a general pro-union and anti-employer bias, pointing to the Board's controversial decisions in such areas as employer free speech and \"mixed motive\" cases, in which the NLRB held that an employer violated the Act by using misconduct that ordinarily would not result in termination to fire an employee who was engaged in pro-union activity. In addition, employers campaigned over the years to outlaw a number of union practices such as closed shops, secondary boycotts, jurisdictional strikes, mass picketing, strikes in violation of contractual no-strike clauses, pension and health and welfare plans sponsored by unions and multi-employer bargaining.\nMany of these criticisms included provisions that employers and their allies were unable to have included in the NLRA. Others developed in reaction to NLRB decisions. Over all, they wanted the NLRB to be neutral as to bargaining power, but the NLRA's policy section takes a decidedly pro-employee position:\nIt is declared to be the policy of the United States to eliminate the causes of certain substantial obstructions to the free flow of commerce and to mitigate and eliminate these obstructions when they have occurred \"by encouraging the practice and procedure of collective bargaining and by protecting the exercise by workers of full freedom of association, self-organization, and designation of representatives of their own choosing, for the purpose of negotiating the terms and conditions of their employment or other mutual aid or protection\".\nSome of these changes were later achieved in the 1947 amendments.\nOver time, the U.S. Supreme Court has gradually undone the efficacy of the NLRA by inhibiting the law from applying to shifting circumstances.\nAmendments.\nOpponents of the Wagner Act introduced several hundred bills to amend or repeal the law in the decade after its passage. All of them failed or were vetoed until the passage of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, or the Taft\u2013Hartley Act, in 1947.\nMore recent unsuccessful efforts included attempts in 1978 to permit triple backpay awards and union collective bargaining certification based on signed union authorization cards, a provision that is similar to one of the proposed amendments in the Employee Free Choice Act. Under the NLRA, unions can become the representative based on signed union authorization cards only if the employer voluntarily recognizes the union. If the employer refuses to recognize the union, the union can be certified through a secret-ballot election conducted by the NLRB.\nIn the 2010s, Democrats began seeking the narrowing of the Act's provisions allowing workers to be hired as independent contractors, thus bringing them under the jurisdiction of the Act. Legislators have introduced a standard for independent contracting termed the \"ABC test\", after its three criteria A, B and C.\nTo be hired as an independent contractor, the worker must:\nIndependent contractors and employers have objected to B, the limitation on working in the employer's usual business. Objections are based on the inconveniences and costs of meeting the criterion. For instance, it prevents small venues from hiring performers, even for one-night stands, unless they are hired as employees. As a result, in the California phase of the campaign, numerous occupations of independent contractors were exempted from the test in California Assembly Bill 5 (2019).\nLegacy.\nThe Little Wagner Act, written by Ida Klaus, is the New York City version of the Wagner Act. The New York State Employment Relations Act was enacted in 1937.\nAlong with other factors, the act contributed to tremendous growth of membership in the labor unions, especially in the mass-production sector. The total number of labor union members grew from three million in 1933 to eight million at the end of the 1930s, with the vast majority of union members living outside of the Southern United States.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55817", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55817", "title": "Wagner Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55818", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55818", "title": "Robinson Patman Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55819", "revid": "326639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55819", "title": "Robinson\u2013Patman Act", "text": "1936 US law prohibiting price discrimination\nThe Robinson\u2013Patman Act (RPA) of 1936 (or Anti-Price Discrimination Act, Pub. L. No. 74-692, 49 Stat. 1526 (codified at \u00a0https://)) is a United States federal law that prohibits anticompetitive practices by producers, specifically price discrimination.\nCo-sponsored by Senator Joseph T. Robinson (D-AR) and Representative Wright Patman (D-TX), it was designed to protect small retail shops against competition from chain stores by fixing a minimum price for retail products. Specifically, the law prevents suppliers, wholesalers, or manufacturers from supplying goods to \"preferred customers\" at a reduced price. It also prevents coercing suppliers into restrictions as to whom they can and can't sell goods. This means that it is illegal for a supplier to sell one truckload of goods at a steep discount to a large business, such as Walmart or Amazon, and then charge a substantially higher price for a truckload of identical goods to a small business, such as a local grocery store.\nThe law grew out of business practices in which chain stores were allowed to purchase goods at lower prices than other retailers. The amendment to the Clayton Antitrust Act prevented unfair price discrimination for the first time by requiring a seller to offer the same price terms to customers at a given level of trade. The RPA provided for criminal penalties but contained a specific exemption for \"cooperative associations\". Enforcement of the RPA's provisions began to decline beginning in the 1980s.\nContents.\nIn general, the Act prohibits sales that discriminate in price on the sale of goods to equally-situated distributors when the effect of such sales is to reduce competition. Price means net price and includes all compensation paid. The seller may not throw in additional goods or services. Injured parties or the US government may bring an action under the Act.\nLiability under section 2(a) of the Act (with criminal sanctions) may arise on sales that involve:\n\"It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in commerce, in the course of such commerce, knowingly to induce or receive a discrimination in price which is prohibited by this section.\"\nDefenses to the Act include cost justification and matching the price of a competitor. In practice, the \"harm to competition\" requirement often is the make-or-break point.\nSales to Military Exchanges and Commissaries are exempt from the act.\nThe United States Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) have joint responsibilities for enforcement of the antitrust laws. Though the FTC has some overlapping responsibilities with the Department of Justice, and although the Robinson\u2013Patman Act is an amendment to the Clayton Act, the Robinson\u2013Patman Act is not widely considered to be in the core area of the antitrust laws. The FTC is active in enforcement of the Robinson\u2013Patman Act and the Department of Justice is not.\nFirms that allege discrimination can also file private civil litigation under the Act. This was the primary method of enforcement from the 1980s until 2025.\nThis act is one in a category of regulatory enactments that attempt to control price discriminations\u2014or different prices for identical products. Similar prohibitions on discrimination have been found in specialized regulatory systems, such as those relating to transportation and communications.\nSuch statutes typically have exceptions or restrictions on range of application similar to those set out in the Robinson\u2013Patman Act, to allow for differences in costs of output and distribution and differences in the degree of competition facing a vendor.\nEarly enforcement of the Robinson\u2013Patman Act was difficult, and even today, it continues to be widely unenforced. That was in part because of its complexity, which limited consumers' ability to understand it. Even for consumers who had the education in antitrust law needed to understand the Robinson\u2013Patman Act, it was unclear how its enforcement could benefit them.\nIn the late 1960s, in response to industry pressure, federal enforcement of the Robinson\u2013Patman Act ceased for several years. Enforcement of the law was driven largely by private action of individual plaintiffs. This most likely led to a decrease in enforcement because of the difficulty individuals tend to have understanding the Act. In the mid-1970s, there was an unsuccessful attempt to repeal the Act. The Federal Trade Commission revived its use of the Act in the late 1980s, alleging discriminatory pricing against bookstores by publishers, but enforcement has declined again since the 1990s. On the other hand, over 20 states have price discrimination statutes similar to Robinson\u2013Patman.\nVolume discounts may violate the act if not all customers are made aware of the availability of the discounts.\nModern enforcement.\nEnforcement of the RPA has declined since the 1980s. In 2022, FTC commissioner Alvaro Bedoya endorsed a revival of enforcing the RPA in order to curb price discrimination. Commentators speculated that the FTC under Lina Khan would ramp up enforcement of the RPA in order to curb the unfair use of market power. In April 2024, sixteen members of Congress wrote to the FTC urging for a revival of the enforcement of the Act. In December 2024, the FTC sued liquor distributor Southern Glazer's under the Act, asserting that they charged small stores more than they charged large chains. 0n January 17, 2025, the closing days of the Biden Administration, the FTC filed a lawsuit against PepsiCo. In May 2025, The FTC voted to dismiss the PepsiCo suit but the suit against Southern Glazer's is proceeding.\nIt has been argued that lax RPA enforcement since the 1980s has been a significant cause in the creation of rural and urban food deserts in the United States."}
{"id": "55820", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55820", "title": "Anti-Price Discrimination Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55821", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55821", "title": "Wheeler\u2013Lea Act", "text": "The Wheeler\u2013Lea Act of 1938 is a United States federal law that amended Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act to proscribe \"unfair or deceptive acts or practices\" as well as \"unfair methods of competition.\" It provided civil penalties for violations of Section 5 orders. It also added a clause to Section 5 that stated \"unfair or deceptive acts or practices in commerce are hereby declared unlawful\" to the Section 5 prohibition of unfair methods of competition in order to protect consumers as well as competition.\nUntil this amendment was passed, the Federal Trade Commission could only restrict practices that were unfair to competitors. This broadened the FTC's powers to include protection for consumers from false advertising practices.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55823", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55823", "title": "Lease-lend", "text": ""}
{"id": "55824", "revid": "1232657731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55824", "title": "Cash and carry (disambiguation)", "text": "Cash and carry is a type of sales operation within the wholesale sector\nCash and carry may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55826", "revid": "1162102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55826", "title": "Selective Service Act", "text": "Selective Service Act may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55827", "revid": "64853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55827", "title": "Thirteenth Amendment (disambiguation)", "text": "The Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was proclaimed in 1865 and abolished slavery and involuntary servitude.\nThirteenth Amendment may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55831", "revid": "20926649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55831", "title": "Lend Lease", "text": ""}
{"id": "55832", "revid": "7397521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55832", "title": "Lend-Lease", "text": "WWII program to provide U.S. allies with free armaments\nLend-Lease, formally the Lend-Lease Act and introduced as An Act to Promote the Defense of the United States (Pub. L.\u00a0, , 55\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, enacted ), was a policy under which the United States supplied the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, France, the Republic of China, and other Allied nations of the Second World War with food, oil, and materiel between 1941 and 1945. The aid was given free of charge on the basis that such help was essential for the defense of the United States.\nThe Lend-Lease Act was signed into law on March 11, 1941, and ended on September 20, 1945. A total of $50.1 billion (equivalent to $ in 2024 when accounting for inflation) worth of supplies was shipped, or 17% of the total war expenditures of the U.S. In all, $31.4 billion went to the United Kingdom, $11.3 billion to the Soviet Union, $3.2 billion to France, $1.6 billion to China, and the remaining $2.6 billion to other Allies. Roosevelt's top foreign policy advisor Harry Hopkins had effective control over Lend-Lease, making sure it was in alignment with Roosevelt's foreign policy goals.\nMateriel delivered under the act was supplied at no cost, to be used until returned or destroyed. In practice, most equipment was destroyed, although some hardware (such as ships) was returned after the war. Supplies that arrived after the termination date were sold to the United Kingdom at a large discount for \u00a31.075 billion, using long-term loans from the United States, which were finally repaid in 2006. Similarly, the Soviet Union repaid $722 million in 1971, with the remainder of the debt written off.\nReverse Lend-Lease to the United States totalled $7.8 billion. Of this, $6.8 billion came from the British and the Commonwealth. Canada also aided the United Kingdom and other Allies with the Billion Dollar Gift and Mutual Aid totalling $3.4 billion in supplies and services (equivalent to $61 billion in 2020).\nLend-Lease ended the United States' neutrality which had been enshrined in the Neutrality Acts of the 1930s. It was a decisive step away from non-interventionist policy and toward open support for the Allies. Lend-Lease's precise significance to Allied victory in World War II is debated. Khrushchev claimed that Stalin told him that Lend-Lease enabled the Soviet Union to defeat Germany.\nHistory.\nNon-interventionism and neutrality.\nThe 1930s began with one of the world's greatest economic depressions, and the later recession of 1937\u20131938 (although minor relative to the Great Depression) was otherwise also one of the worst of the 20th century. In 1934, following the Nye Committee hearings, as well as the publication of influential books such as \"Merchants of Death\", the United States Congress adopted several Neutrality Acts in the 1930s, motivated by non-interventionism\u2014following the aftermath of its costly involvement in World War I (the war debts were still not paid off), and seeking to ensure that the country would not become entangled in foreign conflicts again. The Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937 intended to keep the United States out of war by making it illegal for Americans to sell or transport arms or other war materials to warring nations, be they aggressors or defenders.\nCash and carry.\nIn 1939, however\u2014as Germany, Japan, and Italy pursued aggressive, militaristic policies\u2014President Roosevelt wanted more flexibility to help contain Axis aggression. He suggested amending the act to allow warring nations to purchase military goods, arms and munitions if they paid cash and bore the risks of transporting the goods on non-American ships, a policy that would favor Britain and France. Initially, this proposal failed, but after Germany and the Soviet Union invaded Poland in September, Congress passed the Neutrality Act of 1939 ending the munitions embargo on a \"cash and carry\" basis. The passage of the 1939 amendment to the previous Neutrality Acts marked the beginning of a congressional shift away from isolationism, making a first step toward interventionism.\nAfter the Fall of France during June 1940, the British Commonwealth and Empire were the only forces engaged in war against Germany and Italy, until the Italian invasion of Greece. Britain had been paying for its materiel with gold as part of the \"cash and carry\" program, as required by the U.S. Neutrality Acts of the 1930s, but by 1941 it had liquidated a large part of its overseas holdings and its gold reserves were becoming depleted in paying for materiel from the United States.\nDuring this same period, the U.S. government began to mobilize for total war, instituting the first-ever peacetime draft and a fivefold increase in the defense budget (from $2\u00a0billion to $10\u00a0billion). The Two-Ocean Navy Act of July 1940 set in motion a rapid expansion of the United States Navy. In the meantime, Great Britain was running out of liquid currency and asked not to be forced to sell off British assets. Hampered by public opinion and the Neutrality Acts, which forbade arms sales on credit or the lending of money to belligerent nations, Roosevelt eventually came up with the idea of \"lend\u2013lease\". As one Roosevelt biographer has characterized it: \"If there was no practical alternative, there was certainly no moral one either. Britain and the Commonwealth were carrying the battle for all civilization, and the overwhelming majority of Americans, led in the late election by their president, wished to help them.\" As the President himself put it, \"There can be no reasoning with incendiary bombs.\"\nIn September 1940, during the Battle of Britain the British government sent the Tizard Mission to the United States. The aim of the British Technical and Scientific Mission was to obtain the industrial resources to exploit the military potential of the research and development work completed by the UK up to the beginning of World War II, but that Britain itself could not exploit due to the immediate requirements of war-related production. The British shared technology included the cavity magnetron (key technology at the time for highly effective radar; the American historian James Phinney Baxter III later called \"the most valuable cargo ever brought to our shores\"), the design for the VT fuze, details of Frank Whittle's jet engine and the Frisch\u2013Peierls memorandum describing the feasibility of an atomic bomb. Though these may be considered the most significant, many other items were also transported, including designs for rockets, superchargers, gyroscopic gunsights, submarine detection devices, self-sealing fuel tanks and plastic explosives.\nOn December 7, 1940, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill pressed Roosevelt in a 15-page letter for American help. In his December 29, 1940 Fireside Chat radio broadcast, President Roosevelt proclaimed the United States would be the \"Arsenal of Democracy\" and proposed selling munitions to Britain and Canada. Isolationists were strongly opposed, warning it would result in American involvement with what was considered by most Americans as an essentially European conflict. In time, opinion shifted as increasing numbers of Americans began to consider the advantage of funding the British war against Germany, while staying free of the hostilities themselves. Propaganda showing the devastation of British cities during The Blitz, as well as popular depictions of Germans as savage also rallied public opinion to the Allies, especially after Germany conquered France.\nLend-Lease proposal.\nAfter a decade of neutrality, Roosevelt knew that the change to Allied support must be gradual, given the support for isolationism in the country. Originally, the American policy was to help the British but not join the war. During early February 1941, a Gallup poll revealed that 54% of Americans were in favor of giving aid to the British without qualifications of Lend-Lease. A further 15% were in favor of qualifications such as: \"If it doesn't get us into war\", or \"If the British can give us some security for what we give them\". Only 22% were unequivocally against the President's proposal. When poll participants were asked their party affiliation, the poll revealed a political divide: 69% of Democrats were unequivocally in favor of Lend-Lease, whereas only 38% of Republicans favored the bill without qualification. At least one poll spokesperson also noted that \"approximately twice as many Republicans\" gave \"qualified answers as ... Democrats\".\nOpposition to the Lend-Lease bill was strongest among isolationist Republicans in Congress, who feared the measure would be \"the longest single step this nation has yet taken toward direct involvement in the war abroad\". When the House of Representatives finally took a roll call vote on February 8, 1941, the 260 to 165 vote was largely along party lines. Democrats voted 236 to 25 in favor and Republicans 24 in favor and 135 against.\nThe vote in the Senate, which occurred on March 8, revealed a similar partisan difference: 49 Democrats (79 percent) voted \"aye\" with only 13 Democrats (21 percent) voting \"nay\". In contrast, 17 Republicans (63 percent) voted \"nay\" while 10 Senate Republicans (37 percent) sided with the Democrats to pass the bill.\nPresident Roosevelt signed the Lend-Lease bill into law on March 11, 1941. It permitted him to \"sell, transfer title to, exchange, lease, lend, or otherwise dispose of, to any such government [whose defense the President deems vital to the defense of the United States] any defense article.\" In April, this policy was extended to China, and in October to the Soviet Union, which was attacked by Germany on 22 June 1941. Roosevelt approved $1\u00a0billion in Lend-Lease aid to Britain at the end of October 1941.\nThis followed the 1940 Destroyers for Bases Agreement, whereby 50 US Navy destroyers were transferred to the Royal Navy and the Royal Canadian Navy in exchange for basing rights in the Caribbean. Churchill also granted the US base rights in Bermuda and Newfoundland for free; this act allowed their British garrison to be redeployed to more crucial theatres. In 1944, Britain transferred several of the US-made destroyers to the USSR.\nAfter the attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States entering the war in December 1941, foreign policy was rarely discussed by Congress, and there was very little demand to cut Lend-Lease spending. In spring 1944, the House passed a bill to renew the Lend-Lease program by a vote of 334 to 21. The Senate passed it by a vote of 63 to 1.\nMultilateral Allied support.\nIn February 1942, the U.S. and Britain signed the Anglo-American Mutual Aid Agreement as part of a greater multilateral system, developed by the Allies during the war, to provide each other with goods, services, and mutual aid in the widest sense, without charging commercial payments.\nScale, value and economics.\nA total of $50.1\u00a0billion (equivalent to $ in 2024) was involved, or 17% of the total war expenditures of the U.S. Most, $31.4\u00a0billion ($), went to Britain and its empire. Other recipients were led by $11.3\u00a0billion ($) to the Soviet Union, $3.2\u00a0billion ($) to France, $1.6\u00a0billion ($) to China, and the remaining $2.6\u00a0billion to the other Allies. Reverse Lend-Lease policies comprised services such as rent on bases used by the U.S., and totaled $7.8\u00a0billion; of this, $6.8\u00a0billion came from the British and the Commonwealth, mostly Australia and India.\nThe terms of the agreement provided that the U.S. materiel was to be used until returned or destroyed. In practice, very little equipment was in usable shape for peacetime uses. Supplies that arrived after the termination date were sold to Britain at a large discount for \u00a31.075\u00a0billion, using long-term loans from the United States. Canada was not a direct recipient of Lend-Lease aid. To address balance of payment issues between the US and Canada, and to prevent the US monopolizing British orders, the Hyde Park Declaration of 20 April 1941 made weapons and components manufactured in Canada for Britain eligible for Lend-Lease financing as if they had been manufactured in the US. Canada operated a program similar to Lend-Lease called Mutual Aid that sent a loan of C$1\u00a0billion (equivalent to C$\u00a0billion in 2023) and C$3.4\u00a0billion (C$\u00a0billion) in supplies and services to Britain and other Allies.\nAdministration.\nRoosevelt made sure that Lend-Lease policies were supportive of his foreign policy goals by putting his top aide Harry Hopkins in effective control of the program. In terms of administration, the president established the Office of Lend-Lease Administration during 1941, headed by steel executive Edward R. Stettinius. In September 1943, he was promoted to Undersecretary of State, and Leo Crowley became director of the Foreign Economic Administration, which was given responsibility for Lend-Lease.\nLend-Lease aid to the USSR was nominally managed by Stettinius. Roosevelt's Soviet Protocol Committee was dominated by Harry Hopkins and General John York, who were totally sympathetic to the provision of \"unconditional aid\". Few Americans objected to Soviet aid until 1943.\nThe program was gradually terminated after V-E Day. In April 1945, Congress voted that it should not be used for post-conflict purposes, and in August 1945, after Japan surrendered, the program was ended.\nSignificance of Lend-Lease.\nEven after the United States forces in Europe and the Pacific began to attain full strength during 1943\u20131944, Lend-Lease continued. Most remaining Allies were largely self-sufficient in frontline equipment (such as tanks and fighter aircraft) by this time\u00a0\u2013 though arms shipments continued\u00a0\u2013 but Lend-Lease logistical supplies (including motor vehicles and railroad equipment) remained of enormous assistance.\nWWII was the first major war in which whole formations were routinely motorized; soldiers were supported with large numbers of all kinds of vehicles, not just for direct combat roles, but for transport and logistics as well. In spite of this, belligerent powers massively decreased production of non-lethal materiel to focus on weapons production; this inevitably produced shortages of products required for industrial or logistical uses, particularly unarmored vehicles. Thus, the Allies were almost totally reliant on American industrial production for unarmored vehicles, including ones purpose-built for military use.\nFor example, the USSR was very dependent on rail transport, and starting during the latter half of the 1920s but accelerating during the 1930s, hundreds of foreign industrial giants such as Ford were commissioned to construct modern dual-purpose factories in the USSR, 16 alone within a week of May 31, 1929. However, with the outbreak of war these plants switched from civilian to military production, and locomotive production dropped dramatically. Just 446 locomotives were produced during the war, with only 92 of those being built between 1942 and 1945. In total, 92.7% of the wartime procurement of railroad equipment by the USSR came from Lend-Lease, including 1,911 locomotives and 11,225 railcars. Trucks were also vital; by 1945, nearly a third of the trucks used by the Red Army were U.S.-built. Trucks such as the Dodge &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-ton and Studebaker &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442-ton were easily the best trucks available in their class on either side on the Eastern Front. American shipments of telephone cable, aluminum, canned rations and clothing were also critical.\nLend-Lease also supplied significant amounts of weapons and ammunition. The Soviet air force received 18,200 aircraft, which amounted to about 30 percent of Soviet wartime fighter and bomber production over the course of the war. Most tank units were Soviet-built models but about 7,000 Lend-Lease tanks (plus more than 5,000 British tanks) were used by the Red Army, eight percent of war-time production.\nA critical aspect of Lend-Lease was the supply of food. The invasion had cost the USSR a huge amount of its agricultural base; during the initial Axis offensive of 1941\u201342, the total sown area of the USSR fell by 41.9% and the number of collective and state farms by 40%. The Soviets lost a substantial number of draft and farm animals as they were not able to relocate all the animals in an area before it was captured and of those areas in which the Axis forces would occupy, the Soviets had lost 7 million of out of 11.6 million horses, 17 million out of 31 million cows, 20 million of 23.6 million pigs and 27 million out of 43 million sheep and goats. Tens of thousands of agricultural machines, such as tractors and threshers, were destroyed or captured. Agriculture also suffered a loss of labour; between 1941 and 1945, 19.5 million working-age men had to leave their farms to work in the military and industry. Agricultural issues were also compounded when the Soviets were on the offensive, as areas liberated from the Axis had been devastated and contained millions of people who needed to be fed. Lend-Lease thus provided a massive quantity of foodstuffs and agricultural products.\nAccording to the Russian historian Boris Vadimovich Sokolov, Lend-Lease had a crucial role in winning the war:\nOn the whole the following conclusion can be drawn: that without these Western shipments under Lend-Lease the Soviet Union not only would not have been able to win the Great Patriotic War, it would not have been able even to oppose the German invaders, since it could not itself produce sufficient quantities of arms and military equipment or adequate supplies of fuel and ammunition. The Soviet authorities were well aware of this dependency on Lend-Lease. Thus, Stalin told Harry Hopkins [FDR's emissary to Moscow in July 1941] that the U.S.S.R. could not match Germany's might as an occupier of Europe and its resources.\nNikita Khrushchev, having served as a military commissar and intermediary between Stalin and his generals during the war, addressed directly the significance of Lend-Lease aid in his memoirs:\nI would like to express my candid opinion about Stalin's views on whether the Red Army and the Soviet Union could have coped with Nazi Germany and survived the war without aid from the United States and Britain. First, I would like to tell about some remarks Stalin made and repeated several times when we were \"discussing freely\" among ourselves. He stated bluntly that if the United States had not helped us, we would not have won the war. If we had had to fight Nazi Germany one on one, we could not have stood up against Germany's pressure, and we would have lost the war. No one ever discussed this subject officially, and I don't think Stalin left any written evidence of his opinion, but I will state here that several times in conversations with me he noted that these were the actual circumstances. He never made a special point of holding a conversation on the subject, but when we were engaged in some kind of relaxed conversation, going over international questions of the past and present, and when we would return to the subject of the path we had traveled during the war, that is what he said. When I listened to his remarks, I was fully in agreement with him, and today I am even more so.\nIn a confidential interview with the wartime correspondent Konstantin Simonov, the Soviet Marshal Georgy Zhukov was secretly recorded by the KGB saying:\nToday [1963] some say the Allies didn't really help us ... But listen, one cannot deny that the Americans shipped over to us material without which we could not have equipped our armies held in reserve or been able to continue the war. We did not have explosives, gunpowder. There was nothing to load rifle cartridges with. The Americans really helped us out with gunpowder and explosives. And how much sheet steel they drove to us! Would we have been able to quickly establish the production of tanks if it had not been for American steel aid? And now they imagine that we had all this in abundance.\nDavid Glantz, an American military historian known for his books on the Eastern front, offers a somewhat different view, but still emphasized the significance of Lend-Lease:\nAlthough Soviet accounts have routinely belittled the significance of Lend-Lease in the sustainment of the Soviet war effort, the overall importance of the assistance cannot be understated. Lend-Lease aid did not arrive in sufficient quantities to make the difference between defeat and victory in 1941\u20131942; that achievement must be attributed solely to the Soviet people and to the iron nerve of Stalin, Zhukov, Shaposhnikov, Vasilevsky, and their subordinates. As the war continued, however, the United States and Great Britain provided many of the implements of war and strategic raw materials necessary for Soviet victory. Without Lend-Lease food, clothing, and raw materials (especially metals), the Soviet economy would have been even more heavily burdened by the war effort. Perhaps most directly, without Lend-Lease trucks, rail engines, and railroad cars, every Soviet offensive would have stalled at an earlier stage, outrunning its logistical tail in a matter of days. In turn, this would have allowed the German commanders to escape at least some encirclements, while forcing the Red Army to prepare and conduct many more deliberate penetration attacks in order to advance the same distance. Left to their own devices, Stalin and his commanders might have taken twelve to eighteen months longer to finish off the Wehrmacht; the ultimate result would probably have been the same, except that Soviet soldiers could have waded at France's Atlantic beaches.\nReturning goods after the war.\nRoosevelt, eager to ensure public consent for this controversial plan, explained to the public and the press that his plan was comparable to lending a garden hose to a neighbor whose house is on fire. \"What do I do in such a crisis?\" the president asked at a press conference. \"I don't say ... 'Neighbor, my garden hose cost me $15; you have to pay me $15 for it' ... I don't want $15\u2014I want my garden hose back after the fire is over.\" To which Senator Robert Taft (R-Ohio), responded: \"Lending war equipment is a good deal like lending chewing gum\u2014you certainly don't want the same gum back.\"\nIn practice, very little was returned except for a few unarmed transport ships. Surplus military equipment was of no value in peacetime. The Lend-Lease agreements with 30 countries provided for repayment not in terms of money or returned goods, but in \"joint action directed towards the creation of a liberalized international economic order in the postwar world.\" That is, the U.S. would be \"repaid\" when the recipient fought the common enemy and joined the world trade and diplomatic agencies, such as the United Nations.\nDeliveries to the Soviet Union.\nUnited States.\nIf Germany defeated the Soviet Union, the most significant front in Europe would be closed. Roosevelt believed that if the Soviets were defeated the Allies would be far more likely to lose. Roosevelt concluded that the United States needed to help the Soviets fight against the Germans. Because of its utmost importance, Roosevelt directed his subordinates to emphasis shipments of aid to the Soviet Union above most other uses of available shipping. The Soviet Ambassador, Maxim Litvinov, significantly contributed to the Lend-Lease agreement of 1941. In the fall of 1941, the US Army set up the United States Military Mission to Moscow to help the flow of Lend-Lease material into Russia. In 1943, Major General John R. Deane was made commander of the Moscow Mission and to brief Joseph Stalin on Operation Overlord. American deliveries to the Soviet Union can be divided into the following phases:\nDelivery was via the Arctic Convoys, the Persian Corridor, and the Pacific Route.\nThe Arctic route was the shortest and most direct route for Lend-Lease aid to the USSR, though it was also the most dangerous as it involved sailing past German-occupied Norway. Some 3,964,000 tons of goods were shipped by the Arctic route; 7% was lost, while 93% arrived safely.\nThe Persian Corridor was the longest route, and was not fully operational until mid-1942. Thereafter it saw the passage of 4,160,000 tons of goods, 27% of the total.\nThe Pacific Route opened in August 1941, but was affected by the start of hostilities between Japan and the U.S.; after December 1941, only Soviet ships could be used, and, as Japan and the USSR observed a strict neutrality towards each other, only non-military goods could be transported. Nevertheless, some 8,244,000 tons of goods went by this route, 50% of the total.\nIn total, the U.S. deliveries to the USSR through Lend-Lease amounted to $11 billion in materials (equivalent to $ in 2024): over 400,000 jeeps and trucks; 12,000 armored vehicles (including 7,000 tanks, about 1,386 of which were M3 Lees and 4,102 M4 Shermans); 11,400 aircraft (of which 4,719 were Bell P-39 Airacobras, 3,414 were Douglas A-20 Havocs and 2,397 were Bell P-63 Kingcobras) and 1.75\u00a0million tons of food.\nRoughly 17.5\u00a0million tons of military equipment, vehicles, industrial supplies, and food were shipped from the Western Hemisphere to the USSR, 94% coming from the US. For comparison, a total of 22 million tons landed in Europe to supply American forces from January 1942 to May 1945. It has been estimated that American deliveries to the USSR through the Persian Corridor alone were sufficient, by US Army standards, to maintain sixty combat divisions in the line.\nIn the first weeks and months of the German\u2013Soviet war, the USSR lost a huge number of military aircraft. Some of them were lost at airfields in the first days of the fighting, some were abandoned for various reasons, and some were lost in air battles. The losses of Soviet aviation in 1941 is one of the most controversial topics for military historians and publicists. The situation was aggravated by the loss of many aircraft factories that produced aircraft and components for them, which remained in the territory occupied by the Germans. Some of the factories were hastily evacuated to the east of the country, but it took time to resume production and reach its maximum capacity. In December 1941, all aircraft factories of the Soviet Union produced only 600 aircraft of all types. This was the reason that the supply of aircraft, primarily fighters and bombers, became the main topic in the negotiations between the top leadership of the USSR, Great Britain and the United States. The vast majority of the total number of aircraft received by the USSR under the Lend-Lease program was made up of British Spitfire and Hurricane fighters, American P-39 Airacobra, P-40 fighters, known in Russia under the names \"Tomahawk\" and \"Kittyhawk\", P-63 Kingcobra, American bombers A-20 Havoc, B-25 Mitchell. A significant amount of C-47 Skytrain transport aircraft and PBY Catalina flying boats were also delivered. For the needs of the Soviet Navy, 2,141 aircraft were delivered to the USSR. Not all of the delivered aircraft could be fully called modern models. But even those that could be called obsolete (the English Hurricane and the American Tomahawk) were more advanced and superior in most characteristics than the I-153 and I-16 aircraft that made up the basis of Soviet fighter aviation in the most difficult first months of the war. The superiority in high-altitude characteristics of American and British aircraft, powerful armament and the provision of communications ensured their use in the air defense forces \u2013 out of 10 thousand aircraft received by the USSR during the war, 7 thousand were from received via Lend-Lease.\nFrom October 1, 1941, to May 31, 1945, the United States delivered to the Soviet Union 427,284 trucks, 13,303 combat vehicles, 35,170 motorcycles, 2,328 ordnance service vehicles, 2,670,371 tons of petroleum products (gasoline and oil) or 57.8 percent of the aviation fuel including nearly 90 percent of high-octane fuel used, 4,478,116 tons of foodstuffs (canned meats, sugar, flour, salt, etc.), 1,911 steam locomotives, 66 diesel locomotives, 9,920 flat cars, 1,000 dump cars, 120 tank cars, and 35 heavy machinery cars. Ordnance goods (ammunition, artillery shells, mines, assorted explosives) provided amounted to 53 percent of total domestic consumption. One item typical of many was a tire plant that was lifted bodily from the Ford Company's River Rouge Plant and transferred to the USSR. The 1947 money value of the supplies and services amounted to about $11.3 billion. Unlike the other allies, the Soviets believed these supplies to be gifts to their war effort and even items that were to be returned to the US after the war, such as ships, were sent back as completely stripped hulls. \nGreat Britain.\nOn 12 July 1941, within weeks of the German invasion of the USSR, the Anglo-Soviet Agreement was signed and the first British aid convoy set off along the dangerous Arctic Sea route to Murmansk, arriving in September. It carried 40 Hawker Hurricanes along with 550 mechanics and pilots of No. 151 Wing in Operation Benedict, to provide air defence of the port and to train Soviet pilots. The convoy was the first of many convoys to Murmansk and Arkhangelsk in what became known as the Arctic convoys, the returning ships carried the gold that the USSR was using to pay the US.\nBy the end of 1941, early shipments of Matilda, Valentine and Tetrarch tanks represented only 6.5% of total Soviet tank production but over 25% of medium and heavy tanks produced for the Red Army. The British tanks first saw action with the 138 Independent Tank Battalion in the Volga Reservoir on November 20, 1941. Lend-Lease tanks constituted 30 to 40 percent of heavy and medium tank strength before Moscow at the beginning of December 1941.\nSignificant numbers of British Churchill, Matilda and Valentine tanks were shipped to the USSR.\nBetween June 1941 and May 1945, Britain delivered to the USSR:\nIn total 4\u00a0million tonnes of war material including food and medical supplies were delivered. The munitions totaled \u00a3308m (not including naval munitions supplied), the food and raw materials totaled \u00a3120m in 1946 index. In accordance with the Anglo-Soviet Military Supplies Agreement of June 27, 1942, military aid sent from Britain to the Soviet Union during the war was entirely free of charge.\nSome of the 3,000 Hurricanes given to Soviets were broken up &amp; buried after the war to avoid paying US back under the Lend-Lease legislation. In 2023 eight broken up planes were found buried together in a forest south of Kyiv and were excavated in an archaeological dig by the State Aviation Museum of Ukraine.\nReverse Lend-Lease.\n\"Reverse Lend-Lease\" was the supply of equipment and services to the United States. Nearly $8\u00a0billion (equivalent to $124\u00a0billion today) worth of war material was provided to U.S. forces by its allies, 90% of this sum coming from the British Empire. Reciprocal contributions included the Austin K2/Y military ambulance, British aviation spark plugs used in B-17 Flying Fortresses, Canadian-made Fairmile launches used in anti-submarine warfare, Mosquito photo-reconnaissance aircraft, and Indian petroleum products. Australia and New Zealand supplied the bulk of foodstuffs to United States forces in the South Pacific.\nThough diminutive in comparison, the Soviet Union supplied the United States with chrome and manganese ore, platinum, gold and wood.\nIn a November 1943 report to Congress, President Roosevelt said of Allied participation in reverse Lend-Lease:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhile in April 1944 Congress were briefed by the Foreign Economic Administrator, Leo T Crowley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Just as the RAF's operations against Germany and the invasion coasts would not have been possible on their present scale without lend-lease so the United States Eighth and Ninth air forces daylight missions from Britain would not have been possible without reverse lend-lease. Our Fortresses and Liberators take off from huge air bases built, equipped and serviced under reverse lend-lease at a cost to them of hundreds of millions of dollars. Many of our pilots fly Spitfires built in England, many more are flying American fighter planes powered by British Rolls-Royce Merlin engines, turned over to us by the British. And many of the supplies needed by our Air Force are procured for us without cost by reverse lend-lease. In fact our armed forces in Britain, ground as well as air, receive as reverse lend-lease, with no payment by us, one third of all the supplies and equipment they currently require, Britain furnishes 90% of their medical supplies and in spite of her food shortage, 20% of their food.\nIn 1945\u201346, the value of Reciprocal Aid from New Zealand exceeded that of Lend-Lease, though in 1942\u201343, the value of Lend-Lease to New Zealand was much more than that of Reciprocal Aid. Britain also supplied extensive material assistance to American forces stationed in Europe, for example the USAAF was supplied with hundreds of Spitfire Mk V and Mk VIII fighter aircraft.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The cooperation that was built up with Canada during the war was an amalgam compounded of diverse elements of which the air and land routes to Alaska, the Canol project, and the CRYSTAL and CRIMSON activities were the most costly in point of effort and funds expended.\n... The total of defense materials and services that Canada received through lend-lease channels amounted in value to approximately $419,500,000.\n... Some idea of the scope of economic collaboration can be had from the fact that from the beginning of 1942 through 1945 Canada, on her part, furnished the United States with $1,000,000,000 to $1,250,000,000 in defense materials and services.\n... Although most of the actual construction of joint defense facilities, except the Alaska Highway and the Canol project, had been carried out by Canada, most of the original cost was borne by the United States. The agreement was that all temporary construction for the use of American forces and all permanent construction required by the United States forces beyond Canadian requirements would be paid for by the United States, and that the cost of all other construction of permanent value would be met by Canada. Although it was not entirely reasonable that Canada should pay for any construction that the Canadian Government considered unnecessary or that did not conform to Canadian requirements, nevertheless considerations of self-respect and national sovereignty led the Canadian Government to suggest a new financial agreement.\n... The total amount that Canada agreed to pay under the new arrangement came to about $76,800,000, which was some $13,870,000 less than the United States had spent on the facilities.\nRepayment.\nCongress had not authorized the gift of supplies delivered after the cutoff date, so the U.S. charged for them, usually at a 90% discount. Large quantities of undelivered goods were in Britain or in transit when Lend-Lease was ended on September 2, 1945, following the surrender of Japan. Britain wished to retain some of this equipment in the immediate post-war period. In 1946, the post-war Anglo-American loan further indebted Britain to the United States. Lend-Lease items retained were sold to Britain at 10% of nominal value, giving an initial loan value of \u00a31.075\u00a0billion for the Lend-Lease portion of the post-war loans. Payment was to be stretched out over 50 annual payments, starting in 1951 and with five years of deferred payments, at 2% interest. During the war, the US lent Britain of silver. In 1946, Britain switched its coinage from silver to cupronickel as the price of silver had risen by 250% during the war due to its market scarcity, while the price of nickel matched the stamped coinage value; this recovered 20m ounces of silver per year for five years as the old coinage was progressively retired, generating a \u00a330m net financial surplus after the US silver loan had been repaid.\nThe final payment of $83.3\u00a0million (\u00a342.5\u00a0million), due on December 31, 2006 (repayment having been deferred in the allowed five years and during a sixth year not allowed), was made by Britain on December 29, 2006 (the last working day of the year). After this final payment, Ed Balls, Britain's Economic Secretary to the Treasury, formally issued thanks to the U.S. for its wartime support.\nWhile repayment of the interest-free loans was required after the end of the war under the act, in practice the U.S. did not expect to be repaid by the USSR after the war. The U.S. received $2 million in reverse Lend-Lease from the USSR. This was mostly in the form of landing, servicing, and refueling of transport aircraft; some industrial machinery and rare minerals were sent to the U.S. The U.S. asked for $1.3 billion at the cessation of hostilities to settle the debt, but was only offered $170 million by the USSR. The dispute remained unresolved until 1972, when the U.S. accepted an offer from the USSR to repay $722 million linked to grain shipments from the U.S., representing 25% of the initial debt with inflation taken into account, with the remainder being written off. During the war the USSR provided an unknown number of shipments of rare minerals to the US Treasury as a form of cashless repayment of Lend-Lease. This was agreed upon before the signing of the first protocol on October 1, 1941, and extension of credit. Some of these shipments were intercepted by the Germans. In May 1942, was sunk while carrying 465 ingots (4.5 tonnes) of Soviet gold intended for the U.S. Treasury. Of these ingots, 431 were salvaged in 1981 and a further 29 in 1986, leaving five that are not economically feasible to salvage. In June 1942, was sunk en route from Halifax to New York, allegedly with Soviet platinum, gold, and diamonds aboard; the wreck was discovered in 2008. However, none of this cargo has been salvaged, and no documentation of its treasure has been produced.\nLegacy.\nIn 2022\u2014citing the precedent set by the 1941 Lend-Lease program (and its extensions) for U.S. World War II aid to Britain and others in Europe\u2014the U.S. Congress passed, and President Joe Biden signed, the Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act of 2022, to supply military, economic and humanitarian aid to Ukraine in its defense against the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55833", "revid": "45738846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55833", "title": "Office of Price Administration", "text": "Former US federal government agency\nThe Office of Price Administration (OPA) was established within the Office for Emergency Management of the United States government by Executive Order 8875 on August 28, 1941. The functions of the OPA were originally to control money (price controls) and rents after the outbreak of World War II.\nHistory.\nPresident Franklin D. Roosevelt inaugurated the Council of National Defense Advisory Commission on May 29, 1940, to include Price Stabilization and Consumer Protection Divisions. Both divisions merged to become the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply (OPACS) within the Office for Emergency Management by Executive Order 8734, on April 11, 1941. Civil supply functions were transferred to the Office of Production Management.\nIt became an independent agency under the Emergency Price Control Act, January 30, 1942. The OPA had the power to place ceilings on all prices except agricultural commodities, and to ration scarce supplies of other items, including tires, automobiles, shoes, nylon, sugar, gasoline, fuel oil, coffee, meats and processed foods. At the peak, almost 90% of retail food prices were frozen. It could also authorize subsidies for production of some of those commodities.\nDissolution.\nAs early as 1944, in its annual debate about price control extension, Congress discussed limiting the power of the OPA as World War II drew to a close and the necessity of price controls was called into question. While some argued for the continuation of price controls to hold post war inflation in check, there was widespread support among conservatives and businessmen for the rapid deregulation of the economy as it reconverted to a civilian footing. Groups such as the National Association of Manufacturers and the National Retail Dry Good Association sought to guarantee companies a minimum amount of profits, thereby effectively limiting the price control measures. However, the OPA still enjoyed widespread popular support and the agency was renewed in 1944 and again in 1945. While these renewals were considerable successes for many consumer advocacy groups, they also marked the height of the OPA, from which the agency's power and popularity would decline in the next two years.\nBy June 1946, significant opposition by NAM and NRDA had been mounted to sway Congress, which, only two days before the existing legislation was set to expire, passed a bill that would have left the OPA a much-weakened version of its past self. President Harry S. Truman vetoed this bill in hopes of forcing Congress to create a stronger one, but as the month of June came to an end, the OPA shut down, and its price and rent controls went with it. The result was a sharp jump in prices, with food increasing by 14 percent and the cost of overall living rising by 6 percent, an equivalent to more than 100 percent per year. Consumers all over the nation turned out in varying numbers to protest these increases, with labor unions forming a major part of the participants.\nBy the end of July, Congress had reversed course and passed legislation reinstating the OPA and price controls, though this bill was no stronger than what President Truman had vetoed earlier. This much-weakened version of the OPA did not last long, as meat packers launched their own form of protest against the agency, slowing slaughtering rates and withholding meat from market. The resulting widespread shortages did much to damage the public faith in the OPA, which was now seen as ineffective, and the Democrat-led Congress. When faced with the choices of higher prices or no meat, the consumers chose the latter. Although President Truman ended price controls on meat, on October 14, just two weeks before the election, in a rejection of price controls and as a sign of the changing attitude of the American public towards a control-free re-conversion, many Democratic incumbents were defeated, and Republicans gained control of Congress. Following this defeat, Truman lifted almost all price and wage controls and, while the OPA was authorized to exist through June 30, 1947, its range of tasks and ability to effectively regulate prices was curtailed severely, being reduced to rent control and some price control over a very limited number of goods. Most functions of the OPA were transferred to the newly established Office of Temporary Controls (OTC) by Executive Order 9809, December 12, 1946. The Financial Reporting Division was transferred to the Federal Trade Commission. By the end of December 1946, many of OPA's local offices and price boards were closed, and the OPA did not survive until its authorized June 30 extension.\nThe OPA was abolished effective May 29, 1947 by the General Liquidation Order, issued March 14, 1947, by the OPA Administrator. Some of its functions were taken up by successor agencies:\nFamous employees include economist John Kenneth Galbraith, legal scholar William Prosser, President Richard Nixon, and law professor John Honnold.\nThe OPA is featured, in fictionalized form as the Bureau of Price Regulation, in Rex Stout's Nero Wolfe mystery novel \"The Silent Speaker\".\nThe OPA unsuccessfully tried to revoke the car dealer license of unorthodox businessman Madman Muntz for violating used car regulations, subject to price control. Muntz was acquitted in Los Angeles Superior Court on 1 August 1945.\nDuring the Korean War, similar functions were performed by the Office of Price Stabilization (OPS).\nWomen and the OPA.\nThe success of the OPA\u2019s price controls and rationing policies depended on the support of women who acted as the main shoppers of their households, especially during wartime. Local community organizations, governments, and OPA boards held educational seminars aimed at women, targeted women to join local price and rationing boards, and recruited women for volunteer programs. Many women led local volunteer War Price and Rationing Boards that ensured adherence to stabilization policies through check-ins with stores to report businesses breaking the rules. Women involved with the OPA largely fell into two broad categories: those who were part of already organized groups, such as labor unions, women\u2019s groups, and consumer groups, among others, often with agendas that aligned with OPA\u2019s goals of price stabilization; and women not already part of organized groups, who came from diverse backgrounds. They used the OPA as a legally established and legitimate framework for organizing themselves.\nThe OPA\u2019s enlistment of women to ensure that local businesses were complying with federal policies extended the public sphere into the private sphere and the effective growth of \u201cstate supervision.\u201d This resulted in a pseudo-militant attitude toward regulation and made it more difficult for politicians to curb the power of the OPA.\nThe OPA worked with consumer activists in a \u201cmutually empowering\u201d and mutually reliant fashion to ensure the effectiveness of its policies and activists\u2019 interests. Thus, a large swathe of consumer activists helped to ensure that businesses were compliant with its policies. Widespread support of the OPA came from the belief that the agency could help establish postwar prosperity.\nAfrican Americans and the OPA.\nBlack consumer activists also were among those who supported the OPA, which gave them support from the federal government in fighting market discrimination.\nThe OPA had a base of consumer support that included different socioeconomic classes and racial groups who supported the agency because of their belief it would bring about a postwar vision of \u201cbroad popular participation and consumer rights.\" The OPA worked to defend consumers from exploitation by businesses while also acting as a space for citizens to become involved in politics.\nOPA points.\nOPA points are small vulcanized fibre red and blue ration tokens issued during World War II to make change for ration coupons. Approximately 1.1 billion red and 0.9 billion blue were produced, and even though many were collected and destroyed after the war, they are still quite common today. The red OPA points are a bit more common than the blue. Each token has two letters on it, and some people collect them by letter combination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55834", "revid": "8719036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55834", "title": "Presidential Succession Act", "text": "Law regarding the order of succession to United States president\nThe United States Presidential Succession Act is a federal statute establishing the presidential line of succession. of the United States Constitution authorizes Congress to enact such a statute:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Congress has enacted a Presidential Succession Act on three occasions: 1792 (1\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://), 1886 (24\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://), and 1947 (61\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://). The 1947 Act was last revised in 2006.\nAlthough none of these succession acts have ever been invoked, an invocation was a distinct possibility on several occasions. However, the future likelihood that a person in the line of succession beyond the vice president will be called upon under normal circumstances to be acting president has diminished greatly due to the Twenty-fifth Amendment's provision for filling vice presidential vacancies.\nPresidential Succession Act of 1792.\nArticle II, Section 1, Clause 6 of the Constitution authorizes Congress to declare who should act as president if both the president and vice president died or were otherwise unavailable to serve during their terms of office. Legislation to establish such a line of succession was introduced in December 1790 in the United States House of Representatives, in the 1st Congress. When brought up for discussion the following month, the president pro tempore of the United States Senate and the speaker of the House of Representatives were proposed; the United States secretary of state and the chief justice of the United States were as well. Lawmakers failed to reach consensus on who should be the statutory successor. Naming the secretary of state was unacceptable to most Federalists, as they did not want the office's then-occupant, Thomas Jefferson, the leader of the growing anti-administration opposition that would become the Democratic-Republican Party, placed so close to the presidency. Constitutional and policy objections were raised to naming the president pro tempore of the Senate or the speaker of the House, as it was assumed the individual would retain their office and seat in Congress while temporarily performing duties of the presidency; similar separation of powers concerns were also raised regarding the chief justice.\nThe matter was raised again when the 2nd Congress convened later in 1791. On November 30, the Senate approved legislation titled \"An act relative to the election of a President and Vice President of the United States, and declaring the officer who shall act as President in case of vacancies in the offices both of President and Vice President\", which was sent to the House for concurrence. It contained a provision naming the president pro tempore of the Senate, or, if that office were vacant, the speaker of the House as acting president if a vacancy arose in both the presidency and vice presidency. Various representatives, including a number of the Constitution's framers, criticized the arrangement as being contrary to their intent. As a result, after a contentious debate, on February 15, 1792, the House struck out the president pro tempore and speaker and inserted the secretary of state in their place. The Senate rejected the House change a few days later, and the House relented. The bill became law on March 1, 1792, with the signature of President George Washington.\nThe Presidential Succession Act of 1792 (\u00a0), sections 9 and 10 of a larger act regarding the election of the president and vice president, provided that the president pro tempore of the Senate would be first in line for the presidency should the offices of the president and the vice president both be vacant. The speaker of the House was second in line. Section 9 provided that the statutory successor would serve in an acting capacity until a new president could be elected. If such a double vacancy occurred, Section 10 directed the secretary of state to notify the governor of each state of the vacancies and of the special election to fill them. This special election would take place no fewer than two months later. The persons elected president and vice president in such a special election would have served a full four-year term beginning on March 4 of the next year; no such election ever took place.\nPotential implementation.\nWhile the succession provisions of the 1792 Act were never invoked, there were ten instances when the vice presidency was vacant:\nIn each case, had the incumbent president died, resigned, been removed from office or been disabled during one of these vice presidential vacancies, the president pro tempore of the Senate would have become the acting president. Such a double vacancy nearly occurred on three occasions:\nAs a consequence of the sometimes lengthy vacancies in the office of vice president, the person serving as president pro tempore of the Senate garnered heightened importance, for although he did not assume the vice presidency, he was then next in line for the presidency. Several who served during these vacancies were referred to informally as \"Acting Vice President\".\nPresidential Succession Act of 1886.\nThe death of President James A. Garfield on September 19, 1881\u2014after his lengthy incapacity following an assassination attempt\u2014resulted in Vice President Chester A. Arthur ascending to the presidency. Upon Arthur becoming president, the offices of vice president, president pro tempore of the Senate, and speaker of the House of Representatives were vacant.\nHowever, a new president pro tempore of the Senate was named on October 10, 1881, and a new speaker of the House of Representatives was named in December 1881. \nIn 1884, Grover Cleveland was elected president, with Thomas A. Hendricks being elected vice president. Hendricks' death in November 1885, just eight months into his term, once again left no direct successor, which forced Congress to address the inadequacies of the 1792 Succession Act.\nA bill to transfer the succession from congressional officers to members of the Cabinet was introduced in the Senate by George Hoar in 1882. It was passed by the Senate the following year, but failed in the House. Hoar laid out several reasons why the succession statute needed to be changed: among them, that the four-year term of a president elected in a special election might be out of sync with the congressional election cycle, resulting in \"confusion and trouble\". He also pointed out the negative constitutional and practical implications of having the president pro tempore and the speaker in the line of succession. To buttress this argument, he pointed out that since the federal government began operations 96 years earlier in 1789, six secretaries of state had gone on to be elected president, serving in that office for 36 of those 96 years. Reintroduced shortly after the death of Vice President Hendricks, Senator Hoar's bill was passed by the Senate after vigorous debate, in December 1885, and by the House one month later. It became law on January 19, 1886, with President Cleveland's signature.\nThe Presidential Succession Act of 1886 (\u00a0) substituted the Cabinet secretaries\u2014listed in the order in which their department was created\u2014for the President pro tempore and Speaker in the line of succession. It provided that in case of the removal, death, resignation or inability of both the President and Vice President, such officer would \"act as President until the disability of the President or Vice-President is removed or a President shall be elected.\"\nIt mandated that if Congress were not then in session nor due to meet within twenty days, the acting president was to call a special session of Congress, giving no less than twenty days' notice. It also stipulated that for a member of the Cabinet to act as president, he had to have been appointed by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and be eligible to the office of president, and not under impeachment. This last provision also repealed the 1792 Act's provision for a double-vacancy special election.\nPotential implementation.\nWhile it never became necessary to invoke the 1886 Act, the vice presidency was vacant at the time of its adoption, and would become vacant five more times during the 61 years that it was in effect:\nHad the president died, resigned, been removed from office or been disabled during one of these vacancies, the secretary of state would have become the acting president. Although such circumstances never arose, President Woodrow Wilson apparently drew up a plan (given the turmoil of World War I) whereby, if his Republican opponent Charles Evans Hughes had won the 1916 election, then Wilson would have dismissed his secretary of state, Robert Lansing, and recess-appointed Hughes to the post before Wilson and Vice President Thomas R. Marshall both resigned, thus allowing President-elect Hughes to serve as acting president until his March 4, 1917 inauguration. Wilson's narrow victory over Hughes rendered the plan moot.\nAlso of note is that 1940 Republican presidential nominee Wendell Willkie and vice presidential nominee Charles L. McNary both died in 1944 (October 8, and February 25, respectively), the first (and as of 2023[ [update]] only) time both members of a major-party presidential ticket died during the term for which they sought election. Had they been elected, Willkie's death would have resulted in the secretary of state becoming acting president for the remainder of the term ending on January 20, 1945.\nPresidential Succession Act of 1947.\nIn June 1945, two months after becoming president upon Franklin D. Roosevelt's death, Harry S. Truman sent a message to Congress urging the revision of the Presidential Succession Act of 1886. He recommended that the speaker of the House and president pro tempore of the Senate be restored to, and given priority in, the presidential line of succession over members of the Cabinet. The arrangement reflected Truman's belief that the president should not have the power to appoint to office \"the person who would be my immediate successor in the event of my own death or inability to act\", and that the presidency should, whenever possible, \"be filled by an elective officer\". Cabinet officials are appointed by the president, whereas the speaker and the president pro tempore are elected officials. He also recommended that a provision be made for election of a new president and vice president should vacancies in both of those offices occur more than three months before the midterm congressional elections.\nA bill incorporating the president's proposal was introduced in the House on June 25, 1945, by Hatton W. Sumners and approved\u2014minus the special election provision\u2014four days later by a wide margin. The measure was forwarded to the Senate, which took no action on it during the balance of the 79th Congress. Truman renewed his request in 1947, when the 80th Congress convened following the 1946 midterm elections. Early in 1947, Senator Kenneth S. Wherry introduced a bill in the Senate which, like the previous 1945 version, put the speaker and the president pro tempore second and third in the succession order respectively, and contained no provision for a special election. After considerable debate the measure was approved on June 27, 1947, by a vote of 50 to 35. Forwarded to the House, the legislation engendered little debate, and was passed on July 10 by a vote of 365 to 11. President Truman signed the bill into law on July 18.\nThe Presidential Succession Act of 1947 (\u00a0) restored the speaker of the House and president pro tempore of the Senate to the line of succession\u2014in reverse order from their positions in the 1792 act\u2014and placed them ahead of the members of the Cabinet, who are positioned once more in the order of the establishment of their department: secretary of state, secretary of the treasury, secretary of war, attorney general, postmaster general, secretary of the navy, and secretary of the interior. Three Cabinet secretaries were added to the lineup, reflecting the creation of three Cabinet-level departments post-1886: secretary of agriculture, secretary of commerce, and secretary of labor. The act stipulates, that in order for either the speaker or the president pro tempore to become acting president, he or she must meet the requirements for presidential eligibility, and must, prior to acting as president, resign from office, including from Congress.\nLike the 1886 act, this statute specifies that only Cabinet members who are constitutionally eligible to the office of president, and not under impeachment by the House at the time the powers and duties of the presidency devolve upon them, may become the acting president. However, unlike the 1886 act, this statute mandates that any Cabinet officer who accedes to the powers and duties of the presidency resign their Cabinet post. It also contains a clause stipulating that any Cabinet officer acting as president may be \"bumped\" from office (supplanted) by a qualified individual higher up the line of succession, a provision not contained in either of the earlier succession acts.\nThe 1886 and 1947 acts diverge in one other way. The 1886 act describes \"such officers as shall have been appointed by the advice and consent of the Senate to the offices therein named\" as being eligible to serve as acting president, whereas the 1947 act describes \"officers appointed, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate\" as being eligible. The less explicit 1947 language raises the question of whether acting secretaries are in the line of succession. The nonpartisan Continuity of Government Commission, in a 2009 report, said \"[r]ead literally, this means that the current act allows for acting secretaries to be in the line of succession as long as they are confirmed by the Senate for a post (even for example, the second or third in command within a department).\" Although a case for their inclusion can be made, it is not clear whether acting secretaries are indeed in the line of succession.\nThe 1947 act established that a person who becomes an acting president under the act will earn the same compensation given to the president. Additionally, based on authority granted by Section 3 of the Twentieth Amendment, the act applies to situations where the president-elect, alone or together with the vice president-elect, fails to meet the qualifications for the office of president. Based on that same authority, the act also applies to situations in which there is neither a president-elect nor a vice president-elect on Inauguration Day.\nRevisions.\nThe 1947 act has been modified by a series of incidental amendments to reflect the creation of new federal departments. Less than two weeks after the Act was enacted, Truman signed the National Security Act of 1947 into law. This statute (in part) merged the Department of War (renamed as the Department of the Army) and the Department of the Navy into the National Military Establishment (renamed Department of Defense in 1949), headed by the secretary of defense. It also included a provision substituting the secretary of defense for the secretary of war in the line of succession and striking out the secretary of the navy.\nIn 1953, a new Cabinet department was created; this led to the creation of a new position behind the secretary of labor in the line of succession: the secretary of health, education and welfare. In 1965, another new Cabinet department was created; the secretary of housing and urban development joined the line of succession. The secretary of transportation was added the following year. In 1970 and 1977, respectively, the postmaster general was removed as a result of the Postal Reorganization Act, and the secretary of energy was inserted at the end of the list. In 1979, when the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare was divided by the Department of Education Organization Act, its secretary was replaced in the order of succession by the secretary of health and human services, and the new secretary of education was added in the last position. In 1988 and 2006, respectively, the secretary of veterans affairs and then the secretary of homeland security were added, becoming the 16th and 17th statutory successors (including the vice president) to the powers and duties of the presidency.\nWhen the Department of Homeland Security was created in 2002, the act creating it did not contain a provision adding the new department's secretary into the line of presidential succession. Secretaries of newly created cabinet-level departments are not automatically included, but must be specifically incorporated. Companion bills to include the secretary of homeland security (SHS) in the line of succession were introduced in the 108th Congress (in 2003) and again in the 109th (in 2005) by Senator Mike DeWine and Representative Tom Davis. Both bills strayed from tradition, however, by proposing to place the SHS in the line of succession directly after the attorney general (rather than at the end of the line). Proponents of placing the SHS high in the order of succession (eighth overall, as opposed to seventeenth) argued that, given the department's many responsibilities in the areas of security and national preparedness, the officer responsible for disaster relief and security could be expected to possess the relevant knowledge and expertise to capably function as acting president following a catastrophic event; the same could not be said of every cabinet secretary. Referred to committee, no action was taken on these proposals. The matter remained unresolved until March 2006, when the USA PATRIOT Improvement and Reauthorization Act added the secretary of homeland security to the presidential line of succession, at the end.\nPotential invocations.\nWhile it has not become necessary to invoke the 1947 Act, the vice presidency was vacant at the time of its adoption, and has been vacant three more times since:\nHad the president died, resigned, been removed from office, or been disabled during one of these vacancies the speaker of the House would have become acting president. The nation faced the prospect of such a double-vacancy in the autumn of 1973. With the future of Richard Nixon's presidency in doubt on account of the Watergate scandal, and with the vice presidency vacant following Spiro Agnew's resignation, there was a possibility that Speaker of the House Carl Albert might become acting president. Recourse in this case to the 1947 Act was not necessary, because Section 2 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment, ratified only six years earlier, established a mechanism for filling an intra-term vice presidential vacancy, and House Minority Leader Ford was appointed. As a result, rather than Speaker Albert becoming acting president when Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, Vice President Ford became president on that date.\nThe Twenty-fifth Amendment also established a procedure for responding to presidential disabilities whereby a vice president could assume the powers and duties of the presidency as acting president. Its procedures for declaring a temporary disability have been invoked on four occasions by three presidents.\nDuring the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the Secret Service carried out its plan for ensuring the continuity of government, which in part called for gathering up persons in the presidential line of succession and taking them to a secure location, to guarantee that at least one officer in the line of succession would survive the attacks. Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert and several other congressional leaders went; President pro tempore of the Senate Robert Byrd did not, choosing instead to be taken to his Capitol Hill home. Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Transportation Norman Mineta went into an underground bunker at the White House; a few Cabinet members were out of the country that day.\nDesignated successor.\nThere is a long history, dating back to the Cold War era, of keeping a designated successor away from events at which numerous high-ranking federal officers\u2014including the president, vice president, congressional leaders, and Cabinet members\u2014will be gathered. This is done to ensure that there is always someone available to assume the reins of government if all the other officers are killed at the event. For example, Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue was the Cabinet member so designated when President Donald Trump delivered his 2018 State of the Union Address. Perdue was taken to a secure location several hours beforehand, and remained there throughout the event. Although any cabinet secretary could be selected, the person appointed has usually come from one of the newer departments low in the line of succession. The person chosen must also meet the constitutional requirements to serve as president.\nConstitutionality.\nThe 1947 act has been widely criticized over the years as unconstitutional. Akhil Amar, who is a legal scholar in constitutional law, has called it \"a disastrous statute, an accident waiting to happen\". There are two main areas of concern.\nMeaning of \"officer\".\nThere are concerns regarding the constitutionality of having members of Congress in the line of succession. The Constitution's Succession Clause\u2014\u2014specifies that only an \"Officer\" may be designated as a presidential successor. Constitutional scholars from James Madison to the present day have argued that the term \"Officer\" refers to an \"Officer of the United States\", a term of art that excludes members of Congress. During a September 2003 joint hearing before the U.S. Senate's Committee on Rules and Administration and Committee on the Judiciary, M. Miller Baker said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The 1947 Act is probably unconstitutional because it appears that the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate are not \"Officers\" eligible to act as President within the meaning of the Succession Clause. This is because in referring to an \"Officer\", the Succession Clause, taken in its context in Section\u00a01 of Article\u00a0II, probably refers to an \"Officer of the United States\", a term of art under the Constitution, rather than any officer, which would include legislative and state officers referred to in the Constitution (e.g.,\u00a0the reference to state militia officers found in Article\u00a0I, Section\u00a08). In the very next section of Article\u00a0II, the President is empowered to \"require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments\" and to appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, \"Officers of the United States\". These are the \"Officers\" to whom the Succession Clause probably refers. This contextual reading is confirmed by Madison's notes from the Constitutional Convention, which reveal that the Convention's Committee of Style, which had no authority to make substantive changes, substituted \"Officer\" in the Succession Clause in place of \"Officer of the United States\", probably because the Committee considered the full phrase redundant.\nIn \"Is the Presidential Succession Law Constitutional?\", Akhil Amar and Vikram Amar refer to the Incompatibility Clause (Article\u00a0I, Section\u00a06, Clause\u00a02)\u2014which bars officials in the federal government's executive branch from simultaneously serving in either the U.S. House or Senate\u2014as evidence that members of the Congress cannot be in the Presidential line of succession.\nBumping.\nThe current act is also controversial because it provides that an officer who is acting as president due to the disability or failure to qualify of an officer higher in the order of succession does so only until the other officer's disability or disqualification is removed. If this happens, the previously entitled officer can \"bump\" the person then acting as president. During testimony in 2004 before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice, Akhil Reed Amar stated that this provision violates \"the Succession Clause, which says that an officer named by Congress shall 'act as President ... until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected'\".\nIn its 2009 report, the Continuity of Government Commission argued that as well as going against the language of the Constitution, bumping violates the doctrine of separation of powers by undermining the independence of the executive from the Congress:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn a practical level, it has been argued that this provision could result in there being multiple acting presidents in a short period of time during a national crisis and weaken the public legitimacy of successors. In a January 2011 \"Roll Call\" op-ed, Representative Brad Sherman wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The bumping provision] creates a game of musical chairs with the presidency and would cause great instability. In a time of national crisis, the nation needs to know who its president is.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55835", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55835", "title": "Twenty-Fifth Amendment", "text": ""}
{"id": "55837", "revid": "43160149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55837", "title": "Taft\u2013Hartley Act", "text": "1947 U.S. federal law regulating labor unions\nThe Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, better known as the Taft\u2013Hartley Act, is a United States federal law that restricts the activities and power of labor unions. It was enacted by the 80th United States Congress over the veto of President Harry S. Truman, becoming law on June 23, 1947.\nThe Taft\u2013Hartley Act was introduced in the aftermath of a major strike wave in 1945 and 1946. Though it was enacted by the Republican-controlled 80th Congress, the law received significant support from congressional Democrats, many of whom joined with their Republican colleagues in voting to override Truman's veto. The act continued to generate opposition after Truman left office, but it remains in effect.\nThe Taft\u2013Hartley Act amended the 1935 National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), adding new restrictions on union actions and designating new union-specific unfair labor practices. Among the practices prohibited by the Taft\u2013Hartley act are jurisdictional strikes, wildcat strikes, solidarity or political strikes, secondary boycotts, secondary and mass picketing, closed shops, and monetary donations by unions to federal political campaigns. The amendments also allowed states to enact right-to-work laws banning union shops. Enacted during the early stages of the Cold War, the law required union officers to sign non-communist affidavits with the government.\nBackground.\nIn 1945 and 1946, an unprecedented wave of major strikes affected the United States; by February 1946, nearly 2 million workers were engaged in strikes or other labor disputes. Organized labor had largely refrained from striking during World War II, but with the end of the war, labor leaders were eager to share in the gains from a postwar economic resurgence.\nThe 1946 mid-term elections left Republicans in control of Congress for the first time since the early 1930s. Many of the newly elected congressmen were strongly conservative and sought to overturn or roll back New Deal legislation such as the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, which had established the right of workers to join unions, bargain collectively, and engage in strikes. Republican senator Robert A. Taft and Republican congressman Fred A. Hartley Jr. each introduced measures to curtail the power of unions and prevent strikes. Taft's bill passed the Senate by a 68-to-24 majority, but some of its original provisions were removed by moderates, like Republican senator Wayne Morse. Meanwhile, the stronger Hartley bill garnered a 308-to-107 majority in the House of Representatives. The Taft\u2013Hartley bill that emerged from a conference committee incorporated aspects from both the House and Senate bills. The bill was promoted by large business lobbies, including the National Association of Manufacturers.\nAfter spending several days considering how to respond to the bill, President Truman vetoed Taft\u2013Hartley with a strong message to Congress, calling the act a \"dangerous intrusion on free speech.\" Labor leaders, meanwhile, derided the act as a \"slave-labor bill\". Despite Truman's all-out effort to prevent a veto override, Congress overrode his veto with considerable Democratic support, including 106 out of 177 Democrats in the House, and 20 out of 42 Democrats in the Senate.\nEffects of the act.\nAs stated in Section 1 (\u00a0https://), the purpose of the NLRA is:\n[T]o promote the full flow of commerce, to prescribe the legitimate rights of both employees and employers in their relations affecting commerce, to provide orderly and peaceful procedures for preventing the interference by either with the legitimate rights of the other, to protect the rights of individual employees in their relations with labor organizations whose activities affect commerce, to define and proscribe practices on the part of labor and management which affect commerce and are inimical to the general welfare, and to protect the rights of the public in connection with labor disputes affecting commerce.\nThe amendments enacted in Taft\u2013Hartley added a list of prohibited actions, or unfair labor practices, on the part of unions to the NLRA, which had previously only prohibited unfair labor practices committed by employers. The Taft\u2013Hartley Act prohibited jurisdictional strikes, wildcat strikes, solidarity or political strikes, secondary boycotts, secondary and mass picketing, closed shops, and monetary donations by unions to federal political campaigns. It also required union officers to sign non-communist affidavits with the government. Union shops were heavily restricted, and states were allowed to pass right-to-work laws that ban agency fees. Furthermore, the executive branch of the federal government could obtain legal strikebreaking injunctions if an impending or current strike imperiled the national health or safety.\nJurisdictional strikes.\nIn jurisdictional strikes, outlawed by Taft\u2013Hartley, a union strikes in order to assign particular work to the employees it represents. Secondary boycotts and common situs picketing, also outlawed by the act, are actions in which unions picket, strike, or refuse to handle the goods of a business with which they have no primary dispute but which is associated with a targeted business. A later statute, the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act, passed in 1959, tightened these restrictions on secondary boycotts still further.\nCampaign expenditures.\nAccording to First Amendment scholar Floyd Abrams, the act \"was the first law barring unions and corporations from making independent expenditures in support of or [in] opposition to federal candidates\".\nClosed shops.\nThe law outlawed closed shops which were contractual agreements that required an employer to hire only labor union members. Union shops, still permitted, require new recruits to join the union within a certain amount of time. The National Labor Relations Board and the courts have added other restrictions on the power of unions to enforce union security clauses and have required them to make extensive financial disclosures to all members as part of their duty of fair representation. On the other hand, Congress repealed the provisions requiring a vote by workers to authorize a union shop a few years after the passage of the act when it became apparent that workers were approving them in virtually every case.\nUnion security clauses.\nThe amendments also authorized individual states to outlaw union security clauses (such as the union shop) entirely in their jurisdictions by passing right-to-work laws. A right-to-work law, under Section 14B of Taft\u2013Hartley, prevents unions from negotiating contracts or legally binding documents requiring companies to fire workers who refuse to join the union. Currently all of the states in the Deep South and a number of states in the Midwest, Great Plains, and Rocky Mountains regions have right-to-work laws (with six states\u2014Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Mississippi, and Oklahoma\u2014going one step further and enshrining right-to-work laws in their states' constitutions).\nStrikes and lockouts.\nNotice provisions.\nThe amendments required unions and employers to give 80 days' notice to each other and to certain state and federal mediation bodies before they may undertake strikes or other forms of economic action in pursuit of a new collective bargaining agreement; it did not, on the other hand, impose any \"cooling-off period\" after a contract expired.\nNational emergency provisions.\nSection 206 of the Act, codified at 29 U.S.C. \u00a7 176, also authorized a president to intervene in strikes or lockouts, under certain circumstances, by seeking a court order compelling companies and unions to attempt to continue to negotiate. Under this section, if the president determines that an actual or threatened lockout affects all or a substantial part of an industry engaged in interstate or foreign \"trade, commerce, transportation, transmission, or communication\" and that the occurrence or continuation of a strike or lockout would \"imperil the national health or safety,\" the President may empanel a board of inquiry to review the issues and issue a report. Upon receiving the report, the president may direct the U.S. Attorney General to seek an injunction from a federal court. If a court enters an injunction, then a strike by workers or a lockout by employers is suspended for an 80-day period; employees must return to work while management and unions must \"make every effort to adjust and settle their differences\" with the assistance of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. Presidents have invoked this provision 37 times. In 2002, President George W. Bush invoked the law in connection with the employer lockout of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union during negotiations with West Coast shipping and stevedoring companies. This was the first successful invocation of the emergency provisions since President Richard M. Nixon intervened to halt a longshoremen's strike in 1971.\nProhibition on federal employee strikes.\nSection 305 of the Act prohibited federal employees from striking. This prohibition was subsequently repealed and replaced by a similar provision, 5 U.S.C. \u00a7 7311, which bars any person who \"participates in a strike, or asserts the right to strike against the Government of the United States\" from federal employment.\nAnti-communism.\nThe amendments required union leaders to file affidavits with the United States Department of Labor declaring that they were not supporters of the Communist Party and had no relationship with any organization seeking the \"overthrow of the United States government by force or by any illegal or unconstitutional means\" as a condition to participating in NLRB proceedings. Just over a year after Taft\u2013Hartley passed, 81,000 union officers from nearly 120 unions had filed the required affidavits. This provision was at first upheld in the 1950 Supreme Court decision \"American Communications Ass'n v. Douds\", but in 1965 in \"United States v. Brown\", the Supreme Court held that this provision was an unconstitutional bill of attainder.\nTreatment of supervisors.\nThe amendments expressly excluded supervisors from coverage under the act, and allowed employers to terminate supervisors engaging in union activities or those not supporting the employer's stance. The amendments maintained coverage under the act for professional employees, but provided for special procedures before they may be included in the same bargaining unit as non-professional employees.\nRight of employer to oppose unions.\nThe act revised the Wagner Act's requirement of employer neutrality, to allow employers to deliver anti-union messages in the workplace. These changes confirmed an earlier Supreme Court ruling that employers have a constitutional right to express their opposition to unions, so long as they did not threaten employees with reprisals for their union activities nor offer any incentives to employees as an alternative to unionizing. The amendments also gave employers the right to file a petition asking the board to determine if a union represents a majority of its employees, and allow employees to petition either to decertify their union, or to invalidate the union security provisions of any existing collective bargaining agreement.\nNational Labor Relations Board.\nThe amendments gave the general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board discretionary power to seek injunctions against either employers or unions that violated the act. The law made pursuit of such injunctions mandatory, rather than discretionary, in the case of secondary boycotts by unions. The amendments also established the general counsel's autonomy within the administrative framework of the NLRB. Congress also gave employers the right to sue unions for damages caused by a secondary boycott, but gave the general counsel exclusive power to seek injunctive relief against such activities.\nFederal jurisdiction.\nThe act provided for federal court jurisdiction to enforce collective bargaining agreements. Although Congress passed this section to empower federal courts to hold unions liable in damages for strikes violating a no-strike clause, this part of the act has instead served as the springboard for creation of a \"federal common law\" of collective bargaining agreements, which favored arbitration over litigation or strikes as the preferred means of resolving labor disputes.\nConciliation Service.\nThe United States Conciliation Service, which had provided mediation for labor disputes as part of Department of Labor, was removed from that department and reconstituted as an independent agency, the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (United States). This was done in part because industry forces thought the existing service had been too \"partial\" to labor.\nOther.\nThe Congress that passed the Taft\u2013Hartley Amendments considered repealing the Norris\u2013La Guardia Act to the extent necessary to permit courts to issue injunctions against strikes violating a no-strike clause, but chose not to do so. The Supreme Court nonetheless held several decades later that the act implicitly gave the courts the power to enjoin such strikes over subjects that would be subject to final and binding arbitration under a collective bargaining agreement.\nFinally, the act imposed a number of procedural and substantive standards that unions and employers must meet before they may use employer funds to provide pensions and other employee benefit to unionized employees. Congress has since passed more extensive protections for workers and employee benefit plans as part of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (\"ERISA\").\nAftermath.\nUnion leaders in the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) vigorously campaigned for Truman in the 1948 election based upon a (never fulfilled) promise to repeal Taft\u2013Hartley. Truman won, but a union-backed effort in Ohio to defeat Taft in 1950 failed in what one author described as \"a shattering demonstration of labor's political weaknesses\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55838", "revid": "492987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55838", "title": "National Security Act", "text": "National Security Act may refer to:\nNational Security Law may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55839", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55839", "title": "Bonzo Dog band", "text": ""}
{"id": "55841", "revid": "1319345968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55841", "title": "Mutual Security Act", "text": "American foreign aid law\nThe Mutual Security Act of 1951 launched a major American foreign aid program, 1951\u201361, of grants to numerous countries. It largely replaced the Marshall Plan. The main goal was to help underdeveloped US-allied countries develop and to contain the spread of communism. It was signed on October 10, 1951, by President Harry S. Truman. Annual authorizations were about $7.5 billion ($ billion today), out of a GDP of $340 billion in 1951 ($ trillion today), for military, economic, and technical foreign aid to American allies. The aid was aimed primarily at shoring up Western Europe as the Cold War developed. In 1961 it was replaced by a new foreign aid program, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, which created the Agency for International Development (AID), and focused more on Latin America.\nThe Mutual Security Act also abolished the Economic Cooperation Administration, which had managed the Marshall Plan and transferred its functions to the newly established Mutual Security Agency (MSA). The Agency was established and continued by acts of October 10, 1951 (65 Stat. 373) and June 20, 1952 (66 Stat. 141) to provide military, economic, and technical assistance to friendly nations in the interest of international peace and security, but was abolished by Reorganization Plan No. 7 of 1953, effective August 1, 1953, and its functions were transferred to the Foreign Operations Administration. The act however, was extended by appropriators each fiscal year until the early 1960s.\nAs the Marshall Plan was ending, Congress was in the process of piecing together a new foreign aid proposal designed to unite military and economic programs with technical assistance. In the words of Secretary of State Dean Acheson, who testified before Congress, Western Europe needed assistance against Soviet \"encroachment.\" The measure was intended to signal Washington's resolve to allies and to the Kremlin that the United States was capable of and committed to containing communism globally, even while it fought a protracted land war in Korea. The measure took about two months to work its way through the House, meeting resistance from fiscal conservatives along the way. Republicans were divided about the cost of the expenditures; nevertheless nearly half (80) joined the overwhelming majority of Democrats to pass the measure 260 to 101 on August 17. John M. Vorys of Ohio summed up GOP support for the measure, noting that military aid to \"nations who will fight on our side\" is \"sound economy.\" Representative James P. Richards of South Carolina, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, noted that the Mutual Security Act was intended \"not to fight a war\" but \"to prevent a war.\"\nBackground and follow-on.\nThe Mutual Security Act of 1951 was the successor to the Mutual Defense Assistance Act and the Economic Cooperation Act of 1949, which administered the Marshall plan. It became law on 10 October 1951, and created a new, independent agency, the Mutual Security Administration, to supervise all foreign aid programs including military assistance and economic programs that bolstered the defense capability of U.S. allies globally.\nSubmitted on 24 May 1951, President Harry S. Truman's omnibus foreign aid bill got a hostile reception on Capitol Hill. Rapid expansion of national security expenditures during the Korean War had produced alarm over high taxes, large deficits, government controls, and a possible \"garrison state\" among such prominent conservatives as Senator Robert A. Taft (R\u2010Ohio). Truman's decision to send U.S. troops to Europe as part of a standing NATO force further antagonized congressional conservatives and exacerbated their fears that European nations were not doing enough for their own defense. Congress thus reduced the administration's request for Mutual Security funds by 15 percent and authorized $5.998 billion and $1.486 billion, respectively, for military and economic assistance. The deepest cuts were in economic aid, thus ensuring its subordination to military assistance as \"defense support.\"\nThe Mutual Security Act was renewed each year until 1961, and it annually produced struggles over the size of the foreign aid budget, and the balance between military and economic aid. The US foreign aid program was then reorganized under new Kennedy Administration legislation, with signing of the Foreign Assistance Act and Executive Order 10973 on 3 November 1961, which established the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55843", "revid": "2114166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55843", "title": "McCarran Internal Security Act", "text": "1950 statute against communist subversive activities\nThe Internal Security Act of 1950, 64\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https:// (Public Law 81-831), also known as the Subversive Activities Control Act of 1950, the McCarran Act after its principal sponsor Sen. Pat McCarran (D-Nevada), or the Concentration Camp Law, is a United States federal law. Congress enacted it over President Harry Truman's veto. It required Communist organizations to register with the federal government. The 1965 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board\" saw much of the act's Communist registration requirement abolished. The emergency detention provision was repealed when the Non-Detention Act of 1971 was signed into law by President Richard Nixon. The act's Subversive Activities Control Board, which enforced the law's provision calling for investigations of persons engaging in \"subversive activities,\" would also be abolished in 1972.\nProvisions.\nIts titles were I: Subversive Activities Control (Subversive Activities Control Act) and II: Emergency Detention (Emergency Detention Act of 1950).\nThe Act required Communist organizations to register with the United States Attorney General and established the Subversive Activities Control Board to investigate persons suspected of engaging in subversive activities or otherwise promoting the establishment of a \"totalitarian dictatorship\", either fascist or communist. Members of these groups could not become citizens and in some cases were barred from entering or leaving the country. Immigrants found in violation of the act within five years of being naturalized could have their citizenship revoked.\nUnited States Attorney General J. Howard McGrath asked that the CPUSA provide a list of all its members in the United States, as well as 'reveal its financial details.' Furthermore, members of 'Communist-Action Organizations' including those of the Communist Party of the United States of America were required (prior to a 1965 Supreme Court case mentioned below) to register with the U.S. Attorney General their name and address and be subject to the statutes applicable to such registrants (e.g. being barred from federal employment, among others). In addition, once registered, members were liable for prosecution solely based on membership under the Smith Act due to the expressed and alleged intent of the organization.\nThe Act also contained an emergency detention statute, giving the President the authority to apprehend and detain \"each person as to whom there is a reasonable ground to believe that such person probably will engage in, or probably will conspire with others to engage in, acts of espionage or sabotage.\"\nIt tightened alien exclusion and deportation laws and allowed for the detention of dangerous, disloyal, or subversive persons in times of war or \"internal security emergency\". The act had implications for thousands of people displaced because of the Second World War. In March 1951, chairman of the United States Displaced Persons Commission was quoted as saying that 100,000 people would be barred from entering the United States that otherwise would have been accepted. By March 1, 1951, the act had excluded 54,000 people of German ethnic origin and 12,000 displaced Russian persons from entering the United States. Notable persons barred from the United States include Ernst Chain, who was declined a visa on two occasions in 1951.\nThe Act made picketing a Federal courthouse a felony if intended to obstruct the court system or influence jurors or other trial participants.\nLegislative history.\nPassage.\nSeveral key sections of the Act were taken from the earlier Mundt\u2013Ferguson Communist Registration Bill, which Congress had failed to pass.\nIt included language that Sen. Mundt had introduced several times before without success aimed at punishing federal employees for passing information \"classified by the President (or by the head of any such department, agency, or corporation with the approval of the President) as affecting the security of the United States\" to \"any representative of a foreign government or to any officer or member of a Communist organization\". He told a Senate hearing that it was a response to what the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) had learned when investigating \"the so-called pumpkin papers case, the espionage activities in the Chambers-Hiss case, the Bentley case, and others.\"\nPresident Harry Truman vetoed it on September 22, 1950, and sent Congress a lengthy veto message in which he criticized specific provisions as \"the greatest danger to freedom of speech, press, and assembly since the Alien and Sedition Laws of 1798,\" a \"mockery of the Bill of Rights\" and a \"long step toward totalitarianism\".\nThe House overrode the veto without debate by a vote of 286\u201348 the same day. The Senate overrode his veto the next day after \"a twenty-two hour continuous battle\" by a vote of 57\u201310. Thirty-one Republicans and 26 Democrats voted in favor, while five members of each party opposed it. Democratic Senator Hubert Humphrey led the outnumbered opposition in the Senate despite having voted in favor of the law the first time.\nAmended.\nPart of the Act was repealed by the Non-Detention Act of 1971 after facing public opposition, notably from Japanese Americans. President Richard Nixon, while signing the repeal bill, referred to the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II for historical context as to why the bill needed to be repealed.\nFor example, violation of \u00a0https:// (Section 21 of \"the Internal Security Act of 1950\"), which concerns security of military bases and other sensitive installations, may be punishable by a prison term of up to one year.\nThe part of the act codified as \u00a0https:// has been repealed in its entirety for violating the First Amendment.\nAbolition.\nThe Subversive Activities Control Board was abolished by Congress in 1972.\nConstitutionality.\nThe Supreme Court of the United States was initially deferential towards the Internal Security Act. For example, in \"Galvan v. Press\", the Court upheld the deportation of a Mexican alien on the basis that he had briefly been a member of the Communist Party from 1944 to 1946, even though such membership had been lawful at that time (and had been declared retroactively illegal by the Act).\nAs McCarthyism faded into history, the Court adopted a more skeptical approach towards the Act. The 1964 decision in \"Aptheker v. Secretary of State\" ruled unconstitutional Section 6, which prevented any member of a communist party from using or obtaining a passport. In 1965, the Court voted 8\u20130 in \"Albertson v. Subversive Activities Control Board\" to invalidate the Act's requirement that members of the Communist Party were to register with the government. It held that the information which party members were required to submit could form the basis of their prosecution for being party members, which was then a crime, and therefore deprived them of their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. In 1967, the act's provision prohibiting communists from working for the federal government or at defense facility was also struck down by the Supreme Court as a violation of the First Amendment's right to freedom of association in \"United States v. Robel\".\nUse by U.S. military.\nThe U.S. military continues to use \u00a0https://, citing it in U.S. Army regulation AR 190\u201311 in support of allowing installation commanders to regulate privately owned weapons on army installations. An Army message known as an ALARACT states \"senior commanders have specific authority to regulate privately owned weapons, explosives, and ammunition on army installations.\" The ALARACT refers to AR 190-11 and public law (section 1062 of Public Law 111\u2013383, also known as the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011); AR 190\u201311 in turn cites the McCarran Internal Security Act (codified as 50 USC 797). The ALARACT reference is a truncated version of the public law.\nFictional reimagining.\nThe 1971 pseudo-documentary film \"Punishment Park\" speculated what might have happened if Richard Nixon had enforced the McCarran Act against members of the anti-war movement, black power movement, the feminist movement, and others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55844", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55844", "title": "McCarran Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55846", "revid": "44719641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55846", "title": "Bob Dole", "text": "American politician and attorney (1923\u20132021)\nRobert Joseph Dole (July 22, 1923 \u2013 December 5, 2021) was an American politician, attorney, and U.S. Army officer who represented Kansas in the United States Senate from 1969 to 1996. He was the Republican Leader of the U.S Senate during the final 11 years of his tenure, including three non-consecutive years as Majority Leader of the U.S. Senate. Prior to his 27 years in the Senate, he served in the United States House of Representatives from 1961 to 1969. Dole was also the Republican presidential nominee in the 1996 presidential election and the vice presidential nominee in the 1976 presidential election.\nDole was born and raised in Russell, Kansas, where he established a legal career after serving with distinction in the United States Army during World War II. Following a period as Russell County, Kansas Attorney, he won election to the House of Representatives in 1960. In 1968, Dole was elected to the Senate, where he served as chairman of the Republican National Committee from 1971 to 1973 and chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Finance from 1981 to 1985. He led the U.S. Senate Republican members from 1985 to his resignation in 1996, and served as Senate Majority Leader from 1985 to 1987 and from 1995 to 1996. In his role as Republican leader, he helped defeat the Clinton health care plan of 1993, proposed by Democratic president Bill Clinton.\nPresident Gerald Ford chose Dole as his running mate in the 1976 election after Vice President Nelson Rockefeller withdrew from seeking a full term. The Ford-Dole ticket was defeated by the Democratic ticket of Jimmy Carter and Walter Mondale in the general election. Dole sought the Republican presidential nomination in 1980, but quickly dropped out of the race. He experienced more success in the 1988 Republican primaries but was defeated by Vice President George H. W. Bush. Dole won the Republican presidential nomination in 1996 and selected Jack Kemp as his running mate. The Republican ticket lost in the general election to Clinton. He resigned from the Senate during the 1996 campaign and did not seek public office again after the election.\nDole remained active after retiring from public office. His second wife Elizabeth served one term as U.S. Senate member from North Carolina from 2003 to 2009. Dole appeared in numerous commercials and television programs and served on various councils, including the advisory council for the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation and special counsel at the Washington, D.C., office of law firm Alston &amp; Bird. In 2012, he unsuccessfully advocated Senate ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Dole was the only former Republican presidential nominee to endorse Donald Trump in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections, though he initially supported Jeb Bush in the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries. Dole was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal on January 17, 2018.\nEarly life and education.\nDole was born on July 22, 1923, in Russell, Kansas, the son of Bina M. (n\u00e9e\u00a0Talbott; 1904\u20131983) and Doran Ray Dole (1901\u20131975). His father, who had moved the family to Russell shortly before Robert was born, earned money by running a small creamery. One of Dole's father's customers was the father of his future U.S. Senate colleague Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania. The Doles lived in a house at 1035 North Maple in Russell and it remained his official residence throughout his political career.\nDole graduated from Russell High School in the spring of 1941 and enrolled at the University of Kansas the following fall. Dole had been a star high school athlete in Russell, and Kansas basketball coach Phog Allen traveled to Russell to recruit him to play for the Jayhawks basketball team. While at KU, Dole was on the basketball team, the track team, and the football team. In football, Dole played at the end position. In 1942 he was a teammate of the founder and longtime owner of the Tennessee Titans Bud Adams, Adams's only season playing football at Kansas. While in college, Dole joined the Kappa Sigma fraternity, and in 1970 he was bestowed with the Fraternity's \"Man of the Year\" honor. Dole's collegiate studies were interrupted by World War II, when he enlisted in the United States Army.\nDole attended the University of Arizona in Tucson from 1948 to 1949, before transferring to Washburn University in Topeka, Kansas, where he graduated with both undergraduate and law degrees in 1952.\nWorld War II and recovery.\nDole joined the United States Army's Enlisted Reserve Corps in 1942 to fight in World War II. He was stationed at Brooklyn College in New York City from December 1943 through April 1944 as part of the Army Specialized Training Program, before becoming a second lieutenant in the Army's 10th Mountain Division.\nIn April 1945, while engaged in combat near Castel d'Aiano in the Apennine mountains southwest of Bologna, Italy, Dole was seriously wounded by a German shell that struck his upper back and right arm, shattering his collarbone and part of his spine. \"I lay face down in the dirt,\" Dole said. \"I could not see or move my arms. I thought they were missing.\"\nAs Lee Sandlin describes, when fellow soldiers saw the extent of his injuries, they believed all they could do was \"give him the largest dose of morphine they dared and write an 'M' for 'morphine' on his forehead in his own blood, so that nobody else who found him would give him a second, fatal dose.\"\nDole was paralyzed from the neck down and transported to a military hospital near Kansas. Having blood clots, a life-threatening infection, and a fever of almost , he was expected to die. After large doses of penicillin were not successful, he overcame the infection with the administration of streptomycin, one of the first ever uses of that drug in a human. He remained despondent, \"not ready to accept the fact that my life would be changed forever\". He was encouraged to see Hampar Kelikian, an orthopedist in Chicago who had been working with veterans returning from war. Although during their first meeting Kelikian told Dole that he would never be able to recover fully, the encounter changed Dole's outlook on life, who years later wrote of Kelikian, a survivor of the Armenian genocide, \"Kelikian inspired me to focus on what I had left and what I could do with it, rather than complaining what had been lost.\" Dr. K, as Dole later came to affectionately call him, operated on him seven times, free of charge, and had, in Dole's words, \"an impact on my life second only to my family\".\nDole recovered from his wounds at the Percy Jones Army Hospital in Battle Creek, Michigan. This complex of federal buildings, no longer a hospital, is now named Hart\u2013Dole\u2013Inouye Federal Center in honor of three patients who became United States Senate members: Dole, Philip Hart from Michigan, and Daniel Inouye from Hawaii. Dole was decorated three times, receiving two Purple Heart medals for his injuries, and the Bronze Star with \"V\" device for valor for his attempt to assist a downed radioman. The injuries left him with limited mobility in his right arm and numbness in his left arm. He minimized the effect in public by keeping a pen in his right hand, and learned to write with his left hand. In 1947, he was medically discharged from the Army as a captain.\nEarly political career.\nDole ran for office for the first time in 1950 and was elected to the Kansas House of Representatives, serving a two-year term. During his term he served on the following committees: Assessment and Taxation, Gas and Oil, and Military Affairs and Soldiers Compensation. He became the County Attorney of Russell County in 1953. Dole was elected to the United States House of Representatives from Kansas's 6th congressional district in 1960. After his first term, Kansas lost a congressional district, and most of Dole's district was merged with the neighboring 2nd district to form a new 1st district, encompassing much of central and western Kansas. Dole was elected from this merged district in 1962 and was re-elected two more times.\nDuring his tenure in the House, Dole voted in favor of both the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as well as the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\nU.S. Senate (1969\u20131996).\nIn 1968, Dole defeated former Governor of Kansas William H. Avery for the Republican nomination for the United States Senate to succeed retiring Senate member Frank Carlson. He subsequently won the seat in the general election. Dole was re-elected in 1974, 1980, 1986, and 1992, before resigning on June 11, 1996, to focus on his presidential campaign.\nWhile in the Senate, Dole served as chairman of the Republican National Committee from 1971 to 1973, the ranking Republican on the United States Senate Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry from 1975 to 1978, and the chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Finance from 1981 to 1985. In November 1984, Dole was elected Majority Leader of the United States Senate, defeating Ted Stevens 28\u201325, in the fourth round of balloting.\nThe continuing war in Vietnam was the dominant source of political division on Capitol Hill in the early 1970s; in 1970 Democratic U.S. Senate George McGovern of South Dakota took the Senate floor and condemned the role of the deliberative assembly in maintaining the U.S. presence in Vietnam, saying the Senate chamber \"reeks of blood\", soon followed by freshman Republican senator Dole on the floor, who vociferously attacked McGovern. Dole was appointed chair of the Republican National Committee the next year. Over time in the Senate, Dole was seen by some as having a moderate voting record. During the following years of the 1970s, Dole and McGovern worked together on the Senate Hunger and Human Needs Committee. They partnered to help pass legislation making food stamps and school lunches more accessible, and fraud more difficult. They expanded the school lunch program and helped establish the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), a federal assistance program for low-income pregnant women, breast-feeding women and children under the age of five.\nDole served on congressional agriculture committees throughout the course of his political career, and became the Republican Party's chief spokesman on farm policy and nutrition issues in the Senate. When Ronald Reagan was elected president in 1980, Dole held the chairmanship of the Senate Agriculture Committee's Nutrition Subcommittee and the Senate Finance Committee. Together with McGovern, Dole spearheaded the elimination of the purchase requirement to receive food stamp benefits and the simplification of eligibility requirements.\nFacing a reluctant President and Congress as chairman of the Senate Finance Committee in 1982, Dole was the driving force behind a large tax increase, promoting it as a reform measure to collect money owed by tax cheats and under-taxed businesses. In December of that year, \"The New York Times\" referred to Dole as changing from \"hard-line conservative\" to \"mainstream Republicanism\". He became Senate Majority leader in 1985 initially serving in that position for two years. Democrats took control of the Senate following the 1986 United States Senate elections, and Dole became Senate Minority Leader for the next eight years. Dole was a major supporter and advocate of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.\nThe Republicans took control of both the Senate and House of Representatives in the 1994 midterm elections, due to the fallout from President Bill Clinton's policies including his health care plan, and Dole became Senate Majority Leader for the second time. In October 1995, a year before the presidential election, Dole and Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich led the Republican-controlled Congress to pass a spending bill that President Clinton vetoed, leading to the federal government shutdown from 1995 to 1996. On November 13, Republican and Democratic leaders, including Vice President Al Gore, Dick Armey, and Dole, met to try to resolve the budget and were unable to reach an agreement. By January 1996, Dole was more open to compromise to end the shutdown (as he was campaigning for the Republican presidential nomination), but he was opposed by other Republicans who wanted to continue until their demands were met. In particular, Gingrich and Dole had a tense working relationship as they were potential rivals for the 1996 Republican nomination. Clinton aide George Stephanopoulos cited the shutdown as having a role in Clinton's successful re-election campaign. In a January 3, 1996, Briefing Room address, amid the ongoing United States federal government shutdowns of 1995\u20131996, President Clinton noted Dole as a lawmaker that was \"working together in good faith\" to reopen the government.\nFrom 1992 to 1996, Dole played a major role in mobilizing support for Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Senate, and pressuring the Clinton administration and NATO to resolve the war there.\nIn 1996, Dole was the first sitting Senate Party Leader to receive his party's nomination for president. He hoped to use his long experience in Senate procedures to maximize publicity from his rare positioning as Senate Majority Leader against an incumbent president but was stymied by Senate Democrats. Dole resigned his seat on June 11, 1996, to focus on the campaign, saying he had \"nowhere to go but the White House or home\".\nPresidential politics.\nDole ran unsuccessfully for vice president on a ticket headed by President Gerald Ford in 1976. Incumbent Vice President Nelson Rockefeller had announced the previous November his retirement from politics, opting against a run for a full term as vice president, and Dole was chosen as Ford's running mate. Dole was known for his sarcastic one-liner comments, often directed against himself, and during the vice presidential debate replied to U.S. Senate member Walter Mondale from Minnesota concerning the issues of Watergate scandal and the Pardon of Richard Nixon, \"It is an appropriate topic, I guess, but it's not a very good issue any more than the war in Vietnam would be or World War II or World War I or the war in Korea\u2014all Democrat wars, all in this century. I figured up the other day, if we added up the killed and wounded in Democrat wars in this century, it would be about 1.6\u00a0million Americans, enough to fill the city of Detroit.\" Many voters felt that Dole's criticism was unfairly harsh, and that his dispassionate delivery made him seem cold. Years later, Dole would remark that he regretted the comment, believing that it had hurt the Republican ticket.\nDole ran for the 1980 Republican presidential nomination, eventually won by Ronald Reagan. Despite Dole's national exposure from the '76 campaign, he finished behind Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and four others in Iowa and New Hampshire, receiving only 2.5% and 0.4% of votes cast in those contests, respectively. Dole ceased campaigning after the New Hampshire results and announced his formal withdrawal from the race on March 15, instead being re-elected to his third term as Senator that year.\nDole made another attempt for the Republican presidential nomination in 1988, formally announcing his candidacy in his hometown of Russell, Kansas, on November 9, 1987. At the ceremony, Dole was presented by the VFW with a cigar box, similar to the one he had used to collect donations for his war-related medical expenses, containing more than $7,000 in campaign donations. Dole started out strongly by defeating Vice President George H. W. Bush in the Iowa caucus\u2014Bush finished third, behind television evangelist Pat Robertson.\nBush defeated Dole in the New Hampshire primary a week later. After the returns had come in on the night of that primary, Dole appeared to lose his temper in a television interview with Tom Brokaw, saying Bush should \"stop lying about my record\", in response to a Bush commercial which accused Dole of \"straddling\" on taxes.\nDespite a key endorsement by U.S. Senate member Strom Thurmond, Dole was defeated by Bush again in South Carolina in early March. Several days later, every southern state voted for Bush in a Super Tuesday sweep. This was followed by another loss in Illinois, which persuaded Dole to withdraw from the race.\n1996 presidential campaign.\nDespite the 1994 elections, President Clinton's popularity soared due to a booming economy and public opinion polls supporting him in the 1995 budget shutdown. As a result, Clinton and Vice President Al Gore faced no serious opposition in the Democratic primaries. A few months before his death in April 1994, Richard Nixon warned Dole, \"If the economy's good, you're not going to beat Clinton.\" Dole was the early front runner for the GOP nomination in the 1996 presidential race. At least eight candidates ran for the nomination. Dole was expected to win the nomination against underdog candidates such as the more conservative U.S. Senate member Phil Gramm of Texas and more moderate Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania. Pat Buchanan upset Dole in the early New Hampshire primary, however, with Dole finishing second and former Governor of Tennessee Lamar Alexander finishing third. Speechwriter Kerry Tymchuk observed, \"Dole was on the ropes because he wasn't conservative enough.\"\nDole eventually won the nomination, becoming the oldest first-time presidential nominee at the age of 73 years, 1 month (President Ronald Reagan was 73 years, 6 months in 1984, for his second presidential nomination). If elected, he would have become the oldest president to take office and the first Kansas native to become president (as Dwight D. Eisenhower was born in Texas). Dole found the initial draft of the nomination acceptance speech written by Mark Helprin too hardline, so Kerry Tymchuk, who was part of the \"'Let Dole be Dole' crowd\", revised the speech to cover the themes of honor, decency, and straight talk. It included the following line, a gibe at the all-or-nothing rookie Republicans who had ridden the 1994 midterm GOP wave into Congress: \"In politics honorable compromise is no sin. It is what protects us from absolutism and intolerance\"'.\nIn his acceptance speech, Dole stated, \"Let me be the bridge to an America that only the unknowing call myth. Let me be the bridge to a time of tranquility, faith, and confidence in action,\" to which incumbent president Bill Clinton responded, \"We do not need to build a bridge to the past, we need to build a bridge to the future.\"\nAs told in the Doles' joint biography, \"Unlimited Partners\", speechwriter and biographer Kerry Tymchuk wrote \"that he was going to make a statement. He was going to risk it all for the White House. He knew his time as leader was over. It would have been tough to come back [to the Senate as leader] if he lost in November. He knew it was time to move up or move out.\"\nDole promised a 15% across-the-board reduction in income tax rates and made former U.S. representative and supply-side economics advocate Jack Kemp of New York his running mate for vice president. Dole found himself criticized from both the left and the right within the Republican Party over the convention platform, one of the major issues being the inclusion of the Human Life Amendment. Clinton framed the narrative against Dole early, painting him as a mere clone of unpopular former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Newt Gingrich, warning America that Dole would work in concert with the Republican Congress to slash popular social programs, like Medicare and Social Security, dubbed by Clinton as \"Dole-Gingrich\". Dole's tax-cut plan found itself under attack from the White House, who said it would \"blow a hole in the deficit\".\nDuring the infancy of the Internet, Dole-Kemp was the first presidential campaign to have a website, which was set up by Arizona State college students Rob Kubasko and Vince Salvato, and edged out Clinton-Gore. The Dole-Kemp presidential campaign page is still live as of 2025.\nConcerns over Dole's age and lagging campaign were exemplified by an incident on September 18, 1996. At a rally in Chico, California, he was reaching down to shake the hand of a supporter, when the railing on the stage gave way and he tumbled . While only slightly injured in the fall, \"the televised image of his painful grimace underscored the age difference between him and Clinton\" and proved an ominous sign for Republican hopes of retaking the White House.\nDuring the latter half of October 1996, Dole made a campaign appearance with Heather Whitestone, the first deaf Miss America, where both of them signed \"I love you\" to the crowd. Around that time, Dole and his advisers knew that they would lose the election, but in the last four days of the campaign they went on the \"96-hour victory tour\" to help Republican House candidates.\nDole lost, as pundits had long expected, to incumbent President Bill Clinton in the 1996 election. Clinton won in a 379\u2013159 Electoral College landslide, capturing 49.2% of the vote against Dole's 40.7% and Ross Perot's 8.4%. As Nixon had predicted, Clinton was able to ride a booming economy to a second term in the White House.\nDole was the first losing vice presidential nominee to be nominated since Franklin D. Roosevelt. Dole's loss makes him the only person to lose elections for both the vice presidency and the presidency in the history of the United States. Dole was the last World War II veteran to have been the presidential nominee of a major party. During the campaign, Dole's advanced age was brought up, with critics stating that he was too old to be president.\nIn his election night concession speech, Dole remarked \"I was thinking on the way down in the elevator \u2013 tomorrow will be the first time in my life I don't have anything to do.\" Dole later wrote \"I was wrong. Seventy-two hours after conceding the election, I was swapping wisecracks with David Letterman on his late-night show.\" During the immediate aftermath of his 1996 loss to Clinton, Dole recalled that his critics thought that \"I didn't loosen up enough, I didn't show enough leg. They said I was too serious . . . It takes several months to stop fretting about it and move on. But I did.\" Dole remarked that his decisive defeat to Clinton made it easier for him to be \"magnanimous\". On his decision to leave politics for good after the 1996 presidential election campaign, despite his guaranteed stature as a former Senate leader, Dole stated, \"People were urging [me] to be a hatchet man against Clinton for the next four years. I couldn't see the point. Maybe after all those partisan fights, you look for more friendships. One of the nice things I've discovered is that when you're out of politics, you have more credibility with the other side . . . And you're out among all kinds of people, and that just doesn't happen often for an ex-president; he doesn't have the same freedom. So it hasn't been all bad.\"\nPost-political career.\nThe 1996 presidential election, despite ending in a loss, opened up numerous opportunities for Dole owing in part to his sense of humor. He engaged in a career of writing, consulting, public speaking, and television appearances. Dole was the first defeated presidential nominee to become a political celebrity.\nTelevision appearances.\nIn November 1996, Dole appeared on \"Late Show with David Letterman\" and also made a cameo appearance on \"Saturday Night Live\", parodying himself (shortly after losing the presidential election). He guest-starred as himself on NBC's Brooke Shields sitcom \"Suddenly Susan\" in January 1997.\nDole became a television commercial spokesman for such products as Viagra, Visa Inc, Dunkin' Donuts, and Pepsi (with Britney Spears). He was an occasional political commentator on the interview program \"Larry King Live\", and was a guest a number of times on Comedy Central's satirical news program, \"The Daily Show\". Dole was, for a short time in 2003, a commentator opposite Bill Clinton on CBS's \"60 Minutes\".\nEmployment.\nAfter leaving office, Dole joined the Washington, D.C. firm Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson and Hand, where he was a registered lobbyist on behalf of foreign governments (including those of Kosovo, Taiwan, and Slovenia); the American Society of Anesthesiologists; Tyco International; and the Chocolate Industry Coalition. In 2003, after Verner, Liipfert was acquired by DLA Piper, Dole joined the Washington, D.C. law and lobbying firm Alston &amp; Bird, where he continued his lobbying career. While working for Alston &amp; Bird, Dole was registered as a foreign agent under the Foreign Agents Registration Act in order to represent the government of the Republic of China in Washington.\nDole was head of the Federal City Council, a group of business, civic, education, and other leaders interested in economic development in Washington, D.C., from 1998 to 2002.\nVoluntary work.\nDole was also involved in many volunteer activities. He served as national chairman of the World War II Memorial Campaign, which raised funds for the building of the World War II Memorial. After being built, he visited the memorial on a weekly basis for many years to greet visitors and remember those who served.\nDole also teamed up with his former political rival, Bill Clinton, in 2001 on the Families of Freedom Foundation, a scholarship fund campaign to pay for the college educations for the families of 9/11 victims. It helped raise more than $100\u00a0million.\nThe Robert J. Dole Institute of Politics, housed on the University of Kansas campus in Lawrence, Kansas, was established to bring bipartisanship back to politics. The institute, which opened in July 2003 to coincide with Dole's 80th birthday, has featured such notable speakers as former President Bill Clinton, and awarded the inaugural Dole Leadership Prize to Rudy Giuliani for his leadership as the Mayor of New York City during the September 11 attacks in 2001.\nDole's legacy also includes a commitment to combating hunger, both in the United States and around the globe. In addition to numerous domestic programs, and along with former Senate member George McGovern (D-South Dakota), Dole created an international school lunch program through the McGovern-Dole International Food for Education and Child Nutrition Program, which, funded largely through the Congress, helps fight child hunger and poverty by providing nutritious meals to children in schools in developing countries. This internationally popular program would go on to provide more than 22 million meals to children in 41 countries in its first eight years. It has since led to greatly increased global interest in and support for school-feeding programs\u2014which benefit girls and young women, in particular\u2014and won McGovern and Dole the 2008 World Food Prize.\nDole offered the inaugural lecture to dedicate the University of Arkansas Clinton School of Public Service on September 18, 2004. During the lecture, he chronicled his life as a public servant and discussed the importance of public service related to defense, civil rights, the economy and daily life. Dole also gave the lecture as part Robert C. Vance Distinguished Lecture Series at Central Connecticut State University in 2008.\nAuthor.\nDole wrote several books, including one on jokes told by the presidents of the United States, in which he ranks the presidents according to their level of humor. Dole released his autobiography, \"One Soldier's Story: A Memoir\", on April 12, 2005. The book chronicles his World War II experiences and his battle to survive his war injuries.\nPolitical activities.\nAfter the Clinton\u2013Lewinsky scandal broke in 1998, Dole urged his party to practice \"restraint\" in their reaction to the scandal. After the resulting late-1998 Impeachment of President Clinton, Dole proposed that, instead of holding an impeachment trial, the Senate instead censure Clinton and then have Clinton sign the censure himself in the presence of congressional leaders, the Vice President, Cabinet members, and the justices of the Supreme Court. Some Democratic senators came to support the notion of having a censure motion instead of holding an impeachment trial. However, the Republican-controlled Senate instead held an impeachment trial in which Clinton was acquitted.\nPresident George W. Bush appointed Dole and Donna Shalala, former United States Secretary of Health and Human Services, as co-chairs of the commission to investigate problems at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in 2007. That same year, Dole joined fellow former U.S. Senate majority leaders Howard Baker from Tennessee, Tom Daschle from South Dakota, and George J. Mitchell from Maine to found the Bipartisan Policy Center, a non-profit think-tank that works to develop policies suitable for bipartisan support. Dole also served as a director for the Asia Universal Bank, a bank domiciled in Kyrgyzstan during the discredited Kurmanbek Bakiyev presidential regime which was subsequently shut down owing to its involvement in money laundering.\nDole issued a letter critical of Newt Gingrich, focusing on Dole and Gingrich's time working together on Capitol Hill, on January 26, 2012. The letter was issued immediately before the 2012 Florida primary. Dole endorsed Mitt Romney for the Republican nomination. Dole cited the association made between himself and Gingrich as fellow Congressional leaders in Democratic advertisements as a key factor for his 1996 presidential defeat.\nDole appeared on the Senate floor to advocate ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on December 4, 2012. Democratic U.S. Senate member John Kerry of Massachusetts explained: \"Bob Dole is here because he wants to know that other countries will come to treat the disabled as we do.\" The Senate rejected the treaty by a vote of 61\u201338, less than the 66 required for ratification. Many Republican senators voted against the bill, fearing it would interfere with American sovereignty. Dole began a reunion tour of his home state of Kansas in early 2014, seeking to visit each of the state's 105 counties. At each stop he spent approximately an hour speaking with old friends and well-wishers. Dole endorsed and campaigned for incumbent Kansas Senator Pat Roberts during the latter's 2014 re-election bid.\nIn 2015, Dole endorsed former Florida governor Jeb Bush in his presidential campaign. After Bush ended his campaign following the South Carolina primary, Dole endorsed Florida senator Marco Rubio's campaign. During the campaign, Dole criticized Texas senator Ted Cruz, stating that he \"question[ed] his allegiance to the party\" and that there would be \"wholesale losses\" if he were to win the Republican nomination. Dole endorsed Donald Trump after the latter clinched the Republican nomination, while all other then-living Republican presidential nominees, George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, John McCain, and Mitt Romney refused to do so, and became the lone former nominee to attend the 2016 Republican National Convention. Dole had attended every GOP convention since 1964, and did not consider skipping the 2016 edition even though Trump's politics were closer to that of Dole's 1996 primary rival Pat Buchanan.\nFormer Dole advisers, including Paul Manafort, played a major role in Trump's presidential campaign. Following Trump's electoral victory, Dole coordinated with the Trump campaign and presidential transition team to set up a series of meetings between Trump's staff and Taiwanese officials as well as assisting in successful efforts to include favorable language towards Taiwan in the 2016 Republican Party platform. In February 2016 Dole donated $20,000 to help pay for a camp for children with cancer in central Kansas.\nDole was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal for his service to the nation as a \"soldier, legislator and statesman\" in January 2018. Despite being immobile, Dole signaled to an aide to assist him in standing for the U.S. national anthem prior to the ceremony.\nDole, at age 95 and in a wheelchair, stood up with the help of an aide at the Death and state funeral of George H. W. Bush in the United States Capitol rotunda on December 4, 2018, and saluted to pay his respects to the late president and fellow World War II veteran.\nDole expressed concern the Commission on Presidential Debates were biased against President Trump and his reelection campaign in a public statement on October 9, 2020, saying how he knew all the Republicans on the commission and feared that \"none of them support[ed]\" the president.\nWhile he endorsed Trump in both 2016 and 2020, in an interview with \"USA Today\" conducted for his 98th birthday, Dole said he was \"Trumped out\", and that Trump had lost the 2020 election despite his attempts to overturn the 2020 U.S. presidential election. He further stated, \"He lost the election, and I regret that he did, but they did\", adding that Trump \"had Rudy Giuliani running all over the country, claiming fraud. He never had one bit of fraud in all those lawsuits he filed and statements he made.\" At one point during the conversation Dole said, \"I'm a Trumper\", and added at another, \"I'm sort of Trumped out, though.\"\nAwards.\nDole was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Ronald Reagan on January 18, 1989.\nSenator Dole was presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Bill Clinton on January 17, 1997, for service to his country in the military and in his political career. In his acceptance remarks in the East Room of the White House, Dole remarked \"I had a dream that I would be here this historic week receiving something from the president \u2014 but I thought it would be the front-door key\".\nDole received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards, in 1997.\nDole received the American Patriot Award from the National Defense University in 2004 for his lifelong dedication to the United States and his service in World War\u00a0II.\nOn September 30, 2015, the National Commemoration of the Armenian Genocide Centennial (NCAGC) honored Senator Dole with the organization's Survivor's Gratitude Award in the category of \"Hero of Responsibility and Principle\" for his tireless efforts in raising attention to the Armenian genocide and its victims.\nFor his lobbying efforts on behalf of Kosovo Albanians before, during, and after the Kosovo War, Albanian President Bujar Nishani awarded Dole Albania's highest civilian honor, the National Flag Decoration medal, at a May 2017 ceremony in Washington, D.C.\nDole was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal for his service to the nation as a \"soldier, legislator and statesman\" on January 17, 2018.\nThe U.S. Congress unanimously passed a bill promoting the 95-year-old Dole from captain to colonel for his service during World War II in 2019. \"I've had a great life and this is sort of icing on the cake. It's not that I have to be a colonel; I was happy being a captain and it pays the same,\" Dole said, jokingly.\nPersonal life.\nDole married Phyllis Holden, an occupational therapist at a veterans hospital, in Battle Creek, Michigan, in 1948, three months after they met. They had one daughter, Robin. Dole and Holden divorced on January 11, 1972.\nDole met his second wife, Elizabeth Dole, in 1972. The couple was married on December 6, 1975.\nDole was a Freemason and a member of Russell Lodge No. 177, Russell, Kansas. In 1975, Dole was elevated to the 33rd degree of the Scottish Rite.\nDole was raised Methodist. For years, he and his wife regularly worshipped at Foundry United Methodist Church, but left in 1995, due to the more liberal leanings of its pastor, J. Philip Wogaman, as well as the attendance of the Clinton family at services. They subsequently began attending the National Presbyterian Church. However, Dole was largely private about his personal religious views.\nDole often referred to himself in the third person in conversation. In a 1996 appearance on \"Saturday Night Live\", he jokingly refuted the habit to Norm Macdonald, saying: \"That's not something Bob Dole does. That's not something Bob Dole has ever done, or that Bob Dole will ever do.\" He had no relation to the Dole plc or its namesake James Dole, although confusion between the two did lead Burhanettin Ozfatura, the mayor of \u0130zmir, Turkey, to ban the sale of Dole bananas in the city in February 1995.\nHealth.\nDole had surgery for prostate cancer in 1991. He later spoke before Congress and on public service announcements about early detection of the disease and the erectile dysfunction that resulted from his surgery. He then became a paid spokesman for Viagra. He also starred in a parody of his Viagra commercials for \"the little blue can\" of Pepsi.\nIn 2001, Dole, at age 77, was treated successfully for an abdominal aortic aneurysm by vascular surgeon Kenneth Ouriel.\nDole underwent a hip replacement operation that required him to receive blood thinners in December 2004. One month after the surgery, doctors determined that he was bleeding inside his head. He spent 40 days at Walter Reed Army Medical Center; upon his release, his stronger left arm was of limited use. Dole told a reporter that he needed help to handle the simplest of tasks, since both of his arms were of limited use. He continued to go to Walter Reed several times a week for occupational therapy for his left shoulder.\nIn 2009, Dole was hospitalized for an elevated heart rate and sore legs for which he underwent a successful skin grafting procedure. He was hospitalized with pneumonia in February 2010 after undergoing knee surgery. Dole spent ten months at Walter Reed Army Medical Center recovering from the surgery and experienced three bouts with pneumonia. He was released from the hospital in November 2010. Dole was readmitted to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in January 2011 and spent about six days there being treated for a fever and a minor infection.\nDole was hospitalized in November 2012 at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, according to then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid.\nDole was hospitalized at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center for hypotension on September 13, 2017. He stayed for 24 hours before returning home.\nDeath and funeral.\nIn February 2021, Dole announced that he had been diagnosed with stage four lung cancer, and subsequently underwent immunotherapy, forgoing chemotherapy due to its negative effect on his body. He died of complications from the disease in his sleep at his home in Washington, D.C., on the morning of December 5, 2021, at age 98.\nNumerous politicians paid tribute to Dole after his death, including President Joe Biden and former presidents Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama and Donald Trump. President Biden issued an order for flags to be flown at half-staff through December 11, 2021, with Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi and Majority Leader of the United Senate Chuck Schumer announcing that Dole would lie in state at the U.S. Capitol on December 9.\nA funeral service was held at Washington National Cathedral on December 10, 2021, and was attended by President Biden with First Lady Jill Biden, Vice President Kamala Harris with her husband, second gentleman Doug Emhoff, former president and opponent in the 1996 election Bill Clinton, former vice presidents Mike Pence from Indiana, Dick Cheney from Wyoming and Dan Quayle from Indiana, Minority Leader of the United States Senate Mitch McConnell from Kentucky, and former U.S. senate members Pat Roberts and Tom Daschle, among others. Later that same day, a memorial ceremony was held at the National World War II Memorial where Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Mark Milley, actor Tom Hanks and \"Today Show\" co-anchor Savannah Guthrie were among those who spoke.\nDole's\u00a0casket then returned to Kansas where a memorial service was held at the Catholic Church in his boyhood home of Russell on December 11. The service was open to the public. Speakers included Governor of Kansas Laura Kelly, U.S. Senate members Jerry Moran and Roger Marshall and former U.S. Senate member Pat Roberts. His casket then went to lie in repose at the Kansas State Capitol. Following that, the casket returned to Washington and Dole was interred at Arlington National Cemetery.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHonorary degrees.\nDole was awarded several honorary degrees. These include:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\"\nstyle=\"width:100%\""}
{"id": "55847", "revid": "1314686799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55847", "title": "National Defense Education Act", "text": "United States law enacted 1958\nThe National Defense Education Act (NDEA) was signed into law on September 2, 1958, providing funding to United States education institutions at all levels.\nNDEA was among many science initiatives implemented by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1958 to increase the technological sophistication and power of the United States alongside, for instance, DARPA and NASA. It followed a growing national sense that U.S. scientists were falling behind scientists in the Soviet Union. The early Soviet success in the Space Race catalyzed a national sense of unease with Soviet technological advances, especially after the Soviet Union launched the first-ever satellite, Sputnik, the previous year.\nThe act authorized funding for four years, increasing funding per year: for example, funding increased on eight program titles from $183 million in 1959 to $222 million in 1960. In total, over a billion dollars was directed towards improving American science curricula. However, in the aftermath of McCarthyism, a mandate was inserted in the act that all beneficiaries must complete an affidavit disclaiming belief in the overthrow of the U.S. government. This requisite loyalty statement stirred concern and protest from the American Association of University Professors and over 153 institutions.\nCause and purpose.\nThe NDEA was influenced by the Soviet launch of the satellite Sputnik on October 4, 1957. U.S. citizens feared that education in the USSR was superior to that in the United States, and Congress reacted by adding the act to bring U.S. schools up to speed.\nThe year 1957 also coincided with an acute shortage of mathematicians in the United States. The electronic computer created a demand for mathematicians as programmers and it also shortened the lead time between the development of a new mathematical theory and its practical application, thereby making their work more valuable. The United States could no longer rely on European refugees for all of its mathematicians, though they remained an important source, so it had to drastically increase the domestic supply. At the time, \"mathematics\" was interpreted as pure mathematics rather than applied mathematics. The problem in the 1950s and 1960s was that industry, including defense, was absorbing the mathematicians who were also needed at high schools and universities training the next generation. At the university level, even more recently, there have been years when it was difficult to hire applied mathematicians and computer scientists because of the rate that industry was absorbing them.\nAdditionally, more high school graduates were beginning to attend college. In 1940 about one-half million Americans attended college, which was about 15 percent of their age group. By 1960, however, college enrollments had expanded to 3.6 million. By 1970, 7.5 million students were attending colleges in the United States, or 40 percent of college-age youths.\nThe act, therefore, was designed to fulfill two purposes. First, it was designed to provide the country with specific defense oriented personnel. This included providing federal help to foreign language scholars, area studies centers, and engineering students. Second it provided financial assistance\u2014primarily through the National Defense Student Loan program\u2014for thousands of students who would be part of the growing numbers enrolling at colleges and universities in the 1960s.\nNDEA established the National Defense Student Loan (NDSL) program to provide low-interest federal loans to \"promising, yet needy students\", and to enable them to pursue undergraduate and graduate educations. The national defense student loans were especially targeted toward students who possessed superior capacity in mathematics, engineering, or a modern foreign language or who desired to teach in elementary or secondary schools. A further intention of this loan program was to stimulate and assist in the establishment of loan programs at institutions of higher education through the provision of NDSL loans. The NDEA spurred the creation of federal and university funded college loan programs that still exist today.\nThe 1959 Disney featurette \"Donald in Mathmagic Land\" was produced and distributed with NDEA funding.\nBreakdown by title.\nTitle I.\nTitle I of the NDEA serves as an introduction to the content and purposes of the Act.\nTitle II.\nTitle II authorizes the provision of student loans and provides terms by which they may be awarded. Initially, Title II provided scholarships (also known as grants) rather than loans. However, some members of Congress expressed worry about the message sent by giving students a \"free ride.\" The House version of the bill eliminated scholarship money, while the Senate reduced the amount of scholarship money. By the time the bill was passed into law, student aid was exclusively loan-based.\nTitle III.\nTitle III provides additional financial assistance for the purposes of strengthening science, math, and foreign language programs. Latin and Greek programs are not funded under this title, on the grounds that they are not modern foreign languages, and thus do not support defense needs. Title III provides equipment, materials and state matching funds to develop mathematics, science, and foreign language instruction and professional development. Title III also encouraged cooperation between teachers and researchers. During Title III, research shifted the homogenous definition of intelligence associated with gifted children.\nTitle IV.\nTitle IV provides funding for graduate fellowships in order to increase the number of graduate-level professionals and university professors. Priority was given to students who stated an interest in becoming a professor. However, certain fields (such as folklore) were specifically exempted from these fellowships. Title IV was also one of the only two federal programs (along with Title VI of the NDEA) in existence at the time that gave any funding to the humanities.\nTitle V.\nTitle V includes provisions for the training of guidance counselors and the implementation of testing programs to identify gifted students. This laid the groundwork for Academically Gifted (AG) and Gifted &amp; Talented (GT) programs and began the trend of using standardized testing in schools to measure competency. Title V had a great influence on gifted education. However, since the program started in the 1920s, the defining percentage that marks \"giftedness\" has remained constant.\nTitle VI.\nTitle VI provides funding for language and area studies programs. \"Area studies\" includes such subjects as African American studies and Latin American studies.\nTitle VII.\nTitle VII provided funding for research in the more effective use of technology for educational purposes.\nTitle VIII.\nTitle VIII provided funding for vocational training in order to better prepare citizens for the workforce.\nTitle IX.\nTitle IX established the Science Information Institute and Science Information Council in order to disseminate scientific information and assist the government in matters of a highly technical nature.\nTitle X.\nTitle X contains miscellaneous provisions regarding legal and pragmatic details of the Act.\nControversy.\nThe NDEA includes Title X, Section 1001 (f), a mandate that all beneficiaries of the act complete an affidavit disclaiming belief in the overthrow of the U.S. government. Some in higher education opposed the disclaimer affidavit, as it came to be called, because they said it attempted to control beliefs and as such violated academic freedom. Initially, a small number of institutions (Barnard, Yale, and Princeton) refused to accept funding under the student loan program established by the act because of the affidavit requirement. By 1962, when the disclaimer affidavit was repealed, the number of schools protesting the clause was 153.\nAfter four years of seemingly ineffective protest, the disclaimer requirement was repealed in the Fall of 1962 by President John F. Kennedy who was spurred by an incident extraneous to universities' protests, in particular, following the public disclosure of the case of a National Science Foundation Fellowship recipient who had run into trouble with the House Un-American Activities Committee, and had been convicted of contempt of Congress. Kennedy interpreted this case proved the affidavit clause to be ineffective, and, in spite of\u2014rather than because of\u2014protest prior to 1961, the disclaimer requirement was excised.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55849", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55849", "title": "GI Bill", "text": ""}
{"id": "55850", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55850", "title": "G.I. Bill", "text": "U.S. law providing benefits for World War II veterans\nThe G.I. Bill, formally the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, was a law that provided a range of benefits for some of the returning World War II veterans (commonly referred to as G.I.s). The original G.I. Bill expired in 1956, but the term \"G.I. Bill\" is still used to refer to programs created to assist American military veterans.\nIt was largely designed and passed through Congress in 1944 in a bipartisan effort led by the American Legion, which wanted to reward practically all wartime veterans. John H. Stelle, a former Democratic governor of Illinois, served as the Chairman of the Legion's Executive Committee, which drafted and mobilized public opinion to get the G.I. Bill to President Roosevelt's desk on June 22, 1944. Stelle was rewarded for his efforts by the Legion which unanimously elected him its National Commander in 1945. He is commonly referred to as the \"Father of the G.I. Bill.\" Since the First World War the Legion had been in the forefront of lobbying Congress for generous benefits for war veterans. President Roosevelt initially proposed a much smaller program. As historians Glenn C. Altschuler and Stuart Blumin point out, FDR did not play a significant role in the contours of the bill. At first, Roosevelt shared with nearly everyone the idea that \"satisfactory employment,\" not educational opportunity, was the key feature of the bill. This changed in the fall of 1944, when Roosevelt's special representative to the European Theatre, Anna M. Rosenberg, returned with her report on the G.I.'s postwar expectations. From her hundreds of interviews with servicemen then fighting in France, it was clear they wanted educational opportunities previously unavailable to them. FDR \"lit up,\" Rosenberg recalled, and subsequent additions to the bill included provisions for higher education.\nThe final bill provided immediate financial rewards for practically all World War II veterans, thereby avoiding the highly disputed postponed life insurance policy payout for World War I veterans that had caused political turmoil in the 1920s and 1930s. Benefits included low-cost mortgages, low-interest loans to start a business or farm, one year of unemployment compensation, and dedicated payments of tuition and living expenses to attend high school, college, or vocational school. These benefits were available to all veterans who had been on active duty during the war years for at least 90 days and had not been dishonorably discharged.\nBy 1956, 7.8 million veterans had used the G.I. Bill education benefits, some 2.2 million to attend colleges or universities and an additional 5.6 million for some kind of training program. Historians and economists judge the G.I. Bill a major political and economic success\u2014especially in contrast to the treatments of World War I veterans\u2014and a major contribution to U.S. stock of human capital that encouraged long-term economic growth. It has been criticized for various reasons including increasing racial wealth disparities during the era of Jim Crow.\nThe original G.I. Bill ended in 1956. The Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2008 provided veterans with funding for the full cost of any public college in their state. The G.I. Bill was also modified through the passage of the Forever GI Bill in 2017.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOn June 22, 1944, the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, commonly known as the G.I. Bill of Rights, was signed into law. Professor Edwin Amenta states:\nVeterans benefits were a bargain for conservatives who feared increasingly high taxation and the extension of New Deal national government agencies. Veterans benefits would go to a small group without long-term implications for others, and programs would be administered by the VA, diverting power from New Deal bureaucracies. Such benefits were likely to hamper New Dealers in their attempts to win a postwar battle over a permanent system of social policy for everyone.\nDuring the war, politicians wanted to avoid the postwar confusion about veterans' benefits that became a political football in the 1920s and 1930s. Veterans' organizations that had formed after the First World War had millions of members; they mobilized support in Congress for a bill that provided benefits only to veterans of military service, including men and women. Ortiz says their efforts \"entrenched the VFW and the Legion as the twin pillars of the American veterans' lobby for decades.\"\nHarry W. Colmery, Republican National Committee chairman and a former National Commander of the American Legion, is credited with writing the first draft of the G.I. Bill. He reportedly jotted down his ideas on stationery and a napkin at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.C. A group of 8 from the Salem, Illinois American Legion have also been credited with recording their ideas for veteran benefits on napkins and paper. The group included Omar J. McMackin, Earl W. Merrit, Dr. Leonard W. Esper, George H. Bauer, William R. McCauley, James P. Ringley, A.L. Starshak and Illinois Governor, John Stelle who attended the signing ceremony with President Roosevelt.\nU.S. Senator Ernest McFarland, (D) AZ, and National Commander of the American Legion Warren Atherton, (R) CA were actively involved in the bill's passage. Edith Nourse Rogers, (R) MA, who helped write and who co-sponsored the legislation, might be termed as the \"mother of the G.I. Bill\". As with Colmery, her contribution to writing and passing this legislation has been obscured by time.\nThe bill that President Roosevelt initially proposed had a means test\u2014only poor veterans would get one year of funding; only top-scorers on a written exam would get four years of paid college. The American Legion proposal provided full benefits for all veterans, including women and minorities, regardless of their wealth.\nAn important provision of the G.I. Bill was low interest, zero down payment home loans for servicemen, with more favorable terms for new construction compared to existing housing. This encouraged millions of American families to move out of urban apartments and into suburban homes.\nAnother provision was known as the 52\u201320 clause for unemployment. Unemployed war veterans would receive $20 once a week for 52 weeks for up to one year while they were looking for work. Less than 20 percent of the money set aside for the 52\u201320 Club was distributed. Rather, most returning servicemen quickly found jobs or pursued higher education.\nThe recipients did not pay any income tax on the GI benefits, since they were not considered earned income.\nThe G.I. Bill received criticism for directing some funds to for-profit educational institutions. The G.I. Bill was racially discriminatory, as it was intended to accommodate Jim Crow laws. Due to the discrimination by local and state governments, as well as by private actors in housing and education, the G.I. Bill failed to benefit African Americans as it did with white Americans. Columbia University historian Ira Katznelson described the G.I. Bill as affirmative action for whites. The G.I. Bill has been criticized for increasing racial wealth disparities.\nThe original G.I. Bill ended in 1956. A variety of benefits have been available to military veterans since the original bill, and these benefits packages are commonly referred to as updates to the G.I. Bill.\nAfter World War II.\nA greater percentage of Vietnam veterans used G.I. Bill education benefits (72 percent) than World War II veterans (49 percent) or Korean War veterans (43 percent).\nCanada.\nCanada operated a similar program for its World War II veterans, with a similarly beneficial economic impact.\nProblems.\nRacial discrimination.\nThe G.I. Bill aimed to help American World War II veterans adjust to civilian life by providing them with benefits including low-cost mortgages, low-interest loans and financial support. The chairman of the American Veterans Committee at the time, Charles G. Bolte, wrote that federal agencies were consistently discriminating \"as though the legislation were earmarked 'For White Veterans Only'\". According to historian Ira Katznelson, \"the law was deliberately designed to accommodate Jim Crow\". In the New York and northern New Jersey suburbs 67,000 mortgages were insured by the G.I. Bill, but fewer than 100 were taken out by non-whites.\nAdditionally, some banks and mortgage agencies refused loans to black people. After the war, many people, black people included, returned to their former lives of poverty, making it difficult for them to pursue the higher education opportunities afforded by the G.I. Bill.\nIn the South, which was still segregated at that time, some universities refused to admit black people until the Civil Rights movement. Colleges accepting black people in the South initially numbered 100. Some of those institutions were of lower quality, with 28 of them classified as sub-baccalaureate. Only seven states offered post-baccalaureate training, while no accredited engineering or doctoral programs were available for blacks. These institutions were all smaller than white or non-segregated universities, often facing a lack of resources.\nBy 1946, only one fifth of the 100,000 black people who had applied for educational benefits had been registered in college. Furthermore, historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) came under increased pressure as rising enrollments and strained resources forced them to turn away an estimated 20,000 veterans. HBCUs were already the poorest colleges. HBCU resources were stretched even thinner when veterans' demands necessitated an expansion in the curriculum beyond the traditional \"preach and teach\" course of study.\nThough black people encountered many obstacles in their pursuit of G.I. benefits, the bill greatly expanded the population of African Americans attending college and graduate school. In 1940, enrollment at Black colleges was 1.08% of total U.S. college enrollment. By 1950 it had increased to 3.6%. However, these gains were limited almost exclusively to Northern states, and the educational and economic gap between white and black nationally widened under the effects of the G.I. Bill. With 79 percent of the black population living in southern states, educational gains were limited to a small portion of black Americans.\nMerchant marine.\nCongress did not include the merchant marine veterans in the original G.I. Bill, even though they were considered military personnel in times of war in accordance with the Merchant Marine Act of 1936. As President Roosevelt signed the G.I. Bill in June 1944 he said, \"I trust Congress will soon provide similar opportunities to members of the merchant marine who have risked their lives time and time again during war for the welfare of their country.\" Now that the youngest World War II veterans are in their 90s, efforts have been made to recognize the merchant mariners' contributions by giving some benefits to the remaining survivors. In 2007, three different bills to address this issue were introduced in Congress, of which one only passed in the House of Representatives. The Belated Thank You to the Merchant Mariners of World War II Act of 2007 establishes Merchant Mariner equality compensation payments by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs of a monthly benefit of $1,000 to each individual who, between December 7, 1941, and December 31, 1946, was a documented member of the U.S. Merchant Marine (including Army Transport Service and the Naval Transport Service). This bill was introduced to the House by Rep. Bob Filner (D-California) in 2007 and passed the House but not the Senate so did not become law. Another attempt to notice Merchant Marines in the G.I. Bill was the 21st Century GI Bill of Rights Act of 2007, introduced by Sen. Hillary Clinton, Entitles basic educational assistance to Armed Forces or reserves who, after September 11, 2001: (1) are deployed overseas; or (2) serve for an aggregate of at least two years or, before such period, are discharged due to a service-connected disability, hardship, or certain medical conditions. Entitles such individuals to 36 months of educational assistance. Rep. Jeff Miller (R-Florida) got the house to pass easier access to the GI Bill by \"verifying honorable service as a coast-wise merchant seaman between December 7, 1941, and December 31, 1946, for purposes of eligibility for veterans' benefits under the GI Bill Improvement Act of 1977.\" It passed the House and went no further.\nColleges that target veterans.\nAfter the GI Bill was instituted in the 1940s, a number of \"fly-by-night\" vocational schools were created. Some of these for-profit colleges still target veterans, who are excluded from the 90-10 rule for federal funding. This loophole encourages for-profit colleges to target and aggressively recruit veterans and their families. Legislative efforts to close the 90-10 loophole have failed.\nLead generators like QuinStreet have also acted as third parties to recruit veterans for subprime colleges.\nInadequate disability coverage.\nThe bill specified that any veteran requiring a prosthetic limb would be entitled to one and the training required to utilize it, as well as limited funding for custom automobiles and home renovations. Author Bess Williamson highlighted that there were extensive obstacles to veterans receiving prosthetic limbs following the first and second World Wars. These included inadequate types of prosthetics, poor quality of prosthetics, and a high emphasis on societal reintegration that emphasized aesthetics over function. However, the sympathetic perception of veterans, influenced by films like \"Meet McGonegal\" (1944), helped to drive innovation of prosthetic devices. Williamson also argued that these veteran's benefits, despite their flaws, set the stage for later government support and legislation, like the Americans with Disabilities Act.\nContent.\nAll veteran education programs are found in law in Title 38 of the United States Code. Each specific program is found in its own Chapter in Title 38.\nUnlike scholarship programs, the Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB) requires a financial commitment from the service member. However, if the benefit is not used, the service member cannot recoup whatever money was paid into the system.\nIn some states, the National Guard does offer true scholarship benefits, regardless of past or current MGIB participation.\nChapter 30 (Montgomery GI Bill).\nIn 1984, former Mississippi Democratic Congressman Gillespie V. \"Sonny\" Montgomery revamped the G.I. Bill. From 1984 until 2008, this version of the law was called \"The Montgomery G.I. Bill\". The Montgomery GI Bill\u00a0\u2014 Active Duty (MGIB) stated that active duty members had to forfeit $100 per month for 12 months; if they used the benefits, they received as of 2012[ [update]] $1564 monthly as a full-time student (tiered at lower rates for less-than-full-time) for a maximum of 36 months of education benefits. This benefit could be used for both degree and certificate programs, flight training, apprenticeship/on-the-job training, and correspondence courses if the veteran was enrolled full-time. Part-time veteran students received less, but for a proportionately longer period. This meant that for every month the veteran received benefits at the half-time, the veteran's benefits were only charged for 1/2 of a month. Veterans from the reserve had different eligibility requirements and different rules on receiving benefits (see Ch. 1606, Ch. 1607 and Ch. 33). MGIB could also be used while active, which only reimbursed the cost of tuition and fees. Each service has additional educational benefit programs for active duty members. Most delay using MGIB benefits until after separation, discharge or retirement.\n\"Buy-Up\" option.\nThe \"Buy-Up\" option, allows active duty members to forfeit up to $600 more toward their MGIB. For every dollar the service member contributes, the federal government contributes $8. Those who forfeit the maximum ($600) will receive, upon approval, an additional $150 per month for 36 months, or a total of $5400. This allows the veteran to receive $4,800 in additional funds ($5400 total minus the $600 contribution to receive it), but not until after leaving active duty (unless the tuition of a term is higher than the monthly MGIB rate would pay). The additional contribution must be made while still on active duty. It is available for G.I. Bill recipients using either Ch. 30 or Ch. 1607, but cannot be extended beyond 36 months if a combination of G.I. Bill programs are used. It will pay past 36 months of eligibility, by being paid to the end of the term where entitlement is exhausted.\nThe \"buy-up\" option is not to be confused with a \"kicker\". A kicker is an additional payment as well, however it is a contractual incentive for specific jobs, and not an optional offering soldiers can pay into.\nTime limit/eligibility.\nMGIB benefits may be used up to 10 years from the date of last discharge or release from active duty. The 10-year period can be extended by the amount of time a service member was prevented from training during that period because of a disability or because he/she was held by a foreign government or power.\nThe 10-year period can also be extended if one reenters active duty for 90 days or more after becoming eligible. The extension ends 10 years from the date of separation from the later period. Periods of active duty of fewer than 90 days qualify for extensions only if one was separated for one of the following:\nFor those eligible based on two years of active duty and four years in the Selected Reserve (also known as \"call to service\"), they have 10 years from their release from active duty, or 10 years from the completion of the four-year Selected Reserve obligation to use MGIB benefits.\nAt this time, service members cannot recoup any monies paid into the MGIB program should it not be utilized.\nTop-up option.\nService members may use GI bill in conjunction with Military Tuition Assistance (MilTA) to help with payments above the MilTA CAP. This will reduce the total benefit available once the member leaves service. Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010 (Public Law 111\u2013377, January 4, 2011), Section 111, amended Title 38, U.S. Code, by adding section 3322(h), \"Bar to Duplication of Eligibility Based on a Single Event or Period of Service,\" which does not allow the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to establish eligibility for a Service Member under more than one education benefit. If a service member applies for Montgomery GI Bill benefits (such as the Top-up option to augment Tuition Assistance) and entered service on/after August 1, 2011, then they must incur a subsequent period of service to convert to the Post 9/11 GI Bill. If the service member cannot incur another period of service, they are not eligible to convert. The VA considers a service member has elected a GI Bill upon submission of VA Form 22\u20131990.and VA approval and issues a Certificate of Eligibility.\nEducational.\nUnder this bill, benefits may be used to pursue an undergraduate or graduate degree at a college or university, a cooperative training program, or an accredited independent study program leading to a degree.\nChapter 31 (Vocational Rehabilitation Program).\n\"Chapter 31\" is a vocational rehabilitation program that serves eligible active duty servicemembers and veterans with service-connected disabilities. This program promotes the development of suitable, gainful employment by providing vocational and personal adjustment counseling, training assistance, a monthly subsistence allowance during active training, and employment assistance after training. Independent living services may also be provided to advance vocational potential for eventual job seekers, or to enhance the independence of eligible participants who are presently unable to work.\nIn order to receive an evaluation for Chapter 31 vocational rehabilitation and/or independent living services, those qualifying as a \"servicemember\" must have a memorandum service-connected disability rating of 20% or greater and apply for vocational rehabilitation services. Those qualifying as \"veterans\" must have received, or eventually receive, an honorable or other-than-dishonorable discharge, have a VA service-connected disability rating of 10% or more, and apply for services. Law provides for a 12-year basic period of eligibility in which services may be used, which begins on latter of separation from active military duty or the date the veteran was first notified of a service-connected disability rating. In general, participants have 48 months of program entitlement to complete an individual vocational rehabilitation plan. Participants deemed to have a \"serious employment handicap\" will generally be granted exemption from the 12-year eligibility period and may receive additional months of entitlement as necessary to complete approved plans.\nChapter 32 (Veterans Educational Assistance Program).\nThe Veterans Educational Assistance Program (VEAP) is available for those who first entered active duty between January 1, 1977, and June 30, 1985, and elected to make contributions from their military pay to participate in this education benefit program. Participants' contributions are matched on a $2 for $1 basis by the Government with a maximum allowable participant contribution of $2,700. (Maximum possible government contribution: $5,400. Maximum possible benefit: $8,100.) This benefit may be used for degree and certificate programs, flight training, apprenticeship/on-the-job training and correspondence courses.\nChapter 33 (Post-9/11).\nCongress, in the summer of 2008, approved an expansion of benefits beyond the current G.I. Bill program for military veterans serving since the September 11 attacks originally proposed by Democratic Senator Jim Webb. Beginning in August 2009, recipients became eligible for greatly expanded benefits, or the full cost of any public college in their state. The new bill also provides a housing allowance and $1,000 a year stipend for books, among other benefits.\nThe VA announced in September 2008 that it would manage the new benefit itself instead of hiring an outside contractor after protests by veteran's organizations and the American Federation of Government Employees. Veterans Affairs Secretary James B. Peake stated that although it was \"unfortunate that we will not have the technical expertise from the private sector,\" the VA \"can and will deliver the benefits program on time.\"\nIn December 2010 Congress passed the Post-9/11 Veterans Education Assistance Improvements Act of 2010. The law, often referred to as G.I. Bill 2.0, expands eligibility for members of the National Guard to include time served on Title 32 or in the full-time Active Guard and Reserve (AGR). It does not, however, cover members of the Coast Guard Reserve who have served under Title 14 orders performing duties comparable to those performed by National Guard personnel under Title 32 orders.\nThe 2010 law also includes enrollment periods. In this case if the veteran is full-time, and the maximum BAH rate is $1500 per month, then the veteran will receive (13/30)x$1500 = $650 for the end of the first period of enrollment, then the veteran will receive (10/30)x$1500 = $500 for the beginning of the second period of enrollment. Effectively, the change in break-pay means the veteran will receive $1150 per month for August instead of $1500 per month. This has a significant impact in December - January BAH payments since most Colleges have 2-4 week breaks.\nAnother change enables active-duty servicemembers and their G.I. Bill-eligible spouses to receive the annual $1,000 book stipend (pro-rated for their rate of pursuit), adds several vocational, certification and OJT options, and removes the state-by-state tuition caps for veterans enrolled at publicly funded colleges and universities.\nChanges to Ch. 33 also includes a new $17,500 annual cap on tuition and fees coverage for veterans attending private colleges and foreign colleges and universities.\nChapter 34 (Vietnam Era G.I. Bill).\nThe Vietnam Era G.I. Bill provided educational assistance for service members serving on Active Duty for more than 180 days with any portion of that time falling between January 31, 1955, and January 1, 1977. To be eligible, service members must have been discharged under conditions other than dishonorable. There was no service member contribution for this program like Chapter 30 or 32. This program was sunset on December 31, 1989.\nChapter 35 (Survivors' and Dependents' Educational Assistance Program).\nThe Survivors' and Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) Program delivers education and training advantages to dependents from eligible resources to veterans who have either have a terminal illness due to a service-related condition, or who were called to active duty or had a disability related to serving in the American forces in the United States. That program gives around 50 months of education benefits. However, there are still more opportunities. The benefits may be used for degree and certificate programs, apprenticeship, and on the job training. Spouses of veterans and former spouses are offered free courses occasionally.\nChapter 1606 (Montgomery GI Bill- Selective Reserve).\nThe Montgomery G.I. Bill\u00a0\u2014 Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR) program may be available to members of the\nSelected Reserve, including all military branch reserve components as well as the Army National Guard and Air National Guard. This benefit may be used for degree and certificate programs, flight training, apprenticeship/on-the-job training and correspondence courses.\nChapter 1607 (Reserve Educational Assistance Program).\nThe Reserve Educational Assistance Program (REAP) was available to all reservists who, after September 11, 2001, complete 90 days or more of active duty service \"in support of contingency operations.\" This benefit provided reservists return from active duty with up to 80% of the active duty (Chapter 30) G.I. Bill benefits as long as they remained active participants in the reserves. Chapter 1607 was sunset on November 25, 2019, to make way for the Post 9/11 G.I. Bill.\nOther legal safeguards.\nThe State of California has an 85-15 rule that aims to prevent predatory for-profit colleges and \"fly-by-night schools\" from targeting veterans.\nIn 2012, President Barack Obama issued Executive Order 13607 to ensure that military service members, veterans, and their families would not be aggressively targeted by sub-prime colleges.\nGI Bill comparison tool and college choice.\nThe Department of Veterans Affairs maintains a website for veterans to compare colleges that use the GI Bill, in order to use their educational benefits wisely.\nThe VA also has a GI Bill feedback system for veterans to lodge their complaints about schools they are attending.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\nOfficial\nGeneral information\n[[Category:1944 in American law]]\n[[Category:1944 in military history]]\n[[Category:Higher education in the United States]]\n[[Category:American Legion]]\n[[Category:History of veterans' affairs in the United States]]\n[[Category:Legal history of the United States]]\n[[Category:Military education and training in the United States]]\n[[Category:Politics of World War II]]\n[[Category:United States federal education legislation]]\n[[Category:United States federal legislation articles needing infoboxes]]\n[[Category:United States federal veterans' affairs legislation]]\n[[Category:United States military pay and benefits]]"}
{"id": "55851", "revid": "1559905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55851", "title": "Serviceman's Readjustment Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "55853", "revid": "44719641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55853", "title": "Gus Hall", "text": "General Secretary of Communist Party USA\nGus Hall (born Arvo Kustaa Halberg; October 8, 1910\u00a0\u2013 October 13, 2000) was an American activist who served as the general secretary of the Communist Party USA (CPUSA) from 1959 to 2000. As a labor leader, Hall was closely associated with the so-called \"Little Steel\" Strike of 1937, an effort to unionize the nation's smaller, regional steel manufacturers. During the Second Red Scare, he was indicted under the Smith Act and was sentenced to eight years in prison. After his release, Hall led the CPUSA for over 40 years, generally taking an orthodox Marxist\u2013Leninist stance and becoming a perennial candidate for president of the United States.\nEarly life and political activism.\nHall was born Arvo Kustaa Halberg in 1910 in Cherry Township, St. Louis County, Minnesota, a rural community on northern Minnesota's Mesabi Iron Range. He was Finnish-American, the son of Matt (Matti) and Susan (Susanna) Halberg. Hall's parents were Finnish immigrants from Lapua in South Ostrobothnia, and were politically radical: they were involved in the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) and were early members of the Communist Party USA (CPUSA) in 1919. The Mesabi Range was one of the most important immigration settlements for Finns, who were often active in labor militancy and political activism. Hall's home language was Finnish, and he conversed with his nine siblings in that language for the rest of his life. He did not know political terminology in Finnish and used mostly English when meeting with visiting Finnish Communists.\nHall grew up in a Communist home and was involved early on in politics. According to Hall, after his father was banned from working in the mines for joining an IWW strike, the family grew up in near-starvation in a log cabin built by Halberg.\nAt 15, to support the impoverished ten-child family, Hall left school and went to work in the North Woods lumber camps, mines and railroads. Two years later in 1927, he was recruited to the CPUSA by his father. Hall became an organizer for the Young Communist League (YCL) in the upper Midwest. In 1931, an apprenticeship in the YCL qualified Hall to travel to the Soviet Union to study for two years at the International Lenin School in Moscow.\nMove to Minneapolis.\nAfter his studies, Hall moved to Minneapolis to further the YCL activities there. He was involved in hunger marches, demonstrations on behalf of farmers, and various strikes during the Great Depression. In 1934, Hall was jailed for six months for taking part in the Minneapolis Teamster's Strike, led by Trotskyist Farrell Dobbs. After serving his sentence, Hall was blacklisted and was unable to find work under his original name. He changed his name to Gus Hall, derived from Kustaa (Gustav) Halberg. The change was confirmed in court in 1935.\nOhio activism.\nIn late 1934, Hall went to Ohio's Mahoning Valley. Following the call for organizing in the steel industry, Hall was among a handful hired at a steel mill in Youngstown, Ohio. During 1935\u20131936, he was involved in the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and was a founding organizer of the Steel Workers Organizing Committee (SWOC), which was set up by the CIO. Hall stated that he and others persuaded John L. Lewis, who was one of the founders of the CIO, that steel could be organized.\n\"Little Steel\" strike and war service.\nHall was a leader of the 1937 \"Little Steel\" strike, so called because it was directed against Republic Steel, Bethlehem Steel and the Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company, as opposed to the industry giant U.S. Steel. It had previously entered into a contract with SWOC without a strike. The strike was ultimately unsuccessful, and marred by the deaths of workers at Republic plants in Chicago and Youngstown. Hall was arrested for allegedly transporting bomb-making materials intended for Republic's plant in Warren, Ohio. He pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor and was fined $500. SWOC became the United Steelworkers of America (USWA) in 1942. Philip Murray, USWA founding president, once commented that Hall's leadership of the strike in Warren and Youngstown was a model of effective grassroots organizing.\nAfter the 1937 strike, Hall focused on party activities instead of union work, and became the leader of the Communist Party USA (CPUSA) in Youngstown in 1937. His responsibilities in the party grew rapidly, and in 1939 he became the CPUSA leader for the city of Cleveland. Hall ran on the CPUSA ticket for Youngstown councilman and also for governor of Ohio, but received few votes. In 1940 Hall was convicted of fraud and forgery in an election scandal and spent 90 days in jail.\nHall volunteered for the United States Navy when World War II broke out, serving as a machinist's mate in Guam. During the first years of the war in Europe, the CPUSA held an isolationist stance, as the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany were cooperating based on the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact. When Hitler broke the treaty by invading the USSR in June 1941, the CPUSA began to officially support the war effort. During his naval service, Hall was elected in absence to the National Committee of the CPUSA. He was honorably discharged from the Navy on March 6, 1946.\nSeen as a Moscow loyalist, Hall's reputation in the party rose after the war. In 1946 he was elected to the national executive board of the party under the new general secretary, Eugene Dennis, a pro-Soviet Marxist\u2013Leninist, who had replaced Earl Browder after the latter's expulsion from the party.\nIndictment during the Red Scare and rise to the head of the CPUSA.\nNow a major American communist leader in the post-war era, Hall caught the attention of United States officials. On July 22, 1948, Hall and 11 other Communist Party leaders were indicted under the Alien Registration Act, popularly called the Smith Act, on charges of \"conspiracy to teach and advocate the overthrow of the U.S. government by force and violence\", although his conviction was based entirely on Hall's advocacy of Marxist thought. Hall's initial prison sentence lasted for five years.\nReleased on bail, Hall rose to the secretariat of the CPUSA. When the Supreme Court upheld the Smith Act (June 4, 1951), Hall and three other men skipped bail and went underground. Hall's attempt to flee to Moscow failed when he was picked up in Mexico City on October 8, 1951. He was sentenced to three more years and eventually served over five and a half years in Leavenworth Federal Penitentiary. In prison he distributed party leaflets and lifted weights. He was located in a cell adjacent to that of George \"Machine Gun\" Kelly, a notorious gangster of the prohibition era. The Supreme Court of the United States later reversed some convictions under the Smith Act as unconstitutional.\nIn the early 1960s, Hall was in danger of facing yet another indictment, this time under the Internal Security Act of 1950, known as the McCarran Act, but the Supreme Court found the Act partly unconstitutional, and the government abandoned its charges. The act required \"Communist action\" organizations to register with the government, it excluded party members from applying for United States passports or holding government jobs. Because of the Act, Hall's driver's license was revoked by the State of New York.\nAfter his release, Hall continued his activities. He began to travel around the United States, ostensibly on vacation but gathering support to replace Dennis as the general secretary. He accused Dennis of cowardice for not going underground as ordered in 1951 and also claimed Dennis had used funds reserved for the underground for his own purposes. Hall's rise to the position of general secretary was generally unexpected by the American Communist circles (the post was expected to go to either Henry Winston or Gil Green, both important figures in the YCL), although Hall had held the office of acting general secretary briefly in the early 1950s after Dennis's arrest. In 1959, Hall was elected CPUSA general secretary and afterward received the Order of Lenin.\nGeneral Secretary of the CPUSA.\nThe McCarthy era had taken a heavy toll on the Communist Party USA, as many American members were called to testify to congressional committees. In addition, due to the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956, many members became disenchanted and left the party. They were also moved by the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's dismissal of Stalinism. In the United States, the rise of the New Left and the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 created hostility between leftists and the CPUSA, marginalizing it.\nHall, along with other party leaders who remained, sought to rebuild the party. He led the struggle to reclaim the legality of the Communist Party and addressed tens of thousands in Oregon, Washington, and California. Envisioning a democratization of the American Communist movement, Hall spoke of a \"broad people's political movement\" and tried to ally his party with radical campus groups, the anti-Vietnam War movement, organizations active in the civil rights movement, and the new rank-and-file trade union movements in an effort to build the CPUSA among the young \"baby boomer\" generation of activists. Ultimately, Hall failed to forge a lasting alliance with the New Left.\nHall had a reputation of being one of the most convinced supporters of the actions and interests of the Soviet Union outside the USSR's political sphere of influence. From 1959 onward, Hall spent some time in Moscow each year and was one of the most widely known American politicians in the USSR, where he was received by high-level Soviet politicians such as Leonid Brezhnev.\nHall spoke regularly on campuses and talk shows as an advocate for socialism in the United States. He argued for socialism in the United States to be built on the traditions of U.S.-style democracy rooted in the United States Bill of Rights. He would often say Americans didn't accept the Constitution without a Bill of Rights and wouldn't accept socialism without a Bill of Rights. He professed deep confidence in the democratic traditions of the American people. He remained a prolific writer on current events, producing a great number of articles and pamphlets, of which many were published in the magazine \"Political Affairs\".\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, Hall also made frequent appearances on Soviet television, always supporting the position of the Soviet regime. Hall guided the CPUSA in accordance with the party line of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), rejecting any liberalization efforts such as Eurocommunism. He also dismissed the radical new revolutionary movements that criticized the official Soviet party line of \"Peaceful coexistence\" and called for a world revolution. After the Sino-Soviet split, Maoism likewise was condemned, and all Maoist sympathizers were expelled from the CPUSA in the early 1960s.\nHall defended the Soviet invasions of Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan, and supported the Stalinist principle of \"Socialism in One Country\". In the early 1980s, Hall and the CPUSA criticized the Solidarity movement in Poland. In 1992, the Moscow daily \"Izvestia\" claimed that the CPUSA had received over $40 million in payments from the Soviet Union, contradicting Hall's long-standing claims of financial independence. The former KGB General Oleg Kalugin declared in his memoir that the KGB had Hall and the American Communist Party \"under total control\" and that he was known to be siphoning off \"Moscow money\" to set up his own horse-breeding farm. The writer and J. Edgar Hoover biographer Curt Gentry has noted that a similar story about Hall was planted in the media through the FBI's secret COINTELPRO campaign of disruption and disinformation against radical opposition groups.\nPresidential candidate and later years.\nIn the 1964 United States presidential election, Hall's party supported Lyndon B. Johnson, saying it was necessary to prevent the victory of the conservative Barry Goldwater. During the 1972 presidential election, the CPUSA withdrew its support from the Democratic Party and nominated Hall as its candidate. Hall ran for president four times\u00a0\u2014 in 1972, 1976, 1980, and 1984\u00a0\u2014 the last two times with Angela Davis. Of the four elections, Hall received the largest number of votes in 1976, largely because of the Watergate scandal bringing protest votes for minor parties. Hall ranked only in eighth place among the presidential candidates. Owing to the great expense of running, the difficulty in meeting the strenuous and different election law provisions in each state, and the difficulty in getting media coverage, the CPUSA decided to suspend running national campaigns while continuing to run candidates at the local level. While ceasing presidential campaigns, the CPUSA did not renew support for the Democratic party.\nThe 1980s were a politically difficult decade for Hall and the CPUSA, as one of Hall's trusted confidants and the deputy head of the CPUSA, Morris Childs, was revealed in 1980 to be a longtime Federal Bureau of Investigation informant. Although Childs was taken into the United States Federal Witness Protection Program and received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1987, Hall continued to deny that Childs had been a spy. Also, Henry Winston, Hall's African-American deputy, died in 1986. The black party base questioned the fact that the leadership was exclusively white.\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the party faced another crisis. In a press conference that year, Hall warned of witch hunts and McCarthyism in Russia, comparing that country unfavorably with North Korea. Hall led a faction of the party that stood against Glasnost and Perestroika and, for the hardliners of the CPSU, accused Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin of \"demolishing\" socialism. Hall supported Vietnam and Cuba but criticized the People's Republic of China for failing to oppose the West. In late 1991, members wanting reform founded the Committees of Correspondence for Democracy and Socialism, a group critical of the direction in which Hall was taking the party. When they were unable to influence the leadership, they left the party and Hall purged them from the membership, including such leaders as Angela Davis and Charlene Mitchell.\nDuring the last years of his life, Hall lived in Yonkers, New York, with his wife, Elizabeth. Along with following political events, Hall engaged in hobbies that included art collecting, organic gardening, and painting. In 2000, shortly before his death, Hall resigned the post of party chairman in favor of Sam Webb and was appointed honorary chairman. In 1994, Michael Myerson, who had left the CPUSA along with Herbert Aptheker, Angela Davis, Gil Green, and Charlene Mitchell, accused Hall of living a \"good bourgeois life\" including \"an estate in fashionable Hampton Bays.\"\nCriticism.\nWhen the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party (SWP) and its leaders in the Midwest Teamsters were prosecuted under the Smith Act in Minnesota in 1941, some Communist Party members supported the government actions. Later, Hall admitted it was a mistake for the party to not openly fight against imprisonment of SWP members under the Smith Act. The Trotskyist movement held strong negative opinions against Hall; upon his death, the Trotskyist World Socialist Web Site denounced him for what they perceived as his incompetence, loyalty to the Soviet Union, and abandonment of the working class.\nAt times, some Soviet officials criticized Hall by accusing him of poor leadership of the CPUSA. Young American communists were advised to distance themselves from CPUSA, as the party was under intense FBI surveillance, and these officials believed that under such conditions the party could not be successful.\nMany conservatives saw Hall as a threat to the United States, with J. Edgar Hoover describing him as \"a powerful, deceitful, dangerous foe of Americanism.\" An inflammatory anti-Christian statement was falsely ascribed to Hall, earning him the hostility of some Christian groups, including Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority. In a 1977 speech, future U.S. president Ronald Reagan planned to quote this alleged 1961 statement as proof of the evils of communism: \"I dream of the hour when the last congressman is strangled to death on the guts of the last preacher\u00a0\u2014 and since the Christians seem to love to sing about the blood, why not give them a little of it? Slit the throats of their children [and] draw them over the mourner's bench and the pulpit and allow them to drown in their own blood, and then see whether they enjoy singing those hymns.\" The statement, which Reagan ultimately excised from his speech because he claimed he did not have the \"nerve\" to say it, was falsely claimed to have been said by Hall at the funeral oration of former CPUSA party chairman William Z. Foster. Hall would later make positive comments about Christianity; in 1963, he called the papal encyclical Pacem in terris \"the work of a great Pope\". According to Francis Nigel Lee, Hall held Pope John XXIII in high regard and hoped for dialogue between Catholics and Communists, writing in \"Political Affairs\" that \"Marxists have shown their remarkable willingness to go along with Pope John's giant step forward.\" Gus Hall is also reported to have said: \u201cOur quarrel is with capitalism, not God.\u201d\nHall was also accused of homophobia, as the CPUSA followed a Stalinist doctrine of declaring homosexuality a \"fascist tendency\". As a result, openly gay party members such as Harry Hay were expelled from the party in the 1950s. The Communist Party was critical of newly emerging social movements in the 1960s and 1970s, keeping its distance from the New Left. Nevertheless, some CPUSA members attempted to appeal to the youth, with Gil Green arguing that \u201cthe correct line should have been to try to turn this upheaval amongst young people into a permanent kind of movement while letting its dynamics work itself out with our participation.\u201d Despite the fact that the Communist party of Mexico and some Afro-American communists such as Jarvis Tyner and Kendra Alexander opposed homophobia, CPUSA was opposed to gay rights, with the official party programme from early 1970s condemning any behaviour \u201cwhich encourages or promotes homosexual relationships as an alternative to sound, healthy, male\u2013female relationships or distracts from the family as the basic unity of society and the fundamental component of the future we see to bring into being\u201d and repudiating \u201cas false any attempt to depict the so-called gay lifestyle as part of advanced and even revolutionary movements, or to promote it in the guise of a progressive ideology\". However, Hall himself was not homophobic. According to Erwin Marquit, Hall sought to moderate the party's hostile stance towards gay groups, and when questioned by the student council of the University of Minnesota, he stated his opposition to expelling homosexual members from the party. Hall had also intervened on behalf of Bernard Koten, a party member who was arrested in Kiev in August 1963 and charged with homosexuality. Hall reacted strongly to the news of Koten's arrest and called for the charges to be dropped \"unless a more serious crime is involved\". After protests from Hall and a number of progressive activists, Koten was released without trial.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn Youngstown, Hall met Elizabeth Mary Turner (1909\u20132003), a woman of Hungarian background. They were married in 1935. Elizabeth was a leader in her own right, among the first women steelworkers and a secretary of SWOC. They had two children, Barbara (Conway) (born 1938) and Arvo (born 1947).\nGus Hall died on October 13, 2000, at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan from diabetes mellitus complications. He was buried in the Forest Home Cemetery near Chicago.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55854", "revid": "4135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55854", "title": "Rhyme of the Ancient Mariner", "text": ""}
{"id": "55855", "revid": "4135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55855", "title": "Rime of the Ancyent Marinere", "text": ""}
{"id": "55856", "revid": "50255754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55856", "title": "Linz", "text": "Linz (Pronunciation: , ; ) is the capital of Upper Austria and third-largest city in Austria. Located on the river Danube, the city is in the far north of Austria, south of the border with the Czech Republic. As of 1 January 2024, the city has a population of 214,064. It is the seventh-largest of all cities on the river Danube.\nHistory.\nLinz originated as a Roman fort named \"Lentia\", established in the first century. The name reflects its location at a bend in the Danube (Celtic root \"lentos\" = \"bendable\"). This strategic position on the river made it the first Roman fort in the Noricum region, protecting a vital transportation route.\nThe name \"Linz\" in its present form was first documented in 799.\nLinz was mentioned as a fortified city in 1236 and was granted city rights in 1324.\nJohannes Kepler spent several years of his life in the city teaching mathematics. On 15 May 1618 he discovered Kepler's laws of planetary motion. The local public university Johannes Kepler University Linz is named for him.\nThe \"Oeconomische Encyclop\u00e4die\" (also simply known as \"the Kr\u00fcnitz\"), with the entry about Linz being written around 1800, describes the city as well built and fortified and its economy as growing, partially because of its location on the Danube and the connection to routes to Hungary and Vienna. At that time, the city had a population of 16,000\u201317,000. Major industries were the productions of gunpowder, iron, steel, salt, and firewood. The wool industry was particularly important: a wool manufactory, established in 1672, was the biggest in then-Austria, or rather, the Austrian states. It was nationalized in 1754. Plans, made in 1770, of selling it to a tradesman were canceled. Although it kept production going, by the end of the 18th century its \"golden era \"was over. When the \"Kr\u00fcnitz\" entry was written, the manufactuary had a yearly revenue of 1.5 million \"Gulden\" and was generating 100,000 in profit and was employing around 30,000 people.\nAnton Bruckner spent the years between 1855 and 1868 working as a local composer and organist in the Old Cathedral, Linz. The Brucknerhaus is named for him.\nAdolf Hitler was born in Braunau am Inn (an Austrian town near the German border) and moved to Linz during his childhood. The notorious Holocaust bureaucrat Adolf Eichmann also spent his youth in Linz. Until the end of his life, Hitler considered Linz to be his hometown. Hitler effected the founding of the Bruckner Symphony Orchestra, which began presenting concerts in autumn 1943. His plan for one of the bell towers in Linz to play a theme from Bruckner's Fourth Symphony never came to pass. \nDuring World War II Linz was a giant industrial complex in support of the Nazi war effort. Hermann G\u00f6ring supervised the construction of the Voest complex, ultimately a gigantic construction site built by slave labour. The Mauthausen concentration camp was established to the east of Linz, but three Mauthausen sub-camps were within the Voest complex.\nIn addition to an ordnance depot Linz had a benzol plant which was bombed during the Oil Campaign of World War II. The city's confrontation with its Nazi past resulted in the renaming of many streets. In 1945, immediately after the end of the Nazi dictatorship, 39 streets in Linz were renamed, but from 1946 to 1987, only two streets were renamed. However, since 1988, 17 new traffic areas were named after victims of National Socialism or resistance fighters.\nEconomy.\nLinz is one of the main economic centres of Austria. Voestalpine is a large technology and capital goods group, founded as the \"Reichswerke Hermann G\u00f6ring\" during World War II. It is now known for basic oxygen steelmaking technique. The former \"Chemie Linz\" chemical group has been split up into several companies.\nThe Meeting Industry Report Austria (mira) ranks Linz as the third most important destination for congresses in Austria, with a share of 7.4 percent in the total number of congresses, conferences and seminars held in Austria. Linz has more than 60 congress and event venues. With the Blue Meeting concept, the local tourism association has developed a conference format which focuses on individual needs of participants and adapts to the idea of green meetings, therefore supporting waste minimisation, energy efficiency, climate-neutral travel, as well as regional added value.\nWaterfront and industry.\nLinz has 1 of 4 Austrian harbours on the Danube (). Manufacturing plants can be found along the waterfront. The economic importance of Linz was founded over centuries in trade. Large industrial enterprises are still located in Linz nowadays, for example Voestalpine AG.\nShopping.\nThirteen shopping malls can be found in Linz, three of which are situated in the city centre. Shopping centres include: Arkade, Atrium City Center, Shopping Mall Auwiesen, Shopping Mall Biesenfeld, Shopping Mall Industriezeile, Shopping Mall Kleinm\u00fcnchen, Shopping Mall Muldenstra\u00dfe, EuroCenter Oed, Shopping Mall Wegscheid, Infra Center, Lentia City, Passage, and PRO-Kaufland.\nAccording to a study by Infrapool in Oktober 2010, the Linzer Landstra\u00dfe is the busiest shopping street outside of Vienna. The weekly frequency is noted between 240,500 (Monday\u2013Saturday, 8 a.m. until 7 p.m.) and 228,400 (8 a.m. until 6 p.m.) passers-by, which is the second highest value \u2013 only in 2005 more passers-by were detected.\nMarkets.\nThere are eleven farmer's markets as well as one weekly flea market, and two Christmas markets in Linz. One of these markets, the \"Urfahraner Markt\", takes place in spring and fall every year. Furthermore, there are annually Christmas and New Year's Markets. The aim of the market administration is to provide the population with a wide range of products, as well as operating the markets in an economical, suitable and customer oriented manner. Additionally, the annual market called \"Linzer Marktfr\u00fchling\" sets further accents and lures new customers with attractive offers.\nTransport.\nLinz Airport lies about southwest of the town centre, in the municipality of H\u00f6rsching. The airport can be reached easily via federal highways B139 and B1. The bus line 601 connects the airport within 20 minutes with the centre of Linz. There is also a free shuttle service from H\u00f6rsching railway station. Direct flights include Frankfurt, D\u00fcsseldorf and Vienna with additional seasonal routes added during the summer and winter months, like for example Mallorca, Ibiza, Tenerife, several Greek islands (like Kos, Rhodes, Crete or Corfu) or Hurghada. Ryanair also flies to London Stansted Airport.\nThe city also has a central railway station () on Austria's main rail axis, the West railway, linking Vienna with western Austria, Germany and Switzerland. The Linz central station has been awarded eight times (from 2005 to 2011 and 2014) by Austrian Traffic Club as the most beautiful train station in Austria.\nLocal public transport comprises the city tram network, the city trolleybus network and the city bus network, all operated by the Linz Linien division of Linz AG. The city tram network includes the P\u00f6stlingbergbahn, a steeply graded tramway which climbs a small mountain at the northwest edge of the town.\nPopulation.\nThe urban area includes (parts of) 13 other municipalities with together 271,000 inhabitants. Linz is also part of the Linz-Wels-Steyr metropolitan area of Upper Austria, home to around one third of the state's population (460,000 people) and second-largest urban area in Austria.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStatistical Districts.\nSince January 2014 the city has been divided into 16 statistical districts:\nBefore 2014 Linz was divided into nine districts and 36 statistical quarters. They were:\nClimate.\nLinz has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\"), with warm summers and quite cold winters.\nTourism.\nIn 2018, Germans were the most frequent guests from other countries, followed by tourists from China (including Hong Kong and Macao), making Italians 3rd in comparison with the years before \u2013 the ranking is nearly equal to the overnight stays ranking which is listed in the following. Some restaurants and caf\u00e9s are closed on Sundays. \nDestinations of interest.\nThe main street \"Landstra\u00dfe\" leads from the \"Blumauerplatz\" to \"Taubenmarkt\" (Pigeonmarket) near the main square. The main square (built in 1230), with an area of , is one of the largest converted squares in Europe. In the middle of the main square the high \"Pests\u00e4ule\" (\"plague column\", also known as \"Dreifaltigkeitss\u00e4ule\" (Dreifaltigkeit means Holy Trinity)) was built to remember the people who died in the plague epidemics. It was designed by Antonio Beduzzi in 1713, and was finished in 1723.\nAround the main square are many historically relevant and architecturally interesting houses, such as the Old Town Hall, the Feichtinger House with its carillon, which changes the melody depending on the season, the Kirchmayr House, the Schmidtberger House or the bridgehead buildings, which house a part of the Linz Art University.\nWest of the main square there is the old quarter with many other historic buildings, such as Renaissance houses or older houses with a baroque face.\nNear the Schloss/castle, being the former residence of emperor Friedrich the III\u2014the oldest Austrian church is located: Sankt/Saint Martins church. It was built during early medieval Carolingian times.\nArchitecture.\nAs many central European cities, the cityscape of Linz is characterised by small and several sacred buildings. The Mari\u00e4 Empf\u00e4ngnis Dom or New Cathedral is the biggest church in Austria, not by height (it is roughly 2 metres shorter than the St. Stephen's Cathedral (\"Stephansdom\") in Vienna), but by capacity.\nThe historic centre is characterised by its medieval architectural style, whereas in those parts of the city that border with the historic centre the architecture is of neoclassical, neo-baroque and neo-renaissance styles. Even further from the historic centre there are living areas, such as \"Franckviertel\", \"Froschberg\", \"Bindermichl\" and \"Kleinm\u00fcnchen\" southern of the Danube and \"Alt-Urfahr\" northern of the Danube. These areas are where residential buildings can be found that are still referred to as \"Hitlerbauten\" or \"Hitler buildings\", because they were built during the interwar period and the time of Nazi dictatorship. The residential area called \"Gugl\" became a well liked living area among the wealthy at around 1900, which is why there are numerous villas still there today.\nAmongst the newer buildings is the Linz Hauptbahnhof station, which was designed by Wilhelm Holzbauer and added the Terminal Tower skyscraper as part of a mixed-use complex. Between 2005 und 2011 it was voted Austria's most beautiful railway station seven times in a row by the \"Verkehrsclub \u00d6sterreich\". The Wissensturm (\"Tower of knowledge\") with a height of about 63 metres, houses the public library and the \"Volkshochschule\", an adult education centre. It was designed by Franz Kneidinger and Heinz St\u00f6gm\u00fcller and opened in 2007. Lentos Art Museum, which opened in 2003, was designed by Z\u00fcrich-based architects Weber &amp; Hofer and the Musiktheater (music theatre), which opened in 2013, was designed by Terry Pawson.\nCulture.\nThe city is now home to a vibrant music and arts scene that is well-funded by the city and the state of Upper Austria. Between Lentos Art Museum and the \"Brucknerhaus\", is the \"Donaul\u00e4nde\", which is also referred to as \"Kulturmeile\" (\"culture mile\"). This is a park alongside the river, which is used mainly by young people to relax and meet in summer. It is also used for the Ars Electronica Festival in early September and the \"Stream Festival\", which takes place annually. In June, July and August the \"Musikpavillon\" is placed in the park where musical groups of different styles perform on Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays free of charge. \nLinz has other culture institutions, such as the Posthof, which is near the harbour, and the Stadtwerkstatt, which is by the river Danube. The Pflasterspektakel, an international street art festival, takes place each year in July in and around the Landstra\u00dfe and the main square. Linz was the European Capital of Culture in 2009, along with Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania.\nThe aim is to maintain and represent the cultural diversity. \nThe Ars Electronica Center can be considered as the centre of media art and attracts every year during its festival national and international guests to Linz.\nThe latest project developed by Linz in the context of the City of Media Arts project is the Valie Export Center, which is located in the Tabakfabrik (tobacco factory) and carried out in cooperation with the University of Art and Design Linz. It serves as an international research hub for media and performance art. Beyond that, it comprises the legacy as well as the archives of the most renowned media artist coming from Linz, Valie Export, who has received numerous national as well as international prizes. Along with the Ars Electronica archives, Linz hosts two internationally renowned archives for media art.\nSince 2009, the Open Commons Linz initiative has made available a wide variety of \"free\" data: geo-data and statistical information having to do with city life, local government, recreation and tourism. An associated effort is the Hotspot initiative that has installed 202 hotspots providing free WLAN, as well as Public Server, the municipal cloud available to all citizens registered in Linz. Linz is thus at the forefront in Europe when it comes to universal access to open data.\nLinz houses 43 galleries and exhibit rooms, 13 cultural centres, one club centre, as well as four educational institutes.\nMusic.\nThe Brucknerhaus, a famous concert hall in Linz is named after Anton Bruckner. It is situated just some 200 metres away from the \"Lentos\". It is home to the \"Bruckner Orchestra\", and is frequently used for concerts, as well as balls and other events. It is also the venue of the \"Linz Fest\" which takes place annually in May as well as one of the venues during the Ars Electronica Festival in early September. In June, July and August the \"Musikpavillon\" is placed in the park where musical groups of different styles perform on Thursdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays free of charge.\nThe Musiktheater (music theatre) was opened in April 2013 and is considered to be one of the most modern opera houses in Europe. It offers five stages of varying sizes; the big hall (\"Gro\u00dfer Saal\") with 1,200 seats, the BlackBox with up to 270 seats, the BlackBoxLounge with up to 150 seats, the orchestra hall (\"Orchestersaal\") with up to 200 seats and another stage in the foyer (\"FoyerB\u00fchne\"). Performances at the Musiktheater include operas and typically Austrian operettas, ballets and musicals.\nThe ensemble of the Landestheater (regional theatre) Linz used to perform musical productions as well as theatre productions at a venue located on the \"Promenade\" in the inner city of Linz (this venue is still referred to simply as \"Landestheater\"). Since the opening of the new Musiktheater, only theatre performances take place at the \"Promenade\" venue, whereas musical productions are shown in the Musiktheater. The Landestheater Linz is especially renowned for its theatre for young audiences called u\\hof:.\nThe \"Posthof\" is one of the biggest event centres in Linz with three rooms offering up to 630 seats or standing room for about 1,200 people respectively in the big hall. The programme focuses on contemporary art and covers concerts, theatre, cabaret, dance and literature. Artists from Linz are regularly invited to improve the local cultural scene; e.g. bands from Linz get the opportunity to play as pre-bands alongside nationally and internationally known artists. Altogether a total of about 250 events take place at the \"Posthof\" each year with a total number of visitors of about 80.000.\nThe \"Stadtwerkstatt\" is an independent association for culture and was founded in 1979. Its headquarters is located in the Urfahr district on the north bank of the Danube close to the Ars Electronica Centre and serves as venue for music events and other artistic and cultural activities. Situated at the same address is the Stadtwerkstatt's own Caf\u00e9 Strom caf\u00e9/bar.\nCinema.\nThe history of cinema and film begins in Linz in September 1896, when, as part of a variety programme, a film programme was shown in \"Roithner's vaudeville\" for the first time in Upper Austria. Until the next screening of a film it took until 20 March 1897, when Johann Bl\u00e4ser's travelling cinema guested in the \"Hotel of the Golden Ship\".\nUntil the opening of the first cinemas with regular programme, it took till the end of the year 1908. At that time, Karl Lifka opened his \"Lifka's Grand Th\u00e9\u00e2tre \u00e9lectrique\" in that building, where already the very first film showing took place. Subsequently, the second cinema of Linz was opened a few months later.\nAs the owner of travelling cinemas, Johann Bl\u00e4ser, got settled in Linz, he bought the \"Hotel of the Golden Ship\", and installed a cinema in it, the \"Bio-Kinematograph\". The third stationary cinema, called \"Kino Kolloseum\", in town was founded around 1910 by the vaudeville operator Karl Roithner. Its first location was the former festival hall at Hessenplatz.\nThe Linz International Short Film Festival is the first film festival in Upper Austria to focus on international short films. It launched in October 2018 at the Moviemento in Linz, showing 114 films over four days. The concept goes back to the festival director Parisa Ghasemi.\nCulinary specialties.\nIn Linz there are both traditional restaurants and old wine taverns, as well as modern and exotic cuisine. The influence of 140 nations can be felt in Linz's culinary offerings. A coalition of over 40 restaurants, cafes and among other locations bars are called \"hotspots\". Moreover, Linz has several \u00e0 la carte restaurants and Gault Millau gourmet restaurants.\nTypical dishes in Linz include not only the famous Linzer torte but also kn\u00f6del and strudel in many different kinds of variations. Another specialty is the erd\u00e4pfelk\u00e4s, a spread made from mashed potatoes and cream. Some well-known chefs from Linz are Lukas Erich, who cooks in the \"Verdi\" and Georg Essig from the \"Der neue Vogelk\u00e4fig\".\nCommemorative year 2018.\nThe project \"Linz 1938/1918\", which started on 29 June 2018, commemorates the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Republic (1918) and 80 years of \"political union\" (1938). With this installation in the public space, presented in the city center, Linz fulfills its responsibility and commitment to maintaining peace with its declaration, making a contribution to dealing with the past. The idea is to reach people who have little relation to the years of 1918 or 1938.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLinz is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA previous town-twinning established in 1977 with Gab\u00e8s, Tunisia was ended in 2016 due to lack of contact.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55857", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55857", "title": "Innsbruck", "text": "Capital city of Tyrol, Austria\nInnsbruck (; ) is the capital of the Austrian state of Tyrol and the fifth-largest city in Austria. It is located on the River Inn, at its junction with the Wipp Valley, which provides access to the Brenner Pass to the south. The city had a population of 132,188 in 2024.\nInnsbruck originated in the Middle Ages as a strategic crossing point over the Inn River. The name means \"bridge over the Inn\". In 1363, Innsbruck came under Habsburg control and later became an important residence of Emperor Maximilian I, who enriched the city with landmark buildings like the Golden Roof. During the Early Modern Era, it served as a key political and cultural hub of Tyrol, also playing a role as a center of Catholic reform. In the early 19th century, following the Treaty of Pressburg, the city was temporarily incorporated into the Kingdom of Bavaria, before returning to Austrian rule after the Congress of Vienna.\nIn the broad valley between high mountains, the so-called North Chain in the Karwendel Alps (Hafelekarspitze, ) to the north and Patscherkofel () and Serles () to the south, Innsbruck is an internationally renowned winter sports centre; it hosted the 1964 and 1976 Winter Olympics as well as the 1984 and 1988 Winter Paralympics. It also hosted the first Winter Youth Olympics in 2012 and will host the 2027 Winter Deaflympics.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe earliest traces suggest initial inhabitation in the early Stone Age. Surviving pre-Roman place names show that the area has been populated continuously. In the 4th century the Romans established the army station Veldidena (the name survives in today's urban district Wilten) at Oenipons (Innsbruck), to protect the economically important commercial road from Verona-Brenner-Augsburg in their province of Raetia.\nThe first mention of Innsbruck dates back to the name \"Oeni Pontum\" or \"Oeni Pons\" which is Latin for bridge (pons) over the Inn (Oenus), which was an important crossing point over the Inn river. The Counts of Andechs acquired the town in 1180. In 1248 the town passed into the hands of the Counts of Tyrol. The city's arms show a bird's-eye view of the Inn bridge, a design used since 1267. The route over the Brenner Pass was then a major transport and communications link between the north and the south of Europe, and the easiest route across the Alps. It was part of the Via Imperii, a medieval imperial road under special protection of the king. The revenues generated by serving as a transit station on this route enabled the city to flourish.\nEarly history.\nInnsbruck became the capital of all Tyrol in 1429 and in the 15th century the city became a centre of European politics and culture as Emperor Maximilian I also resided in Innsbruck in the 1490s. The city benefited from the emperor's presence as can be seen for example in the Hofkirche. Here a funeral monument for Maximilian was planned and erected partly by his successors. The ensemble with a cenotaph and the bronze statues of real and mythical ancestors of the Habsburg emperor are one of the main artistic monuments of Innsbruck. A regular postal service between Innsbruck and Mechelen was established in 1490 by the Thurn-und-Taxis-Post.\nIn 1564 Ferdinand II, Archduke of Austria received the rulership over Tyrol and other Further Austrian possessions administered from Innsbruck up to the 18th century. He had Schloss Ambras built and arranged there his unique Renaissance collections nowadays mainly part of Vienna's Kunsthistorisches Museum. Up to 1665 a stirps of the Habsburg dynasty ruled in Innsbruck with an independent court. In the 1620s the first opera house north of the Alps was erected in Innsbruck (Dogana).\nThe university was founded in 1669. Also as a compensation for the court as Emperor Leopold I again reigned from Vienna and the Tyrolean stirps of the Habsburg dynasty had ended in 1665.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars Tyrol was ceded to Bavaria, ally of France. Andreas Hofer led a Tyrolean peasant army to victory in the Battles of Bergisel against the combined Bavarian and French forces, and then made Innsbruck the centre of his administration. The combined army later overran the Tyrolean militia army, Hofer was fusilladed for his role and became a martyr for the locals, his remains were returned to Innsbruck in 1823 and interred in the Franciscan church.\nAfterwards, until 1814 Innsbruck was part of Bavaria. The Vienna Congress restored the Austrian rule over the city. Innsbruck played a part during the revolution of 1848 in Austria. In May of that year, riots in Vienna made Emperor Ferdinand to move the seat of government temporarily to the city. It remained part of the Austrian monarchy (Austria side after the compromise of 1867) as one of the 4 autonomous towns in Tyrol, the centre of the identically named district, one of the 21 \"Bezirkshauptmannschaften\".\nDuring World War I, the only recorded action taking place in Innsbruck was near the end of the war. On 20 February 1918, Allied planes flying out of Italy raided Innsbruck, causing casualties among the Austrian troops there. No damage to the town is recorded. In November 1918 Innsbruck and all Tyrol were occupied by the 20 to 22 thousand soldiers of the III Corps of the First Italian Army.\nIn 1929, the first official Austrian Chess Championship was held in Innsbruck.\nAnnexation and World War II.\nIn 1938 Austria was annexed by Nazi Germany in the \"Anschluss\". During World War II, Innsbruck was the location of two subcamps of the Dachau concentration camp, including a special camp for prominent people from 16 countries and their families, who were held as hostages, including former Prime Minister of France L\u00e9on Blum, former regent of Hungary Mikl\u00f3s Horthy, former Chancellor of Austria Kurt Schuschnigg, Italian general Giuseppe Garibaldi II and a nephew of Winston Churchill. Between 1943 and April 1945, Innsbruck experienced twenty-two air raids and suffered heavy damage.\nEuroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino.\nIn 1996, the European Union approved further cultural and economic integration between the Austrian province of Tyrol and the Italian autonomous provinces of South Tyrol and Trentino by recognizing the creation of the Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nInnsbruck has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") since it has at least one month with a mean temperature below 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F). Innsbruck has a larger annual temperature differences than most of Central Europe due to its location in the center of the Continent and its position around mountainous terrains. Winters are often cold or very cold (colder than those of all major Western European cities, as well as most central European cities) and snowy, although the foehn wind sometimes brings pronounced thaws, despite the warming effect not being as extreme as is common in Salzburg. Spring is brief; days start to get warm, often over , but nights remain cool or even freezing.\nSummer is highly variable and unpredictable. Days can be cool and rainy, or sunny and extremely hot, sometimes hitting . In summer, as expected for an alpine-influenced climate, the diurnal temperature variation is often very high as nights usually remain cool, being on average, but sometimes dipping as low as .\nThe average annual temperature is .\nBoroughs and statistical divisions.\nInnsbruck is divided into nine boroughs (cadastral settlements) that were formed from previously independent municipalities or villages. These nine boroughs are further divided into twenty wards (cadastral districts). All wards are within one borough, except for the ward of Hungerburg (Upper Innsbruck), which is divided between two. For statistical purposes, Innsbruck is further divided into forty-two statistical units (\"Statistischer Bezirk\") and 178 numbered blocks (\"Z\u00e4hlsprengel\").\nThe nine boroughs of Innsbruck and their population as of 2024:\nDemographics.\nAs of 2024, Innsbruck had a population of 132,188; 68.6% of whom held Austrian citizenship and 65.2% of whom were born in Austria.\nThe age group under 20 years old accounted for 15.8% of the population, those aged between 20 and 64 made up 65.2%, and individuals aged 65 and over comprised the remaining 19.0%. Women accounted for 50.7% of the population.\n54.4% of foreign citizens held citizenship from another EU member state. When looking at individual countries, Germany accounts for the largest share of foreign nationals.\nPolitics.\nMunicipal council.\nThe municipal council (\"Gemeinderat\") consists of 40 members. Since the 2024 local elections, it is made up of the following parties:\nThe current mayor, Johannes Anzengruber, was elected in 2024, defeating incumbent Georg Willi.\nCity's senate.\nThe City's senate (\"Stadtsenat\") consists of 7 members. It is chaired by the mayor. The other members\u2014one vice-mayor and five town councillors\u2014are appointed by the municipal council, with party affiliations according to the election results.\nCulture.\nCultural events.\nInnsbruck is a very popular tourist destination, organizing the following events every year:\nIn 1971, author Douglas Adams was inspired to write the internationally successful \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" series while lying intoxicated in a field in Innsbruck. From 2003 onwards each year Towel Day is celebrated worldwide on 25 May.\nSports.\nDue to its location between high mountains, Innsbruck serves as an ideal place for skiing in winter, ski-jumping and mountaineering in summer. There are several ski resorts around Innsbruck, with the Nordkette served by a cable car and additional chair lifts further up. Other ski resorts nearby include Axamer Lizum, Muttereralm, Patscherkofel, Igls, Seefeld, Tulfes and Stubai Valley. The glaciated terrain in the latter makes skiing possible even in summer months.\nThe Winter Olympic Games were held in Innsbruck twice, first in 1964, then again in 1976, when Colorado voters rejected a bond referendum in 1972 to finance the Denver games, originally awarded in 1970. The 1976 Winter Olympics were the last games held in the German-speaking Alps (Austria, Germany, or Switzerland).\nAlong with St. Moritz, Switzerland and Lake Placid, New York in the United States, it is one of three places which have twice hosted the Winter Games. It also hosted the 1984 and 1988 Winter Paralympics.\nInnsbruck hosted the 1st Winter Youth Olympic Games in 2012.\nOther notable events held in Innsbruck include the Air &amp; Style Snowboard Contest from 1994 to 1999 and 2008 and the Ice Hockey World Championship in 2005. Together with the city of Seefeld, Innsbruck organized the Winter Universiade in 2005. Innsbruck's Bergiselschanze is one of the hills of the famous Four Hills Tournament.\nInnsbruck is home to football clubs WSG Tirol and FC Wacker Innsbruck, who play in the Austrian Bundesliga and the Austrian Landesliga respectively. Former teams include the FC Swarovski Tirol and FC Tirol Innsbruck. The teams' stadium, Tivoli Neu, is one of eight stadiums which hosted Euro 2008, which took place in Switzerland and Austria in June 2008.\nThe city is home to the American football team Raiders Tirol. Innsbruck hosted an American football final, Eurobowl XXII between the Swarco Raiders Tirol and the Raiffeisen Vikings Vienna.\nThe city hosted opening round games in the 2011 IFAF World Championship, the official international American football championship.\nIn 2018 Innsbruck hosted the IFSC Climbing World Championships 2018 from 6 to 16 September and the 2018 UCI Road World Championships from 22 to 30 September.\nIn July 2025, Innsbruck hosted the Roller Derby World Cup.\nLanguage.\nInnsbruck is part of the Austro-Bavarian region of dialects and, more specifically, Southern Bavarian (\"S\u00fcdbairisch\"). Irina Windhaber, professor for linguistics at the Universit\u00e4t Innsbruck, has observed a trend among young people to choose more often Standard German language structures and pronunciation.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nInnsbruck is a substantial tourist centre, with more than a million overnight stays.\nIn Innsbruck, there are 86,186 employees and about 12,038 employers. 7,598 people are self-employed. Nearly 35,000 people commute every day into Innsbruck from the surrounding communities in the area. The unemployment rate for the year 2012 was 4.2%.\nThe national statistics office, Statistik Austria, does not produce economic data for the City of Innsbruck alone, but on aggregate level with the Innsbruck-Land District summarised as NUTS 3-region Innsbruck. In 2013, GDP per capita in the NUTS 3-region Innsbruck was \u20ac41,400 which is around 60% above the EU average.\nThe headquarters of Tiroler Wasserkraft (Tiwag, energy production), Bank f\u00fcr Tirol und Vorarlberg (financial services), Tiroler Versicherung (insurance) and MED-EL (medical devices) are located in Innsbruck. The headquarters of Swarovski (glass), Felder Group (mechanical engineering) and Swarco (traffic technology) are located within from the city.\nResidential property is very expensive by national standards. The average price per square metre in Innsbruck is \u20ac4,430 (2015), which is the second highest per square meter price among Austrian cities surpassed only by Salzburg (\u20ac4,823), but followed by Vienna (\u20ac3,980).\nTransport.\nInnsbruck is located along the A12/A13 highway corridor (Inn Valley Autobahn and Brenner Autobahn respectively), providing freeway access to Verona, Italy and Munich, Germany. The A12 and A13 converge near Innsbruck, at which point the A13 terminates.\nInnsbruck Hauptbahnhof, the most important railway station of Innsbruck and Tyrol, is one of the busiest railway stations in Austria. It is served by the Lower Inn Valley line to Germany and eastern Austria, the Arlberg line to the west and the Brenner line, which connects northern Italy with southern Germany via the Brenner Pass. Since December 2007 suburban services have been operated as the Innsbruck S-Bahn.\nInnsbruck Airport is located in the suburb of Kranebitten, which is located in the west of the city. It provides services to airports including Frankfurt, London, Amsterdam and Vienna. It also handles regional flights around the Alps, as well as seasonal flights to other destinations. During the winter, activity increases significantly, due to the high number of skiers travelling to the region. The airport is approximately from the centre of Innsbruck.\nLocal public transport is provided by Innsbrucker Verkehrsbetriebe (IVB), a public authority operating a network of bus and tram routes. The metre-gauge tram network consists of four city lines, 1, 2, 3 and 5, and two lines serving the surrounding area: line 6, the Innsbrucker Mittelgebirgsbahn to Igls, and line \"STB\", the Stubaitalbahn running through the Stubai Valley to Fulpmes. The network is planned to be enlarged during the coming years to reach the neighboring village Rum in the east and V\u00f6ls in the west. Numerous bus lines serve the inner city and connect it with surrounding areas. Until 2007 the bus network included two trolleybus routes, but these were abandoned in preparation for planned expansion of the tram network.\nIn December 2007, the Hungerburgbahn, a funicular service to the district of Hungerburg, was reopened after a two-year closure for extensive rebuilding, with partial realignment and a new extension under the Inn River and into central Innsbruck. The line was also equipped with new vehicles. Because of the unique design of the stations, drafted by the famous architect Zaha Hadid, the funicular evolves immediately to a new emblem of the city. The line was rebuilt by the Italian company Leitner, and can now carry up to 1,200 persons per hour. It is operated by a private company, the 'Innsbrucker Nordkettenbahnen'.\nEducation.\nInnsbruck is a university city, with several locally based colleges and universities.\nInnsbruck is home to the oldest grammar school \"(Gymnasium)\" of Western Austria, the \"Akademisches Gymnasium Innsbruck\". The school was founded in 1562 by the Jesuit order and was the precursor of the university, founded in 1669.\nInnsbruck hosts several universities. The most well-known are the University of Innsbruck (Leopold-Franzens-Universit\u00e4t), the Innsbruck Medical University, and the university of applied sciences MCI Management Center Innsbruck.\nInternational relations.\nAustrian Service Abroad.\nThe Austrian Service Abroad is a NGO, which provides positions for an alternative Austrian national service at 85 organizations in 35 countries worldwide in the sectors Holocaust Memorial Service, Social Service and Peace Service. It was founded by Andreas Maislinger and Andreas H\u00f6rtnagl in 1998 and is based in Innsbruck.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55858", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55858", "title": "Salzburg, Austria", "text": ""}
{"id": "55859", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55859", "title": "Salzburg (state)", "text": "Austrian state\nSalzburg (, ; , also known as \"Salzburgerland\"; ) is an Austrian state () bordering Germany and Italy. In German, its official name is , to distinguish it from its eponymous capital Salzburg.\nThe state of Salzburg is closely tied to the former Prince-Archbishopric of Salzburg, an ecclesiastical principality of the Holy Roman Empire that existed for centuries until its secularization in 1803. After the Napoleonic Wars, the territory changed hands several times, becoming part of Austria, then briefly Bavaria, before being permanently incorporated into the Austrian Empire in 1816. In the 20th century, the region became a federated state of Austria and is today known for its Alpine landscapes, cultural heritage, and the annual Salzburg Festival.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nSalzburg State covers an area of . It stretches along its main river \u2014 the Salzach \u2013 which rises in the Central Eastern Alps in the south to the Alpine foothills in the north. It is located in the north-west of Austria, close to the border with the German state of Bavaria; to the northeast lies the state Upper Austria; to the east the state Styria; to the south the states Carinthia and Tyrol. With 561,714 inhabitants, it is one of the country's smaller federal states in terms of population.\nRunning through the south are the main ranges of the Alpine divide (incl. the Hohe Tauern mountains) with numerous three-thousanders. The Dachstein massif and the Berchtesgaden Alps ranges of the Northern Limestone Alps border Salzburg State to the east and north.\nRegions.\nThe state is traditionally subdivided in five major regions (\"Gaue\"), congruent with its political districts (\"Bezirke\", see administrative divisions).\nMajor cities and towns.\nSalzburg municipalities with town privileges:\nWals-Siezenheim, a common municipality with about 12,000 inhabitants, is known as 'Austria's largest village'.\nHistory.\nSalt mining has played an important role in the region's development; \"Salzburg\" means \"salt city\".\nSalzburg as an independent state.\nIndependence from Bavaria was secured in the late 14th century. The Archbishopric of Salzburg was an independent prince-bishopric and State of the Holy Roman Empire until German Mediatisation in 1803.\nElectorate of Salzburg.\nThe territory was secularized and, as the Electorate of Salzburg, given as compensation to Ferdinand III, former Grand Duke of Tuscany, the brother of Emperor Francis II.\nThe end of independence.\nFollowing the Austrian defeat at Austerlitz in 1805, Salzburg was annexed by Austria as compensation for the loss of Tyrol to the Kingdom of Bavaria, and Ferdinand was transferred to the Grand Duchy of W\u00fcrzburg.\nBavarian Salzburg.\nAfter Austria's defeat in 1809, the region was handed over to Bavaria in 1810.\nThe country divided between Bavaria and Austria.\nIn 1816, following the defeat of Napoleon and the provision of adequate compensation to Bavaria at the Congress of Vienna, it was returned to Austria with the exception of the north-western Rupertiwinkel which remained Bavarian. The Salzburger Land was administered as the department of Salzach from Linz, the capital of Upper Austria. In 1849 the Duchy of Salzburg was established as a crown land of the Austrian Empire and, after 1866, Austria-Hungary.\nWorld War I.\nSalzburg participated in World War I, as part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. 49,000 Salzburgers were called to arms, of whom 6,000 were killed.\nPost-World War I Austrian republics.\nIn 1918 after World War I, the Duchy of Salzburg was dissolved and replaced with the State of Salzburg, as a component part initially of German Austria and subsequently of the First Republic of Austria, the separate state which was mandated by the Allied powers.\nIn 1921 a plebiscite Salzburg, a majority of 99.11% voted for a unification with Germany.\nSalzburg in Germany.\nAs a result of \"Germany's annexation of Austria\" in 1938, Austria, including Salzburg State, was incorporated into Nazi Germany.\nAmerican control.\nAfter the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945, the Allies occupied the territory of Austria, being recognized as an independent territory under their rule. Salzburg State was occupied by the United States.\nSalzburg as an Austrian state.\nIn 1955, Austria was again declared an independent state and Salzburg was once again one of the reconstituted federal states of the Second Republic of Austria.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The historical population is given in the following chart:\nPolitics.\nSalzburg adopted its current provincial constitution in 1999. The provincial government (\"Landesregierung\") is headed by a governor (Landeshauptmann), who is elected by a majority in the provincial parliament Landtag. Provincial elections are held every five years.\nAfter World War II, most provincial governments were led by the conservative Austrian People's Party (\u00d6VP). \u00d6VP politician Josef Klaus (1910-2001), later chancellor of Austria, served as governor of Salzburg from 1949 till 1961. In 2004 Gabi Burgstaller became the first Social Democratic (and first female) governor of Salzburg.\nThe last results, in April 2023 (Compared to 2018) were:\nThe current governor of Salzburg, Wilfried Haslauer (\u00d6VP), entered into coalition discussions with the FP\u00d6, after his proposition of a \u00d6VP-FP\u00d6-SP\u00d6 coalition was rejected by the Social Democrats. Haslauer said \"I regret that we could not implement the Alliance for Salzburg\". After successful coalition negotiations, the \u00d6VP and the FP\u00d6 entered into a governing coalition with Haslauer as the Governor and Marlene Svazek as the First Deputy Governor.https:// Salzburg State has joined Lower Austria and Upper Austria as the third black-blue coalition provincial government. The \u00d6VP has four seats in the government, while the FP\u00d6 has three. The current president (speaker) of the Salzburg federal state parliament is Brigitta Pallauf.\nGovernment.\nGovernment ministers and their portfolios from the 2023 Salzburg state election.\nAdministrative divisions.\nDistricts.\nSalzburg State comprises six districts, known as \"Bezirke\" or vernacularly \"Gaue\":\nSalzburg city is its own administrative district.\nMunicipalities.\nThe federal state is divided into 119 municipalities, including Salzburg City. 11 of them have city status (\"St\u00e4dte\"), 25 are market towns (\"Marktgemeinden\") and the other 83 are simple municipalities (\"Gemeinden\"). Below is a list of all the municipalities divided by district:\nEconomy.\nThe federal state's gross domestic product (GDP) was 29 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 7.5% of the Austria's economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 46,500 \u20ac or 154% of the EU27 average in the same year. Salzburg is the federal state with the highest GDP per capita in Austria before Vienna.\nArchitecture.\nThe Salzburg Cathedral was the first Baroque building in the German-speaking artistic world. Two other important buildings initiated by the Salzburg archbishops were Hohenwerfen Castle and Hohensalzburg Fortress. The first Archbishop of Salzburg was Arno of Salzburg (785\u2013821), in whose honor the world-famous hiking circuit \u2014 the Arnoweg \u2014 is named.\nThe predominant stylistic elements of Salzburg's architecture have their origins in the Baroque and the Rococo periods.\nSalzburg City's historic centre was named by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site.\nLanguage.\nThe official working language is Austrian German, and it can be heard especially in the cities and formal contexts. The vernacular language, typically spoken in informal settings and rural areas in Salzburg, is Bavarian.\nSports.\nSki resorts.\nAltenmarkt im Pongau, Flachau, Wagrain, St. Johann, Zell am See (Saalbach-Hinterglemm), Obertauern, Bad Gastein, Rauris, Lofer, Hochk\u00f6nig, Krispl\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55861", "revid": "38079213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55861", "title": "Praha (disambiguation)", "text": "Praha is Czech for the city of Prague.\nPraha may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55862", "revid": "1307711037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55862", "title": "Wien (disambiguation)", "text": "Wien is the German language name for Vienna, the capital and federal state of Austria. \nWien may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55863", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55863", "title": "Linz, Austria", "text": ""}
{"id": "55864", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55864", "title": "Graz, Austria", "text": ""}
{"id": "55866", "revid": "3454040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55866", "title": "Vienna", "text": "Capital and largest city of Austria\nVienna ( ; ; ) is the capital, most populous city, and one of the nine states of Austria. It is Austria's primate city, with just over two million inhabitants. Its larger metropolitan area has a population of nearly 2.9\u00a0million, representing nearly one-third of the country's population. Vienna is the cultural, economic, and political center of the country, the fifth-largest city by population in the European Union, and the most populous of the cities on the river Danube.\nThe city lies on the eastern edge of the Vienna Woods (\"Wienerwald\"), the northeasternmost foothills of the Alps, that separate Vienna from the more western parts of Austria, at the transition to the Pannonian Basin. It sits on the Danube, and is traversed by the highly regulated Wienfluss (\"Vienna River\"). Vienna is completely surrounded by Lower Austria, and lies around 50\u00a0km (31\u00a0mi) west of Slovakia and its capital Bratislava, 50\u00a0km (31\u00a0mi) northwest of Hungary, and 60\u00a0km (37\u00a0mi) south of Moravia (Czech Republic).\nThe Romans founded a castrum at Vienna, which they called \"Vindobona\", in the 1st century, when the region belonged to the province of Pannonia. It was elevated to a municipium with Roman city rights in 212. This was followed by a time in the sphere of influence of the Lombards and later the Pannonian Avars, when Slavs formed the majority of the region's population. From the 8th century on, the region was settled by the Baiuvarii. In 1155, Vienna became the seat of the Babenbergs, who ruled Austria from 976 to 1246. In 1221, Vienna was granted city rights. During the 16th century, the Habsburgs, who had succeeded the Babenbergs, established Vienna as the seat of the emperors of the Holy Roman Empire, a position it held until the empire's dissolution in 1806, with only a brief interruption. With the formation of the Austrian Empire in 1804, Vienna became the capital of it and all its successor states.\nThroughout the modern era, Vienna has been among the largest German-speaking cities in the world. It was the largest in the 18th and 19th centuries, peaking at two million inhabitants before it was overtaken by Berlin at the beginning of the 20th century. Vienna is host to many major international organizations, including the United Nations, OPEC and the OSCE. In 2001, the city center was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. In July 2017, it was moved to the list of World Heritage in Danger.\nVienna is renowned for its rich musical heritage, having been home to many celebrated classical composers, including Beethoven, Brahms, Bruckner, Haydn, Mahler, Mozart, Schoenberg, Schubert, Johann Strauss I, and Johann Strauss II. It played a pivotal role as a leading European music center, from the age of Viennese Classicism through the early part of the 20th century. The city was home to the world's first psychoanalyst, Sigmund Freud. The historic center of Vienna is rich in architectural ensembles, including Baroque palaces and gardens, and the late-19th-century \"Ringstra\u00dfe\", which is lined with grand buildings, monuments and parks.\nEtymology.\nThe precise origin of the name is uncertain. Vienna was known to the Romans as , a borrowing of a Celtic toponym meaning either \"white place\" or \"place of Vindos\" (a personal name). This name disappeared from the record after the 6th century, occurring for the last time in Jordanes' \"Getica\". The German name for the city, \u2013 of which \"Vienna\" is a Latinized form \u2013 is unrelated, deriving from the River Wien (compare Steyr, Enns, and Krems, which all take their names from the rivers whose mouths they lie at). It occurs for the first time in the Salzburg Annals, which note that a battle was fought at a place named in the year 881. The name may ultimately mean \"forest river\", from Celtic *\"Vedunia\".\n, the Hungarian name for Vienna (borrowed into Serbo-Croatian as and into Ottoman Turkish as ), probably derives from a word meaning \"kiln\", and may date from a period in the 10th century when the region came under temporary Hungarian domination. In Romanian, the city is now called , but the archaic names and were used in chronicles. Romanian still has in use, a common noun meaning \"cellar\"; linguist Dan Alexe states both it and the aforementioned names of Vienna are believed to ultimately be derived from a word of the Turkic-speaking Avars, originally meaning \"fortified place\" or \"treasury\".\nIn Slovene, the city is called , which in other Slavic languages denotes the River Danube.\nIn the Bavarian dialect of eastern Austria, the city is called ; however, this name is hardly used to any significant extent in the local city dialect (Viennese German) anymore.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Duchy of Austria 1156\u20131453\n Archduchy of Austria 1453\u20131485\n Kingdom of Hungary 1485\u20131490\n Archduchy of Austria 1490\u20131804\n Austrian Empire 1804\u20131867\n Austria-Hungary 1867\u20131918\n First Austrian Republic 1919\u20131934\n Federal State of Austria 1934\u20131938\n German Reich 1938\u20131945\n Allied-occupied Austria 1945\u20131955\n\u00a0Austria 1955\u2013present\nRoman period.\nIn the 1st century, the Romans set up the military camp of Vindobona in Pannonia on the site of today's Vienna city center near the Danube with an adjoining civilian town to secure the borders of the Roman Empire. Construction of the legionary camp began around AD 97. At its peak, Vindobona had a population of around 15,000 people. It was a part of a trade and communications network across the Empire. Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius may have died here in AD 180 during a campaign against the Marcomanni.\nAfter a Germanic invasion in the second century, the city was rebuilt. It served as a seat of the Roman government until the fifth century, when the population fled due to the Huns invasion of Pannonia. The city was abandoned for several centuries.\nEvidence of the Romans in the city is plentiful. Remains of the military camp have been found under the city, as well as fragments of the canal system and figurines.\nMiddle Ages.\nIrish Benedictines established monastic settlements in the 12th century; evidence of these connections includes the Schottenstift (\"Scots Abbey\") in Vienna, originally home to a community of Irish monks.\nIn 976, Leopold I of Babenberg was appointed Margrave of the Eastern March, a frontier district of Bavaria centered along the Danube. This march gradually expanded eastward under successive Babenberg rulers, eventually evolving into the Duchy of Austria and incorporating Vienna and its surrounding areas. In 1155, Henry II, Duke of Austria, relocated the Babenberg residence from Klosterneuburg in Lower Austria to Vienna, coinciding with the founding of the Schottenstift. Following this relocation, Vienna became the permanent residence of the Babenberg dynasty. The city was occupied by Hungarian forces between 1485 and 1490. Around the beginning of the 16th century, Vienna became the seat of the Aulic Council, the central advisory body to the Holy Roman Emperor. Vienna served as the residence of the Habsburg emperors during their reigns from 1611 to 1740 and again from 1745 until the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806.\nIn the 16th and 17th centuries, Ottoman forces advanced toward Vienna on two notable occasions: the Siege of Vienna in 1529 and the Battle of Vienna in 1683, both of which resulted in the city's successful defense. In 1679, Vienna was severely affected by the Great Plague, which is estimated to have claimed the lives of nearly one-third of its inhabitants.\nAustrian Empire and early 20th century.\nIn 1804, during the Napoleonic Wars, Vienna became the capital of the newly formed Austrian Empire. The city continued to play a major role in European and world politics, including hosting the Congress of Vienna in 1814\u201315. The city also saw major uprisings against Habsburg rule in 1848, which were suppressed. After the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, Vienna remained the capital of what became the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The city functioned as a center of classical music, for which the title of the First Viennese School (Haydn/Mozart/Beethoven) is sometimes applied. During the latter half of the 19th century, Vienna developed what had previously been the bastions and glacis into the \"Ringstra\u00dfe\", a new boulevard surrounding the historical town and a major prestige project. Former suburbs were incorporated, and the city of Vienna grew dramatically. In 1918, after World War I, Vienna became the capital of the Republic of German-Austria, and then in 1919 of the First Republic of Austria.\nFrom the late-19th century to 1938, the city remained a center of high culture and of modernism. A world capital of music, Vienna played host to composers such as Johannes Brahms, Anton Bruckner, Gustav Mahler, and Richard Strauss.\nThe city's cultural contributions in the first half of the 20th century included, among many, the Vienna Secession movement in art, the Second Viennese School, the architecture of Adolf Loos, the philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein, and the Vienna Circle.\nRed Vienna.\nThe city of Vienna became the center of socialist politics from 1919 to 1934, a period referred to as Red Vienna (\"Das rote Wien\"). After a new breed of socialist politicians won the local elections, they engaged in a brief but ambitious municipal experiment. Social democrats had won an absolute majority in the May 1919 municipal election and commanded the city council with 100 of the 165 seats. Jakob Reumann was appointed by the city council as city mayor. The theoretical foundations of so-called Austromarxism were established by Otto Bauer, Karl Renner, and Max Adler.\nRed Vienna is perhaps most well known for its \"Gemeindebauten\", public housing buildings. Between 1925 and 1934, over 60,000 new apartments were built in the Gemeindebauten. Apartments were assigned based on a point system favoring families and less affluent citizens.\nJuly Revolt and Civil War.\nIn July 1927, after three nationalist far-right paramilitary members were acquitted of the killing of two social democratic \"Republikanischer Schutzbund\" members, a riot broke out in the city. The protestors, enraged by the decision, set the Palace of Justice ablaze. The police attempted to end the revolt with force and killed at least 84 protestors, with 5 policemen also dying. In 1933, right-wing Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss dissolved the parliament, essentially letting him run the country as a dictatorship, banned the Communist Party and severely limited the influence of the Social Democratic Party. This led to a civil war between the right-wing government and socialist forces the following year, which started in Linz and quickly spread to Vienna. Socialist members of the \"Republikanischer Schutzbund\" barricaded themselves inside the housing estates and exchanged fire with the police and paramilitary groups. The fighting in Vienna ended after the Austrian Armed Forces shelled the Karl-Marx-Hof, a civilian housing estate, and the \"Schutzbund\" surrendered.\nAnschluss and World War II.\nOn 15 March 1938, three days after German troops first entered Austria, Adolf Hitler arrived in Vienna. 200,000 Austrians greeted him at the Heldenplatz, where he delivered a speech from a balcony of the Neue Burg, announcing that Austria would be absorbed into Nazi Germany. The persecution of Jews began almost immediately: Viennese Jews were harassed and hounded, and their homes and businesses plundered. Some were forced to scrub pro-independence slogans off the streets. This culminated in the Kristallnacht, a nationwide pogrom against Jews carried out by the Schutzstaffel and the Sturmabteilung, with the support of the Hitler Youth and German civilians. All synagogues and prayer houses in the city were destroyed, except for the Stadttempel, due to its proximity to residential buildings. Vienna lost its status as a capital to Berlin, as Austria had ceased to exist. The few resistors in the city were arrested.\nAdolf Eichmann held office in the expropriated Palais Rothschild and organised the expropriation and persecution of Jews. Of the almost 200,000 Jews in Vienna, around 120,000 were driven to emigrate, and approximately 65,000 were killed. After the war, Vienna's Jewish population was only about 5,000.\nIn 1942, the city suffered its first air raid, carried out by the Soviet air force. Only after the Allies had taken Italy did the next raids commence. From 17 March 1944, a total of 51 air raids were carried out in Vienna. Targets of the bombings were primarily the city's oil refineries. However, around a third of the city centre was destroyed, and culturally important buildings such as the State Opera and the Burgtheater were burned, and the Albertina was heavily damaged. These air raids lasted until March 1945, just before the Soviet troops started the Vienna Offensive.\nThe Red Army, which had previously marched through Hungary, first entered Vienna on 6 April. Initially, they attacked the eastern and southern suburbs before advancing to the western suburbs. By the 8th, they had surrounded the city centre. The following day, the Soviets started with the infiltration of the city centre. Fighting continued for a few more days until the Soviet Navy\u2019s Danube Flotilla naval force arrived with reinforcements. The remaining defending soldiers surrendered that same day.\nFour-power Vienna.\nAfter the war, Vienna was part of Soviet-occupied Eastern Austria until September 1945. That month, Vienna was divided into sectors by the four powers: the US, the UK, France, and the Soviet Union and supervised by an Allied Commission. The four-power occupation of Vienna differed in one key respect from that of Berlin: the central area of the city, known as the first district, constituted an \"international zone\" in which the four powers alternated control every month. The city was policed by the four powers on a day-to-day basis using the \"four soldiers in a jeep\" method, which had one soldier from each nation sitting together. The four powers all had separate headquarters: the Soviets in Palais Epstein next to the Parliament, the French in Hotel Kummer on Mariahilferstra\u00dfe, the Americans in the National Bank, and the British in Sch\u00f6nnbrunn Palace. The division of the city was not comparable to that of Berlin. Although the borders between the sectors were marked, travel between them was freely possible.\nDuring the ten years of the four-power occupation, Vienna was a hotbed for international espionage between the Western and Eastern Blocs, which deeply distrusted each other. The city experienced an economic upturn due to the Marshall Plan. The atmosphere of four-power Vienna is the background for Graham Greene's screenplay for the film \"The Third Man\" (1949). The film's theme music was composed and performed by Viennese musician Anton Karas using a zither. Later, he adapted the screenplay as a novel and published it.\nAustrian State Treaty and subsequent sovereignty.\nThe four-power control of Vienna lasted until the Austrian State Treaty was signed in May 1955 and came into force on 27 July 1955. By October, all soldiers had left the country. That year, after years of reconstruction and restoration, the State Opera and the Burgtheater, both on the \"Ringstra\u00dfe\" reopened to the public.\nIn the Autumn of 1956, Vienna accepted many Hungarian refugees, who had fled Hungary after an attempted revolution. The city experienced another wave of refugees after the Prague Spring in Czechoslovakia in 1968, as well as after the collapse of Yugoslavia in 1991.\nIn 1972, the construction of the \"Donauinsel\" and the excavation of the New Danube began. In the same decade, Austrian Chancellor Bruno Kreisky inaugurated the Vienna International Centre, a new area of the city created to host international institutions. Vienna has regained much of its former international stature by hosting international organisations, such as the United Nations.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBecause of the industrialization and migration from other parts of the Empire, the population of Vienna increased sharply during its time as the capital of Austria-Hungary (1867\u20131918). In 1910, Vienna had more than two million inhabitants and was the third largest city in Europe after London and Paris. Around the start of the 20th century, Vienna was the city with the second-largest Czech population in the world (after Prague). After World War I, many Czechs and Hungarians returned to their ancestral countries, resulting in a decline in the Viennese population. After World War II, the Soviets used force to repatriate key workers of Czech, Slovak, and Hungarian origins to return to their ethnic homelands to further the Soviet bloc economy. The population of Vienna generally stagnated or declined through the remainder of the 20th century, not demonstrating significant growth again until the census of 2000. In 2020, Vienna's population remained significantly below its reported peak in 1916.\nUnder the Nazi regime, 65,000 Jews were deported and murdered in concentration camps by Nazi forces; approximately 130,000 fled.\nBy 2001, 16% of people living in Austria had nationalities other than Austrian, nearly half of whom were from former Yugoslavia; the next most numerous nationalities in Vienna were Turks (39,000; 2.5%), Poles (13,600; 0.9%) and Germans (12,700; 0.8%).\nAs of 2012[ [update]], an official report from Statistics Austria showed that more than 660,000 (38.8%) of the Viennese population have full or partial migrant background, mostly from Ex-Yugoslavia, Turkey, Germany, Poland, Romania and Hungary.\nFrom 2005 to 2015, the city's population grew by 10.1%. According to UN-Habitat, Vienna could be the fastest growing city out of 17 European metropolitan areas until 2025 with an increase of 4.65% of its population, compared to 2010.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 census, 49.0% of Viennese were Christian. Among them, 31.8% were Catholic, 11.2% were Eastern Orthodox, and 3.7% were Protestant, mostly Lutheran, 34.1% had no religious affiliation, 14.8% were Muslim, and 2% were of other religions, including Jewish. One sources estimates that Vienna's Jewish community is of 8,000 members meanwhile another suggest 15,000.\nBased on information provided to city officials by various religious organizations about their membership, Vienna's Statistical Yearbook 2019 reports in 2018 an estimated 610,269 Roman Catholics, or 32.3% of the population, and 200,000 (10.4%) Muslims, 70,298 (3.7%) Orthodox, 57,502 (3.0%) other Christians, and 9,504 (0.5%) other religions. A study conducted by the Vienna Institute of Demography estimated the 2018 proportions to be 34% Catholic, 30% unaffiliated, 15% Muslim, 10% Orthodox, 4% Protestant, and 6% other religions.\nAs of the spring of 2014, Muslims made up 30% of the total proportion of schoolchildren in Vienna.\nVienna is the seat of the Metropolitan Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vienna, in which is also vested the exempt Ordinariate for Byzantine-Rite Catholics in Austria; its Archbishop is Cardinal Christoph Sch\u00f6nborn. Many Catholic Churches in central Vienna feature performances of religious or other music, including masses sung to classical music and organ. Some of Vienna's most significant historical buildings are Catholic churches, including the St. Stephen's Cathedral (\"Stephansdom\"), Karlskirche, Peterskirche and the Votivkirche. On the banks of the Danube is a Buddhist Peace Pagoda, built in 1983 by the monks and nuns of Nipponzan Myohoji.\nGeography.\nVienna is located in northeastern Austria, at the easternmost extension of the Alps in the Vienna Basin. The earliest settlement, at the location of today's inner city, was south of the meandering Danube, while the city now spans both sides of the river. Elevation ranges from . The city has a total area of 414.78 square kilometers (160.1 sq mi), making it the largest city in Austria by area.\nClimate.\nVienna's' urban core has a humid subtropical (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\") climate classification with dozens of days exceeding and night temperatures not dropping below . However, elevated north/western edges of Vienna still have a borderline oceanic climate (Koppen: Cfb).\nThe city has warm to hot showery summers, with average high temperatures ranging between and a record maximum exceeding . Winters are relatively dry and fairly cold with daily mean temperatures around or somewhat above the freezing point. Spring is variable and autumn is cool, with a chance of frost in and after November up to and sometimes including April. Snowfall has become much rarer over the last few decades due to anthropogenic global warming, especially in the urban core with the urban heat island effect.\nPrecipitation is generally moderate throughout the year, averaging around annually, with considerable local variations, the Vienna Woods region in the west being the wettest part ( annually) and the flat plains in the east being the driest part ( annually). Snow in winter is not common anymore and not so frequent compared to the mostly alpine Western and Southern regions of Austria.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDistricts and enlargement.\nDistricts.\nVienna is divided into 23 districts. The district numbers are displayed on every street sign before the street name (e.g., 16, Thaliastra\u00dfe). They also serve as the second and third digits of the postcode (1010 for the 1st district to 1230 for the 23rd district).\nPolitics.\nPolitical history.\nIn the provinces represented in the Imperial Council, men had enjoyed universal suffrage at the national level since 1907. However, Mayor Karl Lueger of the Christian Social Party prevented the adoption of this right to vote in municipal council elections, effectively excluding many working-class people. The first elections in which all adult men and women were entitled to vote took place in 1919, after the end of the monarchy. Since 1919, the Social Democratic Party of Austria (SP\u00d6) has consistently provided the mayor in all free elections, and the Vienna City Council (the city parliament) has maintained a Social Democratic majority.\nOn 10 November 1920, the Federal Constitution of Austria came into force. This constitution defined Vienna as a separate state, enabling its separation from Lower Austria. Since then, the mayor of Vienna has also served as the governor of the state, the city senate has functioned as the state government, and the municipal council the state parliament. Vienna continued to serve as the seat of the Lower Austrian government until 1997, when it relocated to St. P\u00f6lten.\nFrom 1934 to 1945, during the Austrofascist and Nazi periods, no democratic elections were held, and the city was governed under a dictatorship. During this time, the SP\u00d6 was banned, and many of its members were imprisoned. Vienna's city constitution was reinstated in 1945.\nThe city has enacted numerous social democratic policies. One notable example is the Gemeindebauten, social housing assets that are well-integrated into the city's architecture outside the inner district. These low-cost rentals provide comfortable accommodation and good access to city amenities. Many of the projects were built after World War II on vacant lots left by bombings during the war, with a strong emphasis on high construction standards. Today, Vienna's social housing accommodates over 500,000 people.\nGovernment.\nIn the 1996 City Council election, the SP\u00d6 lost its overall majority in the 100-seat chamber, winning 43 seats and 39.15% of the vote. The SP\u00d6 had previously held an outright majority in every free municipal election since 1919. In the same election, the Freedom Party of Austria (FP\u00d6) won 29 seats, an increase from 21 in 1991, and surpassed the \u00d6VP, which finished in third place for the second consecutive election. From 1996 to 2001, the SP\u00d6 governed Vienna in a coalition with the \u00d6VP.\nIn 2001, the SP\u00d6 regained its overall majority with 52 seats and 46.91% of the vote. In 2005, this majority increased further to 55 seats (49.09%). However, in the 2010 elections, the SP\u00d6 lost its overall majority again and subsequently formed a coalition with the Green Party \u2013 the first SP\u00d6/Green coalition in Austria. This coalition remained in place following the 2015 election. After the 2020 election, the SP\u00d6 formed a coalition with NEOS \u2013 The New Austria and Liberal Forum. This coalition continued after the 2025 election.\nCurrent government.\nThe latest elections were held on 27 April 2025. \nEconomy.\nVienna generates 25.1% of Austria's GDP, making it the highest performing regional economy of the country. It has a GDP per capita of \u20ac56,600\u20ac as of 2024. The unemployment rate in Vienna is 9.6% as of 2022, which is the highest of all the states. The private service sector provides 75% of all jobs. The city improved its position from 2012 on the ranking of the most economically powerful cities, reaching number nine on the list in 2015. Of the top 500 Austrian firms measured by turnover, 203 are headquartered in Vienna. As of 2015, 175 international firms maintained offices in Vienna.\nSince the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989, Vienna has expanded its position as a gateway to Eastern Europe. 300 international companies have their Eastern European headquarters in Vienna, including Hewlett-Packard, Henkel, Baxalta, and Siemens.\nResearch and development.\nBioscience is a major research and development sector in Vienna. The Vienna Life Science Cluster is Austria's major hub for life science research, education, and business. Throughout Vienna, five universities and several basic research institutes form the academic core of the hub with more than 12,600 employees and 34,700 students. Here, more than 480 medical devices, biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies with almost 23,000 employees generate around 12\u00a0billion euros in revenue (2017). This corresponds to more than 50% of the revenue generated by life science companies in Austria (22.4\u00a0billion euros).\nVienna is home to Boehringer Ingelheim, Octapharma, Ottobock and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. Companies such as Apeiron Biologics, Hookipa Pharma, Marinomed, mySugr, Themis Bioscience and Valneva operate in Vienna. The Central European Diabetes Association, a cooperative international medical research association, was founded in the city.\nInformation technologies.\nThe Viennese sector for information and communication technologies is comparable in size with those of Helsinki, Milan, or Munich, and ranks among Europe's largest locations for information technology. In 2012, 8,962 information technology businesses with a workforce of 64,223 were located in the Vienna region. Among the biggest IT firms in Vienna are Kapsch, Beko Engineering &amp; Informatics, Frequentis, Cisco Systems Austria, Microsoft Austria, IBM Austria and Samsung Electronics Austria.\nConferences.\nIn 2022, the International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA) ranked Vienna 1st in the world for association meetings. The Union of International Associations (UIA) ranked Vienna 5th in the world for 2019 with 306 international meetings, behind Singapore, Brussels, Seoul and Paris. The city's largest conference center, the Austria Center Vienna (ACV) has a total capacity for around 22,800 people and is situated next to the United Nations Office at Vienna. Other centers are the Messe Wien Exhibition &amp; Congress Center (up to 3,000 people) and the Hofburg Palace (up to 4,900 people).\nTourism.\nThere were 17.3 million overnight stays in Vienna in 2023. The top ten incoming markets in 2023 were Germany, the rest of Austria, the United States, Italy, the United Kingdom, Spain, France, Poland, Switzerland, and Romania.\nCulture.\nClassical music, theater, and opera.\nVienna has a long-standing tradition of art and culture, encompassing theater, opera, classical music, and fine arts. The Burgtheater is considered one of the premier theaters in the German-speaking world alongside its branch, the Akademietheater. The Volkstheater and the Theater in der Josefstadt also enjoy good reputations. There is also a multitude of smaller theaters, in many cases devoted to less mainstream forms of the performing arts, such as modern or experimental plays, as well as cabaret.\nThe city is also home to several opera houses, including the Theater an der Wien, the Staatsoper, and the Volksoper, the latter being devoted to the typical Viennese operetta.Vienna has long been a hub for classical music, nurturing both native composers and musicians who moved there to work. Notable composers born in Vienna include Franz Schubert, Arnold Schoenberg, Alban Berg, Anton Webern, Joseph Lanner, Johann Strauss I, and Johann Strauss II. Violinist Fritz Kreisler and electronic music pioneer Louie Austen also hail from the city.\nMany influential composers relocated to Vienna, including Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, Johannes Brahms, Franz Liszt, Gustav Mahler, Anton Bruckner, and Antonio Salieri. The city also hosted premieres of operas such as \"Fidelio, Die Fledermaus, The Gypsy Baron, The Magic Flute\", and \"The Marriage of Figaro\".\nVienna continues to be a center for classical performances, with venues like the Wiener Musikverein, home of the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra, famous for its annual New Year's Concert, and the Wiener Konzerthaus, headquarters of the Vienna Symphony Orchestra. Many concerts cater to tourists, featuring music by Mozart and the Strauss family.\nUp until 2005, the Theater an der Wien hosted premieres of musicals, but since 2006 (a year dedicated to the 250th anniversary of Mozart's birth), it has devoted itself to opera again, becoming a stagione opera house offering one new production each month. Since 2012, Theater an der Wien has taken over the Wiener Kammeroper, a historically small theater in the first district of Vienna, seating 300 spectators, turning it into its second venue for smaller-sized productions and chamber operas created by the young ensemble of Theater an der Wien (JET). Before 2005, the most successful musical was \"Elisabeth\", which was later translated into several languages and performed around the world. The Wiener Taschenoper is dedicated to stage music of the 20th and 21st centuries. The Haus der Musik museum (\"House of Music\") opened in 2000.\nFounded in 1963 and located in Josefstadt, the Vienna\u2019s English Theatre (VET) is the oldest English-language theater in continental Europe.\nPopular music.\nVienna has made significant contributions to pop music, with pioneers of Austropop such as Georg Danzer, Rainhard Fendrich, Wolfgang Ambros, and Peter Cornelius. Willi Resetarits lived in the city from the age of three. The internationally best-known Viennese artist was Falco, whose song \u201dRock Me Amadeus\u201d is the only German-language song to reach number 1 on the American Billboard Hot 100, which it held for three weeks in 1986. His other hits, such as \u201cDer Kommissar\u201d and \u201cJeanny\u201d also charted internationally. The founder of the American jazz fusion band Weather Report and Miles Davis collaborator, Joe Zawinul, was born in Vienna and studied music at the Conservatory of Vienna. Current artists include Rapper RAF Camora, who grew up in the district of Rudolfsheim-F\u00fcnfhaus and often emphasizes his ties to his home in his lyrics, as well as hip-hop-musician Yung Hurn and indie pop band Wanda.\nMultiple popular songs have been written about Vienna, such as \"Vienna\" (1977) by Billy Joel, \"Vienna\" (1981) by Ultravox, and \"Vienna Calling\" by Falco.\nThe Wienerlied is a unique song genre from Vienna. They are sung in Viennese dialect and often center around the city. There are approximately 60,000 \u2013 70,000 Wienerlieder.\nEvery year, the Donauinsel stages the \"Donauinselfest\", the largest open-air music festival in the world, with approximately 3 million attendees over three days. The festival is organized by the SP\u00d6 Wien and is free to enter. The Vienna Jazz Festival has taken place almost every year since 1991 and has featured artists such as Nina Simone, Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie, and Ravi Shankar.\nCinema.\nFilms set in Vienna include \"Amadeus\", \"Before Sunrise\", \"The Third Man\", \"The Living Daylights\" and \"\".\nNotable actors born in the city include Hedy Lamarr, Christoph Waltz, Christiane H\u00f6rbiger, Eric Pohlmann, Boris Kodjoe, Christine Buchegger, Senta Berger, and Christine Ostermayer. Many filmmakers, such as Michael Haneke and Fritz Lang, were born in Vienna. Billy Wilder and Otto Preminger also lived in the city, with Preminger studying and beginning his career there.\nVienna's cinemas include the Apollo Kino and \"Cineplexx Donauzentrum\" and many English language cinemas, including the Haydn Kino, Artis International and the Burg Kino, which screens \"The Third Man\", a 1949 film set in Vienna, three times a week.\nEvery October since 1960, the city has staged the Viennale, an international film festival which screens several different genres of films and many premieres.\nLiterature.\nNotable writers from Vienna include Carl Julius Haidvogel, Franz Grillparzer, and Stefan Zweig.\nWriters who lived and worked in Vienna include Ingeborg Bachmann, Thomas Bernhard, Elias Canetti, Ernst von Feuchtersleben, Elfriede Jelinek, Franz Kafka, Karl Kraus, Robert Musil, Arthur Schnitzler, and Bertha von Suttner.\nScience.\nScientists and intellectuals who were born, lived, or worked in Vienna include:\nMuseums.\nThe majority of museums in Vienna are located in an area on the border of Innere Stadt and Neubau in the center of the city, from the museums inside the Hofburg to the MuseumsQuartier, with the twin Naturhistorisches Museum and Kunsthistorisches Museum in between. This area is home to many museums, such as:\nThe \u00d6sterreichische Galerie Belvedere at the Belvedere presents art from Austria from the Middle Ages through the Baroque to the early 20th century, including \"The Kiss\", Gustav Klimt's most famous work. It also houses the Baroque Museum with Franz Xaver Messerschmidt's famous character heads. In 2011, Belvedere 21 (formerly 21er Haus) was reopened in its immediate vicinity as a branch of contemporary art.\nThe Vienna Museum documents the history of Vienna with a permanent presentation and temporary exhibitions and presents the memorials to Ludwig van Beethoven, Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Franz Schubert, and Johann Strauss. Other branches of the museum include the Hermesvilla in the Lainzer Tiergarten, the Vienna Clock Museum, the Roman Museum, and the Prater Museum.\nThe former imperial summer residence at Sch\u00f6nbrunn Palace, Vienna's most visited attraction, is set up as a museum with the palace's showrooms and the Imperial Carriage Museum.\nThe Museum of Military History in the Arsenal is the leading museum of the Austrian Armed Forces and documents the history of the Austrian military with exhibits including weapons, armour, tanks, aircraft, uniforms, battle flags, paintings, medals and decorations, photographs, battleship models and documents.\nOther museums in the city include:\nArchitecture.\nA variety of architectural styles have been preserved in Vienna, including Romanesque and Baroque architecture. The Vienna Secession, an art movement closely related to Art Nouveau, has left many architectural traces in Vienna. The Secession building, Karlsplatz Stadtbahn Station, and the Kirche am Steinhof by Otto Wagner rank among the best-known examples of Art Nouveau in the world.\nThe Wiener Moderne shunned the use of extraneous adornment. Architect Adolf Loos is responsible for the Looshaus (1909), the K\u00e4rntner Bar (1908), and the Steiner House (1910).\nThe Hundertwasserhaus by Friedensreich Hundertwasser, designed to counter the clinical look of modern architecture, is one of Vienna's most popular tourist attractions. Hundertwasser also designed the KunstHausWien and the District Heating Plant in Alsergrund.\nIn the 1990s, several quarters were adapted and extensive building projects were implemented in the areas around Donaustadt and Wienerberg. Vienna has seen numerous architectural projects completed, which combine modern architectural elements with old buildings, such as the remodeling and revitalization of the old Gasometer in 2001.\nThe DC Towers are located on the northern bank of the Danube and were completed in 2013.\nPlaces of worship.\nDue to the prevalence of Christianity in the city, most places of worship are churches and cathedrals. Most notable are:\nOther notable churches include the Augustinian Church, the Church of St. Maria Rotunda, the Church of St. Leopold, the Franciscan Church, the Jesuit Church and the Minoritenkirche.\nVienna's biggest mosque is the Vienna Islamic Center in Kaiserm\u00fchlen, which is financed by the Muslim World League. The mosque features a 32-meter-high minaret and a dome 16 meters high, with a 20-meter radius. In addition, there are over 100 further mosques in the city.\nBefore the November pogroms of 1938, also known as the Kristallnacht, Vienna had 24 synagogues and 78 prayer houses. Only one synagogue, the Stadttempel, survived the destruction.\nBall dances.\nThe first balls in Vienna were held in the 18th century. The ball season takes place annually during Carnival, running from 11 November to Shrove Tuesday. Many balls are held in the Hofburg, Rathaus and Musikverein. Guests adhere to a strict dress code; men are required to wear black or white tie, while women must wear ball gowns. Debutants of the ball wear white.\nThe balls are opened with dances, traditionally including a Viennese waltz, at around 22:00, and close at about 05:00 the next morning. Food served at the balls includes sausages with bread, and goulash.\nNotable Viennese balls include the Vienna Opera Ball, the Vienna Ball of Sciences, the Wiener Akademikerball, and the Hofburg Silvesterball.\nThe Wiener Akademikerball in the Hofburg has attracted lots of controversy for being a gathering for far-right politicians and groups. The ball is hosted by the FP\u00d6, the right-wing populist party of Austria, and has attracted multiple right-wing and far-right personalities, such as Martin Sellner and Marine Le Pen. Since 2008, annual demonstrations organized by various groups have protested against the event. Former leader of the FP\u00d6 Heinz-Christian Strache compared anti-fascist protesters to a Nazi mob, alleging that the ball attendees were being treated as \"new Jews\".\nLanguage.\nVienna is part of the Austro-Bavarian language area, in particular Central Bavarian (\"Mittelbairisch\"). The Viennese dialect takes many loanword from languages of the former Habsburg Monarchy, especially Czech. The dialect differs from the west of Austria in its pronunciation and grammar. Features typical of Viennese German include Monophthongization, the transformation of a diphthong into a monophthong (German \"hei\u00df\" (hot) into Viennese \"haas\") and the lengthening of vowels (\"Heeaasd, i bin do ned bleeed, wooos waaasn ii, wea des woooa\" (Standard German \"H\u00f6rst du, ich bin doch nicht bl\u00f6d, was wei\u00df denn ich, wer das war\"): \"Listen, I'm not stupid; what do I know, who that was?\"). Speakers of the dialect tend to avoid the genitive case.\nLGBT.\nVienna is regarded as the center of LGBTQ+ life in Austria. The city has implemented an action plan against homophobic discrimination and has maintained an anti-discrimination unit within its administration since 1998. The city has several caf\u00e9s, bars, and clubs frequented by the LGBTQ+ community, including the Caf\u00e9 Savoy, a traditional coffee house established in 1896. In 2015, ahead of hosting the Eurovision Song Contest, Vienna introduced traffic lights featuring same-sex couples, attracting international media attention. Multiple rainbow crossings are dotted around the city. Vienna's Pride Parade is held every June. In 2019, when the parade hosted Europride, it attracted around 500,000 visitors.\nSocial infrastructure.\nSchools.\nAs of the 2022/2023 school year, there were 457 compulsory education schools in Vienna, including 303 primary schools and 140 middle schools. Additionally, there are 98 high schools, 90 of which also include middle school education. Around 250,000 children are enrolled in the Viennese school system, which is staffed by almost 29,000 teachers.\nDue partly to the numerous international offices in the city, Vienna is home to many international schools, including the Vienna International School, the American International School, the International Christian School, and the Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais de Vienne.\nUniversities.\nWith 197,209 students enrolled in the winter semester of 2023/2024, Vienna has the largest student population of any city in the German-speaking world.\nThe city is home to several historic universities. The University of Vienna, the oldest and largest university in the German-speaking world, was founded in 1365 by Duke Rudolph IV. Its medical faculty became independent as the Medical University of Vienna in 2004. Other prominent institutions include the Academy of Fine Arts (1692), the University of Veterinary Medicine (1765), and the University of Music and Performing Arts (1767). The 19th century saw the founding of the Vienna University of Technology (TU), the University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU) and the University of Economics and Business (WU). The University of Applied Arts, founded in 1867, gained university status in 1970. In addition to these public universities, Vienna also hosts several private universities, including Webster Vienna Private University, the Music and Arts University of the City of Vienna and, since 2019, the Central European University, as well as several universities of applied sciences.\nLibraries.\nVienna's public library system, the \"Wiener B\u00fcchereien\", comprises 39 lending libraries, including the \"Hauptb\u00fccherei\" (Main Library), which serves as the central hub. Located at Urban-Loritz-Platz along the G\u00fcrtel, it sits at the intersection of the districts Rudolfsheim-F\u00fcnfhaus and Neubau. Alongside books, the libraries offer CDs, DVDs, computer games, cassettes, magazines, and digital ebooks, as well as study spaces and literary events.\nBeyond its public libraries, Vienna hosts several academic and research libraries. The Austrian National Library, situated in the Hofburg, is the largest in the country and holds extensive historical and cultural collections. Other institutions include the Vienna University Library, the Vienna City Library in the Rathaus, and the libraries of major universities such as the University of Economics and Business, the Technical University, and the Medical University. Additionally, the city is home to specialized libraries, including the Social Science Study Library of the Chamber of Labour and the Parliamentary Library, which cater to specific fields of research and policy.\nHealthcare.\nIn 2020, Vienna had 729.3 hospital beds and 696.8 doctors per 100,000 inhabitants. The General Hospital (Allgemeines Krankenhaus, known as AKH) in Alsergrund is the largest hospital in Austria and serves as the teaching hospital for the Medical University of Vienna. The city is home to 7 public hospitals and 8 care homes managed by the municipality, in addition to 17 privately operated non-profit hospitals and numerous private healthcare facilities.\nSocial institutions.\nThe first social institutions in Vienna were established in the early 20th century. Due to widespread poverty, homeless shelters and men's hostels were built, such as the one opened in 1905 on Meldemannstra\u00dfe, where the young Adolf Hitler lived from 1910 to 1913. Today, approximately 200,000 people in Vienna live below the poverty line. Non-profit organizations such as \"Volkshilfe\" and \"Caritas\" provide support. \"Caritas\" operates the homeless shelter \"Die Gruft\" in Mariahilf, which has been in existence since 1986. Streetwork services are offered to young people, and the \"Wiener Sozialdienste\" (Vienna Social Services) carry out a range of charitable tasks.\nHousing.\n\"Gemeindebauten\" are public housing complexes owned by the city, primarily constructed during the period of Red Vienna in the early 20th century, as part of a large-scale social housing program aimed at providing affordable homes to working-class families. Famous examples include Karl-Marx-Hof. As symbols of socialism, these buildings are often named after socialist or social-democratic politicians such as Friedrich Engels, Ferdinand Lassalle, Olof Palme, and Victor Adler. Additionally, some are named after other notable figures, including George Marshall, Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld, and George Washington. The \"Gemeindebauten\" often featured additional community facilities, such as municipal libraries, daycare centers, laundromats, indoor pools, and shopping centers. The classic \"Gemeindebauten\" from the interwar period are typically designed in block perimeter development, with a large entrance gate leading to an inner courtyard, featuring a green space with playgrounds. They continue to serve as affordable housing to this day.\nThe remaining half of the socialised housing stock in Vienna is limited-profit housing associations (LPHAs), a kind of housing which can be established either as a private company, or a housing cooperative, which are only allowed to charge cost-covering rents.\nVienna today has some of the most affordable housing and cheapest rents in Europe.\nNature.\nParks.\nOn the southeastern outer border of the Ringstra\u00dfe lies the Stadtpark. The park covers an area of about 28 acres and is split in half by the river Wien. It contains monuments to various Viennese artists, most notably the gilded bronze monument of Johann Strau\u00df II. On the other side of the Ring is the Burggarten, just behind the Hofburg, which features a monument to Mozart as well as a greenhouse. On the other side of the Hofburg is the Volksgarten, home to a small-scale replica of the Temple of Hephaestus and a cultivated flower garden. On the other side of the road, in front of the Rathaus, is the Rathauspark, which hosts the Christmas Christkindlmarkt.\nThe Prater is a large public park in Leopoldstadt. Within the park is the Wurstelprater (colloquially known as \u201cthe Prater\u201d), a public amusement park that contains the Wiener Riesenrad, a\u00a0 Ferris wheel, along with various rides, roller coasters, carousels and a Madame Tussauds. The rest of the park is covered by forest. The \"Hauptallee\", a wide, car-free alley lined with horse chestnut trees, runs through the park. Eliud Kipchoge broke the marathon distance record on this road in the in October 2019. The Prater also is home to the Liliputbahn, a railway line primarily used by tourists, and a planetarium. It was the location of the 1873 Vienna World's Fair. In 1931, the Ernst-Happel-Stadion, formerly known as the Praterstadion, was opened in the Prater.\nThe grounds of the imperial Sch\u00f6nbrunn Palace contain an 18th-century park which includes the Sch\u00f6nbrunn Zoo, which was founded in 1752, making it the world's oldest zoo still in operation. The zoo is one of the few to house giant pandas. The park also features the Palmenhaus Sch\u00f6nbrunn, a large greenhouse with around 4,500 plant species.\nThe Augarten in Leopoldstadt, on the border of Brigittenau, is a 129-acre French Baroque-style public park open during the day. The park is home to flower gardens and multiple tree-lined avenues. The park was opened in 1775 by Joseph II and is surrounded by a wall with five gates, which are shut at night. The baroque Palais Augarten, in the south of the park, is home to the Vienna Boys' Choir. Towering over the park are two anti-aircraft flak towers, built by the Nazis in 1944. After the war, the towers were unable to be destroyed, so they were left standing. They now stand empty and serve no function, though various other such towers in the city were repurposed, such as the Haus des Meeres in Esterhazy Park.\nThe Donauinsel, part of Vienna's flood defences, is a long artificial island between the Danube and New Danube dedicated to leisure activities. It was constructed from 1972 to 1988 for flood protection measures. Sporting amenities, such as volleyball courts, playgrounds, skate spots, dog parks, and multiple toilet facilities, some with showers, are available on the island. To transform the island into a green space, approximately 1.8 million trees and shrubs, along with 170 hectares of forest, were planted. A few hundred Japanese cherry trees were planted as a symbol of friendship between Austria and Japan. Animals on the island include sand lizards and Danube crested newts.\nThe Donaupark is a 63-hectare park in Kaiserm\u00fchlen, Donaustadt, between the New Danube and the Old Danube, next to the Vienna International Centre. The park features the Donauturm, the tallest structure in Austria at 252 meters, as well as a 40-meter tall steel cross, erected in 1983 on the occasion of a holy mass held by Pope John Paul II during his visit to Austria. The park features memorials to multiple Latin American figures such as Salvador Allende, Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, and Che Guevara.\nOther parks include the T\u00fcrkenschanzpark, the Schweizergarten, and the Waldm\u00fcllerpark.\nWoods.\nThe Lobau, a floodplain in the southeast of the city, is a part of the wider Danube-Auen National Park. It is used for recreation and has many nudist areas. It is home to multiple species of animals:\nIn the west of the city is the Lainzer Tiergarten, a 24.5\u00a0km\u00b2 public nature reserve, of which 19.5\u00a0km\u00b2 is woodland. The park was created in 1561 by Emperor Ferdinand I, who used it as a private hunting ground. After the fall of the monarchy, the Austrian government declared it a public nature reserve. Since 1973, admission has been free of charge. The reserve is home to many wild boar, fallow deer, red deer, and European mouflons, as well as 18 species of bats.\nCemeteries.\nVienna has 55 cemeteries, 46 managed by the city and the rest by religious communities.\nThe largest cemetery in the city is the Vienna Central Cemetery (\"Zentralfriedhof\"). Spanning 2.4\u00a0km\u00b2, it holds over 330,000 graves and about 3 million interments. Opened in 1874, the cemetery includes Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, and Jewish sections. Notable figures buried here include Ludwig van Beethoven, Falco, Bruno Kreisky, Hedy Lamarr, and all Austrian presidents who have died since World War II. The cemetery is also a habitat for wildlife, including deer, badgers, and martens. Most notably, European hamsters thrive here, feeding on plants around the headstones. The grounds feature numerous memorials, including those dedicated to the casualties of the Revolutions of 1848, the July Revolt of 1927, and the victims of the Nazi regime.\nSt. Marx Cemetery, now closed, is the final resting place of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Other notable cemeteries include those in Grinzing and Hietzing, as well as the Jewish Cemetery in Ro\u00dfau.\nRivers.\nDanube.\nVienna is the largest city on the Danube, which flows from the north and exits to the southeast.\nUntil 1870, the Danube in Vienna remained unregulated, with the river flowing through multiple branching side arms, making the area highly susceptible to flooding. The first major Danube regulation project involved cutting a new, straight main channel to improve flood control and navigation. As part of the project, the arm that ran closer to the city center was preserved and is now known as the Donaukanal (Danube Canal). Additionally, another former arm north of the river was transformed into an oxbow lake, today called the Alte Donau (\"Old Danube\").\nDespite these measures, Vienna remained vulnerable to flooding. To further mitigate flood risks, a second Danube regulation was undertaken starting in the 1970s. This project involved the construction of a parallel flood relief channel, the Neue Donau (\"New Danube\"), designed to divert excess water during high discharge periods. The excavated material from this project was used to create the Donauinsel (\"Danube Island\"), a long, narrow artificial island situated between the New Danube and the regulated main river. The effectiveness of these flood protection measures was demonstrated during the 2024 European floods, when Vienna remained largely unaffected.\nThe four parts of the Danube:\nWien.\nThe river Wien (\"die Wien\" or \"Wienfluss\") is a 34-kilometer-long tributary of the Danube, with approximately half of its course flowing through Vienna. It originates in the Vienna Woods (\"Wienerwald\") and flows eastward through the city, ultimately joining the Donaukanal. Historically, the river was prone to flooding, which prompted several regulatory measures and modifications, including the canalisation of its course in the 19th century. Today, much of the river Wien is contained within underground channels in the urban area. It enters Vienna in Penzing, flowing above ground past Sch\u00f6nbrunn before being covered by the Naschmarkt. The river reemerges in the Stadtpark in the 1st district, before flowing into the Donaukanal.\nSport.\nFootball.\nThe city is home to numerous football clubs. The two biggest teams are FK Austria Wien (21 Austrian Bundesliga titles and a record 27-time cup winners), who play at the Generali Arena in Favoriten, and SK Rapid Wien (a record 32 Austrian Bundesliga titles), who play at the Allianz Stadion in Penzing. The oldest team in Austria, First Vienna FC, and Floridsdorfer AC both play in the 2. Liga, while the football team of the Wiener Sport-Club, one of the oldest athletics clubs in the country, plays in the Austrian Regionalliga East, the third division.\nThe Ernst-Happel-Stadion is the largest stadium in Austria with 50,865 seats, and serves as the home stadium of the Austria national football team. It has hosted multiple European Cup finals (1963\u201364, 1986\u201387, 1989\u201390, 1994\u201395), as well as seven matches during the 2008 European Championship, including the final, which saw Spain secure a 1\u20130 victory over Germany.\nOther sports.\nOther sports clubs include the Vikings Vienna (American football), who won the Eurobowl title four times in a row between 2004 and 2007 and had a perfect season in 2013, the Hotvolleys Vienna (volleyball), the Vienna Wanderers (baseball), who won the 2012 and 2013 Championship of the Austrian Baseball League, and the Vienna Capitals (ice hockey). The European Handball Federation (EHF) is headquartered in Vienna. There are also three rugby clubs in the city: Vienna Celtic, the oldest rugby club in Austria, RC Donau, and Stade Viennois.\nIn addition to team sports, Vienna offers a wide range of individual sports. The paths in the Prater or along the Donauinsel are popular running routes. The Vienna City Marathon, which attracts more than 10,000 participants annually, typically takes place in May. Cyclists can choose from over 1,000 kilometers of cycle paths and numerous mountain bike trails in the Vienna mountains. Golf courses are available on the Wienerberg and in the Prater. The Vienna Open tennis tournament has taken place in the city since 1974. The matches are played on indoor hard courts in the Wiener Stadthalle. The City of Vienna also operates two ski slopes, one on the Hohe-Wand-Wiese and another on the Dollwiese.\nThe city submitted a bid to host the 1964 Summer Olympics but lost out to Tokyo.\nCulinary specialities.\nFood.\nVienna is well known for Wiener schnitzel, a cutlet of veal \"(Kalbsschnitzel)\", sometimes also made with pork (\"Schweinsschnitzel\") or chicken (\"H\u00fchnerschnitzel\"), that is pounded flat, coated in flour, egg, and breadcrumbs, and fried in clarified butter. It is available in almost every restaurant that serves Viennese cuisine and can be eaten hot or cold. Other examples of Viennese cuisine include \"Tafelspitz\" (very lean boiled beef), which is traditionally served with \"Ger\u00f6stete Erd\u00e4pfel\" (boiled potatoes that are sliced and pan-fried) and horseradish sauce, \"Apfelkren\" (a mixture of horseradish, cream and apple) and \"Schnittlauchsauce\" (a chives sauce made with mayonnaise and stale bread).\nVienna has a long tradition of producing cakes and desserts. These include \"Apfelstrudel\" (hot apple strudel), \"Milchrahmstrudel\" (milk-cream strudel), \"Palatschinken\" (sweet pancakes), and \"Kn\u00f6del\" (dumplings) often filled with fruit such as apricots (\"Marillenkn\u00f6del\"). Sachertorte, a delicately moist chocolate cake with a layer of apricot jam and a chocolate glaze, created by the Sacher Hotel, is world-famous.\nIn winter, small street stands sell traditional \"Maroni\" (hot chestnuts) and potato fritters.\nSausages are popular and available from street vendors (\"W\u00fcrstelstand\") throughout the day and into the night. The sausage known as \"Wiener\" (German for Viennese) in the U.S. and in Germany is called a \"Frankfurter\" in Vienna. Other popular sausages are \"Burenwurst\" (a coarse beef and pork sausage, generally boiled), \"K\u00e4sekrainer\" (spicy pork with small chunks of cheese), and \"Bratwurst\" (a white pork sausage). These sausages either come with sliced bread or as a hot dog. Mustard is the traditional condiment and usually offered in two varieties: \"s\u00fc\u00df\" (sweet) or \"scharf\" (spicy).\nVienna ranked 10th in vegan-friendly European cities in a study by Alternative Traveler in 2020.\nThe Naschmarkt is a permanent market for fruit, vegetables, spices, fish, and meat, as well as a popular spot for international cuisine, with numerous small restaurants and food stalls offering dishes from around the world.\nDrinks.\nVienna is one of the few remaining world capitals with its own vineyards. The wine is served in small Viennese pubs known as Heuriger. The wine is often enjoyed as a Spritzer (\"G'spritzter\") with sparkling water. The Gr\u00fcner Veltliner, a dry white wine, is the most widely cultivated wine in Austria. Another wine typical of the region is \"Gemischter Satz\", which is usually a blend of different grape varieties harvested from the same vineyard.\nBeer is second in importance to wine. Vienna has a single large brewery, Ottakringer, and more than ten microbreweries. Ottakringer's most popular product is the \"Ottakringer Helles\", a beer with an alcohol content of 5.2%. Vienna is home to many \"Beisln\", small traditional Austrian pubs.\nLocal soft drinks, such as Almdudler, are popular across the country as an alternative to alcoholic beverages, ranking them among the top choices alongside American brands like Coca-Cola in terms of market share. Other popular drinks include Spezi, a mix between cola and orange lemonade, and Frucade, a German carbonated orange drink.\nViennese caf\u00e9s.\nThe Viennese coffee house (\"Kaffeehaus\") dates back to the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The Vienna intelligentsia treated Viennese caf\u00e9s like a living room. The first Viennese caf\u00e9 was opened in 1685 by Armenian businessman Johannes Diodato. Caf\u00e9 culture flourished in Vienna in the early 19th century. Notable patrons included political figures such as Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, Leon Trotsky, and Josip Broz Tito, who all lived in Vienna in 1913, as well as scientists, writers, and artists such as Sigmund Freud, Stefan Zweig, Egon Schiele and Gustav Klimt.\nNotable coffee houses include:\nHeuriger.\nVienna is one of the few major cities with its own wine-growing region. This wine is sold in taverns, so-called \"Heuriger\", by the local winemakers during the growing season. The wine is often served as a Schorle, a mix of wine and carbonated water. The meals are simple and homemade, usually consisting of fresh bread, typically semmels, with local cold cuts and cheese, or Liptauer spread. The Heurigers are especially numerous in the areas of D\u00f6bling (Grinzing, Neustift am Walde, Nu\u00dfdorf, Salmannsdorf, Sievering), Floridsdorf (Stammersdorf, Strebersdorf), Liesing (Mauer), and Favoriten (Oberlaa).\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nVienna has an extensive public transportation network. It consists predominantly of the Wiener Linien network (subway, tram, and bus lines) and the S-Bahn lines belonging to the Austrian Federal Railways (\u00d6BB). As of 2023, 32% of the population of the city uses public transit as their main mode of transit.\nU-Bahn.\nThe Vienna metro system consists of five lines (U1, U2, U3, U4, U6) with the U5 currently under construction. The metro currently serves 98 stations and covers a distance of 83.5 kilometers.\nThe services run from 05:00 to about 01:00 with intervals of two to five minutes during the day and up to eight minutes after 20:00. On Friday and Saturday evenings and on evenings before a public holiday they operate a 24-hour service at 15-minute intervals.\nBuses.\nBuses were first introduced to the city in 1907. Currently, 117 bus lines operate in Vienna during the day. 47 of these are run by the Wiener Linien, who also set the routes and timetables, the rest by subcontractors such as \"Dr Richard\", \"Gschwindl\" and \"Blaguss\". The Wiener Linien also operates 20 night buses.\nTrams.\nThe Viennese tram network has existed since 1865; the first line was electrified in 1897. There are currently 28 lines with 1071 stops that operate on a network of 176,9\u00a0km. The trams move at about 15\u00a0km/h. The fleet consists of both high-floor and low-floor vehicles; however, the high-floor models, which are not air-conditioned, are in the process of being replaced by more modern, accessible trams. The modern models are air-conditioned and suitable for disabled users.\nTrains.\nThe city forms the hub of the Austrian railway system, with services to all parts of the country and abroad. The railway system connects Vienna's main station Vienna Hauptbahnhof with other European cities, including Bratislava, Budapest, Ljubljana, Munich, Prague, Venice, Wroc\u0142aw, Warsaw, Zagreb, and Z\u00fcrich. Other train stations include:\nCycling.\nThe cycling network in the city spans 1,721 kilometers. However, this figure counts bidirectional bike paths twice and includes on-road cycle-lanes, which are also shared with motor vehicles. The network is constantly being expanded and upgraded, especially in the outer areas, such as Donaustadt. Bike use in the city has been rising, from just 3% in 1993 to 11% in 2024.\nThe city also operates a bicycle-sharing system called \"WienMobil Radverleih\", which offers over 3,000 bikes across 185 stations, available at all times. The bikes are 7-speed city bikes with an adjustable saddle.\nAirport.\nVienna is served by Vienna International Airport, located 18\u00a0km southeast of the city center near the town of Schwechat. The airport handled approximately 29.5 million passengers in 2023. Following lengthy negotiations with surrounding communities, the airport is set to be expanded to increase its capacity by adding a third runway. The airport is undergoing a major expansion, including a new terminal building that opened in 2012 to accommodate the growing number of passengers. Another option for travelers is to use Bratislava Airport, Slovakia, located approximately 60\u00a0km away.\nInternational relations.\nInternational organizations in Vienna.\nIn 1980, Vienna became a UN headquarters city, alongside New York City and Geneva, and was later joined by Nairobi. The city hosts numerous international organizations, many of which are located in the Vienna International Centre in Donaustadt, including:\nIn addition, the University of Vienna hosts the annual Willem C. Vis Moot, an international commercial arbitration competition for law students from around the world.\nDiplomatic meetings were frequently held in Vienna in the latter half of the 20th century, resulting in several significant documents bearing the name Vienna Convention. Among the most important documents are the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, as well as the 1990 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. Vienna also hosted the negotiations leading to the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear program, as well as the Vienna peace talks for Syria.\nCharitable organizations in Vienna.\nAlongside international and intergovernmental organizations, there are dozens of charitable organizations based in Vienna. One such organization is the network of SOS Children's Villages, founded by Hermann Gmeiner in 1949. Today, SOS Children's Villages is active in 132 countries and territories worldwide. Others include Help Afghan School Children Organization (HASCO).\nInternational city co-operations.\nThe general policy of the City of Vienna is not to sign any twin town agreements with other cities. Instead, the city cooperates with a handful of cities on specific issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDistrict to district partnerships.\nIn addition, individual Viennese districts have international partnerships all over the world. A detailed list is published on the website of the City of Vienna.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55867", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55867", "title": "Innsbruck, Austria", "text": ""}
{"id": "55868", "revid": "1310196240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55868", "title": "Classical logic", "text": "Class of formal logics\nClassical logic (or standard logic) or Frege\u2013Russell logic is the intensively studied and most widely used class of deductive logic. Classical logic has had much influence on analytic philosophy.\nCharacteristics.\nEach logical system in this class shares characteristic properties:\nWhile not entailed by the preceding conditions, contemporary discussions of classical logic normally only include propositional and first-order logics. In other words, the overwhelming majority of time spent studying classical logic has been spent studying specifically propositional and first-order logic, as opposed to the other forms of classical logic.\nMost semantics of classical logic are bivalent, meaning all of the possible denotations of propositions can be categorized as either true or false.\nHistory.\nClassical logic is a 19th and 20th-century innovation. The name does not refer to classical antiquity, which used the term logic of Aristotle. Classical logic was the reconciliation of Aristotle's logic, which dominated most of the last 2000 years, with the propositional Stoic logic. The two were sometimes seen as irreconcilable.\nLeibniz's calculus ratiocinator can be seen as foreshadowing classical logic. Bernard Bolzano has the understanding of existential import found in classical logic and not in Aristotle. Though he never questioned Aristotle, George Boole's algebraic reformulation of logic, so-called Boolean logic, was a predecessor of modern mathematical logic and classical logic. William Stanley Jevons and John Venn, who also had the modern understanding of existential import, expanded Boole's system.\nThe original first-order, classical logic is found in Gottlob Frege's \"Begriffsschrift\". It has a wider application than Aristotle's logic and is capable of expressing Aristotle's logic as a special case. It explains the quantifiers in terms of mathematical functions. It was also the first logic capable of dealing with the problem of multiple generality, for which Aristotle's system was impotent. Frege, who is considered the founder of analytic philosophy, invented it to show all of mathematics was derivable from logic, and make arithmetic rigorous as David Hilbert had done for geometry, the doctrine is known as logicism in the foundations of mathematics. The notation Frege used never much caught on. Hugh MacColl published a variant of propositional logic two years prior.\nThe writings of Augustus De Morgan and Charles Sanders Peirce also pioneered classical logic with the logic of relations. Peirce influenced Giuseppe Peano and Ernst Schr\u00f6der.\nClassical logic reached fruition in Bertrand Russell and A. N. Whitehead's \"Principia Mathematica\", and Ludwig Wittgenstein's \"Tractatus Logico Philosophicus\". Russell and Whitehead were influenced by Peano (it uses his notation) and Frege and sought to show mathematics was derived from logic. Wittgenstein was influenced by Frege and Russell and initially considered the \"Tractatus\" to have solved all problems of philosophy.\nWillard Van Orman Quine believed that a formal system that allows quantification over predicates (higher-order logic) didn't meet the requirements to be a logic, saying that it was \"set theory in disguise\".\nClassical logic is the standard logic of mathematics. Many mathematical theorems rely on classical rules of inference such as disjunctive syllogism and the double negation elimination. The adjective \"classical\" in logic is not related to the use of the adjective \"classical\" in physics, which has another meaning. In logic, \"classical\" simply means \"standard\". Classical logic should also not be confused with term logic, also known as Aristotelian logic.\nJan \u0141ukasiewicz pioneered non-classical logic.\nGeneralized semantics.\nWith the advent of algebraic logic, it became apparent that classical propositional calculus admits other semantics. In Boolean-valued semantics (for classical propositional logic), the truth values are the elements of an arbitrary Boolean algebra; \"true\" corresponds to the maximal element of the algebra, and \"false\" corresponds to the minimal element. Intermediate elements of the algebra correspond to truth values other than \"true\" and \"false\". The principle of bivalence holds only when the Boolean algebra is taken to be the two-element algebra, which has no intermediate elements.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55870", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55870", "title": "Cyclopes", "text": "One-eyed giants in Greek and Roman mythology\nIn Greek mythology and later Roman mythology, the Cyclopes ( ; , \"K\u00fdkl\u014dpes\", \"Circle-eyes\" or \"Round-eyes\"; singular Cyclops ; , \"K\u00fdkl\u014dps\") are giant one-eyed creatures. Three groups of Cyclopes can be distinguished. In Hesiod's \"Theogony\", the Cyclopes are the three brothers, Brontes, Steropes, and Arges, who made Zeus's weapon, the thunderbolt. In Homer's \"Odyssey\", they are an uncivilized group of shepherds, the brethren of Polyphemus encountered by Odysseus. A third group of Cyclopes reputedly built the Cyclopean walls of Mycenae and Tiryns.\nIn \"Cyclops\", the fifth-century BC play by Euripides, a chorus of satyrs offers comic relief based on the encounter of Odysseus and Polyphemus. The third-century BC poet Callimachus makes the Hesiodic Cyclopes the assistants of smith-god Hephaestus, as does Virgil in the Latin epic \"Aeneid\", where he seems to equate the Hesiodic and Homeric Cyclopes.\nFrom at least the fifth century BC, Cyclopes have been associated with the island of Sicily and the volcanic Aeolian Islands.\nKinds.\nThree groups of Cyclopes can be distinguished: the Hesiodic, the Homeric and the wall-builders. In Hesiod's \"Theogony\", the Cyclopes are the three brothers: Brontes, Steropes, and Arges, sons of Uranus and Gaia, who made for Zeus his characteristic weapon, the thunderbolt. In Homer's \"Odyssey\", the Cyclopes are an uncivilized group of shepherds, one of whom, Polyphemus, the son of Poseidon, is encountered by Odysseus. Cyclopes were also said to have been the builders of the Cyclopean walls of Mycenae and Tiryns. A scholiast, quoting the fifth-century BC historian Hellanicus, tells us that, in addition to the Hesiodic Cyclopes (whom the scholiast describes as \"the gods themselves\"), and the Homeric Cyclopes, there was a third group of Cyclopes: the builders of the walls of Mycenae.\nHesiodic Cyclopes.\nHesiod, in the \"Theogony\" (c. 700 BC), described three Cyclopes: Brontes, Steropes, and Arges, who were the sons of Uranus (Sky) and Gaia (Earth), and the brothers of the Titans and Hundred-Handers, and who had a single eye set in the middle of their foreheads. They made for Zeus his all-powerful thunderbolt, and in so doing, the Cyclopes played a key role in the Greek succession myth, which told how the Titan Cronus overthrew his father Uranus, and how in turn Zeus overthrew Cronus and his fellow Titans, and how Zeus was eventually established as the final and permanent ruler of the cosmos. The names that Hesiod gives them, Arges (Bright), Brontes (Thunder), and Steropes (Lightning), reflect their fundamental role as thunderbolt makers. As early as the late seventh century BC, the Cyclopes could be used by the Spartan poet Tyrtaeus to epitomize extraordinary size and strength.\nAccording to the accounts of Hesiod and the mythographer Apollodorus, the Cyclopes had been imprisoned by their father Uranus. Zeus later freed the Cyclopes, and they repaid him by giving him the thunderbolt. The Cyclopes provided for Hesiod, and other theogony-writers, a convenient source of heavenly weaponry, since the smith-god Hephaestus\u2014who would eventually take over that role\u2014had not yet been born. According to Apollodorus, the Cyclopes also provided Poseidon with his trident and Hades with his cap of invisibility, and the gods used these weapons to defeat the Titans.\nAlthough the primordial Cyclopes of the \"Theogony\" were presumably immortal (as were their brothers the Titans), the sixth-century BC Hesiodic \"Catalogue of Women\", has them being killed by Apollo. Later sources tell us why: Apollo's son Asclepius had been killed by Zeus' thunderbolt, and Apollo killed the Cyclopes, the makers of the thunderbolt, in revenge. According to a scholiast on Euripides' \"Alcestis\", the fifth-century BC mythographer Pherecydes supplied the same motive, but said that Apollo, rather than killing the Cyclopes, killed their \"sons\" (one of whom he named Aortes) instead. No other source mentions any offspring of the Cyclopes. A Pindar fragment suggests that Zeus himself killed the Cyclopes to prevent them from making thunderbolts for anyone else.\nThe Cyclopes' prowess as craftsmen is stressed by Hesiod who says \"strength and force and contrivances were in their works.\" Being such skilled craftsmen of great size and strength, later poets, beginning with the third-century BC poet Callimachus, imagine these Cyclopes, the primordial makers of Zeus' thunderbolt, becoming the assistants of the smith-god Hephaestus, at his forge in Sicily, underneath Mount Etna, or perhaps the nearby Aeolian Islands. In his \"Hymn to Artemis\", Callimachus has the Cyclopes on the Aeolian island of Lipari, working \"at the anvils of Hephaestus\", make the bows and arrows used by Apollo and Artemis. The first-century BC Latin poet Virgil, in his epic \"Aeneid\", has the Cyclopes: \"Brontes and Steropes and bare-limbed Pyracmon\" toil under the direction of Vulcan (Hephaestus), in caves underneath Mount Etna and the Aeolian islands. Virgil describes the Cyclopes, in Vulcan's smithy forging iron, making a thunderbolt, a chariot for Mars, and Pallas's Aegis, with Vulcan interrupting their work to command the Cyclopes to fashion arms for Aeneas. The later Latin poet Ovid also has the Hesiodic Cyclopes, Brontes and Steropes (along with a third Cyclops named Acmonides), work at forges in Sicilian caves.\nAccording to a Hellenistic astral myth, the Cyclopes were the builders of the first altar. The myth was a catasterism, which explained how the constellation the Altar (Ara) came to be in the heavens. According to the myth, the Cyclopes built an altar upon which Zeus and the other gods swore alliance before their war with the Titans. After their victory, \"the gods placed the altar in the sky in commemoration\", and thus began the practice, according to the myth, of men swearing oaths upon altars \"as a guarantee of their good faith\".\nAccording to the second-century geographer Pausanias, there was a sanctuary called the \"altar of the Cyclopes\" on the Isthmus of Corinth at a place sacred to Poseidon, where sacrifices were offered to the Cyclopes. There is no evidence for any other cult associated with the Cyclopes. According to a version of the story in the \"Iliad\" scholia (found nowhere else), when Zeus swallowed Metis, she was pregnant with Athena by the Cyclops Brontes.\nAlthough described by Hesiod as \"having very violent hearts\" (\"\u1f51\u03c0\u03ad\u03c1\u03b2\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd \u1f26\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1 \u1f14\u03c7\u03bf\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03c2\"), and while their extraordinary size and strength would have made them capable of great violence, there is no indication of the Hesiodic Cyclopes having behaved in any other way than as dutiful servants of the gods.\nWalter Burkert suggests that groups or societies of lesser gods, like the Hesiodic Cyclopes, \"mirror real cult associations (\"thiasoi\") ... It may be surmised that smith guilds lie behind Cabeiri, Idaian Dactyloi, Telchines, and Cyclopes.\"\nHomeric Cyclopes.\nIn an episode of Homer's \"Odyssey\" (c. 700 BC), the hero Odysseus encounters the Cyclops Polyphemus, the son of Poseidon, a one-eyed man-eating giant who lives with his fellow Cyclopes in a distant land. The relationship between these Cyclopes and Hesiod's Cyclopes is unclear. Homer described a very different group of Cyclopes, than the skilled and subservient craftsman of Hesiod. Homer's Cyclopes live in the \"world of men\" rather than among the gods, as they presumably do in the \"Theogony\". The Homeric Cyclopes are presented as uncivilized shepherds, who live in caves, savages with no regard for Zeus. They have no knowledge of agriculture, ships or craft. They live apart and lack any laws.\nThe fifth-century BC playwright Euripides also told the story of Odysseus' encounter with Polyphemus in his satyr play \"Cyclops\". Euripides' Cyclopes, like Homer's, are uncultured cave-dwelling shepherds. They have no agriculture, no wine, and live on milk, cheese and the meat of sheep. They live solitary lives, and have no government. They are inhospitable to strangers, slaughtering and eating all who come to their land. While Homer does not say if the other Cyclopes are like Polyphemus in their appearance and parentage, Euripides makes it explicit, calling the Cyclopes \"Poseidon's one-eyed sons\". And while Homer is vague as to their location, Euripides locates the land of the Cyclopes on the island of Sicily near Mount Etna.\nLike Euripides, Virgil has the Cyclopes of Polyphemus live on Sicily near Etna. For Virgil apparently, these Homeric Cyclopes are members of the same race of Cyclopes as Hesiod's Brontes and Steropes, who live nearby.\nCyclopean wall-builders.\nCyclopes were also said to have been the builders of the so-called 'Cyclopean' walls of Mycenae, Tiryns, and Argos. Although they can be seen as being distinct, the Cyclopean wall-builders share several features with the Hesiodic Cyclopes: both groups are craftsmen of supernatural skill, possessing enormous strength, who lived in primordial times. These builder Cyclopes were apparently used to explain the construction of the stupendous walls at Mycenae and Tiryns, composed of massive stones that seemed too large and heavy to have been moved by ordinary men.\nThese master builders were famous in antiquity from at least the fifth century BC onwards. The poet Pindar has Heracles driving the cattle of Geryon through the \"Cyclopean portal\" of the Tirynian king Eurystheus. The mythographer Pherecydes says that Perseus brought the Cyclopes with him from Seriphos to Argos, presumably to build the walls of Mycenae. Proetus, the mythical king of ancient Argos, was said to have brought a group of seven Cyclopes from Lycia to build the walls of Tiryns.\nThe late fifth and early fourth-century BC comic poet Nicophon wrote a play called either \"Cheirogastores\" or \"Encheirogastores\" (\"Hands-to-Mouth\"), which is thought to have been about these Cyclopean wall-builders. Ancient lexicographers explained the title as meaning \"those who feed themselves by manual labour\", and, according to Eustathius of Thessalonica, the word was used to describe the Cyclopean wall-builders, while \"hands-to-mouth\" was one of the three kinds of Cyclopes distinguished by scholia to Aelius Aristides. Similarly, possibly deriving from Nicophon's comedy, the first-century Greek geographer Strabo says these Cyclopes were called \"Bellyhands\" (\"gasterocheiras\") because they earned their food by working with their hands.\nThe first-century natural philosopher Pliny the Elder, in his \"Natural History\", reported a tradition, attributed to Aristotle, that the Cyclopes were the inventors of masonry towers. In the same work Pliny also mentions the Cyclopes, as being among those credited with being the first to work with iron, as well as bronze. In addition to walls, other monuments were attributed to the Cyclopes. For example, Pausanias says that at Argos there was \"a head of Medusa made of stone, which is said to be another of the works of the Cyclopes\".\nPrincipal sources.\nHesiod.\nAccording to the \"Theogony\" of Hesiod, Uranus (Sky) mated with Gaia (Earth) and produced eighteen children. First came the twelve Titans, next came the three one-eyed Cyclopes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then [Gaia] bore the Cyclopes, who have very violent hearts, Brontes (Thunder) and Steropes (Lightning) and strong-spirited Arges (Bright), those who gave thunder to Zeus and fashioned the thunderbolt. These were like the gods in other regards, but only one eye was set in the middle of their foreheads; and they were called Cyclopes (Circle-eyed) by name, since a single circle-shaped eye was set in their foreheads. Strength and force and contrivances were in their works.\nFollowing the Cyclopes, Gaia next gave birth to three more monstrous brothers, the Hecatoncheires, or Hundred-Handed Giants. Uranus hated his monstrous children, and as soon as each was born, he imprisoned them underground, somewhere deep inside Gaia. Eventually Uranus' son, the Titan Cronus, castrated Uranus, becoming the new ruler of the cosmos, but he did not release his brothers, the Cyclopes and the Hecatoncheires, from their imprisonment in Tartarus.\nFor this failing, Gaia foretold that Cronus would eventually be overthrown by one of his children, as he had overthrown his own father. To prevent this, as each of his children were born, Cronus swallowed them whole; as gods they were not killed, but imprisoned within his belly. His wife, Rhea, sought her mother's advice to avoid losing all of her children in this way, and Gaia advised her to give Cronus a stone wrapped in swaddling clothes. In this way, Zeus was spared the fate of his elder siblings, and was hidden away by his mother. When he was grown, Zeus forced his father to vomit up his siblings, who rebelled against the Titans. Zeus released the Cyclopes and Hecatoncheires, who became his allies. While the Hundred-Handed Giants fought alongside Zeus and his siblings, the Cyclopes gave Zeus his great weapon, the thunderbolt, with the aid of which he was eventually able to overthrow the Titans, establishing himself as the ruler of the cosmos.\nHomer.\nIn Book 9 of the \"Odyssey\", Odysseus describes to his hosts the Phaeacians his encounter with the Cyclops Polyphemus. Having just left the land of the Lotus-eaters, Odysseus says \"Thence we sailed on, grieved at heart, and we came to the land of the Cyclopes\".\nHomer had already (Book 6) described the Cyclopes as \"men overweening in pride who plundered [their neighbors the Phaeacians] continually\", driving the Phaeacians from their home. In Book 9, Homer gives a more detailed description of the Cyclopes as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;an overweening and lawless folk, who, trusting in the immortal gods, plant nothing with their hands nor plough; but all these things spring up for them without sowing or ploughing, wheat, and barley, and vines, which bear the rich clusters of wine, and the rain of Zeus gives them increase. Neither assemblies for council have they, nor appointed laws, but they dwell on the peaks of lofty mountains in hollow caves, and each one is lawgiver to his children and his wives, and they reck nothing one of another.\nAccording to Homer, the Cyclopes have no ships, nor ship-wrights, nor other craftsman, and know nothing of agriculture. They have no regard for Zeus or the other gods, for the Cyclopes hold themselves to be \"better far than they\".\nHomer says that \"godlike\" Polyphemus, the son of Poseidon and the nymph Thoosa, the daughter of Phorcys, is the \"greatest among all the Cyclopes\". Homer describes Polyphemus as a shepherd who:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;mingled not with others, but lived apart, with his heart set on lawlessness. For he was fashioned a wondrous monster, and was not like a man that lives by bread, but like a wooded peak of lofty mountains, which stands out to view alone, apart from the rest, ... [and as] a savage man that knew naught of justice or of law.\nAlthough Homer does not say explicitly that Polyphemus is one-eyed, for the account of his blinding to make sense he must be. If Homer meant for the other Cyclopes to be assumed (as they usually are) to be like Polyphemus, then they too will be one-eyed sons of Poseidon; however Homer says nothing explicit about either the parentage or appearance of the other Cyclopes.\nEuripides.\nThe Hesiodic Cyclopes: makers of Zeus' thunderbolts, the Homeric Cyclopes: brothers of Polyphemus, and the Cyclopean wall-builders, all figure in the plays of the fifth-century BC playwright Euripides. In his play \"Alcestis\", where we are told that the Cyclopes who forged Zeus' thunderbolts, were killed by Apollo. The prologue of that play has Apollo explain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;House of Admetus! In you I brought myself to taste the bread of menial servitude, god though I am. Zeus was the cause: he killed my son Asclepius, striking him in the chest with the lightning bolt, and in anger at this I slew the Cyclopes who forged Zeus\u2019s fire. As my punishment for this Zeus compelled me to be a serf in the house of a mortal.\nEuripides' satyr play \"Cyclops\" tells the story of Odysseus' encounter with the Cyclops Polyphemus, famously told in Homer's \"Odyssey\". It takes place on the island of Sicily near the volcano Mount Etna where, according to the play, \"Poseidon\u2019s one-eyed sons, the man-slaying Cyclopes, dwell in their remote caves.\" Euripides describes the land where Polyphemus' brothers live, as having no \"walls and city battlements\", and a place where \"no men dwell\". The Cyclopes have no rulers and no government, \"they are solitaries: no one is anyone\u2019s subject.\" They grow no crops, living only \"on milk and cheese and the flesh of sheep.\" They have no wine, \"hence the land they dwell in knows no dancing\". They show no respect for the important Greek value of Xenia (\"guest friendship). When Odysseus asks if they are pious and hospitable toward strangers (\"\u03c6\u03b9\u03bb\u03cc\u03be\u03b5\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9 \u03b4\u1f72 \u03c7\u1f64\u03c3\u03b9\u03bf\u03b9 \u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u03be\u03ad\u03bd\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2\"), he is told: \"most delicious, they maintain, is the flesh of strangers ... everyone who has come here has been slaughtered.\"\nSeveral of Euripides' plays also make reference to the Cyclopean wall-builders. Euripides calls their walls \"heaven-high\" (\"\u03bf\u1f50\u03c1\u03ac\u03bd\u03b9\u03b1\"), describes \"the Cyclopean foundations\" of Mycenae as \"fitted snug with red plumbline and mason\u2019s hammer\", and calls Mycenae \"O hearth built by the Cyclopes\". He calls Argos \"the city built by the Cyclopes\", refers to \"the temples the Cyclopes built\" and describes the \"fortress of Perseus\" as \"the work of Cyclopean hands\".\nCallimachus.\nFor the third-century BC poet Callimachus, the Hesiodic Cyclopes Brontes, Steropes and Arges, become assistants at the forge of the smith-god Hephaestus. Callimachus has the Cyclopes make Artemis' bow, arrows and quiver, just as they had (apparently) made those of Apollo. Callimachus locates the Cyclopes on the island of Lipari, the largest of the Aeolian Islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea off the northern coast of Sicily, where Artemis finds them \"at the anvils of Hephaestus\" making a horse-trough for Poseidon:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And the nymphs were affrighted when they saw the terrible monsters like unto the crags of Ossa: all had single eyes beneath their brows, like a shield of fourfold hide for size, glaring terribly from under; and when they heard the din of the anvil echoing loudly, and the great blast of the bellows and the heavy groaning of the Cyclopes themselves. For Aetna cried aloud, and Trinacia cried, the seat of the Sicanians, cried too their neighbour Italy, and Cyrnos therewithal uttered a mighty noise, when they lifted their hammers above their shoulders and smote with rhythmic swing the bronze glowing from the furnace or iron, labouring greatly. Wherefore the daughters of Oceanus could not untroubled look upon them face to face nor endure the din in their ears. No shame to them! on those not even the daughters of the Blessed look without shuddering, though long past childhood\u2019s years. But when any of the maidens doth disobedience to her mother, the mother calls the Cyclopes to her child\u2014Arges or Steropes; and from within the house comes Hermes, stained with burnt ashes. And straightway he plays bogey to the child and she runs into her mother\u2019s lap, with her hands upon her eyes. But thou, Maiden, even earlier, while yet but three years old, when Leto came bearing thee in her arms at the bidding of Hephaestus that he might give thee handsel and Brontes set thee on his stout knees\u2014thou didst pluck the shaggy hair of his great breast and tear it out by force. And even unto this day the mid part of his breast remains hairless, even as when mange settles on a man\u2019s temples and eats away the hair.\nAnd Artemis asks:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cyclopes, for me too fashion ye a Cydonian bow and arrows and a hollow casket for my shafts; for I also am a child of Leto, even as Apollo. And if I with my bow shall slay some wild creature or monstrous beast, that shall the Cyclopes eat.\nVirgil.\nThe first-century BC Roman poet Virgil seems to combine the Cyclopes of Hesiod with those of Homer, having them live alongside each other in the same part of Sicily. In his Latin epic \"Aeneid\", Virgil has the hero Aeneas follow in the footsteps of Odysseus, the hero of Homer's \"Odyssey\". Approaching Sicily and Mount Etna, in Book 3 of the \"Aeneid\", Aeneas manages to survive the dangerous Charybdis, and at sundown comes to the land of the Cyclopes, while \"near at hand Aetna thunders\". The Cyclopes are described as being \"in shape and size like Polyphemus ... a hundred other monstrous Cyclopes [who] dwell all along these curved shores and roam the high mountains.\" After narrowly escaping from Polyphemus, Aeneas tells how, responding to the Cyclops' \"mighty roar\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the race of the Cyclopes, roused from the woods and high mountains, rush to the harbour and throng the shores. We see them, standing impotent with glaring eye, the Aetnean brotherhood, their heads towering to the sky, a grim conclave: even as when on a mountaintop lofty oaks or cone-clad cypresses stand in mass, a high forest of Jove or grove of Diana.\nLater, in Book 8 of the same poem, Virgil has the Hesiodic Cyclopes Brontes and Steropes, along with a third Cyclopes which he names Pyracmon, work in an extensive network of caverns stretching from Mount Etna to the Aeolian Islands. As the assistants of the smith-god Vulcan, they forge various items for the gods: thunderbolts for Jupiter, a chariot for Mars, and armor for Minerva:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the vast cave the Cyclopes were forging iron\u2014Brontes and Steropes and bare-limbed Pyracmon. They had a thunderbolt, which their hands had shaped, like the many that the Father hurls down from all over heaven upon earth, in part already polished, while part remained unfinished. Three shafts of twisted hail they had added to it, three of watery cloud, three of ruddy flame and the winged South Wind; now they were blending into the work terrifying flashes, noise, and fear, and wrath with pursuing flames. Elsewhere they were hurrying on for Mars a chariot and flying wheels, with which he stirs upmen and cities; and eagerly with golden scales of serpents were burnishing the awful aegis, armour of wrathful Pallas, the interwoven snakes, and on the breast of the goddess the Gorgon herself, with neck severed and eyes revolving.\nApollodorus.\nThe mythographer Apollodorus, gives an account of the Hesiodic Cyclopes similar to that of Hesiod's, but with some differences, and additional details. According to Apollodorus, the Cyclopes were born after the Hundred-Handers, but before the Titans (unlike Hesiod who makes the Titans the eldest and the Hundred-Handers the youngest).\nUranus bound the Hundred-Handers and the Cyclopes, and cast them all into Tartarus, \"a gloomy place in Hades as far distant from earth as earth is distant from the sky.\" But the Titans are, apparently, allowed to remain free (unlike in Hesiod). When the Titans overthrew Uranus, they freed the Hundred-Handers and Cyclopes (unlike in Hesiod, where they apparently remained imprisoned), and made Cronus their sovereign. But Cronus once again bound the six brothers, and reimprisoned them in Tartarus.\nAs in Hesiod's account, Rhea saved Zeus from being swallowed by Cronus, and Zeus was eventually able to free his siblings, and together they waged war against the Titans. According to Apollodorus, in the tenth year of that war, Zeus learned from Gaia, that he would be victorious if he had the Hundred-Handers and the Cyclopes as allies. So Zeus slew their warder Campe (a detail not found in Hesiod) and released them, and in addition to giving Zeus his thunderbolt (as in Hesiod), the Cyclopes also gave Poseidon his trident, and Hades a helmet (presumably the same cap of invisibility which Athena borrowed in the \"Iliad\"), and \"with these weapons the gods overcame the Titans\".\nApollodorus also mentions a tomb of Geraestus, \"the Cyclops\" at Athens upon which, in the time of king Aegeus, the Athenians sacrificed the daughters of Hyacinth.\nNonnus.\nThe \"Dionysiaca\", composed in the 4th or 5th century AD, is the longest surviving poem from antiquity \u2013 20,426 lines. It is written by the poet Nonnus in the Homeric dialect, and its main subject is the life of Dionysus. It describes a war that occurred between Dionysus' troops and those of the Indian king Deriades. In book 28 of the \"Dionysiaca\" the Cyclopes join with Dionysian troops, and they prove to be great warriors and crush most of the Indian king's troops.\nTransformations of Polyphemus.\nDepictions of the Cyclops Polyphemus have differed radically, depending on the literary genres in which he has appeared, and have given him an individual existence independent of the Homeric herdsman encountered by Odysseus. In the \"Odyssey\", he was a man-eating monster dwelling in an unspecified land. Some centuries later, a dithyramb by Philoxenus of Cythera, followed by several episodes by the Greek pastoral poets, created of him a comedic and generally unsuccessful lover of the water nymph Galatea. In the course of these he woos his love to the accompaniment of either a cithara or the pan-pipes. Such episodes take place on the island of Sicily, and it was here that the Latin poet Ovid also set the tragic love story of Polyphemus and Galatea recounted in the Metamorphoses. Still later tradition made him the eventually successful husband of Galatea and the ancestor of the Celtic and Illyrian races.\nLocation.\nFrom at least the fifth-century BC onwards, Cyclopes have been associated with the island of Sicily, or the volcanic Aeolian islands just off Sicily's north coast. The fifth-century BC historian Thucydides says that the \"earliest inhabitants\" of Sicily were reputed to be the Cyclopes and Laestrygones (another group of man-eating giants encountered by Odysseus in Homer's \"Odyssey\"). Thucydides also reports the local belief that Hephaestus (along with his Cyclopean assistants?) had his forge on the Aeolian island of Vulcano.\nEuripides locates Odysseus' Cyclopes on the island of Sicily, near the volcano Mount Etna, and in the same play addresses Hephaestus as \"lord of Aetna\". The poet Callimachus locates the Cyclopes' forge on the island of Lipari, the largest of the Aeolians. Virgil associates both the Hesiodic and the Homeric Cyclopes with Sicily. He has the thunderbolt makers: \"Brontes and Steropes and bare-limbed Pyracmon\", work in vast caverns extending underground from Mount Etna to the island of Vulcano, while the Cyclops brethren of Polyphemus live on Sicily where \"near at hand Aetna thunders\".\nAs Thucydides notes, in the case of Hephaestus' forge on Vulcano, locating the Cyclopes' forge underneath active volcanoes provided an explanation for the fire and smoke often seen rising from them.\nIn 1587, Italian cartographer Urbano Monti depicted a \"ciclops\" on a portion of his world map identified as New Guinea.\nEtymology.\nFor the ancient Greeks, the name \"Cyclopes\" meant \"Circle-eyes\" or \"Round-eyes\", derived from the Greek \"k\u00faklos\" (\"circle\") and \"ops\" (\"eye\"). This meaning can be seen as early as Hesiod's \"Theogony\" (8th\u20137th century BC), which explains that the Cyclopes were called that \"since a single circle-shaped eye was set in their foreheads\". Adalbert Kuhn, expanding on Hesiod's etymology, proposed a connection between the first element \"k\u00faklos\" (which can also mean \"wheel\") and the \"wheel of the sun\", producing the meaning \"wheel (of the sun)-eyes\". Other etymologies have been proposed which derive the second element of the name from the Greek \"klops\" (\"thief\") producing the meanings \"wheel-thief\" or, deriving the first element from Proto-Indo-European \"*p\u00e9\u1e31u\", \"cattle-thief\". Although Walter Burkert has described Hesiod's etymology as \"not too attractive\", Hesiod's explanation still finds acceptance by modern scholars.\nPossible origins.\nVarious origin hypotheses for the Cyclopes, including its distinctive one-eyed appearance, have been offered.\nA possible origin for one-eyed Cyclopes was advanced by the palaeontologist Othenio Abel in 1914, 1925 and 1939. Abel proposed that fossil skulls of Pleistocene dwarf elephants, specifically the Sicilian dwarf elephant \"Palaeoloxodon falconeri\", inspired the cyclopes myth. Abel suggested that the large, central nasal cavity (for the trunk) in the skull might have been interpreted as a large single eye-socket. However, this claim has been criticised by Greek mythology scholars Mercedes Aguirre and Richard Buxton as lacking evidence and being unfalsifiable. Othenio Abel's hypothesis was widely popularized because he claimed that Greek philosopher Empedocles identified elephant bones as cyclopes remains. However, this claim has \"no basis in any surviving records\". Paleontologist Mark Witton and Richard Hing were similarly critical of the dwarf elephant hypothesis, stating that \"without his literary evidence [of the Empedocles story], Abel's geomyth becomes baseless: elephant fossils and myths of one-eyed monsters exist all over the world, and there is no evidence from historic texts or artwork that makes their connection in Sicily particularly notable or important\". Other similarly unverifiable and unfalsifiable explanations include that the eye originated from the appearance of volcanism related features, such as craters, or bubbles in volcanic water and mud.\nCyclopia, a rare birth defect, can result in foetuses which have a single eye. Although the possibility has been raised of a link between this deformity and the myth of the one-eyed Cyclopes, in such cases, the eye is below the nose\u2014rather than above as in ancient Greek depictions.\nAs noted above, Walter Burkert sees the possibility of the Hesiodic Cyclopes having ancient smith guilds as their basis.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55871", "revid": "141808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55871", "title": "List of protected areas of Slovenia", "text": "Protected areas of Slovenia include one national park (), three regional parks (), several natural parks (), and hundreds of natural monuments () and monuments of designed nature (). They cover about 12.5% of the Slovenian territory. Under the Wild Birds Directive, 26 sites totalling roughly 25% of the nation's land are \"Special Protected Areas\"; the Natura 2000 proposal would increase the totals to 260 sites and 32% of national territory.\nNatural parks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNatural monuments.\nOn 1 January 2012, there were 1276 natural monuments in Slovenia.\nNatura 2000 areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55872", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55872", "title": "Love (band)", "text": "American rock group\nLove is an American rock band formed in Los Angeles in 1965. Led by Arthur Lee, the band's primary songwriter, they were one of the first racially diverse American rock bands. Their sound incorporated styles including psychedelic rock, folk rock and garage. While finding only modest success on the music charts, peaking in 1966 with their US No. 33 hit \"7 and 7 Is,\" Love would come to be praised by critics as their third album, \"Forever Changes\" (1967), became generally regarded as one of the best albums of the 1960s.\nThe band's classic lineup is considered to consist of Lee, the guitarist and singer Bryan MacLean, the bassist Ken Forssi, the guitarist Johnny Echols and the drummer Donnie Conca, who was replaced by Alban \"Snoopy\" Pfisterer. By 1968, only Lee remained and he continued recording as Love with varied members through the 1970s. MacLean and Forssi died in 1998. Lee died in 2006. \"Forever Changes\" was added to the Library of Congress's National Recording Registry in 2011. In recent years, original member Johnny Echols has toured under the title of the Love Band or Love Revisited.\nHistory.\nFormation and early years.\nSinger/multi-instrumentalist Arthur Lee, who was originally from Memphis, Tennessee but had lived in Los Angeles since the age of five, had been recording since 1963 with his bands the LAG's and Lee's American Four. He wrote and produced the single \"My Diary\" for Rosa Lee Brooks in 1964, which featured Jimi Hendrix on guitar. The Sons Of Adam, which included future Love drummer Michael Stuart, recorded the Lee composition \"Feathered Fish\". After attending a performance by the Byrds, Lee decided to form a band that joined the newly minted folk-rock sound of the Byrds to his primarily rhythm and blues style.\nSinger/guitarist Bryan MacLean, who had met Lee when he was working as a roadie for The Byrds, joined Lee's new band, which was first called the Grass Roots. MacLean had also been playing in bands around Los Angeles since about 1963. Also joining the band was another Memphis native, lead guitarist Johnny Echols, and drummer Don Conka. A short time later, Conka was replaced by Alban \"Snoopy\" Pfisterer. Love's first bassist, Johnny Fleckenstein, went on to join the Standells in 1967. Fleckenstein was replaced by Ken Forssi (formerly of a post-\"Wipe Out\" lineup of the Surfaris). Upon the appearance of another group called the Grass Roots, Lee changed the name of the new band to Love.\nLove started playing the Los Angeles clubs in April 1965 and became a popular local attraction, while gaining the attention of the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds. The band lived communally in a house called \"the Castle\", a large but run-down residence sourced by Ronnie Haran. It was a dilapidated mansion that the band was allowed to live in if they did the maintenance and paid the taxes. According to John Einarson in the book \"Forever Changes\", the cover photo of their first two albums was of the band taken in Laurel Canyon at a burned down house that only had the remains of a fireplace left standing.\nSigned to Elektra Records as the label's first rock act, the band scored a minor hit single in 1966 with their version of Burt Bacharach and Hal David's \"My Little Red Book\". Their first album, \"Love\", was released in March 1966. The album sold moderately well and reached No.\u00a057 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart. The single \"7 and 7 Is\", released in July 1966 (from their second LP \"Da Capo\"), gained notice for the exceptional guitar work of Johnny Echols and proto-punk style drumming of Pfisterer. The single became Love's highest-charting single at No.\u00a033 in the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. Two more members were added around this time, Tjay Cantrelli (real name John Barbieri) on woodwinds and Michael Stuart on drums. Pfisterer, never a confident drummer, switched to harpsichord. Elektra's art director, William S. Harvey, designed a distinctive logo for the band, \"four cartoonish letters with exaggerated, curvaceous serifs\", incorporating male and female symbols.\nArthur Lee had an exclusive contract with Herb Cohen for a short time after signing with Elektra Records. After Lee met Ronnie Haran, booking manager for the Whisky a Go Go, Cohen was fired by Arthur in favor of Haran. Haran continued to manage Love, despite not having an official contract, for a couple years. Mike Gruber took over after Haran departed as manager, though Haran remained somewhat involved with the group.\n\"Forever Changes\" era.\nLove's second album, \"Da Capo\", was released in November 1966 and included \"7 and 7 Is\" as well as the subsequent singles \"She Comes in Colors\" and \"\". It marked the experimental direction Arthur wanted to take. With the seven member lineup for \"Da Capo\", shortly after this album, Cantrelli and Pfisterer left the band, leaving it as a five-piece once again. Their third album \"Forever Changes\" was released in November 1967 and was co-produced by Bruce Botnick. The album displayed a softer and more avant-garde approach for the band. By this time, tension arose between Arthur Lee and Bryan MacLean, who wanted more of his songs on the album. The band recorded the album in only 64 hours, though many professional session players were used, including some who replaced actual band members in one or two songs. Writer Richard Meltzer, in his book \"The Aesthetics of Rock\", commented on Love's \"orchestral moves\", \"post-doper word contraction cuteness\", and Lee's vocal style that serves as a \"reaffirmation of Johnny Mathis\". \"Forever Changes\" had one single, MacLean's \"Alone Again Or\", which reached number 123 on the pop charts. By this stage, Love were far more popular in the UK, where the album reached No.\u00a024, than in their home country, where it could only reach No.\u00a0154. \"Forever Changes\" has since received recognition as one of the greatest rock albums of all time, appearing on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, being inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, and added to the Library of Congress's National Recording Registry in 2011.\nLater years.\nFor unclear reasons, Bryan MacLean left the band after \"Forever Changes\" (though one possible issue was a solo deal that he had signed with Elektra), while Lee dismissed all the other members. MacLean later reemerged as a Contemporary Christian artist. Johnny Echols and Ken Forssi succumbed to drug addiction and crime, and disappeared from the music scene; and drummer Michael Stuart also retired from music. Echols eventually moved to New York and became an in-demand studio musician.\nArthur Lee, as the only remaining member, convened a new lineup of Love with Jay Donnellan (soon replaced by Gary Rowles) on guitar, Frank Fayad on bass, and George Suranovich on drums. This lineup played in a blues rock style, as opposed to the folk-rock and psychedelic styles of the band's previous incarnation. The new lineup never garnered the widespread acceptance or acclaim of the original group. Three albums were released by various permutations of this lineup: \"Four Sail\" (1969), \"Out Here\" (1969), and \"False Start\" (1970). The last featured a guest appearance by Jimi Hendrix. Another album by this incarnation of the band was recorded in 1971, but the material was not released until 2009 on the compilation album \"Love Lost\". Arthur Lee released the solo album \"Vindicator\" in 1972. Another lost Love album titled \"Black Beauty\" was recorded in 1973 by a new lineup featuring guitarist Melvan Whittington, bassist Robert Rozelle, and drummer Joe Blocker, but Arthur Lee's record label went out of business before it was released. The album was finally released by High Moon Records in 2012. The final official Love album, \"Reel to Real\" (1974), was recorded by Lee and session musicians. It features the track \"Everybody's Gotta Live\", which was previously recorded by Lee for \"Vindicator\".\nThroughout the 1970s and 1980s, there were various attempts to reunite the original Love lineup. At the suggestion of late-period guitarist John Sterling, Arthur Lee and Bryan MacLean reunited for one show in 1978, which was recorded and released as \"Love Live\" in 1980. Material from \"Out Here\" plus four previously unreleased live tracks was released as \"Studio/Live\" in 1982. Arthur Lee was largely inactive in the 1980s and only made sporadic onstage appearances with pickup bands.\nLee reemerged in 1992 with a new album titled \"Five String Serenade\", released under the name Arthur Lee &amp; Love. The album's title track was later covered by Mazzy Star. Lee then returned to semi-regular performing, often backed by the band Baby Lemonade. In 1995, Rhino Records released the compilation \"Love Story\", a two-disc set with extensive liner notes which chronicled the band's 1966\u20131972 period.\nKen Forssi, bassist for the classic Love lineup, died of a suspected brain tumor at age 54 on January 5, 1998. Bryan MacLean died of a heart attack at age 52 on December 25, 1998, while having dinner with a young fan who was researching a book about Love. Arthur Lee was in prison when both of these former bandmates died.\nReformation and reunions.\nAfter spending six years in prison from 1995 to 2001 for firearms offenses, Lee began touring under the name Love with Arthur Lee, with the members of Baby Lemonade rounding out the lineup. In 2002 Michael Stuart (now known as Michael Stuart-Ware), the drummer on the Love albums \"Da Capo\" and \"Forever Changes\", wrote the acclaimed book \"Behind the Scenes on the Pegasus Carousel with the Legendary Rock Group Love\".\nJohnny Echols joined Lee's latest group for a special \"Forever Changes\" 35th Anniversary performance in the spring of 2003 and again for tours in 2004 and 2005. Due to Arthur Lee's battle with acute myeloid leukemia, the details of which were not known by the band at the time, he could not participate in the final tour in 2005. Since no one knew of his illness, Lee's decision to forgo the final tour was met with confused reactions. The remaining members of the band, led by Echols, continued to perform without Lee, under the name the Love Band.\nMichael Stuart-Ware and Johnny Echols performed with Baby Lemonade at Hollywood's Whisky A Go-Go on June 28, 2006, in a benefit concert for Arthur Lee. The show included guest appearances by Robert Plant and Nils Lofgren. Lee died of acute myeloid leukemia on August 3, 2006, at age 61.\nIn 2009, a reformed version of Love, featuring Johnny Echols, members of Baby Lemonade, and Probyn Gregory of the Wondermints, toured the United States and Canada. Michael Stuart-Ware was listed as a member of this act for a time in 2009. The group continued to tour sporadically in the following years under the name the Love Band featuring Johnny Echols. This group completed a 'farewell tour' of the UK in 2019, but continues to perform in the U.S. as LOVE-Revisited. In November 2021, they announced that they would again tour in the UK in 2022, and at some shows would play the whole of their first two albums, \"Love\" and \"Da Capo\", in their entirety, as well as \"Forever Changes\".\nIn August 2024, a new album of unreleased music written by Lee was announced. Titled \"Just to Remind You\", the release comprises material recorded between 1990 and 2005 \"curated and polished by trusted collaborators\". \"Just to Remind You\" is scheduled for release in 2025.\nMusical style.\nLove has been described as psychedelic rock, folk rock, garage rock, acid rock, and psychedelic pop.\nLegacy and influence.\nThe staff of \"BrooklynVegan\" wrote, \"Few bands epitomized the flower-power West Coast scene as much as Love, whose name alone kind of said it all.\" Today, Love's critical reputation exceeds the limited success they experienced during their time; their 1967 album \"Forever Changes\" is held in particularly high regard and often appears on lists of the best rock albums of all time. During their late-1960s heyday, the Rolling Stones and the Doors were known to be Love fans. Many bands of the 1990s that were influenced by psychedelic rock list Love as a major inspiration, such as Primal Scream, the Stone Roses, and the Jesus and Mary Chain. Robert Plant cited \"Forever Changes\" as one of his favorite albums.\nIn October 2006, \"Love Story\", a documentary film about the band premiered at the 50th London Film Festival. It covers the band's journey from their creation to present day and details the band's albums. It features interviews from Arthur Lee shortly before he died as well as other band members Johnny Echols and Alban \"Snoopy\" Pfisterer. It also has archive interview footage of Bryan MacLean. The film was released on DVD in June 2008.\nMembers.\nCurrent members.\n\"classic lineup members are in bold \"\nFormer members.\n\"classic lineup members are in bold \"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55873", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55873", "title": "Masonic lodge", "text": "Basic organisational unit of Freemasonry\nA Masonic lodge (also called Freemasons' lodge, or private lodge or constituent lodge) is the basic organisational unit of Freemasonry.\nIt is also a commonly used term for a building where Freemasons meet and hold their meetings. Every new lodge must be warranted or chartered by a Grand Lodge, but is subject to its direction only by enforcing the published constitution of the jurisdiction. By exception, the three surviving lodges that formed the world's first known grand lodge in London (now merged into the United Grand Lodge of England) have the unique privilege to operate as \"time immemorial\", i.e., without such warrant; only one other lodge operates without a warrant \u2013 the Grand Stewards' Lodge in London, although it is not entitled to the \"time immemorial\" status.[A]\nA Freemason is generally entitled to visit any lodge in any jurisdiction (\"i.e.\", under any Grand Lodge) in amity (recognition of mutual status) with his own Grand Lodge. In some jurisdictions, this privilege is restricted to Master Masons (that is, Freemasons who have attained the Order's third degree). He is first usually required to check, and certify, the regularity of the relationship of the Lodge \u2013 and be able to satisfy that Lodge of his legality of membership. Freemasons gather together as a Lodge to confer (also known by the term \"work\") the three basic Degrees of Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason.\nMasonic premises.\nFreemasons meet \"as\" a lodge, not \"in\" a lodge. In this context, the word \"lodge\" refers to a local chapter of Freemasons, meeting as a body. However, the term is often misused to refer to the buildings or rooms that Masons meet in. Masonic premises are also sometimes referred to as \"Temples\" (\"of Philosophy and the Arts\"). In many countries \"Masonic centre\" or \"Masonic hall\" has now replaced these terms to avoid arousing prejudice and suspicion, or confusion with a religious building. Several different lodges, or other Masonic organizations, often use the same premises at different times.\nTypes.\nBlue lodge.\n\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Blue lodges\", \"craft lodges\" or \"ancient craft lodges\" are those that work the first three Masonic degrees: \"Entered Apprentice\", \"Fellowcraft\", and \"Master Mason\", rather than the appendant Masonic orders such as York Rite and Scottish Rite. The term \"craft lodge\" is used in Great Britain. The \"Blue lodge\" is said to refer to the traditional colour of regalia in lodges derived from English or Irish Freemasonry. Although the term was originally frowned upon, it has gained widespread and mainstream usage in America in recent times.\nResearch lodge.\n\"Research lodges\" have the purpose of furthering Masonic scholarship. Quatuor Coronati Lodge, in London, is an example of a research lodge; it has a strictly limited membership and receives visitors and papers from all over the world. Many jurisdictions have well-established research lodges, which usually meet less frequently than blue lodges and do not confer degrees.\nLodge of Instruction.\nIn Great Britain, a \"lodge of instruction\" (LOI) may be associated with a Lodge, but is not constituted separately. The lodge of instruction provides the officers and those who wish to become officers an opportunity to rehearse ritual under the guidance of an experienced brother; there may also be lectures around the ritual and the symbolism in the lodge within a Lodge of Instruction, in order to develop the knowledge and understanding of the membership.\nIn some jurisdictions in the United States, the lodge of instruction serves as a warranted lodge for candidate instruction in other aspects of Freemasonry besides ritual rehearsal, as well as hosting a speaker on topics both Masonic and non-Masonic.\nMother lodge.\nIn Great Britain, the term \"mother lodge\" is used to identify the particular Lodge where the individual was first \"made a Mason\" (i.e. received his Entered Apprentice degree). 'Mother lodge' may also refer to a lodge that sponsors the creation of a new lodge, the \"daughter lodge\", to be warranted under the jurisdiction of the same grand lodge; specific procedures pertaining to this vary throughout history and in different jurisdictions. Lodge Mother Kilwinning No 0 in the Grand Lodge of Scotland is known as the Mother Lodge of Scotland, having been referred to in the Schaw Statutes of 1598 and 1599, and having itself warranted other lodges at a time when it did not subscribe to a grand lodge.\nVirtual lodge.\nThe 21st century has seen the rise of internet virtual lodges that meet online rather than in person. Examples are the Internet Lodge No. 9659, Lodge Ireland, and Castle Island Virtual Lodge No. 190. The ability to hold remote lodge meetings allows those who are distant to continue to attend, whether they are military servicemen serving overseas or they inhabit a sparsely populated region. Virtual lodges were held often during the COVID-19 pandemic, though most lodges have resumed regular in-person meetings as of 2024.\nOrganization.\nLodges are governed by national, state or provincial authorities, usually called Grand Lodges or Grand Orients, whose published constitutions define the structure of freemasonry under their authority, and which appoint Grand Officers from their senior masons. Provincial Grand Lodges (which in England generally correspond to historic counties) exercise an intermediate authority, and also appoint Provincial Grand Officers.\nDifferent grand lodges and their regions show subtleties of tradition and variation in the degrees and practice; for example under the Grand Lodge of Scotland, the Mark Degree (which is unrecognised by the United Grand Lodge of England, but has a separate Mark Grand Lodge) is integrated into \"The Craft\" as a completion of the second degree. In any case, Grand Lodges have limited jurisdiction over their member Lodges, and where there is no prescribed ritual Lodges may thus have considerable freedom of practice. Despite these minor differences, fraternal relations exist between Lodges of corresponding degrees under different Grand Lodges.\nMembership.\nMembership requirements in Freemasonry have evolved over time and vary depending on the jurisdiction and the specific Masonic style or branch. However, there are certain common requirements that have remained relatively consistent throughout the history of the fraternity.\nRegular Freemasonry.\nIn Regular Freemasonry, which follows the Anglo-American style, a candidate for initiation must generally meet the following criteria:\nContinental Freemasonry.\nIn Continental Freemasonry, which is prevalent in Europe and Latin America, the requirements may differ slightly and can take from one to three years:\nPrince Hall Freemasonry.\nPrince Hall Freemasonry, which predominantly serves African American communities, generally follows similar requirements to Regular Freemasonry, with a few additional criteria:\nCo-Freemasonry and Women's Freemasonry.\nCo-Freemasonry and Women's Freemasonry admit both men and women, or women only, respectively. Their requirements are similar to Regular and Continental Freemasonry, with some variations:\nHistory and evolution of requirements.\nThe membership requirements in Freemasonry have evolved over time, reflecting changes in societal norms and the fraternity's internal guidelines. Some notable developments include:\nIn the early days of speculative Freemasonry (18th century), the requirement of being a \"Free Man\" may have stemmed from the refusal of operative masons to share their secrets with slaves, who could be ordered to divulge them.\nThe \"Free Man\" requirement may have also been related to the necessity of having a license to trade and employ others, making the candidate a free man of the city or borough where the lodge was located.\nThe minimum age requirement has varied over time and across jurisdictions, with some allowing candidates as young as 18 and others setting the limit at 25. The belief in a Supreme Being has been a consistent requirement, although the specific religious affiliation has not been prescribed, reflecting Freemasonry's openness to men of various faiths.\nLandmarks and reasons behind requirements.\nThe membership requirements in Freemasonry are guided by the fraternity's Landmarks, which are the fundamental principles that define the essence of the Craft. Some of the Landmarks related to membership include:\nThese Landmarks and requirements serve several purposes:\nEnsuring that candidates share common values and are committed to personal growth and moral character\nMaintaining the integrity and harmony of the lodge by admitting members who are compatible with Masonic principles\nPreserving the traditions and symbolic teachings of the fraternity\nFostering a sense of brotherhood and trust among members\nProgression through degrees.\nOnce a candidate is elected and initiated into a lodge, he progresses through the three degrees of Freemasonry: Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason. The Lodge decides whether to confer each degree based on the candidate's proficiency and readiness.\nIn Regular Freemasonry under the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE), a Master Mason receives a Grand Lodge certificate, which may be required for visiting other lodges. A Master Mason is considered a full, lifetime member of the lodge where he received his degrees, with the right to demit (resign) if he is in good standing and has paid his dues.\nAfter demitting, a Mason is still regarded as a member in absentia and may rejoin through a new application. However, he and his family have no rights, privileges, or claims on Freemasonry during his absence. Some Masonic scholars, such as Albert Mackey, argue that leaving the lodge does not exempt a Mason from his obligations or the moral conduct expected by the fraternity.\nA Master Mason may be expelled from his lodge and Freemasonry if convicted of serious violations of civil or Masonic law. Expulsion from all of Freemasonry can only be implemented by a Grand Lodge, while individual lodges may expel members from their specific lodges.\nAffiliation and plural membership.\nA Master Mason in good standing may join another regular lodge without taking the degrees again, although he may be expected to serve in office. If a Master Mason is dropped from the rolls for non-payment of dues, he may be reinstated in good standing by paying his current and back dues, with some jurisdictions requiring a ballot for re-admission.\nMany Grand Lodges allow Master Masons to be \"plural affiliates,\" or members of more than one lodge simultaneously. However, some jurisdictions prohibit plural affiliates from serving as elected officers in multiple lodges at the same time.\nThe rules for affiliation and plural membership differ for Freemasons of the Entered Apprentice and Fellowcraft degrees. Some Grand Lodges do not allow Entered Apprentices or Fellowcrafts to demit but may permit them to join another lodge to earn the Master Mason degree with the consent of their original lodge.\nThe membership requirements, progression through degrees, and affiliation rules in Freemasonry are designed to ensure the integrity, harmony, and continuity of the fraternity while allowing for personal growth and brotherhood among its members. These guidelines have evolved over time, reflecting the changing needs and values of the Craft and society at large.\nOfficers.\nThe names, roles and numbers of Lodge officers vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. In most cases, there is an equivalent office in the Grand Lodge of the given jurisdiction, with the addition of the prefix 'Grand' to the title in question.\nThere are certain 'progressive' offices through which members move by a process of effective promotion, but also other more permanent offices, usually held by experienced members.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55875", "revid": "12418561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55875", "title": "Tabard", "text": "Type of short coat\nA tabard is a type of short coat that was commonly worn by men during the late Middle Ages and early modern period in Europe. Generally worn outdoors, the coat was either sleeveless or had short sleeves or shoulder pieces. In its more developed form it was open at the sides, and it could be worn with or without a belt. Though most were ordinary garments, often work clothes, tabards might be emblazoned on the front and back with a coat of arms (livery), and in this form they survive as the distinctive garment of officers of arms.\nIn modern British usage, the term has been revived for what is known in American English as a cobbler apron: a lightweight open-sided upper overgarment, of similar design to its medieval and heraldic counterpart, worn in particular by workers in the catering, cleaning and healthcare industries as protective clothing, or outdoors by those requiring high-visibility clothing. Tabards may also be worn by percussionists in marching bands in order to protect their uniforms from the straps and rigging used to support the instruments.\nMiddle Ages.\nA tabard (from the French \"tabarde\") was originally a humble outer garment of tunic form, generally without sleeves, worn by peasants, monks and foot-soldiers. In this sense, the earliest citation recorded in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" dates from c.\u20091300.\nBy the second half of the 15th century, tabards, now open at the sides and so usually belted, were also being worn by knights in military contexts over their armour, and were usually emblazoned with their arms (though sometimes worn plain). The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" first records this use of the word in English in c.1450. Tabards were apparently distinguished from surcoats by being open-sided, and by being shorter. In its later form, a tabard normally comprised four textile panels \u2013 two large panels hanging down the wearer's front and back, and two smaller panels hanging over his arms as shoulder-pieces or open \"sleeves\" \u2013 each emblazoned with the same coat of arms. Tabards became an important means of battlefield identification with the development of plate armour as the use of shields declined. They are frequently represented on tomb effigies and monumental brasses of the late 15th and early 16th centuries.\nA very expensive, but plain, garment described as a tabard is worn by Giovanni Arnolfini in the Arnolfini Portrait of 1434 (National Gallery, London). This may be made of silk and/or velvet, and is trimmed and fully lined with fur, possibly sable.\nAt The Queen's College, Oxford, the scholars on the foundation were called tabarders, from the tabard (not in this case an emblazoned garment) which they wore.\nA surviving garment similar to the medieval tabard is the monastic scapular. This is a wide strip of fabric worn both front and back of the body, with an opening for the head and no sleeves. It may have a hood, and may be worn under or over a belt.\nBritish heraldry.\nBy the end of the 16th century, the tabard was particularly associated with officers of arms. The shift in emphasis was reported by John Stow in 1598, when he described a tabard as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a Jacquit, or sleevelesse coat, whole before, open on both sides, with a square collor, winged at the shoulders: a stately garment of olde time, commonly worne of Noble men and others, both at home and abroade in the Warres, but then (to witte in the warres) theyr Armes embrodered, or otherwise depicte uppon them, that every man by his Coate of Armes might bee knowne from others: but now these Tabardes are onely worne by the Heraults, and bee called their coates of Armes in service.\nIn the case of Royal officers of arms, the tabard is emblazoned with the coat of arms of the sovereign. Private officers of arms, such as still exist in Scotland, make use of tabards emblazoned with the coat of arms of the person who employs them. In the United Kingdom the different ranks of officers of arms can be distinguished by the fabric from which their tabards are made. The tabard of a king of arms is made of velvet, the tabard of a herald of arms of satin, and that of a pursuivant of arms of damask silk. The oldest surviving English herald's tabard is that of Sir William Dugdale as Garter King of Arms (1677\u20131686).\nIt was at one time the custom for English pursuivants to wear their tabards \"athwart\", that is to say with the smaller (\"shoulder\") panels at the front and back, and the larger panels over the arms; but this practice was ended during the reign of James II and VII.\nThe derisive Scots nickname of \"\" for John Balliol (c.\u20091249 \u2013 1314) may originate from either an alleged incident where his arms were stripped from his tabard in public, or a reference to the Balliol arms which are a plain shield with an orle, also known as an \"inescutcheon voided\".\nCanadian heraldry.\nA tabard for the Chief Herald of Canada to wear on special occasions was unveiled in May 2012 by David Johnston, the then Governor General of Canada. The tabard weighs and is coloured in royal blue, a colour emblematic of the governor general. The tabard is made up of four sections that include several symbols. Its body is embroidered with stripes of alternating maple leaves with raven-bears at the body's centre. The raven-bears are derived from the supporters of the arms of the Canadian Heraldic Authority, and were designed in the emblematic tradition of Coast Salish and Kwakwaka\u02bcwakw nation. Unlike traditional tabards, the coat of arms of Canada is embroidered on the tabard's sleeves.\nCultural allusions.\nA tabard was the inn sign of the Tabard Inn in Southwark, London, established in 1307 and remembered as the starting point for Geoffrey Chaucer's pilgrims on their journey to Canterbury in \"The Canterbury Tales\", dating from about the 1380s.\nIn E. C. Bentley's short story \"The Genuine Tabard\", published in his collection \"Trent Intervenes\" in 1938, a wealthy American couple purchase an antique heraldic tabard, having been told that it was worn in 1783 by Sir Rowland Verey, Garter King of Arms, when proclaiming the Peace of Versailles from the steps of St James's Palace. The amateur detective Philip Trent is able to point out that it in fact bears the post-1837 royal arms."}
{"id": "55876", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55876", "title": "Dinnerladies (TV series)", "text": "British TV sitcom (1998\u20132000)\nDinnerladies (stylised as dinnerladies) is a British television sitcom created, written and co-produced by Victoria Wood. Two series were broadcast on BBC One from 1998 to 2000, with sixteen episodes in total. The programme is repeated on Gold, and Drama. The complete series was released on DVD in November 2004.\nThe series is set almost entirely in the canteen of HWD Components, a fictional factory in Manchester, featuring the caterers and regular customers as the main characters. It depicts the lives and social and romantic interactions of the staff, and is centred around the main character of Brenda Furlong, played by Wood.\nPlot.\nThe beginning of the first series introduces the characters, a group of mostly female and middle-aged canteen workers at a factory in Manchester. The main character is the kind and dependable Brenda \"Bren\" Furlong, whose relationship with sarcastic and exhausted canteen manager Tony Martin (Andrew Dunn) develops through the show.\nThe characters feature the prim and prudish Dolly Bellfield (Thelma Barlow) and her waspish friend Jean (Anne Reid), and the younger and snarky Twinkle (Maxine Peake), who is always late, and the scatter-brained but mild-mannered Anita (Shobna Gulati).\nStan Meadowcroft (Duncan Preston) is an opinionated and easily provoked, but well-meaning, maintenance man who is responsible for cleaning the factory and fixing equipment. The new cheery but disorganised human resources manager Philippa Moorcroft (Celia Imrie) is from the South and does not initially fit in well with the rest of the staff; she moved to Manchester because of her relationship with senior staff member Mr Michael (Christopher Greet).\nActress Julie Walters also appears in nine episodes as Bren's down-and-out, delusional and manipulative mother, who lives in a caravan behind a petrol station. She abandoned Bren at an orphanage, and often turns up to ask for favours.\nIn the first series, Bren and Tony's relationship begins to develop, and she supports him as he undergoes chemotherapy. Philippa tries to organise team-building activities, the factory receives a royal visit, Bren's mother causes a scandal in the factory, the team bring their mothers to work, HWD Components merges with a Japanese company and Tony is temporarily replaced by Nicola Bodeux due to his treatment. Bodeux resigns after causing the canteen staff to strike, leading Bren to take charge on an interim basis amidst a crisis for the company.\nThroughout the second series, Bren and Tony's relationship develops further; the canteen takes on a work experience girl named Sigourney (Joanne Froggatt), Jean goes to stay with her sister after she is put in a foul mood by her unfaithful husband, a prisoner escapes from a local prison and Bren's fear of needles is mistaken for pregnancy. Jane (Sue Devaney) organises a holiday to Marbella, on which Bren and Tony want to go together. After a mix-up, Bren manages to get a place, but she ends up giving the money to her mother instead. Their colleagues bet on when Bren and Tony will \"get it on\", and they finally get together after Tony puts on a surprise birthday party for Bren, who was born on Christmas Eve.\nLater in the series, Philippa cannot attend the Millennium meal she organises, and Anita has a baby; after leaving it anonymously for Bren to care for, she takes it back and goes on parental leave; she is replaced temporarily by Christine (Kay Adshead), who is disliked by the rest of the dinner ladies.\nAs the closure of the canteen looms, the staff plan to move on with their lives. Bren goes on a game show, but loses her chance to win after she cannot attend due to her mother's death. It is revealed that her mother left her a large amount of money, which Bren and Tony use to move to Scotland.\nBren is the deputy manager of the canteen, and arguably the most reasonable of the characters. She had an unhappy childhood as her mother had her taken into foster care, and she later married an alcoholic named Martin of whom she was afraid. She is very good at solving her colleagues' problems but often doubts her ability to overcome her own hardships and has low self-esteem. She has a very quick mind, often scrambling for adjectives and making unintentional malapropisms. She has a near-encyclopaedic knowledge of film, which she makes many metaphorical references to, and gets as her subject on the quiz show \"Totally Trivial\". Several times in the first series it is hinted that she has feelings for Tony, though nothing comes of this until halfway through the second series. At the end of the final episode, she and Tony make plans to move to Scotland.\nThe divorced canteen manager, whose battle against cancer is a running storyline in the first series, prompting him to want to do more with his life than running a canteen in the second. He is mildly frustrated when the staff are not working, and tends to come out with sarcastic remarks. Though he talks and thinks about women a lot, he has very little luck with them. He is attracted to Bren, but is too shy to reveal this to her for a long time. He is also a smoker and uses his need for a cigarette as an excuse to escape uncomfortable or surreal situations.\nSomething of a social climber, Dolly is the cattiest of the dinner ladies, often making bitchy remarks about others. Prim and prudish, she previously worked at the upmarket Caf\u00e9 Bonbon. She frequently snaps at people for using bad language and frowns on the sexual shenanigans of Twinkle, whom she is convinced did not have to work for her catering qualification. Overtly conservative, she believes everything she reads in the \"Daily Mail\" without question, often quoting the articles she has read, and is prone to making remarks of dubious political correctness. She is fixated on her weight and dieting, although she is tempted to snack on Mars bars in stressful situations and it is revealed in several episodes that she was formerly obese. She has been married for thirty years to her husband Bob (Jack Smethurst), with whom she has a son named Stephen; it is implied that Stephen is in a homosexual relationship with his university roommate, Marcus, although this is a topic of embarrassment to Dolly, who seems to have reluctantly acknowledged the situation without truly accepting it. She hopes to move to the nearby upmarket village of Mobberley after her retirement.\nDolly's best friend, Jean is very often the stooge for her mordant remarks. She has a somewhat bawdy sense of humour and is long-sighted, but refuses to wear her glasses, so often misinterprets headlines when reading newspapers or magazines. She is unhappily married to her husband Keith (Peter Lorenzelli) at the start of the series, with grown-up daughter Lisa (Jane Hazlegrove), but in series two he leaves her for a Welsh dental hygienist named Bronwyn. After getting over the shock, which leaves her so depressed and irritable that her sister Peggy (Linda Bassett) is called in to take her to Tunstall to recuperate, Jean rediscovers her self-confidence and has a fling with security guard Barry (Howard Crossley), \"the love muscle\", before settling down in a more solid relationship with Stan. She accepts his proposal in the final episode, and reveals that she has been asked to stay on at HWD Components to run the snack bar replacing the canteen.\nThe youngest member of the team, she frequently turns up late for work and tries unsuccessfully to scrounge cigarettes from Tony. Despite her snarky attitude, she regards the other members of staff as friends, particularly Bren, to whom she turns for help on several occasions, such as when she thinks she is pregnant. She lives with her disabled mother Bev (Jackie Downey), for whom she acts as carer, and often spends her evenings getting drunk and falling into skips. Something of a recalcitrant delinquent who often skipped school, she speaks with a heavy Manc accent and is also a closeted football fan.\nPleasant, but rather dim and forgetful, Anita is a kind and loyal friend to her colleagues, empathising with them and often helping them to solve their problems without even realising it. She is somewhat desperate to have a family and children, becoming pregnant in the second series after a one-night stand with a visiting decorator (Kevin Maxwell) and, terrified of the implications, leaves the baby on the fire escape on Millennium Eve, attaching a note asking Bren to look after him. However, she quickly returns to take the baby back. She is a big fan of Celine Dion and is of a South Asian background.\nOne of the factory's maintenance men, Stan lives with his father Jim (Eric Sykes), a retired Desert Rat soldier of whom he often speaks. In the episode \"moods\", Stan reveals that his mother ran off with a piano tuner in 1954, which his father never recovered from. He is particularly close to Bren as she seems to be the only one who knows how to successfully handle his changeable moods. After his father's death he decides to get his life going again, embarking on a brief relationship with a nurse called Bobbi (Tina Malone) before dating, and ultimately proposing to, his colleague Jean, who accepts him in the final episode. Although he is well-meaning, Stan's behaviour can occasionally verge on being chauvinistic, believing that he should perform physical labour. This stems from his belief that such tasks (among others, such as seeing animal carcasses) are not suitable for, as he puts it, \"female women\".\nThe scatty and disorganised manager of the Human Resources department, having apparently landed the job because she was in a relationship with the factory manager, Mr Michael, who she refers to as Mikey. Her well-meaning attempts to relieve the dinner ladies' stress or help them in their personal lives generally have the opposite effect: in the first episode, she tries to organise Scottish country dancing sessions. In the second series she decides to break up with Mr Michael, and later begins a relationship with a colleague, Tom Murray (Mark Drewry). Philippa is the only character in the series who comes from the south of England.\nBren's selfish, manipulative, and delusional mother, who had Bren taken into foster care as a child because she was \"cramping her style\", and claims that she lost the address of the orphanage. She sometimes seems to forget that Bren is her daughter, and usually turns up looking for money or a favour. She often claims to be a close friend (and usually lover) of the rich and famous, but in reality is a down-and-out who lives in a caravan behind a petrol station. In the first series, she has an affair with 16-year-old Clint (Kenny Doughty). In the second series, she gets involved with Reg (Kaleem Janjua), an Asian petrol station attendant, and claims to be pregnant with his child. In the final episode, she dies off-screen on 29 February 2000, after having been admitted to hospital on 7 February with three weeks to live. It is revealed that her real name was the same as Bren's; Bren muses that she \"can't have hated [her] that much\" if she named her after herself.\nA member of the planning department, she had a small but significant role in the first series, usually ordering the toast round for meetings. In the second series, she played a larger role, having an ongoing wager with the canteen staff on whether Bren and Tony would \"get it on\" by Christmas Eve. She reportedly had a drunken snog herself with Tony whilst on holiday in Marbella.\nDelivers bread to the canteen. Norman is dour, work-shy, agoraphobic and \"technically\" a bigamist. He often attributes his agoraphobia to an incident when he \"fell off a diving board in Guernsey\". He also developed a fear of bread in the second series.\nA bread supplier who often takes over Norman's duties when his agoraphobia is plaguing him. She underwent bladder surgery, the nature of which is never directly mentioned. Tony often jokes that she is his \"fantasy woman\" and once claimed she bore a resemblance to the UK comic character Desperate Dan.\nSenior staff member of HWD Components; it is hinted that he is a manager or even managing director. He was in a relationship with Philippa, which was the reason she moved to Manchester. He is a fan of trad jazz, jigsaws, custard and Garibaldi biscuits.\nA factory worker who appears at the counter in a number of episodes, usually asking for bacon or liver. He takes a mild interest in canteen gossip.\nA perennially unlucky individual considered a jinx by the rest of the factory. He was reluctantly invited on the Marbella trip by Jane, as his last three holidays were cancelled due to various unfortunate events, but he fell down a staircase after tripping on spilled orange juice Anita forgot to clean, resulting in a space being left open for Bren. Steve has to separate his food before eating it, an eccentricity that only adds to his alienation from his co-workers.\nA friend of Petula's from Urmston, with a possible learning disability and a vast knowledge of catering appliances, which briefly attracts Stan towards her. After accompanying Petula to the factory's Christmas party uninvited (as was Petula), it is she who arrives to inform Bren that Petula's caravan has exploded and she needs money, which leads to Bren forfeiting her place in the group holiday to Marbella\nCharacters.\nGuest stars.\nThe ensemble cast occasionally featured notable guest actors, including Joanne Froggatt, Tina Malone, Dora Bryan, Lynda Baron, Elspet Gray, Janette Tough (of The Krankies fame), Henry Kelly, Simon Williams, Kenny Doughty, Lesley Nicol, Eric Sykes and Thora Hird.\nProduction.\nWriting.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I do get very lonely and I nearly jacked it in [...] I thought it was very bad and I couldn't write comedy any more.\"\n\u2014 Victoria Wood\nThe series was written entirely by Victoria Wood, with no additional contributors or script editor. Wood approached writing by allowing plots to develop from interactions between characters, rather than fitting characters into pre-determined storylines.\nShe wrote the whole six-episode first series in one month; however, she found the second series much harder to write, and even though it had only four more episodes, it took her six months. Wood has attributed this to pressure to do everything herself and loneliness, and has said that she even considered giving up because she thought her scripts were of low quality.\nWood deliberately ended the programme after two series, and the final episode of the second was designed to conclude it. She has said that she \"[doesn't] normally do anything twice\", but felt that a second series was necessary to do the show justice, and that she knew where to take the show after seeing it air and understanding \"what people [have] taken from it\". She mentioned the short run of \"Fawlty Towers\" when explaining why she planned not to continue the series further. However, in a televised BBC TV documentary about the history of situation comedy at the corporation, Wood complained that the series had been axed by the BBC, despite it being what she described as \"a show they couldn't kill\".\nFilming.\nInvolving only one set throughout its run (with the exception of quiz show and hospital sets which are both seen on a television screen in the last two episodes), \"dinnerladies\" was entirely filmed at the London BBC Television Centre in front of a live studio audience, employing a multiple-camera setup. Other locations such as characters' homes and other parts of the factory are only referred to in conversation.\nThe set was intended to be as realistic as possible, and even featured a functioning catering toaster from which the studio audience were served toast during filming.\nPunchlines were generally delivered at a fast pace with dialogue usually only pausing to allow audience laughter to settle. Each episode was filmed twice in front of two separate audiences, once on a Friday and again on a Saturday. This gave cast members two attempts to perfect a scene and, if necessary, the opportunity to correct mistakes without having to repeat a joke to the same audience. This also gave Wood the opportunity to make script changes that she felt might improve each episode.\nThe series' director and producer was Geoff Posner, and the executive producers were Philip McIntyre and David Tyler; the programme was co-produced by Victoria Wood's production company Good Fun and Posner's Pozzitive Television.\nWood reprised her character Bren for the BBC's \"Shaggy Dog Story\" in 1999.\nMusic.\nThe show's theme music was composed by Victoria Wood. It is usually played without lyrics, but at the end of the episodes \"Minnellium\" and \"Toast\", vocals which were also written and performed by Wood were included.\nThemes.\nHumour is mostly derived from the conversation and banter between characters, regarding their lives and popular culture, most commonly film and television: dialogue often features humorous misunderstandings, malapropisms and sexual innuendos. The series also features various surreal situations, often involving Bren's mother.\nThere is also a counterpoint of sadder themes, including deaths in the families of two of the main characters, a painful divorce, one of the characters living with cancer, one character having an unplanned pregnancy, and the underlying heartache in Bren's childhood. Bren and Tony's relationship seems to be eternally thwarted either by themselves or random circumstance.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"dinnerladies\" was generally well-received, and was praised by critic Tom Paulin.\nRatings.\nThe viewing figures for series 1 peaked with its premiere at 12.24 million viewers, and series 2 peaked with \"Minnellium\", which aired on 30 December 1999 and reached 15.33 million viewers.\nAwards.\nThe first series won the 1999 Rose d'Or Press Award and \"Best New TV Comedy\" at the 1999 British Comedy Awards, and the second won \"Best TV Comedy\" in 2000. The show has also been nominated for the British Academy Television Award for \"Best Comedy (Programme or Series)\" and the \"Situation Comedy Award\" in 1998 and 1999 respectively. It came 28th in the BBC's \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" poll in 2004.\nTheatre.\nA play based on the series premiered in London in April 2009. The play was based on three episodes of the second series of the TV show, and concentrated on the romance between Bren and Tony. It was directed by David Graham, who also adapted Victoria Wood's original TV scripts for the stage. Gulati and Dunn reprised their original roles from the TV series. The show toured the UK during 2009.\nA second show called \"Dinnerladies: Second Helpings\" toured in 2011 with a new script, once again featuring Dunn, joined by original series cast member Sue Devaney. Shobna Gulati left to return to the soap opera \"Coronation Street\".\nHome media.\n\"Dinnerladies\" was initially released from BBC Video on 12 November 1999, with two individual VHS tapes, the first comprising the first three episode of series one, and the second contains the remaining three episode of series one. The distribution rights were then acquired by Universal Pictures for the release of the complete second series on VHS and, for the first time, on DVD, on 17 November 2003. This was followed by the first series being released in its entirety from Universal on VHS and DVD on 15 November 2004. A complete series set was also made available from Universal on DVD on 15 November 2004.\nThe series was later reissued on DVD from Universal\u2019s subsidiary, Universal Playback, with the complete series boxset receiving distribution on 13 November 2006, followed by individual sets of the first series on 30 April 2007 and the second series on 27 August 2007. A slimline set of the complete series was made available on 24 May 2010.\nIn Australia, the complete series was released via Reel DVD on 6 November 2013. It was re-released from Madman Entertainment on 1 April 2015.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55877", "revid": "157842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55877", "title": "Plzen, Czech Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "55878", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55878", "title": "Triglav National Park", "text": "National park in Slovenia\nTriglav National Park (TNP; ) is the only national park in Slovenia. It was established in its modern form in 1981 and is located in the northwestern part of the country, respectively the southeastern part of the Alpine massif. Mount Triglav, the highest peak of the Julian Alps, stands almost in the middle of the national park. From there the valleys spread out radially, supplying water to two large river systems with their sources in the Julian Alps: the So\u010da and the Sava, flowing to the Adriatic and Black Sea, respectively.\nHistory.\nThe proposal for the protection of the Triglav Lakes Valley area was first put forward by the seismologist Albin Belar in 1906 or 1908. However, the proposal was not accepted, as there was no legal base for it and the laws of the time prohibited any restriction of pasture. The strategic basis for the protection of the area, titled \"The Memorandum\" (), and which explicitly mentioned the proposal of Belar, was submitted to the Provincial Government for Slovenia in 1920. The idea was finally implemented in 1924. Then, at an initiative by the Nature Protection Section of the Slovene Museum Society together with the Slovene Mountaineering Society, a twenty-year lease was taken out on the Triglav Lakes Valley area, some 14\u00a0km\u00b2. It was destined to become an \"Alpine Conservation Park\"; however, permanent conservation was not possible at that time. The name \"Triglavski narodni park\" was first used in 1926 by Fran Jesenko.\nIn 1961, after many years of effort, the protection was renewed (this time on a permanent basis) and somewhat enlarged, embracing around 20\u00a0km\u00b2. The protected area was officially designated as \"Triglav National Park\". It was named after Mount Triglav, a symbol of Slovenia and of Slovene character. However, all objectives of a true national park were not attained and for that reason over the next two decades new proposals for expanding and modifying this protection were put forward.\nFinally, in 1981, Triglav National Park was officially established in the modern form. A rearrangement was achieved and the park was given a new concept and expanded to 838\u00a0km\u00b2. In 2010, the park expanded to include the settlement Kne\u0161ke Ravne (Tolmin), according to wishes of its inhabitants, thus the new park area amounts to 880\u00a0km\u00b2, which is 4% of the area of Slovenia.\nBiodiversity.\nFlora.\nSystematic surveys of plants, especially of ethnobotanically useful species, in Triglav National Park have been carried out by Chandra Prakash Kala and Petra Ratajc covering various microhabitats, elevations, aspects, and terrain types. The park has over fifty-nine species of ethnobotanical values, of these 37 species (which contribute 62%) fall under four major categories of medicinal plants per the \"Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia\" such as H, Z, ZR and ND. Some important species such as \"Aconitum napellus\", \"Cannabis sativa\", and \"Taxus baccata\" are not allowed to be collected and used per the \"Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia\".\nFauna.\nTriglav National Park is home to over 700 species of animals.\nHydrology.\nWaters in Triglav National Park consist of two watersheds: the Sava River watershed and the So\u010da River watershed.\nMany waterfalls can be found in the park, and most of them are located in the valleys of So\u010da River and its tributaries. The highest waterfall is Boka Falls (106 m). The Tolmin Gorges on the Tolminka River are located in the national park.\nThe lakes in the park are all of glacial origin. The largest among them is Lake Bohinj. Others are the Triglav Lakes (located in the Triglav Lakes Valley), Lake Krn, and Lower and Upper Lake Kri\u017e.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55879", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55879", "title": "Munich, Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "55880", "revid": "51032710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55880", "title": "Naples", "text": "Third-largest city in Italy\nNaples ( ; ; ) is the regional capital of Campania and the third-largest city of Italy, after Rome and Milan, with a population of 908,082 within the city's administrative limits as of 2025, while its province-level municipality is the third most populous metropolitan city in Italy with a population of 2,958,410 residents, and the eighth most populous in the European Union. Its metropolitan area stretches beyond the boundaries of the city wall for approximately . Naples also plays a key role in international diplomacy, since it is home to NATO's Allied Joint Force Command Naples and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean.\nFounded by Greeks in the first millennium BC, Naples is one of the oldest continuously inhabited urban areas in the world. In the eighth century BC, a colony known as Parthenope () was established on the Pizzofalcone hill. In the sixth century BC, it was refounded as Ne\u00e1polis. The city was an important part of Magna Graecia, played a major role in the merging of Greek and Roman society, and has been a significant international cultural centre ever since with particular reference to the development of the arts.\nNaples served as the capital of the Duchy of Naples (661\u20131139), subsequently as the capital of the Kingdom of Naples (1282\u20131816), and finally as the capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies \u2014 until the unification of Italy in 1861. Naples is also considered a capital of the Baroque, beginning with the artist Caravaggio's career in the 17th century and the artistic revolution he inspired. It was also an important centre of humanism and Enlightenment. The city has long been a global point of reference for classical music and opera through the Neapolitan School. Between 1925 and 1936, Naples was expanded and upgraded by the Fascist regime. During the later years of World War II, it sustained severe damage from Allied bombing as they invaded the peninsula. The Four Days of Naples (Italian: Quattro giornate di Napoli) was an uprising in Naples, Italy, against Nazi German occupation forces from 27 September to 30 September 1943, immediately prior to the arrival of Allied forces in Naples on 1 October during World War II. The city underwent extensive reconstruction work after the war.\nSince the late 20th century, Naples has had significant economic growth, helped by the construction of the Centro Direzionale business district and an advanced transportation network, which includes the Alta Velocit\u00e0 high-speed rail link to Rome and Salerno and an expanded subway network. Naples is the third-largest urban economy in Italy by GDP, after Milan and Rome. The Port of Naples is one of the most important in Europe.\nNaples's historic city centre has been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. A wide range of culturally and historically significant sites are nearby, including the Palace of Caserta and the Roman ruins of Pompeii and Herculaneum. Naples is undoubtedly one of the world's cities with the highest density of cultural, artistic, and monumental resources, described by the BBC as \"the Italian city with too much history to handle.\"\nHistory.\nGreek birth and Roman acquisition.\nNaples has been inhabited since the Neolithic period. In the second millennium BC, a first Mycenaean settlement arose not far from the geographical position of the future city of Parthenope.\nSailors from the Greek island of Rhodes established probably a small commercial port called Parthenope (, meaning \"Pure Eyes\", a Siren in Greek mythology) on the island of Megaride in the ninth century BC. By the eighth century BC, the settlement was expanded by Cumaeans, as evidenced by the archaeological findings, to include Monte Echia. In the sixth century BC the city was refounded as Ne\u00e1polis (), eventually becoming one of the foremost cities of Magna Graecia.\nThe city grew rapidly due to the influence of the powerful Greek city-state of Syracuse, and became an ally of the Roman Republic against Carthage. During the Samnite Wars, the city, now a bustling centre of trade, was captured by the Samnites; however, the Romans soon captured the city from them and made it a Roman colony. During the Punic Wars, the strong walls surrounding Ne\u00e1polis repelled the invading forces of the Carthaginian general Hannibal.\nThe Romans greatly respected Naples as a paragon of Hellenistic culture. During the Roman era, the people of Naples maintained their Greek language and customs. At the same time, the city was expanded with elegant Roman villas, aqueducts, and public baths. Landmarks such as the Temple of Dioscures were built, and many emperors chose to holiday in the city, including Claudius and Tiberius. Virgil, the author of Rome's national epic, the \"Aeneid\", received part of his education in the city, and later resided in its environs.\nIt was during this period that Christianity first arrived in Naples; the apostles Peter and Paul are said to have preached in the city. Januarius, who would become Naples's patron saint, was martyred there in the fourth century AD. The last emperor of the Western Roman Empire, Romulus Augustulus, was exiled to Naples by the Germanic king Odoacer in the fifth century AD.\nDuchy of Naples.\nFollowing the decline of the Western Roman Empire, Naples was captured by the Ostrogoths, a Germanic people, and incorporated into the Ostrogothic Kingdom. However, Belisarius of the Byzantine Empire recaptured Naples in 536, after entering the city via an aqueduct.\nIn 543, during the Gothic Wars, Totila briefly took the city for the Ostrogoths, but the Byzantines seized control of the area following the Battle of Mons Lactarius on the slopes of Vesuvius. Naples was expected to keep in contact with the Exarchate of Ravenna, which was the centre of Byzantine power on the Italian Peninsula.\nAfter the exarchate fell, a Duchy of Naples was created. Although Naples's Greco-Roman culture endured, it eventually switched allegiance from Constantinople to Rome under Duke Stephen II, putting it under papal suzerainty by 763.\nThe years between 818 and 832 saw tumultuous relations with the Byzantine Emperor, with numerous local pretenders feuding for possession of the ducal throne. Theoctistus was appointed without imperial approval; his appointment was later revoked and Theodore II took his place. However, the disgruntled general populace chased him from the city and elected Stephen III instead, a man who minted coins with his initials rather than those of the Byzantine Emperor. Naples gained complete independence by the early ninth century. Naples allied with the Muslim Saracens in 836 and asked for their support to repel the siege of Lombard troops coming from the neighbouring Duchy of Benevento. However, during the 850s, Muslim general Muhammad I Abu 'l-Abbas sacked Miseno, but only for Khums purposes (Islamic booty), without conquering the territories of Campania.\nThe duchy was under the direct control of the Lombards for a brief period after the capture by Pandulf IV of the Principality of Capua, a long-term rival of Naples; however, this regime lasted only three years before the Greco-Roman-influenced dukes were reinstated. By the 11th century, Naples had begun to employ Norman mercenaries to battle their rivals; Duke Sergius IV hired Rainulf Drengot to wage war on Capua for him.\nBy 1137, the Normans had attained great influence in Italy, controlling previously independent principalities and duchies such as Capua, Benevento, Salerno, Amalfi, Sorrento and Gaeta; it was in this year that Naples, the last independent duchy in the southern part of the peninsula, came under Norman control. The last ruling duke of the duchy, Sergius VII, was forced to surrender to Roger II, who had been proclaimed King of Sicily by Antipope Anacletus II seven years earlier. Naples thus joined the Kingdom of Sicily, with Palermo as the capital.\nAs part of the Kingdom of Sicily.\nAfter a period of Norman rule, in 1189, the Kingdom of Sicily was in a succession dispute between Tancred, King of Sicily of an illegitimate birth and the Hohenstaufens, a Germanic royal house, as its Prince Henry had married Princess Constance the last legitimate heir to the Sicilian throne. In 1191 Henry invaded Sicily after being crowned as Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, and many cities surrendered. Still, Naples resisted him from May to August under the leadership of Richard, Count of Acerra, Nicholas of Ajello, Aligerno Cottone and Margaritus of Brindisi before the Germans suffered from disease and were forced to retreat. Conrad II, Duke of Bohemia and Philip I, Archbishop of Cologne died of disease during the siege. During his counterattack, Tancred captured Constance, now empress. He had the empress imprisoned at Castel dell'Ovo at Naples before her release on May 1192 under the pressure of Pope Celestine III. In 1194 Henry started his second campaign upon the death of Tancred, but this time Aligerno surrendered without resistance, and finally, Henry conquered Sicily, putting it under the rule of Hohenstaufens.\nThe University of Naples, the first university in Europe dedicated to training secular administrators, was founded by Frederick II, making Naples the intellectual centre of the kingdom. Conflict between the Hohenstaufens and the Papacy led in 1266 to Pope Innocent IV crowning the Angevin duke Charles I King of Sicily: Charles officially moved the capital from Palermo to Naples, where he resided at the Castel Nuovo. Having a great interest in architecture, Charles I imported French architects and workmen and was personally involved in several building projects in the city. Many examples of Gothic architecture sprang up around Naples, including the Naples Cathedral, which remains the city's main church.\nKingdom of Naples.\nIn 1282, after the Sicilian Vespers, the Kingdom of Sicily was divided into two. The Angevin Kingdom of Naples included the southern part of the Italian peninsula, while the island of Sicily became the Aragonese Kingdom of Sicily. Wars between the competing dynasties continued until the Peace of Caltabellotta in 1302, which saw Frederick III recognised as king of Sicily, while Charles II was recognised as king of Naples by Pope Boniface VIII. Despite the split, Naples grew in importance, attracting Pisan and Genoese merchants, Tuscan bankers, and some of the most prominent Renaissance artists of the time, such as Boccaccio, Petrarch and Giotto. During the 14th century, the Hungarian Angevin king Louis the Great captured the city several times. In 1442, Alfonso I conquered Naples after his victory against the last Angevin king, Ren\u00e9, and Naples was unified with Sicily again for a brief period.\nAragonese and Spanish.\nSicily and Naples were separated since 1282, but remained dependencies of Aragon under Ferdinand I. The new dynasty enhanced Naples's commercial standing by establishing relations with the Iberian Peninsula. Naples also became a centre of the Renaissance, with artists such as Laurana, da Messina, Sannazzaro and Poliziano arriving in the city. In 1501, Naples came under direct rule from France under Louis XII, with the Neapolitan king Frederick being taken as a prisoner to France; however, this state of affairs did not last long, as Spain won Naples from the French at the Battle of Garigliano in 1503.\nFollowing the Spanish victory, Naples became part of the Spanish Empire, and remained so throughout the Spanish Habsburg period. The Spanish sent viceroys to Naples to directly deal with local issues: the most important of these viceroys was Pedro \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, who was responsible for considerable social, economic and urban reforms in the city; he also tried to introduce the Inquisition. In 1544, around 7,000 people were taken as slaves by Barbary pirates and brought to the Barbary Coast of North Africa.\nBy the 17th century, Naples had become Europe's second-largest city \u2013 second only to Paris \u2013 and the largest European Mediterranean city, with around 250,000 inhabitants. The city was a major cultural centre during the Baroque era, being home to artists such as Caravaggio, Salvator Rosa and Bernini, philosophers such as Bernardino Telesio, Giordano Bruno, Tommaso Campanella and Giambattista Vico, and writers such as Giambattista Marino. A revolution led by the local fisherman Masaniello saw the creation of a brief independent Neapolitan Republic in 1647. However, this lasted only a few months before Spanish rule was reasserted. In 1656, an outbreak of bubonic plague killed about half of Naples's 300,000 inhabitants.\nIn 1714, Spanish rule over Naples came to an end as a result of the War of the Spanish Succession; the Austrian Charles VI ruled the city from Vienna through viceroys of his own. However, the War of the Polish Succession saw the Spanish regain Sicily and Naples as part of a personal union, with the 1738 Treaty of Vienna recognising the two polities as independent under a cadet branch of the Spanish Bourbons.\nIn 1755, the Duke of Noja commissioned an accurate topographic map of Naples, later known as the Map of the Duke of Noja, employing rigorous surveying accuracy and becoming an essential urban planning tool for Naples.\nDuring the time of Ferdinand IV, the effects of the French Revolution were felt in Naples: Horatio Nelson, an ally of the Bourbons, arrived in the city in 1798 to warn against the French republicans. Ferdinand was forced to retreat and fled to Palermo, where he was protected by a British fleet. However, Naples's lower class \"lazzaroni\" were strongly pious and royalist, favouring the Bourbons; in the that followed, they fought the Neapolitan pro-Republican aristocracy, causing a civil war.\nEventually, the Republicans conquered Castel Sant'Elmo and proclaimed a Parthenopaean Republic, secured by the French Army. A counter-revolutionary religious army of \"lazzaroni\" known as the \"sanfedisti\" under Cardinal Fabrizio Ruffo was raised; they met with great success, and the French were forced to surrender the Neapolitan castles, with their fleet sailing back to Toulon.\nFerdinand IV was restored as king; however, after only seven years, Napoleon conquered the kingdom and installed Bonapartist kings, including installing his brother Joseph Bonaparte. With the help of the Austrian Empire and its allies, the Bonapartists were defeated in the Neapolitan War. Ferdinand IV once again regained the throne and the kingdom.\nIndependent Two Sicilies.\nThe Congress of Vienna in 1815 saw the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily combine to form the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, with Naples as the capital city. In 1839, Naples became the first city on the Italian Peninsula to have a railway, with the construction of the Naples\u2013Portici railway.\nItalian unification to the present day.\nAfter the Expedition of the Thousand led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, which culminated in the controversial siege of Gaeta, Naples became part of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861 as part of the Italian unification, ending the era of Bourbon rule. The economy of the area formerly known as the Two Sicilies as dependant on agriculture suffered the international pressure on prices of wheat, and together with lower sea fares prices lead to an unprecedented wave of emigration, with an estimated 4\u00a0million people emigrating from the Naples area between 1876 and 1913. In the forty years following unification, the population of Naples grew by only 26%, vs. 63% for Turin and 103% for Milan; however, by 1884, Naples was still the largest city in Italy with 496,499 inhabitants, or roughly 64,000 per square kilometre (more than twice the population density of Paris).\nPublic health conditions in certain areas of the city were poor, with twelve epidemics of cholera and typhoid fever claiming some 48,000 people between 1834 and 1884. A death rate 31.84 per thousand, high even for the time, persisted in the absence of epidemics between 1878 and 1883. Then in August 1884, Naples fell victim to a major cholera epidemic, caused largely by the city's poor sewerage infrastructure. In response to these problems, in 1885, the government prompted a radical transformation of the city called \"risanamento\" to improve the sewer infrastructure and replace the most clustered areas, considered the main cause of insalubrity, with large and airy avenues. The project proved difficult to accomplish politically and economically due to corruption, as shown in the Saredo Inquiry, land speculation and extremely long bureaucracy. This led to the project to massive delays with contrasting results. The most notable transformations made were the construction of Via Caracciolo in place of the beach along the promenade, the creation of Galleria Umberto I and and the construction of Corso Umberto.\nNaples was the most-bombed Italian city during World War II. Though Neapolitans did not rebel under Italian Fascism, Naples was the first Italian city to rise up against German military occupation; for the first time in Europe, the Nazis, whose leader in this case was Colonel Scholl, negotiated a surrender in the face of insurgents. The city was already completely freed by 1 October 1943, when British and American forces entered the city. Departing Germans burned the library of the university, as well as the Italian Royal Society. They also destroyed the city archives. Time bombs planted throughout the city continued to explode into November. Departing Germans also \"looted all the food and fuel. They blew up the city's gas, water and sewage piping. They destroyed its port facilities ... and scuttled more than 300 ships in the harbor. They destroyed 75% of the major bridges, stole nearly 90% of the city's trucks, buses and trams, demolished railroad tracks and tunnels...\"\nThe symbol of the rebirth of Naples was the rebuilding of the church of Santa Chiara, which had been destroyed in a United States Army Air Corps bombing raid.\nSpecial funding from the Italian government's Fund for the South was provided from 1950 to 1984, helping the Neapolitan economy to improve somewhat, with city landmarks such as the Piazza del Plebiscito being renovated. However, high unemployment continues to affect Naples.\nItalian media attributed the city's recent illegal waste disposal issues to the Camorra, the organized crime network centered in Campania. Due to illegal waste dumping, as exposed by Roberto Saviano in his book \"Gomorrah\", severe environmental contamination and increased health risks remain prevalent. In 2007, Silvio Berlusconi's government held senior meetings in Naples to demonstrate their intention to solve these problems. However, the late-2000s recession had a severe impact on the city, intensifying its waste-management and unemployment problems. By August 2011, the number of unemployed in the Naples area had risen to 250,000, sparking public protests against the economic situation. In June 2012, allegations of blackmail, extortion, and illicit contract tendering emerged concerning the city's waste management issues.\nNaples hosted the sixth World Urban Forum in September 2012 and the 63rd International Astronautical Congress in October 2012. In 2013, it was the host of the Universal Forum of Cultures and the host for the 2019 Summer Universiade.\nArchitecture.\nUNESCO World Heritage Site.\nNaples's 2,800-year history has left it with a wealth of historical buildings and monuments, from medieval castles to classical ruins, and a wide range of culturally and historically significant sites nearby, including the Palace of Caserta and the Roman ruins of Pompeii and Herculaneum. In 2017 the BBC defined Naples as \"the Italian city with too much history to handle\".\nThe most prominent forms of architecture visible in present-day Naples are the Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque styles. Naples has a total of 448 historical churches (1000 in total), making it one of the most Catholic cities in the world in terms of the number of places of worship. In 1995, the historic centre of Naples was listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site, a United Nations programme which aims to catalogue and conserve sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of mankind.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Naples is one of the most ancient cities in Europe, whose contemporary urban fabric preserves the elements of its long and eventful history. The rectangular grid layout of the ancient Greek foundation of Neapolis is still discernible. It has indeed continued to provide the layout for the present-day Historic Centre of Naples, one of the major Mediterranean port cities. From the Middle Ages to the 18th century, Naples was a focal point in terms of art and architecture, expressed in its ancient forts, the royal ensembles such as the Royal Palace of 1600, and the palaces and churches sponsored by the noble families.\u2014\u200a\nPiazzas, palaces and castles.\nThe main city square or \"piazza\" of the city is the Piazza del Plebiscito. Its construction was begun by the Bonapartist king Joachim Murat and finished by the Bourbon king Ferdinand IV. The piazza is bounded on the east by the Royal Palace and on the west by the church of San Francesco di Paola, with the colonnades extending on both sides. Nearby is the Teatro di San Carlo, which is the oldest opera house in Italy. Directly across San Carlo is Galleria Umberto.\nNaples is well known for its castles: The most ancient is Castel dell'Ovo (\"Egg Castle\"), which was built on the tiny islet of Megarides, where the original Cumaean colonists had founded the city. In Roman times the islet became part of Lucullus's villa, later hosting Romulus Augustulus, the exiled last western Roman emperor. It had also been the prison for Empress Constance between 1191 and 1192 after her being captured by Sicilians, and Conradin and Giovanna I of Naples before their executions.\nCastel Nuovo, also known as \"Maschio Angioino\", is one of the city's top landmarks; it was built during the time of Charles I, the first king of Naples. Castel Nuovo has seen many notable historical events: for example, in 1294, Pope Celestine V resigned as pope in a hall of the castle, and following this Pope Boniface VIII was elected pope by the cardinal collegium, before moving to Rome.\nCastel Capuano was built in the 12th century by William I, the son of Roger II of Sicily, the first monarch of the Kingdom of Naples. It was expanded by Frederick II and became one of his royal palaces. The castle was the residence of many kings and queens throughout its history. In the 16th century, it became the Hall of Justice.\nAnother Neapolitan castle is Castel Sant'Elmo, which was completed in 1329 and is built in the shape of a star. Its strategic position overlooking the entire city made it a target of various invaders. During the uprising of Masaniello in 1647, the Spanish took refuge in Sant'Elmo to escape the revolutionaries.\nThe Carmine Castle, built in 1392 and highly modified in the 16th century by the Spanish, was demolished in 1906 to make room for the Via Marina, although two of the castle's towers remain as a monument. The Vigliena Fort, built in 1702, was destroyed in 1799 during the royalist war against the Parthenopean Republic and is now abandoned and in ruin.\nMuseums.\nNaples is widely known for its wealth of historical museums. The Naples National Archaeological Museum is one of the city's main museums, with one of the most extensive collections of artefacts of the Roman Empire in the world. It also houses many of the antiques unearthed at Pompeii and Herculaneum, as well as some artefacts from the Greek and Renaissance periods.\nPreviously a Bourbon palace, now a museum and art gallery, the Museo di Capodimonte is another museum of note. The gallery features paintings from the 13th to the 18th centuries, including major works by Simone Martini, Raphael, Titian, Caravaggio, El Greco, Jusepe de Ribera and Luca Giordano. The royal apartments are furnished with antique 18th-century furniture and a collection of porcelain and majolica from the various royal residences: the famous Capodimonte Porcelain Factory once stood just adjacent to the palace.\nIn front of the Royal Palace of Naples stands the Galleria Umberto I, which contains the Coral Jewellery Museum. Occupying a 19th-century palazzo renovated by the Portuguese architect \u00c1lvaro Siza, the Museo d'Arte Contemporanea Donnaregina (MADRE) features an enfilade procession of permanent installations by artists such as Francesco Clemente, Richard Serra, and Rebecca Horn. The 16th-century palace of Roccella hosts the Palazzo delle Arti Napoli, which contains the civic collections of art belonging to the City of Naples, and features temporary exhibits of art and culture. Palazzo Como, which dates from the 15th century, hosts the Museo Civico Filangieri of plastic arts, created in 1883 by Gaetano Filangieri.\nChurches and other religious structures.\nNaples is the seat of the Archdiocese of Naples; there are hundreds of churches in the city. The Cathedral of Naples is the city's premier place of worship; each year on 19 September, it hosts the longstanding Miracle of Saint Januarius, the city's patron saint. During the miracle, which thousands of Neapolitans flock to witness, the dried blood of Januarius is said to turn to liquid when brought close to holy relics said to be of his body. Below is a selective list of Naples's major churches, chapels, and monastery complexes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther features.\nAside from the Piazza del Plebiscito, Naples has two other major public squares: the Piazza Dante and the Piazza dei Martiri. The latter originally had only a memorial to religious martyrs, but in 1866, after the Italian unification, four lions were added, representing the four rebellions against the Bourbons.\nThe San Gennaro dei Poveri is a Renaissance-era hospital for the poor, erected by the Spanish in 1667. It was the forerunner of a much more ambitious project, the Bourbon Hospice for the Poor started by Charles III. This was for the destitute and ill of the city; it also provided a self-sufficient community where the poor would live and work. Though a notable landmark, it is no longer a functioning hospital.\nSubterranean Naples.\nUnderneath Naples lies a series of caves and structures created by centuries of mining, and the city rests atop a major geothermal zone. There are also several ancient Greco-Roman reservoirs dug out from the soft tufo stone on which, and from which, much of the city is built. Approximately of the many kilometres of tunnels under the city can be visited from the Napoli Sotteranea, situated in the historic centre of the city in Via dei Tribunali. This system of tunnels and cisterns underlies most of the city and lies approximately below ground level. During World War II, these tunnels were used as air-raid shelters, and there are inscriptions on the walls depicting the suffering endured by the refugees of that era.\nThere are large catacombs in and around the city, and other landmarks such as the Piscina Mirabilis, the main cistern serving the Bay of Naples during Roman times.\nSeveral archaeological excavations are also present; they revealed in San Lorenzo Maggiore the macellum of Naples, and in Santa Chiara, the biggest thermal complex of the city in Roman times.\nParks, gardens, villas, fountains and stairways.\nOf the various public parks in Naples, the most prominent are the Villa Comunale, which was built by the Bourbon king Ferdinand IV in the 1780s; the park was originally a \"Royal Garden\", reserved for members of the royal family, but open to the public on special holidays. The Bosco di Capodimonte, the city's largest green space, served as a royal hunting reserve. The Park has 16 additional historical buildings, including residences, lodges, churches, fountains, statues, orchards and woods.\nAnother important park is the Parco Virgiliano, which looks towards the tiny volcanic islet of Nisida; beyond Nisida lie Procida and Ischia. Parco Virgiliano was named after Virgil, the classical Roman poet and Latin writer who is thought to be entombed nearby. Naples is noted for its numerous stately villas, fountains and stairways, such as the Neoclassical Villa Floridiana, the Fountain of Neptune and the Pedamentina stairway.\nNeo-Gothic, \"Liberty Napoletano\" and modern architecture.\nVarious buildings inspired by the Gothic Revival are extant in Naples, due to the influence that this movement had on the Scottish-Indian architect Lamont Young, one of the most active Neapolitan architects of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Young left a significant footprint in the cityscape and designed many urban projects, such as the city's first subway (metro).\nIn the first years of the 20th century, a local version of the Art Nouveau phenomenon, known as \"Liberty Napoletano\", developed in the city, creating many buildings which still stand today. In 1935, the Rationalist architect Luigi Cosenza designed a new fish market for the city. During the Benito Mussolini era, the first structures of the city's \"service center\" were built, all in a Rationalist-Functionalist style, including the Palazzo delle Poste and the Pretura buildings. The Centro Direzionale di Napoli is the only adjacent cluster of skyscrapers in southern Europe.\nGeography.\nThe city is situated on the Gulf of Naples, on the western coast of southern Italy; it rises from sea level to an elevation of . The small rivers that formerly crossed the city's centre have since been covered by construction. It lies between two notable volcanic regions, Mount Vesuvius and the Campi Flegrei (\"Phlegraean Fields\"). Campi Flegrei is considered a supervolcano. The islands of Procida, Capri and Ischia can all be reached from Naples by hydrofoils and ferries. Sorrento and the Amalfi Coast are situated south of the city. At the same time, the Roman ruins of Pompeii, Herculaneum, Oplontis and Stabiae, which were destroyed in the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD, are also visible nearby. The port towns of Pozzuoli and Baia, which were part of the Roman naval facility of Portus Julius, lie to the west of the city.\nQuarters.\nThe thirty quarters (\"quartieri\") of Naples are listed below. For administrative purposes, these thirty districts are grouped together into ten governmental community boards.\nClimate.\nNaples has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), that borders closely on a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfa\"). The climate and fertility of the Gulf of Naples made the region famous during Roman times, when emperors such as Claudius and Tiberius holidayed near the city. Maritime features mitigate the winters but occasionally cause heavy rainfall, particularly in the autumn and winter. Summers feature high temperatures and humidity.\nWinters are mild, and snow is rare in the city area but frequent on Mount Vesuvius. November is the wettest month in Naples, while July is the driest.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2022[ [update]], the population of the \"comune di Napoli\" totals around 910,000. Naples's wider metropolitan area, sometimes known as Greater Naples, has a population of approximately 4.4\u00a0million. The demographic profile for the Neapolitan province in general is relatively young: 19% are under the age of 14, while 13% are over 65, compared to the national average of 14% and 19%, respectively. Naples has a higher percentage of females (52.5%) than males (47.5%). Naples currently has a higher birth rate than other parts of Italy, with 10.46 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nNaples's population rose from 621,000 in 1901 to 1,226,000 in 1971, declining to 910,000 in 2022 as city dwellers moved to the suburbs. According to different sources, Naples's metropolitan area is either the second-most-populated metropolitan area in Italy after Milan (with 4,434,136 inhabitants according to Svimez Data) or the third (with 3.5\u00a0million inhabitants according to the OECD). In addition, Naples is Italy's most densely populated major city, with approximately 8,182 people per square kilometre; however, it has seen a notable decline in population density since 2003, when the figure was over 9,000 people per square kilometre.\nIn contrast to many northern Italian cities, there are relatively few foreign immigrants in Naples; 94.3% of the city's inhabitants are Italian nationals. In 2023, there were a total of 56,153 foreigners in the city of Naples; the majority of these are mostly from Sri Lanka, China, Ukraine, Pakistan and Romania. Statistics show that, in the past, the vast majority of immigrants in Naples were female; this happened because male immigrants in Italy tended to head to the wealthier north.\nEducation.\nNaples is noted for its numerous higher education institutes and research centres. Naples hosts what is thought to be the oldest state university in the world, in the form of the University of Naples Federico II, which was founded by Frederick II in 1224. The university is among the most prominent in Italy, with around 70,000 students and over 6,000 professors in 2022. It is host to the Botanical Garden of Naples, which was opened in 1807 by Joseph Bonaparte, using plans drawn up under the Bourbon king Ferdinand IV. The garden's 15 hectares feature around 25,000 samples of over 10,000 species.\nNaples is also served by the University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, a modern university which opened in 1989, and which has strong links to the nearby province of Caserta. Another notable centre of education is the University of Naples \"L'Orientale\", which specialises in Eastern culture, and was founded by the Jesuit missionary Matteo Ripa in 1732, after he returned from the court of Kangxi, the emperor of the Manchu Qing dynasty of China.\nOther prominent universities in Naples include the Parthenope University of Naples, the private Suor Orsola Benincasa University of Naples, and the Jesuit Pontifical Theological Seminary of Southern Italy. The San Pietro a Maiella music conservatory is the city's foremost institution of musical education; the earliest Neapolitan music conservatories were founded in the 16th century under the Spanish. The Academy of Fine Arts located on the Via Santa Maria di Costantinopoli is the city's foremost art school and one of the oldest in Italy. Naples hosts also the Astronomical Observatory of Capodimonte, established in 1812 by the king Joachim Murat and the astronomer Federigo Zuccari, the oldest marine zoological study station in the world, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, created in 1872 by German scientist Anton Dohrn, and the world's oldest permanent volcano observatory, the Vesuvius Observatory, founded in 1841. The Observatory lies on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, near the city of Ercolano, and is now a permanent specialised institute of the .\nPolitics.\nGovernance.\nEach of the 7,896 \"comune\" in Italy is today represented locally by a city council headed by an elected mayor, known as a \"sindaco\" and informally called the first citizen (\"primo cittadino\"). This system, or one very similar to it, has been in place since the invasion of Italy by Napoleonic forces in 1808. When the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was restored, the system was kept in place with members of the nobility filling mayoral roles. By the end of the 19th century, party politics had begun to emerge; during the fascist era, each commune was represented by a \"podest\u00e0\". Since World War II, the political landscape of Naples has been neither strongly right-wing nor left-wing \u2013 both Christian democrats and democratic socialists have governed the city at different times, with roughly equal frequency. Since the early 1990s, the mayors of Naples have all belonged to left-wing or center-left political groups.\nSince 2021, the mayor of Naples is Gaetano Manfredi, an independent politician candidated by the center-left coalition, former minister of university and research in the second Conte government, and former rector of the University of Naples Federico II.\nEconomy.\nNaples, within its administrative limits, is Italy's fourth-largest economy after Milan, Rome and Turin, and is the world's 103rd-largest urban economy by purchasing power, with an estimated 2024 GDP of \u20ac28.4 billion, equivalent to \u20ac30.804 per capita. Naples is a major cargo terminal, and the port of Naples is one of the Mediterranean's largest and busiest. The city has experienced significant economic growth since World War II, but joblessness remains a major problem, and the city is characterised by high levels of political corruption and organised crime.\nNaples is a major national, and international tourist destination, one of Italy's and Europe's top tourist cities. Tourists began visiting Naples in the 18th century during the Grand Tour.\nIn the last decades, there has been a move away from a traditional agriculture-based economy in the province of Naples to one based on service industries. The service sector employs the majority of Neapolitans, although more than half of these are small enterprises with fewer than 20 workers; about 70 companies are said to be medium-sized with more than 200 workers, and about 15 have more than 500 workers.\nTourism.\nNaples is, with Florence, Rome, Venice and Milan, one of the main Italian tourist destinations. With 20,000,000 visitors in 2025, the city has completely emerged from the strong tourist depression of past decades (due primarily to the unilateral destination of an industrial city but also due to the damage to the city's image caused by the Italian media, from the 1980 Irpinia earthquake and the waste crisis, in favour of the coastal centres of its metropolitan area). To adequately assess the phenomenon, however, it must be considered that a large slice of tourists visit Naples per year, staying in the numerous localities in its surroundings, connected to the city with both private and public direct lines. Daily visits to Naples are carried out by various Roman tour operators and by all the main tourist resorts of Campania: as of 2019, Naples is the tenth most visited municipality in Italy and the first in the South.\nThe sector is constantly growing and the prospect of reaching the art cities of its level is once again expected in a relatively short time; tourism is increasingly assuming a decisive weight for the city's economy, which is why, exactly as happened for example in the case of Venice or Florence, the risk of gentrification of the historic centre is now high.\nTransport.\nNaples is served by several major motorways (it: \"autostrade\"). The Autostrada A1, the longest motorway in Italy, links Naples to Milan. The A3 runs southwards from Naples to Salerno, where the motorway to Reggio Calabria begins, while the A16 runs east to Canosa. The A16 is nicknamed the \"autostrada dei Due Mari\" (\"Motorway of the Two Seas\") because it connects the Tyrrhenian Sea to the Adriatic Sea.\nSuburban rail services are provided by Ente Autonomo Volturno and Trenitalia through the Naples metropolitan railway service\nThe city's main railway station is Napoli Centrale, which is located in Piazza Garibaldi; other significant stations include the Napoli Campi Flegrei and Napoli Mergellina. Napoli Afragola serves high-speed trains that do not start or finish at Napoli Centrale railway station. Naples's streets are famously narrow (it was the first city in the world to set up a pedestrian one-way street), so the general public commonly use compact hatchback cars and scooters for personal transit. Since 2007, trains running at have connected Naples with Rome with a journey time of under an hour, and direct high speed services also operate to Florence, Bologna, Milan, Turin and Salerno. Direct sleeper 'boat train' services operate nightly to cities in Sicily.\nThe port of Naples runs several ferry, hydrofoil, and SWATH catamaran lines to Capri, Ischia and Sorrento, Salerno, Positano and Amalfi. Services are also available to Sicily, Sardinia, Ponza and the Aeolian Islands. The port serves over 6\u00a0million local passengers annually, plus a further 1\u00a0million international cruise ship passengers. A regional hydrofoil transport service, the \"Metropolitana del Mare\", runs annually from July to September, maintained by a consortium of shipowners and local administrations.\nThe Naples International Airport is located in the suburb of San Pietro a Patierno. It is the largest airport in southern Italy, with around 250 national and international flights arriving or departing daily.\nThe average commute with public transit in Naples on a weekday is 77 minutes. Nineteen per cent of public transit commuters ride for more than 2\u00a0hours every day. The average time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 27 minutes, while 56% of riders wait for over 20 minutes. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 11% travel for over in a single direction.\nUrban public transport.\nNaples has an extensive public transport network, including trams, buses and trolleybuses, most of which are operated by the municipally owned company Azienda Napoletana Mobilit\u00e0 (ANM). Some suburban services are operated by AIR Campania.\nThe city furthermore operates the Naples Metro (), an underground rapid transit railway system which integrates both surface railway lines and the city's metro stations, many of which are noted for their decorative architecture and public art. In fact, the station of Via Toledo is often in the top spots of the rankings of the most beautiful metro stations in the world.\nThere are also four funiculars in the city (operated by ANM): \"Centrale\", \"Chiaia\", \"Montesanto\" and \"Mergellina\". Five public elevators are in operation in the city: within the bridge of Chiaia, in via Acton, near the Sanit\u00e0 Bridge,under the Mount Echia, and in the Ventaglieri Park, accompanied by two public escalators.\nCulture.\nArt.\nNaples has long been a centre of art and architecture, dotted with Medieval-, Baroque- and Renaissance-era churches, castles and palaces. A critical factor in the development of the Neapolitan school of painting was Caravaggio's arrival in Naples in 1606. In the 18th century, Naples went through a period of neoclassicism, following the discovery of the remarkably intact Roman ruins of Herculaneum and Pompeii.\nThe Neapolitan Academy of Fine Arts, founded by Charles III of Bourbon in 1752 as the Real Accademia di Disegno (en: \"Royal Academy of Design\"), was the centre of the artistic School of Posillipo in the 19th century. Artists such as Domenico Morelli, Giacomo Di Chirico, Francesco Saverio Altamura and Gioacchino Toma worked in Naples during this period, and many of their works are now exhibited in the academy's art collection. The modern Academy offers courses in painting, decorating, sculpture, design, restoration, and urban planning. Naples is also known for its theatres, which are among the oldest in Europe: the Teatro di San Carlo opera house dates back to the 18th century.\nNaples is also the home of the artistic tradition of Capodimonte porcelain. In 1743, Charles of Bourbon founded the Royal Factory of Capodimonte, many of whose artworks are now on display in the Museum of Capodimonte. Several of Naples's mid-19th-century porcelain factories remain active today.\nCuisine.\nNaples is internationally famous for its cuisine and wine; it draws culinary influences from the numerous cultures which have inhabited it throughout its history, including the Greeks, Spanish and French. Neapolitan cuisine emerged as a distinct form in the 18th century. The ingredients are typically rich in taste while remaining affordable to the general populace.\nNaples is traditionally credited as the home of pizza. This originated as a meal of the poor, but under Ferdinand IV it became popular among the upper classes: famously, the Margherita pizza was named after Queen Margherita of Savoy after her visit to the city. Cooked traditionally in a wood-burning oven, the ingredients of Neapolitan pizza have been strictly regulated by law since 2004, and must include wheat flour type \"00\" with the addition of flour type \"0\" yeast, natural mineral water, peeled tomatoes or fresh cherry tomatoes, mozzarella, sea salt and extra virgin olive oil.\nSpaghetti is also associated with the city, and is commonly eaten with clams \"vongole\" or \"lupini di mare\". A popular Neapolitan folkloric symbol is the comic figure Pulcinella eating a plate of spaghetti. Other dishes popular in Naples include \"Parmigiana di melanzane\", \"spaghetti alle vongole\" and \"casatiello\". As a coastal city, Naples is furthermore known for numerous seafood dishes, including \"impepata di cozze\" (peppered mussels), \"purpetiello affogato\" (octopus poached in broth), \"alici marinate\" (marinated anchovies), \"baccal\u00e0 alla napoletana\" (salt cod) and \"baccal\u00e0 fritto\" (fried cod), a dish commonly eaten during the Christmas period.\nNaples is well known for its sweet dishes, including colourful , which is similar to ice cream, though more fruit-based. Popular Neapolitan pastry dishes include , , and , the latter of which is prepared specially for Easter celebrations. Another seasonal sweet is \"struffoli\", a sweet-tasting honey dough decorated and eaten around Christmas. Neapolitan coffee is also widely acclaimed. The traditional Neapolitan flip coffee pot, known as the \"cuccuma\" or \"cuccumella\", was the basis for the invention of the espresso machine, and also inspired the Moka pot.\nWineries in the Vesuvius area produce wines such as the \"Lacryma Christi\" (\"tears of Christ\") and \"Terzigno\". Naples is also the home of \"limoncello\", a popular lemon liqueur.\nIn May 2024, Time Out has named Naples the best city for food.\nFestivals.\nThe cultural significance of Naples is often represented through a series of festivals held in the city. The following is a list of several festivals that take place in Naples (note: some festivals are not held on an annual basis).\nLanguage.\nThe Neapolitan language, considered to be a distinct language and mainly spoken in the city, is also found in the region of Campania and has been diffused into other areas of Southern Italy by Neapolitan migrants, and in many different places in the world. On 14 October 2008, a regional law was enacted by Campania which has the effect that the use of the Neapolitan language is protected.\nThe term \"Neapolitan language\" is often used to describe the language of all of Campania (except Cilento), and is sometimes applied to the entire South Italian language; \"Ethnologue\" refers to the latter as \"Napoletano-Calabrese\". This linguistic group is spoken throughout most of southern continental Italy, including the Gaeta and Sora district of southern Lazio, the southern part of Marche and Abruzzo, Molise, Basilicata, northern Calabria, and northern and central Apulia. In 1976, there were an estimated 7,047,399 native speakers of this group of dialects.\nLiterature and philosophy.\nNaples is one of the leading centres of Italian literature. The history of the Neapolitan language was deeply entwined with that of the Tuscan dialect, which then became the current Italian language. The first written testimonies of the Italian language are the Placiti Cassinensi legal documents, dated 960 A.D., preserved in the Monte Cassino Abbey, which are, in fact, evidence of a language spoken in a southern dialect. The Tuscan poet Boccaccio lived for many years at the court of King Robert the Wise and his successor Joanna of Naples, using Naples as a setting for a number of his later novels. His works contain some words that are taken from Neapolitan instead of the corresponding Italian, e.g. \"\"testo\" (neap.: \"testa\"\"), which in Naples indicates a large terracotta jar used to cultivate shrubs and little trees. King Alfonso V of Aragon stated in 1442 that the Neapolitan language was to be used instead of Latin in official documents.\nLater Neapolitan was replaced by Italian in the first half of the 16th century, during Spanish domination. In 1458 the \"Accademia Pontaniana\", one of the first academies in Italy, was established in Naples as a free initiative by men of letters, science and literature. In 1480 the writer and poet Jacopo Sannazzaro wrote the first pastoral romance, \"Arcadia\", which influenced Italian literature. In 1634 Giambattista Basile collected \"Lo Cunto de li Cunti\" five books of ancient tales written in the Neapolitan dialect rather than Italian. Philosopher Giordano Bruno, who theorised the existence of infinite solar systems and the infinity of the entire universe, completed his studies at the University of Naples. Due to philosophers such as Giambattista Vico, Naples became one of the centres of the Italian peninsula for historical and philosophy of history studies.\nJurisprudence studies were enhanced in Naples thanks to eminent personalities of jurists like Bernardo Tanucci, Gaetano Filangieri and Antonio Genovesi. In the 18th century Naples, together with Milan, became one of the most important sites from which the Enlightenment penetrated Italy. Poet and philosopher Giacomo Leopardi visited the city in 1837 and died there. His works influenced Francesco de Sanctis, who studied in Naples and eventually became Minister of Instruction during the Italian kingdom. De Sanctis was one of the first literary critics to discover, study and diffuse the poems and literary works of the great poet from Recanati.\nWriter and journalist Matilde Serao co-founded the newspaper Il Mattino with her husband Edoardo Scarfoglio in 1892. Serao was an acclaimed novelist and writer during her day. Poet Salvatore Di Giacomo was one of the most famous writers in the Neapolitan dialect, and many of his poems were adapted to music, becoming famous Neapolitan songs. In the 20th century, philosophers like Benedetto Croce pursued the long tradition of philosophy studies in Naples, and personalities like jurists and lawyer Enrico De Nicola pursued legal and constitutional studies. De Nicola later helped to draft the modern Constitution of the Italian Republic and was eventually elected to the office of President of the Italian Republic. Other noted Neapolitan writers and journalists include Antonio De Curtis, Giancarlo Siani, Roberto Saviano and Elena Ferrante. In Naples'44, An Intelligence Officer in the Italian Labyrinth (London, Eland, 2002), the acclaimed British travel writer Norman Lewis records the lives of the Napolitean people following the liberation of the city from Nazi forces in 1943.\nTheatre.\nNaples was one of the centres of the peninsula from which originated the modern theatre genre as nowadays intended, evolving from 16th century . The masked character of Pulcinella is a worldwide famous figure either as a theatrical character or puppetry character.\nThe music Opera genre of was created in Naples in the 18th century and then spread to Rome and northern Italy. In the period of Belle \u00c9poque, Naples rivalled Paris for its , and many famous Neapolitan songs were originally created to entertain the public in the caf\u00e8s of Naples. Perhaps the most well-known song is \"Nin\u00ec Tirabusci\u00f2\". The history of how this song was born was dramatised in the eponymous comedy movie \"\" starring Monica Vitti.\nThe Neapolitan popular genre of is an important genre of modern folk theatre worldwide, dramatising common canon themes of thwarted love stories, comedies, tearjerker stories, commonly about honest people becoming camorra outlaws due to unfortunate events. The Sceneggiata became very popular amongst Neapolitans and eventually one of the best-known genres of Italian cinematography thanks to actors and singers like Mario Merola and Nino D'Angelo. Many writers and playwrights, such as Raffaele Viviani, wrote comedies and dramas for this genre. Actors and comedians like Eduardo Scarpetta and then his sons Eduardo De Filippo, Peppino De Filippo and Titina De Filippo contributed to making the Neapolitan theatre. Eduardo's comedies and tragedies, such as \"Filumena Marturano\" and \"Napoli milionaria\" (which he also filmed as \"Side Street Story\"), are well-known.\nMusic.\nNaples has played an important role in the history of Western European art music for more than four centuries. The first music conservatories were established in the city under Spanish rule in the 16th century. The San Pietro a Majella music conservatory, founded in 1826 by Francesco I of Bourbon, continues to operate today as both a prestigious centre of musical education and a musical museum.\nDuring the late Baroque period, Alessandro Scarlatti, the father of Domenico Scarlatti, established the Neapolitan school of opera; this was in the form of \"opera seria\", which was a new development for its time. Another form of opera originating in Naples is \"opera buffa\", a style of comic opera strongly linked to Battista Pergolesi and Piccinni; later contributors to the genre included Rossini and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The Teatro di San Carlo, built in 1737, is the oldest working theatre in Europe, and remains the operatic centre of Naples.\nThe earliest six-string guitar was created by the Neapolitan Gaetano Vinaccia in 1779; the instrument is now referred to as the romantic guitar. The Vinaccia family also developed the mandolin. Influenced by the Spanish, Neapolitans became pioneers of classical guitar music, with Ferdinando Carulli and Mauro Giuliani being prominent exponents. Giuliani, who was actually from Apulia but lived and worked in Naples, is widely considered to be one of the greatest guitar players and composers of the 19th century, along with his Catalan contemporary Fernando Sor. Another Neapolitan musician of note was opera singer Enrico Caruso, one of the most prominent opera tenors of all time: he was considered a man of the people in Naples, hailing from a working-class background.\nA popular traditional dance in Southern Italy and Naples is the Tarantella, which originated in Apulia and spread throughout the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. The Neapolitan tarantella is a courtship dance performed by couples whose \"rhythms, melodies, gestures, and accompanying songs are quite distinct\", featuring faster, more cheerful music.\nA notable element of popular Neapolitan music is the style, essentially the traditional music of the city, with a repertoire of hundreds of folk songs, some of which can be traced back to the 13th century. The genre became a formal institution in 1835, after the introduction of the annual Festival of Piedigrotta songwriting competition. Some of the best-known recording artists in this field include Roberto Murolo, Sergio Bruni and Renato Carosone. There are furthermore various forms of music popular in Naples but not well known outside it, such as \"cantautore\" (\"singer-songwriter\") and \"sceneggiata\", which has been described as a musical soap opera; the most well-known exponent of this style is Mario Merola.\nCinema and television.\nNaples has had a significant influence on Italian cinema. Because of the city's relevance, many films and television shows are set (entirely or partially) in Naples. In addition to serving as the backdrop for several movies and shows, many talented celebrities (actors, actresses, directors, and producers) are originally from Naples.\nNaples was the location for several early Italian cinema masterpieces. \"Assunta Spina\" (1915) was a silent film adapted from a theatrical drama by Neapolitan writer Salvatore Di Giacomo. The film was directed by Neapolitan Gustavo Serena. Serena also starred in the 1912 film \"Romeo and Juliet\".\nA list of some well-known films that take place (fully or partially) in Naples includes:\nNaples is home to one of the first Italian colour films, \"Toto in Color\" (1952), starring Tot\u00f2 (Antonio de Curtis), a famous comedic actor born in Naples.\nSome notable comedies set in Naples include (\"Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow\"), by Vittorio De Sica, starring Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni, \"Adelina of Naples\" (Academy Award-winning movie), \"It Started in Naples\", again by Vittorio De Sica, dramatic movies like Dino Risi's \"Scent of a Woman\", war movies like \"The Four Days of Naples\" by Sardinian director Nanni Loy, music and Sceneggiata movies like \"Zappatore\", from the eponymous song by Libero Bovio, starring singer and actor Mario Merola, crime movies like with Ben Gazzara playing the part of infamous camorra boss Raffaele Cutolo, and historical or costume movies like \"That Hamilton Woman\" starring Vivien Leigh and Laurence Olivier.\nMore modern Neapolitan films include , which depicts the misadventures of a young emigrant in the late 20th century. The 2008 film \"Gomorrah\", based on the book by Roberto Saviano, explores the dark underbelly of the city of Naples through five intertwining stories about the powerful Neapolitan crime syndicate, as well as the TV series of the same name.\nSeveral episodes of the animated series \"Tom and Jerry\" also have references/influences from Naples. The song \"Santa Lucia\" played by Tom Cat in \"Cat and Dupli-cat\" has its origins in Naples. \"Neapolitan Mouse\" takes place in the same city.\nThe Japanese series \"JoJo's Bizarre Adventure\"'s part 5, Vento Aureo, takes place in the city.\nNaples has appeared in episodes of TV serials such as \"The Sopranos\" and the 1998 version of \"The Count of Monte Cristo\", starring G\u00e9rard Depardieu.\nTailoring.\nNeapolitan tailoring was born as an attempt to loosen up the stiffness of English tailoring, which did not suit the Neapolitan lifestyle. The Neapolitan jacket is shorter, lighter, quarter-lined or unlined, and has no shoulder padding.\nSport.\nFootball is by far the most popular sport in Naples. Brought to the city by the British during the early 20th century, the sport is deeply embedded in local culture: it is popular at every level of society, from the \"scugnizzi\" (street children) to wealthy professionals. The city's best known football club is Napoli, which plays its home games at the Stadio Maradona in Fuorigrotta. The club's stadium was renamed Stadio Diego Armando Maradona in honour of the Argentinian attacking midfielder who played for the club for seven years. The team plays in Serie A and has won the \"Scudetto\" four times, the Coppa Italia six times and the Supercoppa Italiana twice. The team has also won the UEFA Cup, and once named FIFA Player of the Century Diego Maradona among its players. Naples is the birthplace of numerous prominent professional footballers, including Ciro Ferrara and Fabio Cannavaro. Cannavaro was captain of Italy's national team until 2010 and led the team to victory in the 2006 World Cup. He was consequently named World Player of the Year.\nSome of the city's smaller clubs include Sporting Neapolis and Internapoli, which play at the Stadio Arturo Collana. The city also has teams in a variety of other sports: Eldo Napoli represents the city in basketball's Serie A and plays in the city of Bagnoli. The city co-hosted the EuroBasket 1969. Partenope Rugby is the city's best-known rugby union side: the team has won the rugby union Serie A twice. Other popular local sports include futsal, water polo, horse racing, sailing, fencing, boxing and martial arts. The Accademia Nazionale di Scherma (National Academy and Fencing School of Naples) is the only place in Italy where the titles \"Master of Sword\" and \"Master of Kendo\" can be obtained.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nNaples is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartnerships.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55882", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55882", "title": "Koln", "text": ""}
{"id": "55883", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55883", "title": "Cologne, Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "55884", "revid": "15466653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55884", "title": "Triglav", "text": "Mountain in northwest Slovenia; highest peak of the Julian Alps\nTriglav (; ; ), with an elevation of , is the highest mountain in Slovenia and the highest peak of the Julian Alps. The mountain is the pre-eminent symbol of the Slovene nation, appearing on the coat of arms and flag of Slovenia. It is the centrepiece of Triglav National Park, Slovenia's only national park. Triglav was also the highest peak in Yugoslavia before Slovenia's independence in 1991.\nName.\nVarious names have been used for the mountain through history. An old map from 1567 used the Latin name \"Ocra mons\", whereas Johann Weikhard von Valvasor called it \"Krma\" (the modern name of an Alpine valley in the vicinity) in the second half of the 17th century. According to the German mountaineer and professor Adolf Gstirner, the name \"Triglav\" first appeared in written sources as \"Terglau\" in 1452, but the original source has been lost. The next known occurrence of \"Terglau\" is cited by Gstirner and is from a court description of the border in 1573. Early forms of the name \"Triglav\" also include \"Terglau\" in 1612, \"Terglou\" in 1664 and \"Terklou\" around 1778\u20131789. The name is derived from the compound \"*Tri-golv\u044a\" (literally 'three-head'\u2014that is, 'three peaks'), which may be understood literally because the mountain has three peaks when viewed from much of Upper Carniola. It is unlikely that the name has any connection to the Slavic deity Triglav. In the local dialect, the name is pronounced (with a second-syllable accent, as if it was written \"Trglov\", with the dark L experiencing vocalization) in contrast to standard Slovene . The highest peak is sometimes also called Big Mount Triglav ( ) to distinguish it from Little Mount Triglav ( , ) immediately to the east.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded ascent of Triglav was achieved in 1778, at the initiative of the industrialist and polymath Sigmund Zois. According to the most commonly cited report, published in the newspaper \"Illyrisches Blatt\" in 1821 by the historian and geographer Johann Richter, these were the surgeon Lovrenz Willomitzer (written as \"Willonitzer\" by Richter), the chamois hunter \u0160tefan Ro\u017ei\u010d, and the miners Luka Koro\u0161ec and Matev\u017e Kos. According to a report by Belsazar Hacquet in his \"Oryctographia Carniolica\", the ascent took place towards the end of 1778, by two chamois hunters, one of them being Luka Koro\u0161ec, and one of his former students, whose name is not mentioned.\nTriglav's height was first measured on 23 September 1808 by Valentin Stani\u010d. The first to put the name of the mountain on a map, written as \"Mons Terglou\", was Joannes Disma Floriantschitsch de Grienfeld, who in 1744 published the map \"Ducatus Carniolae Tabula Chorographica\". The first map its name appeared on written as \"Triglav\" was \"Zemljovid Slovenske de\u017eele in pokrajin\" (Map of the Slovene Land and Provinces) by Peter Kosler, completed from 1848 until 1852 and published in Vienna in 1861.\nDuring World War II, Triglav symbolically captured the primary drive by the Slovene resistance to the Fascist and Nazi armies. The Slovene Partisans wore the Triglav cap from 1942 until after 1944.\nTriglav was the highest peak of the now defunct Yugoslavia; it was both countries' highest and most prominent peak. The expression \"from Triglav to the Vardar\" (a river in southern Macedonia) was a common synecdoche for Yugoslavia, referring to two prominent features at the geographic extremes of the nation.\nLandmarks.\nAlja\u017e Tower.\nAt the top of the mountain stands a small metal structure, the Alja\u017e Tower (). It acts as a storm shelter and a triangulation point. Along with Triglav, it is also a landmark of Slovenia and a symbol of the Slovenes and Slovene territorial sovereignty.\nThe tower's namesake was the priest, mountaineer and patriot Jakob Alja\u017e. In early 1895, he drew up, with a piece of chalk on the floor of his room in the parish of Dovje, plans for a cylindrical tower with a flag on its top. In April that year he purchased the summit of Triglav for the sum of one florin. Having done so, he secured himself the right to erect a building on the mountain top. The tower was constructed from iron and zinc coated sheet steel by Anton Belec from \u0160ent Vid nad Ljubljano. He and four workers brought the parts of the tower to the summit of Triglav and put the tower together in only five hours on 7 August 1895. The opening took place that same day. Alja\u017e donated the shelter to the Slovene Alpine Society today Alpine Association of Slovenia.\nIn the beginning, there were three four-legged chairs, a summit register, a spirit stove, and the image \"Triglav Panorama\" by Marko Pernhart in the tower. It was later repainted and renovated several times by Alojz Knafelc and others. In the Communist era, as the highest point of the former Yugoslavia, it was painted red and decorated with a red star. However, it has now more or less been restored to its original appearance. The star was removed shortly before the dissolution of Yugoslavia. On the proclamation of Slovene independence in June 1991, the flag of Slovenia was raised on top of the tower.\nStani\u010d Shelter.\nIn 1895, due to a lack of space, Alja\u017e also commissioned the building of the Stani\u010d Shelter. It is located below the top of Triglav and is named after the poet and mountaineer Valentin Stani\u010d. The shelter has dimensions of and has room for 8 people sitting or 16 standing. Originally it also had a wooden door, benches, a table, and a chair. Its significance diminished after the Kredarica Lodge was erected in 1896.\nTriglav Glacier.\nThe Triglav Glacier () was located below the summit on the karstified Triglav Plateaus (), part of the northeastern side of the mountain. Covering over at the end of the 19th century, the glacier had shrunk to by 1946, and after further shrinkage had fallen into two parts by 1992. By 2011 it covered an area of only 1\u20133 hectares, depending on the season. It was no longer considered a glacier in 2019.\nGeology.\nGeologically Triglav is composed of a sequence of Triassic rocks arranged as a stack of thrust sheets, the uppermost of these, forming the summit of Triglav, is the Zlatna klippe, an isolated fragment of the Zlatna nappe (also referred to as the Zlatenski plo\u0161\u010di, Slatenskem pokrovu, Slatenskem narivu or Triglavskem pokrovu). In the Triglav area the Zlatna nappe has a well preserved sub-horizontal contact with the underlying Julian nappe which is dominated by a thick succession of more than 1000m of limestones including a cyclic sequence of Dachstein Limestone of Norian to Rhaetian age.\nIn the upper Vrata Valley, near Kozja Dnina about 2km NNE of Triglav's summit, a sequence of pelagic limestones of Carnian age is exposed. This has been known to paleontologists from the beginning of the 20th century and has produced a variety of excellently preserved fossils which include \nbivalves, brachiopods, echinoids, crinoids, asteroids, ammonites, belemnites, scleractinian corals, shrimps, lobsters, fish and thylacocephalans.\nCultural significance.\nFolk literature.\nThe Triglav area is the setting of an old Slovene folk tale concerning a hunter seeking a treasure guarded by an enchanted chamois buck named \"Zlatorog\" (lit.\u2009'Goldhorn', after its golden horns).\nArts.\nThe earliest known depiction of Triglav is on the front page of the work \"Oryctographia Carniolica\", written by Belsazar Hacquet. It was a copper engraving made in 1778 by C. Conti after a drawing by Franz Xaver Baraga. Among later visual artists who depicted Triglav, the most well known are Anton Karinger (1829\u20131870) from Ljubljana, Marko Pernhart (1824\u20131871) from Klagenfurt, Valentin Hodnik (1896\u20131935) from Stara Fu\u017eina, Edo Der\u017eaj (1904\u20131980) from Ljubljana, and more recently Marjan Zaletel (born 1945), living in Ljubljana.\nAmong the musical works related to Triglav, a special place is held for the poem \"Oh, Triglav, My Home\" (). It was written in 1894 by the priest and poet Matija Zemlji\u010d and quickly became very popular among Slovene mountaineers. In 2007, its first stanza, accompanied by a melody of Jakob Alja\u017e, became the official anthem of the Alpine Association of Slovenia. An instrumental version of the poem, written by Bojan Adami\u010d, is part of the start and end credits of the annual ski jumping broadcasts from Planica. In 2023, the Slovenian industrial act Laibach released their rendition of the song, titled \"O, Triglav, moj dom.\"\nThe first Slovene-language full-length film, recorded in 1931 by Janko Ravnik, was titled \"In the Kingdom of the Goldhorn\" () and features an ascent by a group of students to the top of Triglav. The second Slovene full-length film, recorded the following year, was titled \"The Slopes of Mount Triglav\" (). It was directed by Ferdo Delak and was a romantic story featuring a wedding on the top of Triglav.\nSince 1968, Triglav has become a theme of avant-garde artists. The first instance was a manifestation by the art group OHO, called \"Mount Triglav\", which took place in December 1968 at Ljubljana's Congress Square. In 2004, the group IRWIN produced a series of paintings named \"Like to Like/ Mount Triglav\". In 2007, an artistic performance was held atop Mount Triglav by the artists Janez Jan\u0161a (director), Janez Jan\u0161a (visual artist) and Janez Jan\u0161a (performance artist) called \"Mount Triglav on Mount Triglav\".\nNational symbol.\nA stylized depiction of Triglav's distinctive shape is the central element of the Slovene coat of arms, designed by the sculptor Marko Poga\u010dnik, and is in turn featured on the flag of Slovenia. Alongside San Marino and Slovakia, Slovenia is the only other country in Europe and one of the few in the world to feature a mountain on its coat of arms. Formerly, it was featured on the coat of arms of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia.\nThe first to depict Triglav as the symbol of the Slovenes was the architect Jo\u017ee Ple\u010dnik, who in 1934 put it besides other coats-of-arms of the nations of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia on the coat of the statue of the Mother of God in front of the parish church in Bled.\nDuring World War II, the stylised Triglav was the symbol of the Liberation Front of the Slovene Nation resistance movement. The distinctive three-pronged caps worn by Slovene Partisans during World War II were known as \"triglavkas\".\nA relief map of the mountain is the design on the national side of the Slovene 50 eurocent coin.\nThe former Slovene president Milan Ku\u010dan once proclaimed that it is a duty of every Slovenian person to climb Triglav at least once in their lifetime.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55885", "revid": "35119144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55885", "title": "Computer insecurity", "text": ""}
{"id": "55886", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55886", "title": "Local currency", "text": "Currency that can be spent in a particular area at participating organisations\nIn economics, a local currency is a currency that can be spent in a particular geographical locality at participating organisations. A regional currency is a form of local currency encompassing a larger geographical area, while a community currency might be local or be used for exchange within an online community. A local currency acts as a complementary currency to a national currency, rather than replacing it, and aims to encourage spending within a local community, especially with locally owned businesses. Such currencies may not be backed by a national government nor be legal tender. About 300 complementary currencies, including local currencies, are listed in the Complementary Currency Resource Center worldwide database.\nTerminology.\nSome definitions:\nPurpose.\nLocal currencies aim at using money as a tool to achieve social or environmental objectives. According to the New Economics Foundation partner Community Currencies in Action: \nSome of the purposes for community currencies identified by Community Currencies in Action include:\nBenefits.\nThe W\u00f6rgl experiment illustrates some of the common characteristics and major benefits of local currencies.\nDifficulties and criticisms.\nLocal currencies and the Transition Towns movement in the UK have been criticized for failing to address the needs of the wider population, especially lower socio-economic groups. Such local currency initiatives have been more widely criticized as having limited success in stimulating spending in local economies, and as an unrealistic strategy to reduce carbon emissions.\nModern local currencies.\nModern local currencies can be classified into the following distinct types:\nSoftware.\nSeveral software packages have been written supporting the management of community currencies. In 1998, Richard Kay, a senior lecturer at Birmingham City University, wrote a \"Multi-registry System\" specification for routing and processing community currency transactions using an approach designed to be decentralized, with no single point of control or failure, using the Domain Name System for server discovery.\nList of local currencies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55888", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55888", "title": "Trusted system", "text": "In the security engineering subspecialty of computer science, a trusted system is one that is relied upon to a specified extent to enforce a specified security policy. This is equivalent to saying that a trusted system is one whose failure would break a security policy (if a policy exists that the system is trusted to enforce).\nThe word \"trust\" is critical, as it does not carry the meaning that might be expected in everyday usage. A trusted system is one that the user feels safe to use, and trusts to perform tasks without secretly executing harmful or unauthorized programs; trusted computing refers to whether programs can trust the platform to be unmodified from the expected, and whether or not those programs are innocent or malicious or whether they execute tasks that are undesired by the user.\nA trusted system can also be seen as a level-based security system where protection is provided and handled according to different levels. This is commonly found in the military, where information is categorized as unclassified (U), confidential (C), secret (S), top secret (TS), and beyond. These also enforce the policies of no read-up and no write-down.\nTrusted systems in classified information.\nA subset of trusted systems (\"Division B\" and \"Division A\") implement mandatory access control (MAC) labels, and as such, it is often assumed that they can be used for processing classified information. However, this is generally untrue. There are four modes in which one can operate a multilevel secure system: multilevel, compartmented, dedicated, and system-high modes. The National Computer Security Center's \"Yellow Book\" specifies that B3 and A1 systems can only be used for processing a strict subset of security labels, and only when operated according to a particularly strict configuration.\nCentral to the concept of U.S. Department of Defense-style trusted systems is the notion of a \"reference monitor\", which is an entity that occupies the logical heart of the system and is responsible for all access control decisions. Ideally, the reference monitor is\nAccording to the U.S. National Security Agency's 1983 Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), or \"Orange Book\", a set of \"evaluation classes\" were defined that described the features and assurances that the user could expect from a trusted system.\nThe dedication of significant system engineering toward minimizing the complexity (not \"size\", as often cited) of the trusted computing base (TCB) is key to the provision of the highest levels of assurance (B3 and A1). This is defined as that combination of hardware, software, and firmware that is responsible for enforcing the system's security policy. An inherent engineering conflict would appear to arise in higher-assurance systems in that, the smaller the TCB, the larger the set of hardware, software, and firmware that lies outside the TCB and is, therefore, untrusted. Although this may lead the more technically naive to sophists' arguments about the nature of trust, the argument confuses the issue of \"correctness\" with that of \"trustworthiness\".\nTCSEC has a precisely defined hierarchy of six evaluation classes; the highest of these, A1, is featurally identical to B3\u2014differing only in documentation standards. In contrast, the more recently introduced Common Criteria (CC), which derive from a blend of technically mature standards from various NATO countries, provide a tenuous spectrum of seven \"evaluation classes\" that intermix features and assurances in a non-hierarchical manner, and lack the precision and mathematical stricture of the TCSEC. In particular, the CC tolerate very loose identification of the \"target of evaluation\" (TOE) and support \u2013 even encourage \u2013 an inter-mixture of security requirements culled from a variety of predefined \"protection profiles.\" While a case can be made that even the seemingly arbitrary components of the TCSEC contribute to a \"chain of evidence\" that a fielded system properly enforces its advertised security policy, not even the highest (E7) level of the CC can truly provide analogous consistency and stricture of evidentiary reasoning.\nThe mathematical notions of trusted systems for the protection of classified information derive from two independent but interrelated corpora of work. In 1974, David Bell and Leonard LaPadula of MITRE, under the technical guidance and financial sponsorship of Maj. Roger Schell, Ph.D., of the U.S. Army Electronic Systems Command (Fort Hanscom, MA), devised the Bell\u2013LaPadula model, in which a trustworthy computer system is modeled in terms of objects (passive repositories or destinations for data such as files, disks, or printers) and subjects (active entities that cause information to flow among objects \"e.g.\" users, or system processes or threads operating on behalf of users). The entire operation of a computer system can indeed be regarded as a \"history\" (in the serializability-theoretic sense) of pieces of information flowing from object to object in response to subjects' requests for such flows. At the same time, Dorothy Denning at Purdue University was publishing her Ph.D. dissertation, which dealt with \"lattice-based information flows\" in computer systems. (A mathematical \"lattice\" is a partially ordered set, characterizable as a directed acyclic graph, in which the relationship between any two vertices either \"dominates\", \"is dominated by,\" or neither.) She defined a generalized notion of \"labels\" that are attached to entities\u2014corresponding more or less to the full security markings one encounters on classified military documents, \"e.g.\" TOP SECRET WNINTEL TK DUMBO. Bell and LaPadula integrated Denning's concept into their landmark MITRE technical report\u2014entitled, \"Secure Computer System: Unified Exposition and Multics Interpretation\". They stated that labels attached to objects represent the sensitivity of data contained within the object, while those attached to subjects represent the trustworthiness of the user executing the subject. (However, there can be a subtle semantic difference between the sensitivity of the data within the object and the sensitivity of the object itself.) \nThe concepts are unified with two properties, the \"simple security property\" (a subject can only read from an object that it \"dominates\" [\"is greater than\" is a close, albeit mathematically imprecise, interpretation]) and the \"confinement property,\" or \"*-property\" (a subject can only write to an object that dominates it). (These properties are loosely referred to as \"no read-up\" and \"no write-down,\" respectively.) Jointly enforced, these properties ensure that information cannot flow \"downhill\" to a repository where insufficiently trustworthy recipients may discover it. By extension, assuming that the labels assigned to subjects are truly representative of their trustworthiness, then the no read-up and no write-down rules rigidly enforced by the reference monitor are sufficient to constrain Trojan horses, one of the most general classes of attacks (\"sciz.\", the popularly reported worms and viruses are specializations of the Trojan horse concept).\nThe Bell\u2013LaPadula model technically only enforces \"confidentiality\" or \"secrecy\" controls, \"i.e.\" they address the problem of the sensitivity of objects and attendant trustworthiness of subjects to not inappropriately disclose it. The dual problem of \"integrity\" (i.e. the problem of accuracy, or even provenance of objects) and attendant trustworthiness of subjects to not inappropriately modify or destroy it, is addressed by mathematically affine models; the most important of which is named for its creator, K. J. Biba. Other integrity models include the Clark-Wilson model and Shockley and Schell's program integrity model, \"The SeaView Model\"\nAn important feature of MACs, is that they are entirely beyond the control of any user. The TCB automatically attaches labels to any subjects executed on behalf of users and files they access or modify. In contrast, an additional class of controls, termed discretionary access controls(DACs), are under the direct control of system users. Familiar protection mechanisms such as permission bits (supported by UNIX since the late 1960s and \u2013 in a more flexible and powerful form \u2013 by Multics since earlier still) and access control list (ACLs) are familiar examples of DACs.\nThe behavior of a trusted system is often characterized in terms of a mathematical model. This may be rigorous depending upon applicable operational and administrative constraints. These take the form of a finite-state machine (FSM) with state criteria, state transition constraints (a set of \"operations\" that correspond to state transitions), and a descriptive top-level specification, DTLS (entails a user-perceptible interface such as an API, a set of system calls in UNIX or system exits in mainframes). Each element of the aforementioned engenders one or more model operations.\nTrusted systems in trusted computing.\nThe Trusted Computing Group creates specifications that are meant to address particular requirements of trusted systems, including attestation of configuration and safe storage of sensitive information.\nTrusted systems in policy analysis.\nIn the context of national or homeland security, law enforcement, or social control policy, trusted systems provide conditional prediction about the behavior of people or objects prior to authorizing access to system resources. For example, trusted systems include the use of \"security envelopes\" in national security and counterterrorism applications, \"trusted computing\" initiatives in technical systems security, and credit or identity scoring systems in financial and anti-fraud applications. In general, they include any system in which\nThe widespread adoption of these authorization-based security strategies (where the default state is DEFAULT=DENY) for counterterrorism, anti-fraud, and other purposes is helping accelerate the ongoing transformation of modern societies from a notional Beccarian model of criminal justice based on accountability for deviant actions after they occur to a Foucauldian model based on authorization, preemption, and general social compliance through ubiquitous preventative surveillance and control through system constraints.\nIn this emergent model, \"security\" is not geared towards policing but to risk management through surveillance, information exchange, auditing, communication, and classification. These developments have led to general concerns about individual privacy and civil liberty, and to a broader philosophical debate about appropriate social governance methodologies.\nTrusted systems in information theory.\nTrusted systems in the context of information theory are based on the following definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Trust is that which is essential to a communication channel but cannot be transferred from a source to a destination using that channel\"\u2014\u200a\nIn information theory, information has nothing to do with knowledge or meaning; it is simply that which is transferred from source to destination, using a communication channel. If, before transmission, the information is available at the destination, then the transfer is zero. Information received by a party is that which the party does not expect\u2014as measured by the uncertainty of the party as to what the message will be.\nLikewise, trust as defined by Gerck, has nothing to do with friendship, acquaintances, employee-employer relationships, loyalty, betrayal and other overly-variable concepts. Trust is not taken in the purely subjective sense either, nor as a feeling or something purely personal or psychological\u2014trust is understood as something potentially communicable. Further, this definition of trust is abstract, allowing different instances and observers in a trusted system to communicate based on a common idea of trust (otherwise communication would be isolated in domains), where all necessarily different subjective and intersubjective realizations of trust in each subsystem (man and machines) may coexist.\nTaken together in the model of information theory, \"information is what you do not expect\" and \"trust is what you know\". Linking both concepts, trust is seen as \"qualified reliance on received information\". In terms of trusted systems, an assertion of trust cannot be based on the record itself, but on information from other information channels. The deepening of these questions leads to complex conceptions of trust, which have been thoroughly studied in the context of business relationships. It also leads to conceptions of information where the \"quality\" of information integrates trust or trustworthiness in the structure of the information itself and of the information system(s) in which it is conceived\u2014higher quality in terms of particular definitions of accuracy and precision means higher trustworthiness.\nAn example of the calculus of trust is \"If I connect two trusted systems, are they more or less trusted when taken together?\".\nThe IBM Federal Software Group has suggested that \"trust points\" provide the most useful definition of trust for application in an information technology environment, because it is related to other information theory concepts and provides a basis for measuring trust. In a network-centric enterprise services environment, such a notion of trust is considered to be requisite for achieving the desired collaborative, service-oriented architecture vision.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55889", "revid": "643099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55889", "title": "Security stance", "text": ""}
{"id": "55890", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55890", "title": "Cocoa (API)", "text": "MacOS framework\nCocoa is Apple's native object-oriented application programming interface (API) for its desktop operating system macOS.\nCocoa consists of the Foundation Kit, Application Kit, and Core Data frameworks, as included by the codice_1 header file, and the libraries and frameworks included by those, such as the C standard library and the Objective-C runtime.\nCocoa applications are typically developed using the development tools provided by Apple, specifically Xcode (formerly Project Builder) and Interface Builder (now part of Xcode), using the programming languages Objective-C or Swift. However, the Cocoa programming environment can be accessed using other tools. It is also possible to write Objective-C Cocoa programs in a simple text editor and build it manually with GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) or Clang from the command line or from a makefile.\nFor end users, Cocoa applications are those written using the Cocoa programming environment. Such applications usually have a familiar look and feel, since the Cocoa programming environment provides a lot of common UI elements (such as buttons, scroll bars, etc.), and automates many aspects of an application to comply with Apple's human interface guidelines.\nFor iOS, iPadOS, tvOS, and watchOS, APIs similar to Application Kit, named UIKit and WatchKit, are available; they include gesture recognition, animation, and a different set of graphical control elements that are designed to accommodate the specific platforms they target. Foundation Kit and Core Data are also available in those operating systems. It is used in applications for Apple devices such as the iPhone, the iPod Touch, the iPad, the Apple TV, and the Apple Watch.\nHistory.\nCocoa continues the lineage of several software frameworks (mainly the \"App Kit\" and \"Foundation Kit\") from the NeXTSTEP and OpenStep programming environments developed by NeXT in the 1980s and 1990s. Apple acquired NeXT in December 1996, and subsequently went to work on the Rhapsody operating system that was to be the direct successor of OPENSTEP. It was to have had an emulation base for classic Mac OS applications, named \"Blue Box\". The OpenStep base of libraries and binary support was termed \"Yellow Box\". Rhapsody evolved into Mac OS X, and the Yellow Box became Cocoa. Thus, Cocoa classes begin with the letters \"NS\", such as NSString or NSArray. These stand for the original proprietary term for the OpenStep framework, NeXTSTEP.\nMuch of the work that went into developing OpenStep was applied to developing Mac OS X, Cocoa being the most visible part. However, differences exist. For example, NeXTSTEP and OpenStep used Display PostScript for on-screen display of text and graphics, while Cocoa depends on Apple's Quartz (which uses the Portable Document Format (PDF) imaging model, but not its underlying technology). Cocoa also has a level of World Wide Web support, including the NSURL and WebKit HTML classes, and others, while OpenStep had only rudimentary support for managed network connections via NSFileHandle classes and Berkeley sockets.\nThe API toolbox was originally called \u201cYellow Box\u201d and was renamed to Cocoa - a name that had been already trademarked by Apple. Apple's \"Cocoa\" trademark had originated as the name of a multimedia project design application for children. The name was intended to evoke \"Java for kids\", as it ran embedded in web pages. The original \"Cocoa\" program was discontinued following the return of Steve Jobs to Apple. At the time, Java was a big focus area for the company, so \u201cCocoa\u201d was used as the new name for \u201cYellow Box\u201d because, in addition to the native Objective-C usage, it could also be accessed from Java via a bridging layer. Even though Apple discontinued support for the Cocoa Java bridge, the name continued and was even used for the Cocoa Touch API.\nMemory management.\nOne feature of the Cocoa environment is its facility for managing dynamically allocated memory. Foundation Kit's NSObject class, from which most classes, both vendor and user, are derived, implements a reference counting scheme for memory management. Objects that derive from the NSObject root class respond to a codice_2 and a codice_3 message, and keep a retain count. A method titled codice_4 exists, but contrary to its name, will usually not return the exact retain count of an object. It is mainly used for system-level purposes. Invoking it manually is not recommended by Apple.\nA newly allocated object created with codice_5 or codice_6 has a retain count of one. Sending that object a codice_2 message increments the retain count, while sending it a codice_3 message decrements the retain count. When an object's retain count reaches zero, it is deallocated by a procedure similar to a C++ \"destructor\". codice_9 is not guaranteed to be invoked.\nStarting with Objective-C 2.0, the Objective-C runtime implemented an optional garbage collector, which is now obsolete and deprecated in favor of Automatic Reference Counting (ARC). In this model, the runtime turned Cocoa reference counting operations such as \"retain\" and \"release\" into no-ops. The garbage collector does not exist on the iOS implementation of Objective-C 2.0. Garbage collection in Objective-C ran on a low-priority background thread, and can halt on Cocoa's user events, with the intention of keeping the user experience responsive. The legacy garbage collector is still available on Mac OS X version 10.13, but no Apple-provided applications use it.\nIn 2011, the LLVM compiler introduced Automatic Reference Counting (ARC), which replaces the conventional garbage collector by performing static analysis of Objective-C source code and inserting retain and release messages as necessary.\nMain frameworks.\nCocoa consists of three Objective-C object libraries called \"frameworks\". Frameworks are functionally similar to shared libraries, a compiled object that can be dynamically loaded into a program's address space at runtime, but frameworks add associated resources, header files, and documentation. The Cocoa frameworks are implemented as a type of bundle, containing the aforementioned items in standard locations.\nA key part of the Cocoa architecture is its comprehensive views model. This is organized along conventional lines for an application framework, but is based on the Portable Document Format (PDF) drawing model provided by Quartz. This allows creating custom drawing content using PostScript-like drawing commands, which also allows automatic printer support and so forth. Since the Cocoa framework manages all the clipping, scrolling, scaling and other chores of drawing graphics, the programmer is freed from implementing basic infrastructure and can concentrate on the unique aspects of an application's content.\nModel\u2013view\u2013controller.\nThe Smalltalk teams at Xerox PARC eventually settled on a design philosophy that led to easy development and high code reuse. Named \"model\u2013view\u2013controller\" (MVC), the concept breaks an application into three sets of interacting object classes:\nCocoa's design is a fairly, but not absolutely strict application of MVC principles. Under OpenStep, most of the classes provided were either high-level View classes (in AppKit) or one of a number of relatively low-level model classes like NSString. Compared to similar MVC systems, OpenStep lacked a strong model layer. No stock class represented a \"document,\" for instance. During the transition to Cocoa, the model layer was expanded greatly, introducing a number of pre-rolled classes to provide functionality common to desktop applications.\nIn Mac OS X 10.3, Apple introduced the NSController family of classes, which provide predefined behavior for the controller layer. These classes are considered part of the Cocoa Bindings system, which also makes extensive use of protocols such as Key-Value Observing and Key-Value Binding. The term 'binding' refers to a relationship between two objects, often between a view and a controller. Bindings allow the developer to focus more on declarative relationships rather than orchestrating fine-grained behavior.\nWith the arrival of Mac OS X 10.4, Apple extended this foundation further by introducing the Core Data framework, which standardizes change tracking and persistence in the model layer. In effect, the framework greatly simplifies the process of making changes to application data, undoing changes when necessary, saving data to disk, and reading it back in.\nIn providing framework support for all three MVC domains, Apple's goal is to reduce the amount of boilerplate or \"glue\" code that developers have to write, freeing up resources to spend time on application-specific features.\nLate binding.\nIn most object-oriented languages, calls to methods are represented physically by a pointer to the code in memory. This restricts the design of an application since specific \"command handling\" classes are needed, usually organized according to the chain-of-responsibility pattern. While Cocoa retains this approach for the most part, Objective-C's late binding opens up more flexibility.\nUnder Objective-C, methods are represented by a \"selector\", a string describing the method to call. When a message is sent, the selector is sent into the Objective-C runtime, matched against a list of available methods, and the method's \"implementation\" is called. Since the selector is text data, this lets it be saved to a file, transmitted over a network or between processes, or manipulated in other ways. The implementation of the method is looked up at runtime, not compile time. There is a small performance penalty for this, but late binding allows the same selector to reference different implementations.\nBy a similar token, Cocoa provides a pervasive data manipulation method called \"key-value coding\" (KVC). This allows a piece of data or property of an object to be looked up or changed at runtime by name. The property name acts as a key to the value. In traditional languages, this late binding is impossible. KVC leads to great design flexibility. An object's type need not be known, yet any property of that object can be discovered using KVC. Also, by extending this system using something Cocoa terms \"key-value observing\" (KVO), automatic support for undo-redo is provided.\nLate static binding is a variant of binding somewhere between static and dynamic binding. The binding of names before the program is run is called static (\"early\"); bindings performed as the program runs are dynamic (\"late\" or \"virtual\").\nRich objects.\nOne of the most useful features of Cocoa is the powerful \"base objects\" the system supplies. As an example, consider the Foundation classes codice_10 and codice_11, which provide Unicode strings, and the codice_12 system in AppKit, which allows the programmer to place string objects in the GUI.\ncodice_12 and its related classes are used to display and edit strings. The collection of objects involved permit an application to implement anything from a simple single-line text entry field to a complete multi-page, multi-column text layout schema, with full professional typography features such as kerning, ligatures, running text around arbitrary shapes, rotation, full Unicode support, and anti-aliased glyph rendering. Paragraph layout can be controlled automatically or by the user, using a built-in \"ruler\" object that can be attached to any text view. Spell checking is automatic, using a system-wide set of language dictionaries. Unlimited undo/redo support is built in. Using only the built-in features, one can write a text editor application in as few as 10 lines of code. With new controller objects, this may fall towards zero.\nWhen extensions are needed, Cocoa's use of Objective-C makes this a straightforward task. Objective-C includes the concept of \"https://,\" which allows modifying existing class \"in-place\". Functionality can be accomplished in a category without any changes to the original classes in the framework, or even access to its source. In other common languages, this same task requires deriving a new subclass supporting the added features, and then replacing all instances of the original class with instances of the new subclass.\nImplementations and bindings.\nThe Cocoa frameworks are written in Objective-C. Java bindings for the Cocoa frameworks (termed the \"Java bridge\") were also made available with the aim of replacing Objective-C with a more popular language but these bindings were unpopular among Cocoa developers and Cocoa's message passing semantics did not translate well to a statically-typed language such as Java. Cocoa's need for runtime binding means many of Cocoa's key features are not available with Java. In 2005, Apple announced that the Java bridge was to be deprecated, meaning that features added to Cocoa in macOS versions later than 10.4 would not be added to the Cocoa-Java programming interface.\nAt Apple Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) 2014, Apple introduced a new programming language named Swift, which is intended to replace Objective-C.\nAppleScriptObjC.\nOriginally, AppleScript Studio could be used to develop simpler Cocoa applications. However, as of Snow Leopard, it has been deprecated. It was replaced with AppleScriptObjC, which allows programming in AppleScript, while using Cocoa frameworks.\nOther bindings.\nThe Cocoa programming environment can be accessed using other tools with the aid of bridge mechanisms such as PasCocoa, PyObjC, CamelBones, RubyCocoa, and a D/Objective-C Bridge.\nThird-party bindings available for other languages include AppleScript, Clozure CL, Monobjc and NObjective (C#), Cocoa# (CLI), Cocodao and D/Objective-C Bridge, LispWorks, Object Pascal, CamelBones (Perl), PyObjC (Python), FPC PasCocoa (Lazarus and Free Pascal), RubyCocoa (Ruby).\nA Ruby language implementation named MacRuby, which removes the need for a bridge mechanism, was formerly developed by Apple, while Nu is a Lisp-like language that uses the Objective-C object model directly, and thus can use the Cocoa frameworks without needing a binding.\nOther implementations.\nThere are also open source implementations of major parts of the Cocoa framework, such as GNUstep and Cocotron, which allow cross-platform Cocoa application development to target other operating systems, such as Microsoft Windows and Linux.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55891", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55891", "title": "GNUstep", "text": "Open source widget toolkit and application development tools\n \nGNUstep is a free software implementation of the Cocoa (formerly OpenStep) Objective-C frameworks, widget toolkit, and application development tools for Unix-like operating systems and Microsoft Windows. It is part of the GNU Project.\nGNUstep features a cross-platform, object-oriented IDE. Apart from the default Objective-C interface, GNUstep also has bindings for Java, Ruby, GNU Guile and Scheme. The GNUstep developers track some additions to Apple's Cocoa to remain compatible. The roots of the GNUstep application interface are the same as the roots of Cocoa: NeXTSTEP and OpenStep. GNUstep thus predates Cocoa, which emerged when Apple acquired NeXT's technology and incorporated it into the development of the original Mac OS X, while GNUstep was initially an effort by GNU developers to replicate the technically ambitious NeXTSTEP's programmer-friendly features.\nHistory.\nGNUstep began when Paul Kunz and others at Stanford Linear Accelerator Center wanted to port HippoDraw from NeXTSTEP to another platform. Instead of rewriting HippoDraw from scratch and reusing only the application design, they decided to rewrite the NeXTSTEP object layer on which the application depended. This was the first version of \"libobjcX\". It enabled them to port HippoDraw to Unix systems running the X Window System without changing a single line of their application source. After the OpenStep specification was released to the public in 1994, they decided to write a new \"objcX\" which would adhere to the new APIs. The software would become known as \"GNUstep\".\nSoftware architecture.\nThe Foundation Kit provides basic classes such as wrapper classes and data structure classes. The Application Kit provides classes oriented around graphical user interface capabilities. GNUstep contains a set of graphical control elements written in the Objective-C programming language.\nThe graphical user interface (GUI) of GNUMail is composed of graphics control elements. GNUMail has to interact with the windowing system, e.g. X11 or Wayland, and its graphical user interface has to be rendered. GNUstep's backend provides a small set of functions used by the user interface library to interface to the actual windowing system. It also has a rendering engine which emulates common Postscript functions. The package gnustep-back provides the following backends:\nGNUstep inherits some design principles proposed in OPENSTEP (GNUstep predates Cocoa, but Cocoa is based on OPENSTEP) as well as the Objective-C language.\nIn addition to the Objective-C interface, some small projects under the GNUstep umbrella implement other APIs from Apple:\nAs of \u00a02020[ [update]], there are no projects that build the Swift programming language against the GNUstep Objective-C environment.\nApplications.\nHere are some examples of applications written for or ported to GNUstep.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55892", "revid": "14596827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55892", "title": "Primo\u017e Trubar", "text": "Carniolan writer, Protestant reformer\nPrimo\u017e Trubar or Primus Truber () (1508 \u2013 28 June 1586) was a Slovene Protestant Reformer of the Lutheran tradition, mostly known as the author of the first Slovene language printed book, the founder and the first superintendent of the Protestant Church of the Duchy of Carniola, and for consolidating the Slovenian language. Trubar introduced The Reformation in Slovenia, leading the Austrian Habsburgs to wage the Counter-Reformation, which a small Protestant community survived. Trubar is a key figure of Slovenian history and in many aspects a major historical personality.\nLife and work.\nTrubar was born in the village of Ra\u0161ica (now in the Municipality of Velike La\u0161\u010de) in the Duchy of Carniola, then under the Habsburgs. In the years 1520\u20131521 he attended school in Rijeka, in 1522\u20131524 he continued his education in Salzburg. From there he went to Trieste under the tutorship of the Roman Catholic bishop Pietro Bonomo, where he got in touch with the Humanist writers, in particular Erasmus of Rotterdam. In 1527 the bishop Pietro Bonomo assigned Trubar a priest position in Loka pri Zidanem Mostu. In 1528 he enrolled at the University of Vienna, but did not complete his studies. In 1530 he returned to the Slovenian Lands and became a preacher in Ljubljana, where he lived up until 1565. While in Ljubljana, he lived in a house, on today's Fish Square (\"Ribji trg\"), in the oldest part of the city. Living in Ljubljana had profound impact on his work, he considered Ljubljana the capital of all Slovenes because of its central position in the heart of the Slovene lands and because its residents spoke Slovene as their first language, unlike several other towns in today's Slovenia. It is estimated that in Trubar's period around 70% of Ljubljana's 4000 inhabitants attended mass in Slovene. It was the language of Ljubljana that Trubar took as a foundation of what later became standard Slovene, with small addition of his native speech, that is Lower Carniolan dialect. Trubar considered Ljubljana's speech most suitable, since it sounded much more noble, than his own, simple dialect of his hometown Ra\u0161ica. His decision to write in Ljubljana's variety was later adopted also by other Protestant writers, who also lived in Ljubljana during Trubar's time. He gradually leaned towards Protestantism and was expelled from Ljubljana in 1547.\nIn 1550, while a Protestant preacher in Rothenburg, he wrote the first two books in Slovene, \"Catechismus\" and \"Abecedarium\", which were then printed that year in Schw\u00e4bisch Hall by Peter Frentz. \"Catechismus\" also contained the first Slovene musical manuscript in print.\nAltogether, Trubar authored 22 books in Slovene and two books in German. He was the first to translate parts of the Bible into Slovene. After the exhortation by Pier Paolo Vergerio, he translated the Gospel of Matthew in 1555 and until 1577 in three parts published the translation of the entire New Testament. In period between 1561 and 1565 Trubar was the manager and supervisor of the South Slavic Bible Institute. Eschatologically minded, he also endeavored to proselytize Muslims in Turkey with his books.\nTrubar died in Derendingen, Holy Roman Empire (now part of the city of T\u00fcbingen, Germany), where he is also buried.\nCommemoration.\nOn June 4, 1952, the street \"\u0160entpeterska cesta\" in Ljubljana was renamed \"Trubarjeva cesta\" after Trubar. It is one of the oldest roads in the city, first mentioned in 1802, and starts in \"Pre\u0161ernov trg\" (Pre\u0161eren Square), named after Slovenia's national poet. The street is currently known for its high concentration of ethnic restaurants.\nIn 1986, Slovene television produced a TV series, directed by Andrej Strojan with the screenplay written by Drago Jan\u010dar, in which Trubar was played by the Slovene actor Polde Bibi\u010d.\nTrubar was commemorated on the 10 tolar banknote in 1992, and on the Slovene 1 euro coin in 2007. In 2008, the Government of Slovenia proclaimed the Year of Primo\u017e Trubar and the 500th anniversary of Trubar's birth was celebrated throughout the country. A commemorative \u20ac2 coin and a postage stamp were issued. An exhibition dedicated to the life and work of Primo\u017e Trubar, and the achievements of the Slovene Reformation Movement was on display at the National Museum of Slovenia from 6 March to 31 December 2008.\nIn 2009, the Trubar Forum Association printed Trubar's Catechism and Abecedarium in modern Slovene, in a scholarly edition that includes both the Trubar-era Slovene and the modern Slovene translation with scholarly notes.\nThe \"Sermon on Faith\", a portion of the Catechism, is available in modern Slovene, English, German and Esperanto.\nSince 2010, 8 June is commemorated in Slovenia as Primo\u017e Trubar Day. Google celebrated his 505th birthday anniversary with a dedicated Google Doodle.\nBibliography.\nBooks written or published by Trubar include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55894", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55894", "title": "Ljubljana, Slovenia", "text": ""}
{"id": "55895", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55895", "title": "Laibach (disambiguation)", "text": "Laibach is a Slovenian industrial musical group.\nLaibach may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55896", "revid": "41559835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55896", "title": "Peter Gabriel", "text": "British musician (born 1950)\nPeter Brian Gabriel (born 13 February 1950) is an English singer, songwriter, musician, and human rights activist. He came to prominence as the original frontman of the rock band Genesis. He left the band in 1975 and launched a solo career with \"Solsbury Hill\" as his first single. After releasing four successful studio albums, all titled \"Peter Gabriel\", his fifth studio album, \"So\" (1986), became his best-selling release and is certified triple platinum in the UK and five times platinum in the US. The album's most successful single, \"Sledgehammer\", won a record nine MTV Awards at the 1987 MTV Video Music Awards. A 2011 \"Time\" report said \"Sledgehammer\" was the most played music video of all time on MTV.\nA supporter of world music for much of his career, Gabriel co-founded the World of Music, Arts and Dance (WOMAD) festival in 1982, and has continued to produce and promote world music through his Real World Records label. He has pioneered digital distribution methods for music by co-founding OD2, one of the first online music download services. He has also been involved in numerous humanitarian efforts. In 1980, he released the anti-apartheid single \"Biko\". He has participated in several human rights benefit concerts, including Amnesty International's Human Rights Now! tour in 1988, and co-founded the human rights organisation Witness in 1992. He developed the idea for The Elders, an organisation of public figures noted as peace activists, alongside Nelson Mandela and Richard Branson in 2007.\nGabriel has won three Brit Awards, six Grammy Awards, 13 MTV Video Music Awards, the first Pioneer Award at the BT Digital Music Awards, the \"Q\" Lifetime Achievement, the Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement, and the Polar Music Prize. He was named a BMI Icon at the 57th annual BMI London Awards for his \"influence on generations of music makers\". In recognition of his human rights activism, he received the Man of Peace award from the Nobel Peace Prize laureates in 2006, and \"Time\" magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2008. AllMusic described him as \"one of rock's most ambitious, innovative musicians, as well as one of its most political\". He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Genesis in 2010, and as a solo artist in 2014. In recognition of his musical achievements, he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of South Australia in 2015.\nEarly life.\nGabriel was born in Chobham on 13 February 1950, the son of Edith Irene (n\u00e9e Allen, 1921\u20132016) and Ralph Parton Gabriel (1912\u20132012). His maternal grandfather was Colonel Edward Allen, chairman of the Civil Service Department Store on London's Strand, and his paternal grandfather was Christopher Burton Gabriel (1876\u20131947). His mother came from a musical family, while his father was an electrical engineer and dairy farm owner from a long-established family of London timber importers and merchants. He was raised at Deep Pool Farm, a Victorian manor near Chobham. His great-great-great-uncle, Sir Thomas Gabriel, 1st Baronet, was Lord Mayor of London from 1866 to 1877, who in turn was the grandson of Cornish Plane maker Christopher Gabriel. Gabriel attended the private primary school Cable House in Woking and St Andrews Preparatory School for Boys in Horsell. During his time at the latter, his teachers noticed his singing talent, but he instead opted for piano lessons from his mother and developed an interest in drumming. At age 10, he purchased a floor tom-tom.\nGabriel later remarked of his early influences, \"Hymns played quite a large part. They were the closest I came to soul music before I discovered soul music. There are certain hymns that you can scream your lungs out on, and I used to love that. It was great when you used to get the old shivers down the back.\" He wrote his first song, \"Sammy the Slug\", at age 12. An aunt gave him money for professional singing lessons around this time, but he used it to buy the Beatles' debut album \"Please Please Me\", which had just been released. In September 1963, he started at the public Charterhouse School in Godalming. There, he was a drummer and vocalist for his first band, the trad jazz outfit the Milords (or M'Lords). This was followed by a holiday band called the Spoken Word, which recorded an acetate in 1966. Gabriel played drums in both these bands, with Mike Rutherford later commenting, \"Pete was\u2014and still is, I think\u2014a frustrated drummer.\"\nCareer.\n1965\u20131975: Early career and Genesis.\nIn 1965, while still at Charterhouse, Gabriel formed the band Garden Wall with his schoolmates Tony Banks on piano, Johnny Trapman on trumpet, and Chris Stewart on drums. Banks had started at Charterhouse at the same time as Gabriel, and the two were uninterested in school activities but bonded over music and started to write songs. At their final concert before they broke up, Gabriel wore a kaftan and beads and showered the audience with petals he had picked from neighbouring gardens. Garden Wall disbanded in 1967; Gabriel and Banks were invited by their Charterhouse schoolmates Anthony Phillips and Mike Rutherford, who were in their own band at the school called Anon until it split up the previous year, to work on a demo tape of songs together. Gabriel and Banks contributed \"She Is Beautiful\", the first song they wrote together. The tape was sent to Charterhouse alumnus, musician Jonathan King, who was immediately enthusiastic largely due to Gabriel's vocals. He signed the group and suggested that their name be Gabriel's Angels, but this was unpopular with the other members, and they soon settled on his other suggestion of Genesis.\nAfter King suggested they stick to more straightforward pop, Gabriel and Banks wrote \"The Silent Sun\" as a pastiche of the Bee Gees, one of King's favourite bands. It became Genesis' first single, released in 1968, and was included on their debut studio album \"From Genesis to Revelation\" (1968). Following the commercial failure of \"From Genesis to Revelation\", the band went their separate ways, and Gabriel continued his studies at Charterhouse. In September 1969, Gabriel, Banks, Rutherford, and Phillips decided to drop their plans and make Genesis a full-time band. In early 1970, Gabriel played the flute on \"Mona Bone Jakon\" by Cat Stevens. The second studio album by Genesis, \"Trespass\" (1970), marked Gabriel expanding his musical output with the flute, accordion, tambourine, and bass drum, and incorporating his soul music influences. Gabriel explained that he was driven to play these instruments because he was uncomfortable with doing nothing during instrumental sections. He would have preferred to play keyboard instruments, but said, \"[Banks] was extraordinarily possessive about the keyboards. I'd done a bit of flute at school, I always liked the sound, and a little bit of oboe (I was an even worse oboe player, but it made a couple of good noises now and again). Then the bass drum was something physical, visual, that I could kick hard and occasionally it was in time!\" The album sold few copies, with Gabriel at one point securing a place to study at the London School of Film Technique because the band \"seemed to be dying\".\nGenesis soon recruited guitarist Steve Hackett and drummer Phil Collins. Gabriel began growing in confidence as a frontman; during an encore performance of \"The Knife\" on 19 June 1971, he took a running jump into the audience and expected them to catch him, only for them to instead move out of the way and leave him to land on the floor and break his ankle. He consequently had to perform Genesis' next several shows with a wheelchair and crutches. Also during the \"Trespass\" tour, he started to recite stories to introduce songs as a way to cover the silence while the band tuned their instruments or technical faults were being fixed. These stories were all improvised on the spot, and evolved as the tour went along. The opener of their next studio album, \"Nursery Cryme\" (1971), \"The Musical Box\", was their first song in which Gabriel incorporated a story and characters into the lyrics, as the lyrics to previous story-based Genesis songs such as \"White Mountain\" and \"One-Eyed Hound\" were all written by other members of the group. Gabriel was the primary writer of \"Harold the Barrel\", another story song on \"Nursery Cryme\", with Collins helping him on the lyrics.\nThe shows featuring \"Foxtrot\" (1972) marked a key development in Gabriel's stage performance. During a gig in Dublin in September 1972, he disappeared from the set during the instrumental section of \"The Musical Box\" and reappeared in his wife's red dress and a fox's head, mimicking the album's cover. The idea of the fox costume had been suggested to him by Paul Conroy and Glen Colson, employees of Genesis's record label, Charisma Records. Gabriel said he consulted the rest of Genesis about the fox costume but grew tired of arguing about it, but the other members all maintained that nothing was said about it beforehand and that when Gabriel came out in costume they initially mistook him for a fan invading the stage. The incident received front-page coverage in \"Melody Maker\", giving them national exposure which allowed the group to double their performance fee. One of Gabriel's stories was printed on the liner notes of their live album, \"Genesis Live\" (1973). By late 1973, following the success of \"Selling England by the Pound\" (1973), which centred on English themes and literary and materialistic references, a typical Genesis show had Gabriel wear fluorescent make-up, a cape, and bat wings for \"Watcher of the Skies\", a helmet, chest plate, and a shield for \"Dancing with the Moonlit Knight\", a crown of thorns and a flower mask for \"Supper's Ready\", and an old man mask for \"The Musical Box\".\nGabriel continued to fight for involvement with Genesis's keyboards throughout his time with the group, and following a lengthy argument with Banks, he was allowed to play a minor keyboard part on \"I Know What I Like (In Your Wardrobe)\", only for this part to be left out of the mix. \"I Know What I Like\" became Genesis's first hit single, reaching number 21 in the UK Singles Chart.\n\"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" (1974) was Gabriel's final studio album with Genesis. He devised its story of the spiritual journey of Rael, a Puerto Rican youth living in New York City, and insisted upon writing all the lyrics himself, whereas on previous albums the lyrics had been divided among all the members of Genesis. Tensions increased during this period, and Gabriel split with the band to pursue a film project with William Friedkin, only to rejoin a week later. Matters were complicated further with the difficult birth of Gabriel's first daughter, resulting in periods of time away from the band. The other members complained that Gabriel was showing a lack of commitment to the band. Gabriel saw this as a \"really unsympathetic handling of my dealing with a family crisis\" and said it caused a breakdown in his relationships with the rest of Genesis; Rutherford later admitted that they had been overly fixated on their music and were very unhelpful in what must have been a difficult time for Gabriel. Gabriel was late to deliver the lyrics, but has denied that he was too busy to write much music for the album and relied on contributions from Banks and Rutherford. Banks corroborated that Gabriel was the primary composer of the \"Lamb\" songs \"The Carpet Crawlers\" and \"The Chamber of 32 Doors\" and the sole composer of \"Counting Out Time\".\nDuring a stop in Cleveland, Ohio, early into the album's tour, Gabriel informed the band of his intention to leave at its conclusion. Rutherford recalled that they all \"could see it coming\". Music critics often focused their reviews on Gabriel's theatrics and took the band's musical performance as secondary, which irritated the rest of the band. The tour ended in May 1975, after which Gabriel wrote a piece for the press on 15 August, entitled \"Out, Angels Out\", about his departure, his disillusion with the business, and his desire to spend time with his family. The news stunned fans of the group and left commentators wondering if the band could survive without him. His exit resulted in drummer Phil Collins reluctantly taking over on lead vocals after 400 singers were fruitlessly auditioned.\n1975\u20131985: Solo debut with four self-titled albums.\nGabriel described his break from the music business as his \"learning period\", during which he took piano and music lessons. He had recorded demos by the end of 1975, the fruits of a period of writing around 20 songs with his friend Martin Hall. In 1977, Gabriel released his solo debut, \"Peter Gabriel\", which was recorded in Toronto with Bob Ezrin serving as the album's producer. Gabriel did not title his first four studio albums. All were labelled \"Peter Gabriel\", using the same typeface, with designs by Hipgnosis. \"The idea is to do it like a magazine, which will only come out once a year,\" he remarked in 1978. \"So it's the same title, the same lettering in the same place; only the photo is different.\"\n\"Peter Gabriel\" (a.k.a. \"Peter Gabriel 1: Car\") was released in February 1977 and reached No. 7 in the UK and No. 38 in the US. Its lead single, \"Solsbury Hill\", is an autobiographical song about a spiritual experience on top of Solsbury Hill in Somerset. \"It's about being prepared to lose what you have for what you might get\u00a0...\" said Gabriel. \"It's about letting go.\" Gabriel toured the album with an 80-date tour from March to November 1977 with a band that included guitarist Robert Fripp of King Crimson often playing off stage and introduced as \"Dusty Rhodes\".\nIn late 1977, Gabriel started recording the second \"Peter Gabriel\" studio album (a.k.a. \"Peter Gabriel 2: Scratch\") in the Netherlands, with Fripp as producer. Its \"Mother of Violence\" was written by Gabriel and his first wife Jill. Released in June 1978, the album went to No. 10 in the UK and No. 45 in the US. Gabriel's tour for the album lasted from August to December 1978. On this tour, Gabriel and his band shaved their heads.\nGabriel recorded the third \"Peter Gabriel\" studio album (a.k.a. \"Peter Gabriel 3: Melt\") in England in 1979. He developed an interest in African music and drum machines and later hailed the record as his artistic breakthrough. Gabriel banned the use of cymbals on the album in order to grant more sonic space for instruments like keyboards and synths. This resulted in the creation of the distinctive gated reverb, a noise processing technique which came about while recording drums on \"Intruder\", one of the tracks featuring Phil Collins. Collins implemented the reverb to great effect on his debut solo single \"In the Air Tonight\" and it has since became a signature sound of the 1980s and beyond.\nUpon completion Atlantic Records, Gabriel's US distributor who had released his first two albums, refused to put out \"Peter Gabriel 3: Melt\" as they thought it was not commercial enough. Gabriel signed a recording contract with Mercury Records. Released in May 1980, the album went to No. 1 in the UK for three weeks. In the US, it peaked at No. 22. The single \"Games Without Frontiers\" went to No. 4 and \"Biko\" went to No. 36 in the UK. After a handful of shows in 1979, Gabriel toured the album from February to October 1980. The tour marked Gabriel's first successful instance of crowd surfing (following his failed June 1971 attempt when touring with Genesis) when he fell back into the audience in a crucifix position. The stunt became a staple of his live shows.\nOn \"Peter Gabriel\" four (a.k.a. \"Peter Gabriel 4: Security\"), Gabriel took on greater responsibility over the production than before. He recorded it in 1981 and 1982, solely on digital tape, with a mobile studio parked at his home, Ashcombe House, in Somerset. Gabriel utilized a Fairlight CMI digital sampling synthesizer and incorporated electronic instrumentation with sampling world beat percussion. \"Over the course of the last two albums,\" he observed, \"I've got back into a rhythm consciousness. And the writing\u2014particularly with the invention of these drum machines\u2014is fantastic. You can store in their memories rhythms that interest you and excite you. And then the groove will carry on without you, and the groove will be exactly what you want it to be, rather than what a drummer thinks is appropriate for what you're doing.\"\nThe fourth \"Peter Gabriel\", released in September 1982, hit No. 6 in the UK and No. 28 in the US. The second single, \"Shock the Monkey\", became Gabriel's first top 40 hit in the US, reaching No. 29. To handle American distribution, Gabriel signed with Geffen Records, which\u2014initially unbeknown to Gabriel\u2014titled the album \"Security\" to differentiate it from the first three. Gabriel's 1982 tour lasted a year and became his first to make a profit. Recordings from the tour were released on Gabriel's debut live release, \"Plays Live\" (1983).\nGabriel produced versions of the third and fourth \"Peter Gabriel\" albums with German lyrics. The third consisted of the studio recordings, overdubbed with new vocals. The fourth was remixed, with several tracks extended or altered.\nIn 1983, Gabriel developed the soundtrack for Alan Parker's drama film \"Birdy\" (1984), co-produced with Daniel Lanois. This consisted of new material, without lyrics, as well as remixed instrumentals from his previous studio album.\n1985\u20131997: \"So\" and \"Us\".\nAfter finishing the soundtrack to \"Birdy\", Gabriel shifted his musical focus from rhythm and texture, as heard on \"Peter Gabriel\" four and \"Birdy\", towards more straightforward songs. In 1985, he recorded his fifth studio album, \"So\" (also co-produced with Lanois). \"So\" was released in May 1986 and reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 2 in the US. It remains Gabriel's best-selling album with over five million copies sold in the US alone. It produced one of Gabriel's signature songs, that has become a concert staple: \"In Your Eyes\", with a distinctive vocal appearance by Youssou N'Dour, and three UK top 20 singles: \"Sledgehammer\", \"Big Time\", and \"Don't Give Up\", a duet with Kate Bush.\nThe first went to No. 1 on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100, Gabriel's only single of his career to do so. It knocked \"Invisible Touch\" by Genesis, his former band, out of the top spot, which was also their only US number one hit. In the UK, the single went to No. 4. In 1990, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked \"So\" at No. 14 on its list of \"Top 100 Albums of the Eighties\".\n\"Sledgehammer\" was particularly successful, dealing with sex and sexual relations through lyrical innuendos. Its famed music video was a collaboration between director Stephen R. Johnson, Aardman Animations, and the Brothers Quay and won a record nine MTV Video Music Awards in 1987. In 1998, it was named MTV's number one animated video of all time. \"So\" earned Gabriel two wins at the 1987 Brit Awards for Best British Male Solo Artist and Best British Video (for \"Sledgehammer\"). He was nominated for four Grammy Awards: Best Male Rock Vocal Performance, Song of the Year, and Record of the Year for \"Sledgehammer\", and Album of the Year for \"So\". Gabriel toured worldwide to support \"So\" with the This Way Up Tour, from November 1986 to October 1987.\nIn 1988, Gabriel became involved as composer for Martin Scorsese's film \"The Last Temptation of Christ\" (1988). Scorsese had contacted Gabriel about the project since 1983 and wished, according to Gabriel, to present \"the struggle between the humanity and divinity of Christ in a powerful and original way\". Gabriel used musicians from WOMAD to perform instrumental pieces with focus on rhythm and African, Middle Eastern and European textures, using the National Sound Archive in London for additional inspiration. The initial plan had dedicated ten weeks for recording before it was cut to three, leaving Gabriel unable to finish all the pieces he originally wanted to record. When the film was finished, Gabriel worked on the soundtrack for an additional four months to develop more of his unfinished ideas. Its soundtrack was released as \"Passion\" in June 1989. It won Gabriel a Grammy Award for Best New Age Performance and a nomination for a Golden Globe for Best Original Score \u2013 Motion Picture. In 1990, Gabriel put out his first compilation album, \"\", which sold 2 million copies in the US.\nUp until 1989, Gabriel was managed by Gail Colson. From 1989 to 1992, Gabriel recorded his follow-up to \"So\", titled \"Us\". The album saw Gabriel address personal themes, including his failed first marriage, psychotherapy, and the growing distance between him and his eldest daughter at the time.\nGabriel's introspection within the context of the album \"Us\" can be seen in the first single release \"Digging in the Dirt\" directed by John Downer. Accompanied by a video featuring Gabriel covered in snails and various foliage, this song made reference to the psychotherapy which had taken up much of Gabriel's time since the previous studio album. Gabriel describes his struggle to get through to his daughter in \"Come Talk to Me\" directed by Matt Mahurin, which featured backing vocals by Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor. O'Connor also lent vocals to \"Blood of Eden\", directed by Nichola Bruce and Michael Coulson, the third single to be released from the album, and once again dealing with relationship struggles, this time going right back to Adam's rib for inspiration.\nThe album is one of Gabriel's most personal. It met with less success than \"So\", reaching No. 2 in the album chart on both sides of the Atlantic, and making modest chart impact with the singles \"Digging in the Dirt\" and the funkier \"Steam\", which evoked memories of \"Sledgehammer\". Gabriel followed the release of the album with the Secret World Tour, first using touring keyboardist Joy Askew to sing O'Connor's part, then O'Connor herself for a few months. O'Connor quit the tour, and was replaced by Paula Cole, the latter appearing on the tour recordings: a double album \"Secret World Live\", and a concert video also called \"Secret World Live\", both released in 1994. The film received the 1996 Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video, naming director Francois Girard and producer Robert Warr.\nGabriel employed an innovative approach in the marketing of the \"Us\" album. Not wishing to feature only images of himself, he asked artist filmmakers Nichola Bruce and Michael Coulson to co-ordinate a marketing campaign using contemporary artists. Artists such as Helen Chadwick, Rebecca Horn, Nils-Udo, Andy Goldsworthy, David Mach and Yayoi Kusama collaborated to create original artworks for each song on the multi-million-selling CD. Coulson and Bruce documented the process on Hi-8 video. Bruce left Real World and Coulson continued with the campaign, using the documentary background material as the basis for a promotional EPK, the long-form video \"All About Us\" and the interactive CD-ROM \"\".\nGabriel won three more Grammy Awards, all in the Music Video category. He won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video in 1993 and 1994 for the videos to \"Digging in the Dirt\" and \"Steam\", respectively. Gabriel also won the 1996 Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video for his \"Secret World Live\" video.\n1997\u20132009: \"OVO\" and \"Up\".\nIn 1997, Gabriel was invited to participate in the direction and soundtrack of the Millennium Dome Show, a live multimedia performance staged in the Millennium Dome in London throughout 2000. Gabriel said the team were given free rein, which contributed to the various problems they encountered with it, such as a lack of proper budgeting. He also felt that management, while succeeding to get the building finished on time, failed to understand the artistic side of the show and its content. Gabriel's soundtrack was released as \"OVO\" in June 2000. The Story of OVO was released in the CD-booklet-shaped comic book which was part of the CD edition with the title \"OVO The Millennium Show\". As part of Record Store Day 2025, OVO celebrated its 25th anniversary and was released on vinyl for the first time in limited quantity.\nAround that same time, the Genesis greatest hits album, \"\" (1999), featured Gabriel sharing vocals with Phil Collins on a new version of \"The Carpet Crawlers\" entitled \"The Carpet Crawlers 1999\", produced by Trevor Horn.\nIn 2002 he stuck with soundtrack work for his next project, scoring for the Australian film \"Rabbit-Proof Fence\" (2002) with worldbeat music. Released in June 2002, \"\" received a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Original Score \u2013 Motion Picture.\nLater in 2002, \"Up\", Gabriel's first full-length studio album in a decade, was released in September 2002. He started work on it in 1995 before production halted three years later to focus time on other projects and collaborations. Work resumed in 2000, by which time Gabriel had 130 potential songs for the album, and spent almost two years on it before management at Virgin Records pushed Gabriel to complete it. \"Up\" reached No. 9 in the US and No. 11 in the UK, and supported with a world tour with a band that included Gabriel's daughter Melanie on backing vocals. The tour was documented with two live DVDs: \"Growing Up Live\" (2003) and \"\" (2005).\nIn 2004, Gabriel met with his former Genesis bandmates to discuss the possibility of staging \"The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway\" (1974) as a reunion tour. He ultimately dismissed the idea, paving the way for Banks, Rutherford and Collins to organise the . Gabriel produced and performed at the Eden Project Live 8 concert in July 2005. He joined Cat Stevens on stage to perform \"Wild World\" during Nelson Mandela's 46664 concert. In 2005, FIFA asked Gabriel and Brian Eno to organise an opening ceremony for the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany, but FIFA cancelled the idea in January 2006. At the opening ceremony of the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Gabriel performed John Lennon's \"Imagine\".\nIn November 2006, the Seventh World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates in Rome presented Gabriel with the Man of Peace award. The award, presented by former General Secretary of the USSR and Nobel Peace Prize winner Mikhail Gorbachev and Walter Veltroni, Mayor of Rome, was an acknowledgement of Gabriel's extensive contribution and work on behalf of human rights and peace. The award was presented in the Giulio Cesare Hall of the Campidoglio in Rome. At the end of the year, he was awarded the \"Q\" magazine Lifetime Achievement Award, presented to him by American musician Moby. In an interview published in the magazine to accompany the award, Gabriel's contribution to music was described as \"vast and enduring\".\nGabriel took on a project with the BBC World Service's competition \"The Next Big Thing\" to find the world's best young band. Gabriel judged the final six young artists with William Orbit, Geoff Travis and Ang\u00e9lique Kidjo.\nIn June 2008, Gabriel released \"Big Blue Ball\", an album of various artists collaborating with each other at his Real World Studios across three summers in the 1990s. He planned its release in the US without assistance from a label; he raised \u00a32\u00a0million towards the recording and distribution of the album with Ingenious Media with the worldwide release handled through Warner Bros. Records. Gabriel appeared on a nationwide tour for the album in 2009.\nGabriel was a judge for the 6th and 8th annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists.\nGabriel contributed to the Pixar film \"WALL-E\" soundtrack in 2008 with Thomas Newman, including the film's closing song, \"Down to Earth\", for which they received the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media. The song was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song and an Academy Award for Best Original Song. In February 2009, Gabriel announced that he would not be performing on the 2008 Academy Awards telecast because producers of the show were limiting his performance of \"Down to Earth\" from \"WALL-E\" to 90 seconds. According to Gabriel, his window was reduced to 65 seconds. John Legend and the Soweto Gospel Choir performed the song in his stead.\nGabriel's 2009 tour appearances included Mexico, Argentina, Chile, Peru and Venezuela. His first ever performance in Peru was held in Lima on 20 March 2009, during his second visit to the country.\nOn 25 July 2009, he played at WOMAD Charlton Park, his only European performance of the year, to promote Witness. The show included two tracks from the then-forthcoming \"Scratch My Back\": Paul Simon's \"The Boy in the Bubble\" and the Magnetic Fields' \"The Book of Love\".\n2009\u20132019: \"Scratch My Back\", \"New Blood\" and further side projects.\nIn 2009, Gabriel recorded \"Scratch My Back\", an album of cover songs by various artists including David Bowie, Lou Reed, Arcade Fire, Radiohead, Regina Spektor and Neil Young. The original concept was for Gabriel to cover an artists' song if they, in turn, covered one of his for an album simultaneously released as \"I'll Scratch Yours\", but several participants later declined or were late to deliver and it was placed on hold. Gabriel avoided using drums and guitar in favour of orchestral arrangements, and altered his usual songwriting method by finishing the vocals first and then the song, for which he collaborated with John Metcalfe. Released in February 2010, \"Scratch My Back\" reached No. 12 in the UK. Gabriel toured worldwide with the New Blood Tour from March 2010 to July 2012 with a 54-piece orchestra and his daughter Melanie and Norwegian singer-songwriter Ane Brun on backing vocals. The follow-up, \"And I'll Scratch Yours\", was released in September 2013.\nDuring the New Blood Tour, Gabriel decided to expand on the \"Scratch My Back\" concept and, with Metcalfe's assistance, re-record a collection of his own songs with an orchestra. The result, \"New Blood\", was released in October 2011.\nIn September 2012, Gabriel kicked off his Back to Front Tour which featured \"So\" (1986) performed in its entirety with the original musicians who played on the album, to mark its 25th anniversary. When the opening leg finished a month later, Gabriel took one year off to travel the world with his children. The tour resumed with a European leg from September 2013 to December 2014.\nIn 2014, Gabriel was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist by Coldplay frontman Chris Martin. They performed Gabriel's \"Washing of the Water\" together. Gabriel performed \"Heroes\" by David Bowie with an orchestra at a concert in Berlin to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 2014.\nIn 2016, he was featured on the song \"A.I.\" by American pop rock band OneRepublic from their fourth studio album \"Oh My My\".\nIn June 2016, Gabriel released the single \"I'm Amazing\". The song was written several years prior, in part as a tribute to boxer Muhammad Ali. That month, he embarked on a joint tour with Sting titled The Rock Paper Scissors North American Tour.\nGabriel re-emerged in 2019 with the release of \"Rated PG\", a compilation of songs that were created for film soundtracks throughout his career. The song selection spans over 30 years and includes tracks that had never been released on an official Gabriel album previously, including \"Down to Earth\" (from \"WALL-E\") and \"That'll Do\" (from \"\"), an Oscar-nominated collaboration with Randy Newman. Initially only released on vinyl for Record Store Day on 13 April, the album was eventually released on digital streaming services later that month. Later that same year, Gabriel issued another digital release on 13 September titled \"Flotsam and Jetsam\", a collection of B-sides, remixes and rarities that span Gabriel's entire solo career from 1976 to 2016, including his first solo recording, a cover of the Beatles' song \"Strawberry Fields Forever\".\n2022\u2013present: \"I/O\" and \"O/I\".\nBy 2002, Gabriel had been continually working on what he had given the tentative title of \"I/O\", his tenth studio album, which he had begun work on as early as 1995. It was originally set to be released 18 months after \"Up\", but touring pushed the release far away. He did an interview with \"Rolling Stone\" in 2005 stating that he had 150 songs in various stages. From 2013 to 2016, he posted regularly on social media about recording the new album. In 2019, he spoke on BBC Radio 6 about how he had taken a hiatus from making music due to his wife being sick, but he had begun to return to it now that she had recovered. In 2021, he was interviewed multiple times about his new album, and revealed that he had been recording with Manu Katch\u00e9, Tony Levin and David Rhodes on 17 new songs. He posted multiple photos to his Facebook and Instagram of these sessions. In June 2022, Katch\u00e9 told the French magazine \"L'Illustr\u00e9\" that the album was nearly complete and would be released later that year, pending an official announcement.\nIn November 2022, Gabriel announced his upcoming \"I/O The Tour\" for the spring of 2023 across several European cities, with later dates to be confirmed for the North America leg of the tour for the late summer/fall of 2023. This announcement also confirmed the name of the upcoming album to be stylised as \"I/O\". The first single from the album, \"Panopticom\", was released digitally on 6 January 2023. A new piece from the album will be released on the date of each full moon in 2023, as well as a different mix of the song on each new moon in 2023, starting with the Dark Side Mix of \"Panopticom\". On 5 February, Gabriel released \"The Court\", the second single from the album. On 7 March, Gabriel released the third single, \"Playing for Time\". A basic arrangement of the song featuring only Gabriel on piano and Levin on bass had already opened the shows on the Back to Front Tour, by the name of \"Daddy Long Legs\". The title track \"I/O\" was the fourth single released on 6 April. On 5 May, Peter Gabriel released the fifth single from the album, \"Four Kinds of Horses\", a track which is a collaboration with Brian Eno and Richard Russell. The sixth single, \"Road to Joy\", was released on 4 June. Six more singles were released, separately, within the next six months\u2014\"So Much\", \"Olive Tree\", \"Love Can Heal\", \"This Is Home\", \"And Still\" and \"Live and Let Live\"\u2014before \"I/O\" was finally released on 1 December 2023.\nOne day prior to \"I/O\"'s release, Gabriel told \"The New York Times\" that he does not expect a follow-up album (which he described as his \"brain project\") to take another 21 years, saying that \"there's a lot of stuff in the can\" but added that the material is not yet finished.\nAdditionally, Gabriel stated in his November 2023 Full Moon update video that the track \"What Lies Ahead\" will be on \"the next record\". He performed \"What Lies Ahead\" several times in 2023 and it was a contender for \"I/O\". In February 2025, Gabriel revealed to \"Mojo\" that he was working on the follow-up to \"I/O\": \"It will be called \"O/I\" [...] that's \"I/O\" backwards.\"\nArtistry.\nStylistically, Gabriel's music has been alternately described by music writers as progressive rock, art rock, art pop, worldbeat, post-progressive and progressive soul. According to \"Rolling Stone\" journalist Ryan Reed, Gabriel has developed in all as an \"art-rock innovator, soul-pop craftsman, [and] 'world music' ambassador\" over the course of his career, while music scholar Gregg Akkermann argues that, despite his progressive rock origins, he has \"managed to attract fans from across the spectrum: prog rock, alternative rock, world beat, blue-eyed soul, dance music, the college crowd, the teens, Americans and Europeans\". More broadly, AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine says Gabriel emerged during the 1980s as \"one of rock's most ambitious, innovative musicians\", as well as \"an international pop star\".\nGabriel has worked with a relatively stable crew of musicians and recording engineers throughout his solo career. Bass and Stick player Tony Levin has performed on every Gabriel studio album and every live tour except for \"Scratch My Back\" (2010), the soundtracks \"Passion\" (1989) and \"Long Walk Home\" (2002), and the New Blood Tour. Guitarist David Rhodes has been Gabriel's guitarist of choice since 1979. Prior to \"So\" (1986), Jerry Marotta was Gabriel's preferred drummer, both in the studio and on the road. (For the \"So\" and \"Us\" albums and tours Marotta was replaced by Manu Katch\u00e9, who was then replaced by Ged Lynch on parts of the \"Up\" album and all of the subsequent tour). Gabriel is known for choosing top-flight collaborators, from co-producers such as Ezrin, Fripp, Lillywhite and Lanois to musicians such as Natalie Merchant, Elizabeth Fraser, L. Shankar, Trent Reznor, Youssou N'Dour, Larry Fast, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan, Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor, Kate Bush, Ane Brun, Paula Cole, John Giblin, Dave Gregory, Peter Hammill, Papa Wemba, Manu Katch\u00e9, Bayete, Milton Nascimento, Phil Collins, Stewart Copeland and OneRepublic.\nOver the years, Gabriel has collaborated with singer Kate Bush several times; Bush provided backing vocals for Gabriel's \"Games Without Frontiers\" and \"No Self Control\" in 1980, and female lead vocal for \"Don't Give Up\" (a top 10 hit in the UK) in 1986, and Gabriel appeared on her television special. Their duet of Roy Harper's \"Another Day\" was discussed for release as a single, but never appeared.\nHe also collaborated with avant-garde artist Laurie Anderson on two versions of her composition \"Excellent Birds\"\u2014one for her second album \"Mister Heartbreak\" (1984), and another version called \"This is the Picture (Excellent Birds)\", which appeared on original cassette and CD versions, and all versions past 2002, of \"So\".\nGabriel sang (along with Jim Kerr of Simple Minds) on \"Everywhere I Go\", from the Call's 1986 studio album, \"Reconciled\". On Toni Childs' 1994 studio album, \"The Woman's Boat\", Gabriel sang on the track, \"I Met a Man\".\nIn 1998, Gabriel appeared on the soundtrack of \"\" as the lead vocalist of the song \"That'll Do\", written by Randy Newman. The song was nominated for an Academy Award, and Gabriel and Newman performed it at the following year's Oscar telecast. He performed a similar soundtrack appearance for the 2004 film \"Shall We Dance?\", singing a cover version of \"The Book of Love\" by the Magnetic Fields.\nIn 1987, Gabriel appeared on Robbie Robertson's self-titled solo studio album, singing on \"Fallen Angel\"; co-wrote two Tom Robinson singles; and appeared on Joni Mitchell's 1988 studio album \"Chalk Mark in a Rain Storm\", on the opening track \"My Secret Place\".\nIn 2001, Gabriel contributed lead vocals to the song \"When You're Falling\" on Afro Celt Sound System's \"\". In the summer of 2003, Gabriel performed in Ohio with a guest performance by Uzbek singer Sevara Nazarkhan.\nGabriel collaborated on tracks with electronic musician BT, who also worked on the \"OVO\" soundtrack with him. The tracks were never released, as the computers they were contained on were stolen from BT's home in California. He also sang the lyrics for Deep Forest on their theme song for the movie \"Strange Days\" (1995). In addition, Gabriel has appeared on Angelique Kidjo's 2007 studio album \"Djin Djin\", singing on the song \"Salala\".\nGabriel has recorded a cover of the Vampire Weekend single \"Cape Cod Kwassa Kwassa\" with Hot Chip, where his name is mentioned several times in the chorus. He substitutes the original line \"But this feels so unnatural / Peter Gabriel too / This feels so unnatural/ Peter Gabriel too\" with \"It feels so unnatural / Peter Gabriel too / and it feels so unnatural / to sing your own name.\"\nGabriel collaborated with Arcade Fire on their 2022 studio album, \"We\". He sang backing vocals on the track \"Unconditional II (Race and Religion)\".\nWOMAD and other projects.\nGabriel's interest in world music was first apparent on his third solo studio album. According to Spencer Kornhaber in \"The Atlantic\" in 2019: \"When Peter Gabriel moved toward 'world music' four decades ago, he not only evangelized sounds that were novel to Western pop. He also set a radio template: majestic, with flourishes meant to read as 'exotic,' and lyrics meant to change lives.\" This influence has increased over time, and he co-founded the World of Music, Arts and Dance (WOMAD) festival in 1982. Gabriel said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first time I really got into music from another culture was as a result of the shifting of Radio 4, which I used to wake up to. I'd lost it on medium wave and was groping around in the morning on the dial, trying to find something that I could listen to, and came across a Dutch radio station who were playing the soundtrack from some obscure Stanley Baker movie called \"Dingaka\". That had quite a lot of stuff from\u2014I think it was\u2014Ghana. I can't remember now, but it really moved me. One of the songs I heard on that was a thing called 'Shosholoza', which I recorded on the b-side of the 'Biko' single.\nGabriel created the Real World Studios and record label to facilitate the creation and distribution of such music by various artists, and he has worked to educate Western culture about such musicians as Yungchen Lhamo, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and Youssou N'dour.\nIn the 1990s, with Steve Nelson of Brilliant Media and director Michael Coulson, he developed advanced multimedia CD-ROM-based entertainment projects, creating \"Xplora\" (the world's largest-selling music CD-ROM), and subsequently the \"\" CD-ROM. \"EVE\" was a music and art adventure game directed by Michael Coulson and co-produced by the Starwave Corporation in Seattle; it won the Milia d'Or award Grand Prize at the Cannes in 1996.\nIn 1990, Gabriel lent his backing vocals to Ugandan political exile Geoffrey Oryema's \"Land of Anaka\", appearing on Oryema's first studio album \"Exile\", released on Gabriel's Real World label.\nIn 1994, Gabriel starred in Breck Eisner's short film \"Recon\" as a detective who enters the minds of murder victims to find their killer's identity.\nGabriel helped pioneer a new realm of musical interaction in 2001, visiting Georgia State University's Language Research Center to participate in keyboard jam sessions with bonobo apes from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. (This experience inspired the song \"Animal Nation\", which was performed on Gabriel's 2002 \"Growing Up\" tour and was featured on the \"Growing Up Live\" DVD and \"The Wild Thornberrys Movie\" soundtrack.) Gabriel's desire to bring attention to the intelligence of primates also took the form of ApeNet, a project that aimed to link great apes through the internet, enabling the first interspecies internet communication.\nGabriel was one of the founders of on Demand Distribution (OD2), one of the first online music download services. Prior to its closure in 2009, its technology had been used by over 100 music download sites including MSN Music UK, MyCokeMusic, Planet Internet (KPN), Wanadoo and CD WOW!. OD2 was bought by US company Loudeye in June 2004 and subsequently by Finnish mobile giant Nokia in October 2006 for $60\u00a0million.\nGabriel is co-founder (with Brian Eno) of a musicians union called Mudda, short for \"magnificent union of digitally downloading artists\".\nIn 2000, Gabriel collaborated with Zucchero, Anggun and others in a charity for kids with AIDS. Erick Benzi wrote words and music and Patrick Bruel, Stephan Eicher, Faudel, Lokua Kanza, Laam, Nourith, Axelle Red have accepted to sing it.\nIn 2003, Gabriel contributed a song for the video game \"Uru: Ages Beyond Myst\". In 2004, Gabriel contributed another song (\"Curtains\") and contributed voice work on another game in the Myst franchise, \"\".\nIn June 2005, Gabriel and broadcast industry entrepreneur David Engelke purchased Solid State Logic, a manufacturer of mixing consoles and digital audio workstations. In 2017, the company was sold to the Audiotonix Group.\nIn May 2008, Gabriel's Real World Studios, in partnership with Bowers &amp; Wilkins, started the Bowers &amp; Wilkins Music Club\u2014later known as Society of Sound\u2014a subscription-based music retail site. Albums are currently available in either Apple Lossless or FLAC format.\nGabriel is one of the founding supporters of the annual global event Asteroid Day.\nActivist for humanitarian causes.\nIn 1986, Gabriel started what has become a longstanding association with Amnesty International, becoming a pioneering participant in all 28 of Amnesty's \"Human rights concerts\"\u2014a series of music events and tours staged by the US Section of Amnesty International between 1986 and 1998. He performed during the six-concert \"A Conspiracy of Hope\" US tour in June 1986; the twenty-concert \"Human Rights Now!\" world tour in 1988; the \"Chile: Embrace of Hope Concert\" in 1990 and at \"The Paris Concert for Amnesty International\" in 1998. He also performed in Amnesty's \"Secret Policeman's Ball\" benefit shows in collaboration with other artists and friends such as Lou Reed, David Gilmour of Pink Floyd and Youssou N'Dour; Gabriel closed those concerts performing his anti-apartheid anthem \"Biko\".\nHe spoke of his support for Amnesty on NBC's \"Today Show\" in 1986.\nGabriel has a longstanding interest in human rights and launched Witness, a charity that trains human rights activists to use video and online technologies to expose human rights abuses. In 2006, his work with Witness and his long-standing support of peace and human rights causes was recognised by the Nobel Peace Prize Laureates with the Man of Peace award. In November 2007, Witness launched The Hub, a participatory media site for human rights.\nIn 1995, Gabriel and Cape Verdean human rights activist Vera Duarte were awarded the North\u2013South Prize in its inaugural year.\nIn the late 1990s, Gabriel and entrepreneur Richard Branson discussed with Nelson Mandela their idea of a small, dedicated group of leaders, working objectively and without any vested personal interest to solve difficult global conflicts. On 18 July 2007, in Johannesburg, South Africa, Nelson Mandela announced the formation of a new group, The Elders, in a speech he delivered on the occasion of his 89th birthday. Kofi Annan served as Chair of the Elders and Gro Harlem Brundtland as deputy chair. The other members of the group are Martti Ahtisaari, Ela Bhatt, Lakhdar Brahimi, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Jimmy Carter, Hina Jilani, Gra\u00e7a Machel, Mary Robinson and Ernesto Zedillo. Desmond Tutu was an Honorary Elder, as was Nelson Mandela. The Elders is independently funded by a group of donors, including Branson and Gabriel, and use their collective skills to catalyse peaceful resolutions to long-standing conflicts, articulate new approaches to global issues that are causing or may later cause immense human suffering, and share wisdom by helping to connect voices all over the world. They work together to consider carefully which specific issues to approach.\nIn September 2008, Gabriel was named as the recipient of Amnesty International's 2008 \"Ambassador of Conscience Award\". In the same month, he received Quadriga \"United We Care\" award of Werkstatt Deutschland along with Boris Tadi\u0107, Eckart H\u00f6fling and Wikipedia. The award was presented to him by Queen Silvia of Sweden.\nIn 2010, Gabriel lent his support to the campaign to release Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, an Iranian Azeri woman who was sentenced to death by stoning after being convicted of committing adultery.\nIn December 2013, Gabriel posted a video message in tribute to the deceased former South African president and anti-apartheid leader Nelson Mandela. Gabriel was quoted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To come out of 27 years in jail and to immediately set about building a Rainbow Nation with your sworn enemy is a unique and extraordinary example of courage and forgiveness. In this case, Mandela had seen many of his people beaten, imprisoned and murdered, yet he was still willing to trust the humanity and idealism of those who had been the oppressors, without whom he knew he could not achieve an almost peaceful transition of power. There is no other example of such inspirational leadership in my lifetime.\nGabriel has criticised Air France for their continued transport of monkeys to laboratories. In a letter to the airline, Gabriel wrote that in laboratories, \"primates are violently force-fed chemicals, inflicted with brain damage, crippled, addicted to cocaine or alcohol, deprived of food and water, or psychologically tormented and ultimately killed.\"\nIn March 2014, Gabriel publicly supported #withsyria, a campaign to rally support for victims of the Syrian Civil War.\nIn November 2014, Gabriel, along with Pussy Riot and Iron &amp; Wine supported Hong Kong protesters at Hong Kong's Lennon Wall in their efforts.\nIn March 2015, Gabriel was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of South Australia in recognition of his commitment to creativity and its transformational power in building peace and understanding.\nHe composed the song \"The Veil\" for Oliver Stone's film \"Snowden\" (2016).\nPolitical views.\nGabriel has been described as one of rock's most political musicians by AllMusic. In 1992, on the 20th anniversary of the Bloody Sunday massacre, Gabriel joined Peter Hain, Jeremy Corbyn, Tony Benn, Ken Loach, John Pilger and Adrian Mitchell in voicing his support for a demonstration in London calling for British withdrawal from Northern Ireland.\nAt the 1997 general election, he declared his support for the Labour Party, which won that election by a landslide after 18 years out of power, led by Tony Blair. In 1998, he was named in a list of the biggest private financial donors to Labour. He subsequently distanced himself from the Labour government following Blair's support for George W. Bush and Britain's involvement in the Iraq War, which he strongly opposed. Gabriel later explained his decision for funding Labour, saying, \"after all those years of Thatcher, that was the only time I've put money into a political party because I wanted to help get rid of the Tory government of that time.\"\nAt the 2005 general election, Gabriel gave a Green Party of England and Wales candidate special permission to record a cover of his song \"Don't Give Up\" for his campaign. In 2010, \"The Guardian\" described Gabriel as \"a staunch advocate of proportional representation\". In 2013, he stated that he had become more interested in online petitioning organisations to effect change than traditional party politics.\nIn 2012, Gabriel condemned the use of his music by the American conservative talk radio personality Rush Limbaugh during a controversial segment in which Limbaugh vilified Georgetown University law student Sandra Fluke. A statement on behalf of Gabriel read: \"Peter was appalled to learn that his music was linked to Rush Limbaugh's extraordinary attack on Sandra Fluke. It is obvious from anyone that knows Peter's work that he would never approve such a use. He has asked his representatives to make sure his music is withdrawn and especially from these unfair, aggressive and ignorant comments.\"\nIn 2016, Gabriel supported the UK's continued membership of the European Union in the referendum on the issue.\nGabriel has declared his support for the two-state solution to the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. In 2014, he contributed songs to a new compilation album to raise funds for humanitarian organisations aiding Palestinian Arabs in Gaza. Gabriel was quoted: \"I am certain that Israelis and Palestinians will both benefit from a two-state solution based on the 1967 borders. We have watched Palestinians suffer for too long, especially in Gaza. I am not, and never was, anti-Israeli or anti-Semitic, but I oppose the policy of the Israeli government, oppose injustice and oppose the occupation ... I am proud to be one of the voices asking the Israeli government: 'Where is the two-state solution that you wanted so much?' and clearly say that enough is enough.\" In 2019, Gabriel was among 50 artists who urged the BBC to ask for the Eurovision Song Contest to be moved out of Israel, citing human rights concerns. In 2023, Gabriel signed the Artists4Ceasefire open letter to President Joe Biden calling for a ceasefire during the Gaza war.\nGabriel has been in support of the Armenian genocide recognition. In October 2020, he posted a message on social media in support of Armenia and Artsakh in regards to the Nagorno-Karabakh war. He said, \"The fighting that has now broken out between Azerbaijan and Armenia is really horrific and we need to lobby whoever we can to encourage a ceasefire, but hearing reports that President Erdo\u011fan has now lined up 80,000 Turkish troops on the Armenian border is a terrifying prospect, full of the dark echoes of history.\"\nIn popular culture.\nGabriel's music featured prominently on the popular 1980s television show \"Miami Vice\". The songs include \"The Rhythm of the Heat\" and \"Biko\" (from \"Evan\"), \"Red Rain\" (from \"Stone's War\"), \"Mercy Street\" (from \"Killshot\"), \"Sledgehammer\" (from \"Better Living Through Chemistry\"), \"We Do What We're Told (Milgram's 37)\" (from \"Forgive Us Our Debts\" and \"Deliver Us from Evil\") and \"Don't Give Up\" (from \"Redemption in Blood\"). With seven songs used total, Gabriel had the most music featured by a solo artist in the series, and he is the only artist to have had a song used in four of Vice's five seasons. Five of the nine tracks on his most popular album \"So\" (1986) were used in the series.\nGabriel\u2019s song \"In Your Eyes\" features twice in the teen romance drama \"Say Anything\" (1989). It is the song playing on Lloyd Dobler\u2019s boombox as he serenades Diane, creating the film\u2019s most iconic scene.\nGabriel's cover of David Bowie's \"Heroes\" was featured in the fourth season finale of \"Big Love\", as well as the first season and the ending scene of \"Stranger Things\" season 3 and the ending credits of \"Lone Survivor\". The song also features in 'Children of Mars', a 2020 episode of the web series \"\".\nA series of spoof documentaries about the fictitious rock star Brian Pern were based loosely on Gabriel.\nIn 2021, Northern Irish post-punk band Invaderband released their second studio album entitled 'Peter Gabriel'. The sleeve was a painting of Gabriel by Luke Haines.\nPersonal life.\nGabriel has married twice and has four children. In 1971, at age 21, he married Jill Moore, daughter of Baron Philip Moore. They had two daughters, one of whom, Anna-Marie, is a filmmaker who filmed and directed Gabriel's live DVDs \"Growing Up on Tour: A Family Portrait\" (2003), \"\" (2005) and some of his music videos. Melanie is a musician who had been a backing vocalist in her father's band in 2002\u20132011. Both daughters appear in the final sequence of the video for their father's song \"Sledgehammer\".\nGabriel's marriage became increasingly strained, culminating in Moore's affair with David Lord, the co-producer of Gabriel's fourth studio album. After the couple divorced in 1987, Gabriel fell into a period of depression and attended therapy sessions for six years.\nFor a time after his divorce, Gabriel lived with American actress Rosanna Arquette. In 2021, Irish singer Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor said that she maintained an on-and-off relationship with Gabriel in the wake of his divorce. She ended the relationship because of her frustration with his lack of commitment, which inspired her single \"Thank You for Hearing Me\".\nGabriel married Meabh Flynn in 2002, with whom he has two sons.\nGabriel has resided in Wiltshire for many years and runs Real World Studios from Box, Wiltshire. He previously lived in the Woolley Valley near Bath, Somerset. In 2010, he joined a campaign to stop agricultural development in the valley, which had also inspired his first solo single, \"Solsbury Hill\", in 1977.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nSoundtracks\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55897", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55897", "title": "Dubrovnik, Croatia", "text": ""}
{"id": "55898", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55898", "title": "Ragusa", "text": "Ragusa may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "55899", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55899", "title": "Flare Technology", "text": "Defunct computer hardware company\nFlare Technology was a computer hardware company based in Cambridge, United Kingdom. It was founded in 1986 by Martin Brennan, Ben Cheese, and John Mathieson, former engineers at Sinclair Research.\nHistory.\nFlare Technology first worked for Amstrad before developing a technology-demonstrator system called Flare One. The Flare One was intended as a home computer or games console with extensive audio and video capabilities.\nRelated to the \"Loki\" project they had worked on previously at Sinclair Research, which in turn was derived from the ZX Spectrum home computer, Flare One was based around a Zilog Z80B CPU (working as an 8-bit-per-pixel blitter and a video controller) and a custom 16-bit DSP chip (responsible for 8 channel sound and 3D computation), 1 MB or RAM, with a display resolution of 256 x 256 with 256 colors or 512 x 256 with 16 colors, and an expected price of \u00a3200 in 1988.\nFlare One was used in some arcade game cabinets including a line of video quiz machines produced by Bellfruit (\"A Question of Sport,\" \"Beeline\", \"Every Second Counts\", \"Inquizitor\", \"Quizvaders\"\u00a0 and \"Treble Top\"). The Flare One chipset was further developed into the Konix Multisystem \"Slipstream\" prototype.\nIn 1989 Martin Brennan was contracted by Atari Corp. to complete and implement the chip design of the unreleased Atari Panther.\nMartin Brennan and John Mathieson went on to design the Flare II, which was purchased by Atari and became Atari Jaguar."}
{"id": "55900", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55900", "title": "Karlowitz", "text": ""}
{"id": "55901", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55901", "title": "Carlowitz", "text": ""}
{"id": "55902", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55902", "title": "Karloca", "text": ""}
{"id": "55903", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55903", "title": "Sremski Karlovci, Yugoslavia", "text": ""}
{"id": "55904", "revid": "49983941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55904", "title": "Belgrade", "text": "Capital and largest city of Serbia\nBelgrade is the capital and largest city of Serbia. It is located at the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers and at the crossroads of the Pannonian Plain and the Balkan Peninsula. According to the 2022 census[ [update]], the population of Belgrade city proper stands at 1,197,114, its contiguous urban area has 1,298,661 inhabitants, while population of city's administrative area (which roughly corresponds to its metro area) totals 1,681,405 people. It is one of the major cities of Southeast Europe and the third-most populous city on the river Danube.\nBelgrade is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in Europe and the world. One of the most important prehistoric cultures of Europe, the Vin\u010da culture, evolved within the Belgrade area in the 6th millennium BC. In antiquity, Thraco-Dacians inhabited the region and, after 279 BC, Celts settled the city, naming it \"Singid\u016bn\". It was conquered by the Romans under the reign of Augustus and awarded Roman city rights in the mid-2nd century. It was settled by the Slavs in the 520s, and changed hands several times between the Byzantine Empire, the Frankish Empire, the Bulgarian Empire, and the Kingdom of Hungary before it became the seat of the Serbian king Stefan Dragutin in 1284. Belgrade served as capital of the Serbian Despotate during the reign of Stefan Lazarevi\u0107, and then his successor \u0110ura\u0111 Brankovi\u0107 returned it to the Hungarian king in 1427. Noon bells in support of the Hungarian army against the Ottoman Empire during the siege in 1456 have remained a widespread church tradition to this day. In 1521, Belgrade was conquered by the Ottomans and became the seat of the Sanjak of Smederevo. It frequently passed from Ottoman to Habsburg rule, which saw the destruction of most of the city during the Ottoman\u2013Habsburg wars.\nFollowing the Serbian Revolution, Belgrade was once again named the capital of Serbia in 1841. Northern Belgrade remained the southernmost Habsburg post until 1918, when it was attached to the city, due to former Austro-Hungarian territories becoming part of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes after World War I. Belgrade was the capital of Yugoslavia from its creation to its dissolution. In a fatally strategic position, the city has been battled over in 115 wars and razed 44 times, being bombed five times and besieged many times.\nBeing Serbia's primate city, Belgrade has special administrative status within Serbia. It is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and government ministries, as well as home to almost all of the largest Serbian companies, media, and scientific institutions. Belgrade is classified as a Beta-Global City. The city is home to the University Clinical Centre of Serbia, a hospital complex with one of the largest capacities in the world; the Church of Saint Sava, one of the largest Orthodox church buildings; and the Belgrade Arena, one of the largest capacity indoor arenas in Europe.\nBelgrade hosted major international events such as the Danube River Conference of 1948, the first Non-Aligned Movement Summit (1961), the first major gathering of the OSCE (1977\u20131978), the Eurovision Song Contest (2008), as well as sports events such as the first FINA World Aquatics Championships (1973), UEFA Euro (1976), Summer Universiade (2009) and EuroBasket three times (1961, 1975, 2005). On 21 June 2023, Belgrade was confirmed host of the BIE- Specialized Exhibition Expo 2027.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nChipped stone tools found in Zemun show that the area around Belgrade was inhabited by nomadic foragers in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic eras. Some of these tools are of Mousterian industry\u2014belonging to Neanderthals rather than modern humans. Aurignacian and Gravettian tools have also been discovered near the area, indicating some settlement between 50,000 and 20,000 years ago. The first farming people to settle in the region are associated with the Neolithic Star\u010devo culture, which flourished between 6200 and 5200 BC. There are several Star\u010devo sites in and around Belgrade, including the eponymous site of Star\u010devo. The Star\u010devo culture was succeeded by the Vin\u010da culture (5500\u20134500 BC), a more sophisticated farming culture that grew out of the earlier Star\u010devo settlements and also named for a site in the Belgrade region (Vin\u010da-Belo Brdo). The Vin\u010da culture is known for its very large settlements, one of the earliest settlements by continuous habitation and some of the largest in prehistoric Europe. Also associated with the Vin\u010da culture are anthropomorphic figurines such as the Lady of Vin\u010da, the earliest known copper metallurgy in Europe, and a proto-writing form developed prior to the Sumerians and Minoans known as the Old European script, which dates back to around 5300 BC. Within the city proper, on Cetinjska Street, a skull of a Paleolithic human dated to before 5000 BC was discovered in 1890.\nAntiquity.\nEvidence of early knowledge about Belgrade's geographical location comes from a variety of ancient myths and legends. The ridge overlooking the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers, for example, has been identified as one of the places in the story of Jason and the Argonauts. In the time of antiquity, too, the area was populated by Paleo-Balkan tribes, including the Thracians and the Dacians, who ruled much of Belgrade's surroundings. Specifically, Belgrade was at one point inhabited by the Thraco-Dacian tribe Singi; following Celtic invasion in 279 BC, the Scordisci wrested the city from their hands, naming it \"Singid\u016bn\" (\"d|\u016bn\", fortress). In 34\u201333 BC, the Roman army reached Belgrade. It became the romanised \"Singidunum\" in the 1st century AD and, by the mid-2nd century, the city was proclaimed a \"municipium\" by the Roman authorities, evolving into a full-fledged \"colonia\" (the highest city class) by the end of the century. While the first Christian Emperor of Rome\u2014Constantine I, also known as Constantine the Great\u2014was born in the territory of Naissus to the city's south, Roman Christianity's champion, Flavius Iovianus (Jovian/Jovan), was born in Singidunum. Jovian reestablished Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, ending the brief revival of traditional Roman religions under his predecessor Julian the Apostate. In 395\u00a0AD, the site passed to the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire. Across the Sava from Singidunum was the Celtic city of Taurunum (Zemun); the two were connected with a bridge throughout Roman and Byzantine times.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 442, the area was ravaged by Attila the Hun. In 471, it was taken by Theodoric the Great, king of the Ostrogoths, who continued into Italy. As the Ostrogoths left, another Germanic tribe, the Gepids, invaded the city. In 539, it was retaken by the Byzantines. In 577, some 100,000 Slavs poured into Thrace and Illyricum, pillaging cities and more permanently settling the region.\nThe Avars, under Bayan I, conquered the whole region and its new Slavic population by 582. Following Byzantine reconquest, the Byzantine chronicle \"De Administrando Imperio\" mentions the White Serbs, who had stopped in Belgrade on their way back home, asking the \"strategos\" for lands; they received provinces in the west, towards the Adriatic, which they would rule as subjects to Heraclius (610\u2013641). In 829, Khan Omurtag was able to add Singidunum and its environs to the First Bulgarian Empire. The first record of the name \"Belograd\" appeared on April, 16th, 878, in a Papal missive to Bulgarian ruler Boris I. This name would appear in several variants: \"Alba Bulgarica\" in Latin, \"Griechisch Weissenburg\" in High German, \"N\u00e1ndorfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r\" in Hungarian, and \"Castelbianco\" in Venetian, among other names, all variations of 'white fortress' or 'Bulgar white fortress'. For about four centuries, the city would become a battleground between the Byzantine Empire, the medieval Kingdom of Hungary, and the Bulgarian Empire. Basil II (976\u20131025) installed a garrison in Belgrade. The city hosted the armies of the First and the Second Crusade, but, while passing through during the Third Crusade, Frederick Barbarossa and his 190,000 crusaders saw Belgrade in ruins.\nKing Stefan Dragutin (r. 1276\u20131282) received Belgrade from his father-in-law, Stephen V of Hungary, in 1284, and it served as the capital of the Kingdom of Syrmia, a vassal state to the Kingdom of Hungary. Dragutin (Hungarian: \"Dragutin Istv\u00e1n\") is regarded as the first Serbian king to rule over Belgrade.\nFollowing the battles of Maritsa (1371) and Kosovo field (1389), Moravian Serbia, to Belgrade's south, began to fall to the Ottoman Empire.\nThe northern regions of what is now Serbia persisted as the Serbian Despotate, with Belgrade as its capital. The city flourished under Stefan Lazarevi\u0107, the son of Serbian prince Lazar Hrebeljanovi\u0107. Lazarevi\u0107 built a castle with a citadel and towers, of which only the Despot's tower and the west wall remain. He also refortified the city's ancient walls, allowing the Despotate to resist Ottoman conquest for almost 70 years. During this time, Belgrade was a haven for many Balkan peoples fleeing Ottoman rule, and is thought to have had a population ranging between 40,000 and 50,000 people.\nIn 1427, Stefan's successor \u0110ura\u0111 Brankovi\u0107, returning Belgrade to the Hungarian king, made Smederevo his new capital. Even though the Ottomans had captured most of the Serbian Despotate, Belgrade, known as N\u00e1ndorfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r in Hungarian, was unsuccessfully besieged in 1440 and 1456. As the city presented an obstacle to the Ottoman advance into Hungary and further, over 100,000 Ottoman soldiers besieged it in 1456, in which the Christian army led by the Hungarian General John Hunyadi successfully defended it. The \"noon bell\" ordered by Pope Callixtus III commemorates the victory throughout the Christian world to this day, which is now a cultural symbol of Hungary.\nOttoman rule and Austrian invasions.\nSeven decades after the initial siege, on 28 August 1521, the fort was finally captured by Suleiman the Magnificent with 250,000 Turkish soldiers and over 100 ships. Subsequently, most of the city was razed to the ground and its entire Orthodox Christian population was deported to Istanbul to an area that has since become known as the Belgrade forest.\nBelgrade was made the seat of the Pashalik of Belgrade (also known as the Sanjak of Smederevo), and quickly became the second largest Ottoman town in Europe at over 100,000 people, surpassed only by Constantinople. Ottoman rule introduced Ottoman architecture, including numerous mosques, and the city was resurrected\u2014now by Oriental influences.\nIn 1594, a major Serb rebellion was crushed by the Ottomans. In retribution, Grand Vizier Sinan Pasha ordered the relics of Saint Sava to be publicly torched on the Vra\u010dar plateau; in the 20th century, the church of Saint Sava was built to commemorate this event.\nOccupied by the Habsburgs three times (1688\u20131690, 1717\u20131739, 1789\u20131791), headed by the Holy Roman Princes Maximilian of Bavaria and Eugene of Savoy, and field marshal Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon, respectively, Belgrade was quickly recaptured by the Ottomans and substantially razed each time. During this period, the city was affected by the two Great Serbian Migrations, in which hundreds of thousands of Serbs, led by two Serbian Patriarchs, retreated together with the Austrian soldiers into the Habsburg Empire, settling in today's Vojvodina and Slavonia.\nPrincipality and Kingdom of Serbia.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, Belgrade was predominantly inhabited by a Muslim population. Traces of Ottoman rule and architecture\u2014such as mosques and bazaars, were to remain a prominent part of Belgrade's townscape into the 19th century; several decades, even, after Serbia was granted autonomy from the Ottoman Empire.\nDuring the First Serbian Uprising, Serbian revolutionaries held the city from 8 January 1807 until 1813, when it was retaken by the Ottomans. In 1807, Turks in Belgrade were massacred and forcefully converted to Christianity. The massacre was encouraged by Russia in order to cement divisions between the Serb rebels and the Porte. Around 6,000 Muslims and Jews were forcibly converted to Christianity. Most mosques were converted into churches. Muslims, Jews, Aromanians and Greeks were\nsubjected to forced labour, and Muslim women were widely made available to young Serb men, and some were taken into slavery. Milenko Stojkovi\u0107 bought many of them, and established his harem for which he gained fame. In this circumstances Belgrade demographically transformed from Ottoman to Serb. After the Second Serbian Uprising in 1815, Serbia achieved some sort of sovereignty, which was formally recognised by the Porte in 1830.\nThe development of Belgrade architecture after 1815 can be divided into four periods. In the first phase, which lasted from 1815 to 1835, the dominant architectural style was still of a Balkan character, with substantial Ottoman influence. At the same time, an interest in joining the European mainstream allowed Central and Western European architecture to flourish. Between 1835 and 1850, the amount of neoclassicist and baroque buildings south of the Austrian border rose considerably, exemplified by St Michael's Cathedral (Serbian: \"Saborna crkva)\", completed in 1840. Between 1850 and 1875, new architecture was characterised by a turn towards the newly popular Romanticism, along with older European architectural styles. Typical of Central European cities in the last quarter of the 19th century, the fourth phase was characterised by an eclecticist style based on the Renaissance and Baroque periods.\nIn 1841, Prince Mihailo Obrenovi\u0107 moved the capital of the Principality of Serbia from Kragujevac to Belgrade. During his first reign (1815\u20131839), Prince Milo\u0161 Obrenovi\u0107 pursued expansion of the city's population through the addition of new settlements, aiming and succeeding to make Belgrade the centre of the Principality's administrative, military and cultural institutions. His project of creating a new market space (the Abad\u017eijska \u010dar\u0161ija), however, was less successful; trade continued to be conducted in the centuries-old Donja \u010dar\u0161ija and Gornja \u010dar\u0161ija. Still, new construction projects were typical for the Christian quarters as the older Muslim quarters declined; from Serbia's autonomy until 1863, the number of Belgrade quarters even decreased, mainly as a consequence of the gradual disappearance of the city's Muslim population. An Ottoman city map from 1863 counts only 9 Muslim quarters (\"mahalas\"). The names of only five such neighbourhoods are known today: Ali-pa\u0161ina, Reis-efendijina, Jahja-pa\u0161ina, Bajram-begova, and Laz Had\u017ei-Mahmudova. Following the \u010cukur Fountain incident, Belgrade was bombed by the Ottomans.\nOn 18 April 1867, the Ottoman government ordered the Ottoman garrison, which had been since 1826 the last representation of Ottoman suzerainty in Serbia, withdrawn from Kalemegdan. The forlorn Porte's only stipulation was that the Ottoman flag continue to fly over the fortress alongside the Serbian one. Serbia's \"de facto\" independence dates from this event. In the following years, urban planner Emilijan Josimovi\u0107 had a significant influence on Belgrade. He conceptualised a regulation plan for the city in 1867, in which he proposed the replacement of the town's crooked streets with a grid plan. Of great importance also was the construction of independent Serbian political and cultural institutions, as well as the city's now-plentiful parks. Pointing to Josimovi\u0107's work, Serbian scholars have noted an important break with Ottoman traditions. At the time of independence, Belgrade had a mainly Ottoman look, and Josimovi\u0107 stated \nhe wanted to rebuild Belgrade so that \"the capital does not retain the form that barbarism gave it\". Josimovi\u0107 designed Belgrade to resemble Vienna, right down to building grand boulevards inspired by the \"Ringstrasse\". All that remains of Ottoman Belgrade today are two mosques, the citadel, and a fountain with Arabic inscriptions. However, Istanbul\u2014the capital city of the state to which Belgrade and Serbia \"de jure\" still belonged\u2014underwent similar changes.\nIn May 1868, \"knez\" Mihailo was assassinated with his cousin Anka Konstantinovi\u0107 while riding in a carriage in his country residence.\nWith the Principality's full independence in 1878 and its transformation into the Kingdom of Serbia in 1882, Belgrade once again became a key city in the Balkans, and developed rapidly. Nevertheless, conditions in Serbia remained those of an overwhelmingly agrarian country, even with the opening of a railway to Ni\u0161, Serbia's second city. In 1900, the capital had only 70,000 inhabitants (at the time Serbia numbered 2.5\u00a0million). Still, by 1905, the population had grown to more than 80,000 and, by the outbreak of World War I in 1914, it had surpassed the 100,000 citizens, disregarding Zemun, which still belonged to Austria-Hungary.\nThe first-ever projection of motion pictures in the Balkans and Central Europe was held in Belgrade in June 1896 by Andr\u00e9 Carr, a representative of the Lumi\u00e8re brothers. He shot the first motion pictures of Belgrade in the next year; however, they have not been preserved. The first permanent cinema was opened in 1909 in Belgrade.\nWorld War I: Austro\u2013German invasion.\nThe First World War began on 28 July 1914 when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Most of the subsequent Balkan offensives occurred near Belgrade. Austro-Hungarian monitors shelled Belgrade on 29 July 1914, and it was taken by the Austro-Hungarian Army under General Oskar Potiorek on 1 December.On 16 December, it was re-taken by Serbian troops under Marshal Radomir Putnik. After a prolonged battle which destroyed much of the city, starting on 6 October 1915, Belgrade fell to German and Austro-Hungarian troops commanded by Field Marshal August von Mackensen on 9 October of the same year. The city was liberated by Serbian and French troops on 1 November 1918, under the command of Marshal Louis Franchet d'Esp\u00e8rey of France and Crown Prince Alexander of Serbia. Belgrade, devastated as a front-line city, lost the title of largest city in the Kingdom to Subotica for some time.\nKingdom of Yugoslavia.\nAfter the war, Belgrade became the capital of the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929. The Kingdom was split into banovinas and Belgrade, together with Zemun and Pan\u010devo, formed a separate administrative unit.\nDuring this period, the city experienced fast growth and significant modernisation. Belgrade's population grew to 239,000 by 1931 (with the inclusion of Zemun), and to 320,000 by 1940. The population growth rate between 1921 and 1948 averaged 4.08% a year.\nIn 1927, Belgrade's first airport opened, and in 1929, its first radio station began broadcasting. The Pan\u010devo Bridge, which crosses the Danube, was opened in 1935, while King Alexander Bridge over the Sava was opened in 1934. On 3 September 1939 the first Belgrade Grand Prix, the last Grand Prix motor racing race before the outbreak of World War II, was held around the Belgrade Fortress and was followed by 80,000 spectators. The winner was Tazio Nuvolari.\nWorld War II.\nOn 25 March 1941, the government of regent Crown Prince Paul signed the Tripartite Pact, joining the Axis powers in an effort to stay out of the Second World War and keep Yugoslavia neutral during the conflict. This was immediately followed by mass protests in Belgrade and a military coup d'\u00e9tat led by Air Force commander General Du\u0161an Simovi\u0107, who proclaimed King Peter II to be of age to rule the realm. As a result, the city was heavily bombed by the Luftwaffe on 6 April 1941, killing up to 2,274 people. Yugoslavia was then invaded by German, Italian, Hungarian, and Bulgarian forces. Belgrade was captured by subterfuge, with six German soldiers led by their officer Fritz Klingenberg feigning threatening size, forcing the city to capitulate.\n Belgrade was more directly occupied by the German Army in the same month and became the seat of the puppet Nedi\u0107 regime, headed by its namesake general. Some of today's parts of Belgrade were incorporated in the Independent State of Croatia in occupied Yugoslavia, another puppet state, where Ustashe regime carried out the Genocide of Serbs.\nDuring the summer and autumn of 1941, in reprisal for guerrilla attacks, the Germans carried out several massacres of Belgrade citizens; in particular, members of the Jewish community were subject to mass shootings at the order of General Franz B\u00f6hme, the German Military Governor of Serbia. B\u00f6hme rigorously enforced the rule that for every German killed, 100 Serbs or Jews would be shot. Belgrade became the first city in Europe to be declared by the Nazi occupation forces to be \"judenfrei\". The resistance movement in Belgrade was led by Major \u017darko Todorovi\u0107 from 1941 until his arrest in 1943.\nJust like Rotterdam, which was devastated twice by both German and Allied bombing, Belgrade was bombed once more during World War II, this time by the Allies on 16 April 1944, killing at least 1,100 people. This bombing fell on the Orthodox Christian Easter. Most of the city remained under German occupation until 20 October 1944, when it was liberated by the Red Army and the Communist Yugoslav Partisans.\nOn 29 November 1945, Marshal Josip Broz Tito proclaimed the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia in Belgrade (later renamed to Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on 7 April 1963).\nSocialist Yugoslavia.\nWhen the war ended, the city was left with 11,500 demolished housing units. During the post-war period, Belgrade grew rapidly as the capital of the renewed Yugoslavia, developing as a major industrial centre.\nIn 1948, construction of New Belgrade started. In the late 1940s and 1950s, the new regime made a point of rebuilding Belgrade in a modernistic style inspired by Le Corbusier to show that Yugoslavia was in the forefront of progress. In 1958, Belgrade's first television station began broadcasting. In 1961, Belgrade hosted the first and founding conference of the Non-Aligned Movement under Tito's chairmanship. In 1962, Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport was built. In the 1960s, a number of prestige buildings were put up such as the parliament building, the U\u0161\u0107e Towers which served as the headquarters for the Central Committee of the League of Communists, and the Hotel Jugoslavija. An American journalist from the \"Washington Post\" newspaper wrote in 1967: \"Belgrade is a lively, frivolous, noisy, jam-packed city compared with the one I remember from twenty years ago\". In 1964, Tito embarked upon the policy of \"market socialism\" that allowed capitalism to co-exist with communism. As a result, Western visitors to Belgrade in the late 1960s were astonished to see that the main streets were dominated by gigantic and garish billboards promoting Western brands such as Coca-Cola, Volkswagen, Siemens and Pan Am, giving Belgrade a very Western feel. Likewise, the Belgradians in the 1960s were described as dressed very much in fashionable Western styles with visitors noting that many women had an obsession with having their hair bleached blonde. The German historian Marie-Jannine Calic wrote that in the 1960s Belgrade \"a vibrant hustle and bustle prevailed in the streets, squares, and numerous cafes.\" She also noted that the core of Belgrade had a very modern look, but that \"along the mighty boulevards huddled pathetic little stores selling cloth, metal goods and dishware next to the dingy workshops of shoemakers, silversmiths and candle makers\". On the periphery of Belgrade, there was a semi-rural feel as chickens and cows wandered about the streets while the people lived in dire poverty, making their living as peddlers, wandering musicians, rag pickers, panhandlers, shoe shiners, scissor grinders, casual laborers and other marginal occupations. In 1968, major student protests led to several street clashes between students and the police. \nBy 1969, the population of Belgrade passed the one million mark for the first time. The population increase was largely due to people moving from rural areas to Belgrade as it was estimated in 1969 that two of three Belgradians had been born in the countryside. The population increase in the 1960s imposed serious social strains as more people were moving to Belgrade faster than the pace of housing construction, leading a housing crisis. The 1961 Yugoslav census showed that an average of 2.5 people lived per one room in Belgrade compared to the average of 1.6 people per room in the rest of Yugoslavia. In 1965, it was estimated that there was a shortage of 50, 000 housing units in Belgrade, which led to many people to make illegal makeshift homes in shops, basements, laundry rooms and even elevator shafts while on the periphery of Belgrade people built wooden huts and cottages. The mayor of Belgrade, Branko Pe\u0161i\u0107, told a journalist in 1965: \"In the last seven or eight years, 20,000 to 30,000 people have come to Belgrade each year. That equals an entire small town...And all of these people find shelter somewhere, hole up someplace. Some get an apartment, but that is the smallest percentage of them. A great number are forced...to house in basement, in unhygienic apartments and barracks. And whoever has not yet seen this should definitely see what this looks like...Something like this doesn't even exist in Africa\".\nIn 1972, Belgrade faced a smallpox outbreak, the last major outbreak of smallpox in Europe since World War II. Between October 1977 and March 1978, the city hosted the first major gathering of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe with the aim of implementing the Helsinki Accords from, while in 1980 Belgrade hosted the UNESCO General Conference. Josip Broz Tito died in May 1980 and his funeral in Belgrade was attended by high officials and state delegations from 128 of the 154 members of the United Nations from all over the world, based on which it became one of the largest funerals in history.\nBreakup of Yugoslavia.\nOn 9 March 1991, massive demonstrations led by Vuk Dra\u0161kovi\u0107 were held in the city against Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107. According to various media outlets, there were between 100,000 and 150,000 people on the streets. Two people were killed, 203 were injured and 108 were arrested during the protests, and later that day tanks were deployed onto the streets to restore order. Many anti-war protests were held in Belgrade, with the largest protests being dedicated to solidarity with the victims from the besieged Sarajevo. Further anti-government protests were held in Belgrade from November 1996 to February 1997 against the same government after alleged electoral fraud in local elections. These protests brought Zoran \u0110in\u0111i\u0107 to power, the first mayor of Belgrade since World War II who did not belong to the League of Communists of Yugoslavia or its later offshoot, the Socialist Party of Serbia.\nIn 1999, during the Kosovo War, the NATO bombing campaign targeted a number a buildings in Belgrade. Among the sites bombed were some ministry buildings, the RTS building, hospitals, Hotel Jugoslavija, the Central Committee building, Avala Tower, and the Chinese embassy. Between 500 and 2,000 civilians were killed in Serbia and Montenegro as a result of the NATO bombings, of which 27 were killed in Belgrade. After the Yugoslav Wars, Serbia became home to the highest number of refugees and internally displaced persons in Europe, with more than a third of these refugees having settled in Belgrade.\nAfter the 2000 presidential elections, Belgrade was the site of major public protests, with over half a million people taking part. These demonstrations resulted in the ousting of president Milo\u0161evi\u0107 as a part of the Otpor movement.\nRecent period.\nIn 2014, Belgrade Waterfront, an urban renewal project, was initiated by the Government of Serbia and its Emirati partner, Eagle Hills Properties. Around \u20ac3.5 billion was to be jointly invested by the Serbian government and their Emirati partners. The project includes office and luxury apartment buildings, five-star hotels, a shopping mall and the envisioned 'Belgrade Tower'. The project is, however, quite controversial\u2014there are a number of uncertainties regarding its funding, necessity, and its architecture's arguable lack of harmony with the rest of the city.\nIn addition to Belgrade Waterfront, the city is under rapid development and reconstruction, especially in the area of Novi Beograd, where (as of 2020) apartment and office buildings were under construction to support the burgeoning Belgrade IT sector, now one of Serbia's largest economic players. In September 2020, there were around 2000 active construction sites in Belgrade. The city budget for 2023 stood at 205,5 billion dinars (1.750 billion Euros). The budget for the city of Belgrade has been estimated to be more than 2 billion Euros for 2024.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nBelgrade lies above sea level and is located at the confluence of the Danube and Sava rivers. The historical core of Belgrade, Kalemegdan, lies on the right banks of both rivers. Since the 19th century, the city has been expanding to the south and east; after World War II, New Belgrade was built on the left bank of the Sava river, connecting Belgrade with Zemun. Smaller, chiefly residential communities across the Danube, like Krnja\u010da, Kote\u017e and Bor\u010da, also merged with the city, while Pan\u010devo, a heavily industrialised satellite city, remains separate. The city has an urban area of , while together with its metropolitan area it covers .\nOn the right bank of the Sava, central Belgrade has a hilly terrain, while the highest point of Belgrade proper is Torlak hill at . The mountains of Avala () and Kosmaj () lie south of the city. Across the Sava and Danube, the land is mostly flat, consisting of alluvial plains and loessial plateaus.\nOne of the characteristics of the city terrain is mass wasting. On the territory covered by the General Urban Plan there are 1,155 recorded mass wasting points, out of which 602 are active and 248 are labeled as 'high risk'. They cover almost 30% of the city territory and include several types of mass wasting. Downhill creeps are located on the slopes above the rivers, mostly on the clay or loam soils, inclined between 7 and 20%. The most critical ones are in Karaburma, Zvezdara, Vi\u0161njica, Vin\u010da and Ritopek, in the Danube valley, and Umka, and especially its neighbourhood of Duboko, in the Sava valley. They have moving and dormant phases, and some of them have been recorded for centuries. Less active downhill creep areas include the entire Terazije slope above the Sava (Kalemegdan, Savamala), which can be seen by the inclination of the Pobednik monument and the tower of the Cathedral Church, and the Vo\u017edovac section, between Banjica and Autokomanda.\nLandslides encompass smaller areas, develop on the steep cliffs, sometimes being inclined up to 90%. They are mostly located in the artificial loess hills of Zemun: Gardo\u0161, \u0106ukovac and Kalvarija.\nHowever, the majority of the land movement in Belgrade, some 90%, is triggered by the construction works and faulty water supply system (burst pipes, etc.). The neighbourhood of Mirijevo is considered to be the most successful project of fixing the problem. During the construction of the neighbourhood from the 1970s, the terrain was systematically improved and the movement of the land is today completely halted.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Belgrade has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") bordering on a humid continental climate (\"Dfa\") with four seasons and uniformly spread precipitation. Monthly averages range from in January to in July, with an annual mean of . \nThere are, on average, 44.6 days a year when the maximum temperature is at or above , and 95 days when the temperature is above , On the other hand, Belgrade experiences 52.1 days per year in which the minimum temperature falls below , with 13.8 days having a maximum temperature below freezing as well. Belgrade receives about of precipitation a year, with late spring being wettest. The average annual number of sunny hours is 2,020.\nBelgrade may experience thunderstorms at any time of the year, experiencing 31 days annually, but it's much more common in spring and summer months. Hail is rare and occurs exclusively in spring or summer.\nThe highest officially recorded temperature in Belgrade was on 24 July 2007, while on the other end, the lowest temperature was on 10 January 1893. The highest recorded value of daily precipitation was on 15 May 2014.\nAdministration.\nBelgrade is a separate territorial unit in Serbia, with its own autonomous city authority. The Assembly of the City of Belgrade has 110 members, elected on four-year terms. A 13-member City Council, elected by the Assembly and presided over by the mayor and his deputy, has the control and supervision of the city administration, which manages day-to-day administrative affairs. It is divided into 14 Secretariats, each having a specific portfolio such as traffic or health care, and several professional services, agencies and institutes.\nThe 2024 Belgrade City Assembly election was won by the Serbian Progressive Party, which formed a ruling coalition with the Socialist Party of Serbia. Between 2004 and 2013, the Democratic Party was in power. Due to the importance of Belgrade in political and economic life of Serbia, the office of city's mayor is often described as the third most important office in the state, after the President of the Government and the President of the Republic.\nAs the capital city, Belgrade is seat of all Serbian state authorities \u2013 executive, legislative, judiciary, and the headquarters of almost all national political parties as well as 75 diplomatic missions. This includes the National Assembly, the Presidency, the Government of Serbia and all the ministries, Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court.\nMunicipalities.\nThe city is divided into 17 municipalities. Previously, they were classified into 10 urban (lying completely or partially within borders of the city proper) and 7 suburban municipalities, whose centres are smaller towns. With the new 2010 City statute, they were all given equal status, with the proviso that suburban ones (except Sur\u010din) have certain autonomous powers, chiefly related with construction, infrastructure and public utilities.\nMost of the municipalities are situated on the southern side of the Danube and Sava rivers, in the \u0160umadija region. Three municipalities (Zemun, Novi Beograd, and Sur\u010din), are on the northern bank of the Sava in the Syrmia region and the municipality of Palilula, spanning the Danube, is in both the \u0160umadija and Banat regions.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2022 census, the population of the city proper stands at 1,197,114, its contiguous urban area (including the adjacent settlements of Bor\u010da, Kalu\u0111erica, and Sur\u010din) has 1,298,661 inhabitants, while population of city's administrative area (often equated with its metropolitan area) totals 1,681,405 people. However, Belgrade's metropolitan area has not been defined, either statistically or administratively, and it sprawls into the neighboring municipalities of Pan\u010devo, Pe\u0107inci, and Stara Pazova.\nBelgrade is home to many ethnicities from across the former Yugoslavia and the wider Balkans region. The main ethnic group comprising over 86% of the metropolitan population of Belgrade are Serbs (1,449,241). Some significant minorities include Roma (23,160), Yugoslavs (10,499), Gorani (5,249), Montenegrins (5,134), Russians (4,659), Croats (4,554), Macedonians (4,293), and ethnic Muslims (2,718). Many people came to the city as economic migrants from smaller towns and the countryside, while tens of thousands arrived as refugees from Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo, as a result of the Yugoslav wars of the 1990s. The most recent wave of immigration following the Russian invasion of Ukraine saw tens of thousands of Russians and Ukrainians register their residence in Serbia, majority of them in Belgrade.\nBetween 10,000 and 20,000 Chinese people are estimated to live in Belgrade and, since their arrival in the mid-1990s, Block 70 in New Belgrade has been known colloquially as the Chinese quarter. Many Middle Easterners, mainly from Syria, Iran, Jordan and Iraq, arrived in order to pursue their studies during the 1970s and 1980s, and have remained in the city. Throughout the 19th and early 20th century, small communities of Aromanians, Czechs, Greeks, Germans, Hungarians, Jews, Turks, Armenians and Russian White \u00e9migr\u00e9s also existed in Belgrade. There are two suburban settlements with significant minority population today: Ov\u010da and the village of Boljevci, both with about one quarter of their population being Romanians and Slovaks, respectively. Immigration to Belgrade from other countries accelerates. In 2023, more than 30,000 foreign workers got working and residence permits only in Belgrade.\nAlthough there are several historic religious communities in Belgrade, the religious makeup of the city is relatively homogeneous. The Serbian Orthodox community is by far the largest, with 1,475,168 adherents. There are also 31,914 Muslims, 13,720 Roman Catholics, and 3,128 Protestants.\nThere once was a significant Jewish community in Belgrade but, following the World War II Nazi occupation of the city and subsequent Jewish emigration, their numbers have fallen from over 10,000 to just 295. Belgrade also used to have one of the largest Buddhist colonies in Europe outside Russia when some 400 mostly Buddhist Kalmyks settled on the outskirts of Belgrade following the Russian Civil War. The first Buddhist temple in Europe was built in Belgrade in 1929. Most of them moved away after the World War II and their temple, Belgrade pagoda, was abandoned, claimed by the new Communist regime and eventually demolished.\nEconomy.\nBelgrade is the financial centre of Serbia and Southeast Europe, with a total of of office space. It is also home to the country's Central Bank. 750,550 people are employed (July 2020) in 120,286 companies, 76,307 enterprises and 50,000 shops. The City of Belgrade itself owns of rentable office space.\nAs of 2019, Belgrade contained 31.4% of Serbia's employed population and generated over 40.4% of its GDP. City GDP in 2023 at purchasing power parity is estimated at $73 bn USD, which is $43,400 per capita in terms of purchasing power parity. Nominal GDP in 2023 is estimated at $31.5 bn USD, which is $18.700 per capita.\nNew Belgrade is the country's Central business district and one of Southeastern Europe's financial centres. It offers a range of facilities, such as hotels, congress halls (e.g. Sava Centar), Class A and B office buildings, and business parks (e.g. Airport City Belgrade). Over of land is under construction in New Belgrade, with the value of planned construction over the next three years estimated at over 1.5\u00a0billion euros. The Belgrade Stock Exchange is also located in New Belgrade.\nWith 6,924 companies in the IT sector (according to 2013 data[ [update]]), Belgrade is one of the foremost information technology hubs in Southeast Europe. Microsoft's Development Center Serbia, located in Belgrade, was, at the time of its establishment, the fifth such programme on the globe. Many global IT companies choose Belgrade as their European or regional centre of operations, such as Asus, Intel, Dell, Huawei, Ubisoft, Yandex,Nutanix, NCR etc. The most famous Belgrade IT startups, among others, are Nordeus, ComTrade Group, MicroE, FishingBooker, and Endava. IT facilities in the city include the Mihajlo Pupin Institute and the ILR, as well as the brand-new IT Park Zvezdara. Many prominent IT innovators began their careers in Belgrade, including Voja Antoni\u0107 and Veselin Jevrosimovi\u0107.\nIn April 2025, the average New Belgrade CBD monthly net salary stood at 177.418 RSD ($1760) in net terms, with the gross equivalent at 242.254 RSD ($2403), while in Belgrade with suburbs is Euros 1.058 .\nAccording to Cushman &amp; Wakefield, Knez Mihajlova street is 36th most expensive retail street in the world in terms of renting commercial space.\nAs an example of the attractiveness of the city and its importance in this part of the continent is the fact that numerous multinational companies choose precisely Belgrade to place its local headquarters. An early example of this was the multinational food-giant McDonald's opening its first ever restaurant in a communist country in Europe in Belgrade.\nCulture.\nAccording to the BBC, Belgrade is one of the five most creative cities in the world.\nBelgrade hosts many annual international cultural events, including the Film Festival, Theatre Festival, Summer Festival, BEMUS, Belgrade Early Music Festival, Book Fair, Belgrade Choir Festival, Eurovision Song Contest 2008, and the Beer Fest. In 2022 Belgrade was also home to the Europride event, even though the Serbian president, Aleksandar Vu\u010di\u0107, tried to cancel it. The Nobel Prize winning author Ivo Andri\u0107 wrote his most famous work, \"The Bridge on the Drina\", in Belgrade. Other prominent Belgrade authors include Branislav Nu\u0161i\u0107, Milo\u0161 Crnjanski, Borislav Peki\u0107, Milorad Pavi\u0107 and Me\u0161a Selimovi\u0107. The most internationally prominent artists from Belgrade are Charles Simic, Marina Abramovi\u0107 and Milovan Destil Markovi\u0107.\nMost of Serbia's film industry is based in Belgrade. FEST is an annual film festival that has been held since 1971. Through 2013, the festival had been attended by four million people and had presented almost 4,000 films.\nThe city was one of the main centres of the Yugoslav new wave in the 1980s: VIS Idoli, Ekatarina Velika, \u0160arlo Akrobata and Elektri\u010dni Orgazam were all from Belgrade. Other notable Belgrade rock acts include Riblja \u010corba, Bajaga i Instruktori and Partibrejkers. Today, it is the centre of the Serbian hip hop scene, with acts such as Beogradski Sindikat, Bad Copy, \u0160kabo, Mar\u010delo, and most of the Bassivity Music stable hailing from or living in the city. There are numerous theatres, the most prominent of which are National Theatre, Theatre on Terazije, Yugoslav Drama Theatre, Zvezdara Theatre, and Atelier 212. The Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts is also based in Belgrade, as well as the National Library of Serbia. Other major libraries include the Belgrade City Library and the Belgrade University Library. Belgrade's two opera houses are: National Theatre and Madlenianum Opera House. Following the victory of Serbia's representative Marija \u0160erifovi\u0107 at the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, Belgrade hosted the Contest in 2008.\nThere are more than 1650 public sculptures in Belgrade.\nMuseums.\nThe most prominent museum in Belgrade is the National Museum, founded in 1844 and reconstructed from 2003 until June 2018. The museum houses a collection of more than 400,000 exhibits (over 5600 paintings and 8400 drawings and prints, including many foreign masters like Bosch, Juan de Flandes, Titian, Tintoretto, Rubens, C\u00e9zanne, G.B. Tiepolo, Renoir, Monet, Lautrec, Matisse, Picasso, Gauguin, Chagall, Van Gogh, Mondrian etc.) and also the famous Miroslav's Gospel. The Museum of Contemporary Art was the first contemporary art museum in Yugoslavia and one of the first museums of this type in the world. Following its foundation in 1965, has amassed a collection of more than 8,000 works from art produced across the former Yugoslavia. The collection represents some of the most notable Serbian and Yugoslav 20th century artists, including Sava \u0160umanovi\u0107, Nade\u017eda Petrovi\u0107, Petar Dobrovi\u0107, Milena Pavlovi\u0107-Barili, Milan Konjovi\u0107, Zora Petrovi\u0107, \u0110or\u0111e Andrejevi\u0107 Kun, Vladimir Veli\u010dkovi\u0107, Petar Lubarda, Krsto Hegedu\u0161i\u0107, Mi\u0107a Popovi\u0107, Ivan Me\u0161trovi\u0107, Antun Augustin\u010di\u0107, Toma Rosandi\u0107, Olga Jevri\u0107, Olga Jan\u010di\u0107, Lojze Dolinar, among others. The museum was closed in 2007, but has since been reopened in 2017 to focus on the modern as well as on the Yugoslav art scenes. Artist Marina Abramovi\u0107, who was born in Belgrade, held an exhibition in the Museum of Contemporary Art, which the \"New York Times\" described as one of the most important cultural happenings in the world in 2019. The exhibition was seen by almost 100,000 visitors. Marina Abramovi\u0107 made a stage speech and performance in front of 20,000 people. In the heart of Belgrade you can also find the Museum of Applied Arts, a museum that has been awarded for the Institution of the Year 2016 by ICOM.\nThe Belgrade City Museum moved into a new building in downtown in 2006. The museum hosts a range of collections covering the history of urban life since prehistory and it houses a collection of more than 150,000 exhibits. Belgrade City Museum also includes additional sites, such as Ivo Andri\u0107 Museum, Princess Ljubica's Residence, Paja Jovanovi\u0107 Museum, Jovan Cviji\u0107 Museum. The City Museum is scheduled to move to a much larger building in the city center in 2027.\nThe Ethnographic Museum, established in 1901, contains more than 150,000 items showcasing the rural and urban culture of the Balkans, particularly the countries of former Yugoslavia. Belgrade also houses the Museum of African Art, founded in 1977, which has a large collection of art from West Africa. Another major Belgrade museum is the Museum of Vuk and Dositej, which showcases the lives, work and legacy of Vuk Stefanovi\u0107 Karad\u017ei\u0107 and Dositej Obradovi\u0107, the 19th century reformer of the Serbian literary language and the first Serbian Minister of Education and a man of letters, respectively. \nThe Military Museum, established in 1878 in Kalemegdan, houses a wide range of more than 25,000 military objects dating from the prehistoric to the medieval to the modern eras. Notable items include Turkish and oriental arms, national banners, and Yugoslav Partisan regalia. The Aviation Museum, located near Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport, has more than 200 aircraft, of which about 50 are on display, and a few of which are the only surviving examples of their type, such as the Fiat G.50. This museum also displays parts of shot down US and NATO aircraft, such as the F-117 and F-16.\nThe Nikola Tesla Museum, founded in 1952, preserves the personal items of Nikola Tesla, the inventor after whom the Tesla unit was named. It holds around 160,000 original documents and around 5,700 personal other items including his urn. The Museum of Science and Technology, founded in 1989, moved to the building of the first city's power plant in Dor\u0107ol in 2005.\nWith around 95,000 copies of national and international films, the Yugoslav Cinematheque is the largest in the region and among the 10 largest archives in the world. The institution also operates the Museum of Yugoslav Cinematheque, with movie theatre and exhibition hall. The archive's long-standing storage problems were finally solved in 2007, when a new modern depository was opened. The Yugoslav Film Archive also exhibits original Charlie Chaplin's stick and one of the first movies by Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re.\nThe Museum of Yugoslavia has collections from the Yugoslav era. Beside paintings, the most valuable are Moon rocks donated by Apollo 11 crew Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins while visiting Belgrade in 1969 and from mission Apollo 17 donated by Richard Nixon in 1971. The museum also houses Joseph Stalin's sabre with 260 brilliants and diamonds, donated by Stalin himself. \nArchitecture.\nBelgrade has wildly varying architecture, from the centre of Zemun, typical of a Central European town, to the more modern architecture and spacious layout of New Belgrade.\nThe oldest architecture is found in Kalemegdan Park. Outside of Kalemegdan, the oldest buildings date only from the 18th century, due to its geographic position and frequent wars and destructions. The oldest public structure in Belgrade is a nondescript Turkish t\u00fcrbe, while the oldest house is a modest clay house on Dor\u0107ol, from late 18th century. Western influence began in the 19th century, when the city completely transformed from an oriental town to the contemporary architecture of the time, with influences from neoclassicism, romanticism, and academic art. Serbian architects took over the development from foreign builders in the late 19th century, producing the National Theatre, Stari Dvor, Cathedral Church and later, in the early 20th century, the House of the National Assembly and National Museum, influenced by art nouveau. Elements of Serbo-Byzantine Revival are present in buildings such as Vuk Foundation House, old Post Office in Kosovska street, and sacral architecture, such as St. Mark's Church (based on the Gra\u010danica monastery), and the Church of Saint Sava. In the socialist period, housing was built quickly and cheaply for the huge influx of people fleeing the countryside following World War II, sometimes resulting in the brutalist architecture of the \"blokovi\" ('blocks') of New Belgrade; a socrealism trend briefly ruled, resulting in buildings like the Trade Union Hall. However, in the mid-1950s, modernist trends took over, and still dominate the Belgrade architecture. Belgrade has the second oldest sewer system in Europe. The Clinical Centre of Serbia spreads over 34 hectares and consists of about 50 buildings, while also has 3,150 beds considered to be the highest number in Europe, and among highest in the world.\nTourism.\nLying on the main artery connecting Europe and Asia, as well as, eventually, the Orient Express, Belgrade has been a popular place for travellers through the centuries. In 1843, on Dubrova\u010dka Street (today Kralj Petar Street ), Serbia's \"knez\" Mihailo Obrenovi\u0107 built a large edifice which became the first hotel in Belgrade: \"Kod jelena\" ('at the deer's'), in the neighbourhood of Kosan\u010di\u0107ev Venac. Many criticised the move at the time due to the cost and the size of the building, but it soon became the gathering point of the Principality's wealthiest citizens. Colloquially, the building was also referred to as the \"staro zdanje\", or the 'old edifice'. It remained a hotel until 1903 before being demolished in 1938. After the \"staro zdanje\", numerous hotels were built in the second half of the 19th century: \"Nacional\" and \"Grand\", also in Kosan\u010di\u0107ev Venac, \"Srpski Kralj\", \"Srpska Kruna\", \"Gr\u010dka Kraljica\" near Kalemegdan, \"Balkan\" and \"Pariz\" in Terazije, \"London\", etc.\nAs Belgrade became connected via steamboats and railway (after 1884), the number of visitors grew and new hotels were opened with luxurious commodities. In Savamala, the hotels \"Bosna\" and \"Bristol\" were opened. Other hotels included \"Solun\" and \"Orient\", which was built near the Financial Park. Tourists who arrived by the Orient Express mostly stayed at the Petrograd Hotel in Wilson Square. Hotel \"Srpski Kralj\", at the corner of Uzun Mirkova and Pariska Streets was considered the best hotel in Belgrade during the Interbellum. It was destroyed during World War II.\nThe historic areas and buildings of Belgrade are among the city's premier attractions. They include Skadarlija, the National Museum and adjacent National Theatre, Zemun, Nikola Pa\u0161i\u0107 Square, Terazije, Students' Square, the Kalemegdan Fortress, Knez Mihailova Street, the Parliament, the Church of Saint Sava, and the Old Palace. On top of this, there are many parks, monuments, museums, caf\u00e9s, restaurants and shops on both sides of the river. The hilltop Avala Monument and Avala Tower offer views over the city. According to \"The Guardian\", Dor\u0107ol is the one of top ten coolest suburbs in Europe.\nThe elite neighbourhood of Dedinje is situated near the Top\u010dider and Ko\u0161utnjak parks. The Dedinje Royal Compound which houses the former royal residences of (Kraljevski Dvor and Beli Dvor) is open for visitors. The palace has many valuable artworks. Nearby, Josip Broz Tito's mausoleum, called \"The House of Flowers\", documents the life of the former Yugoslav president.\nAda Ciganlija is a former island on the Sava River, and Belgrade's biggest sports and recreational complex. Today it is connected with the right bank of the Sava via two causeways, creating an artificial lake. It is the most popular destination for Belgraders during the city's hot summers. There are of long beaches and sports facilities for various sports including golf, football, basketball, volleyball, rugby union, baseball, and tennis. During summer there are between 200,000 and 300,000 bathers daily.\nBelgrade is also known for tourist activities involving extreme sports such as bungee jumping, water skiing, and paintballing. There are numerous trails on the island, where it is possible to ride a bike, go for a walk, or go jogging. Apart from Ada, Belgrade has total of 16 islands on the rivers, many still unused. Among them, the Great War Island, at the confluence of Sava, stands out as an oasis of unshattered wildlife (especially birds). These areas, along with nearby Small War Island, are protected by the city's government as a nature preserve. There are 37 protected natural resources in the Belgrade urban area, among which eight are geo-heritage sites, i.e. Stra\u017eevica profile, Ma\u0161in Majdan-Top\u010dider, Profile at the Kalemegdan Fortress, Abandoned quarry in Barajevo, Karaga\u010da valley, Artesian well in Ov\u010da, Kapela loess profile, and Lake in Srem\u010dica. Other 29 places are biodiversity sites.\nTourist income in 2016 amounted to nearly half a billion euros; with a visit of almost a million registered tourists. Of those, in 2019 more than 100,000 tourists arrived by 742 river cruisers. Average annual growth is between 13% and 14%.\nAs of 2018, there are three officially designated camp grounds in Belgrade. The oldest one is located in Batajnica, along the Batajnica Road. Named \"Dunav\", it is one of the most visited campsites in the country. The second one is situated within the complex of the ethno-household \"Zorni\u0107's House\" in the village of Ba\u0107evac, while the third is located in Ripanj, on the slopes of Avala mountain. In 2017 some 15,000 overnights were recorded in camps.\nBelgrade is a common stop on the Rivers Route, European cycling route known as \"Danube Bike Trail\" in Serbia as well as on the Sultans Trail, a long-distance hiking footpath between Vienna and Istanbul.\nNightlife.\nBelgrade has a reputation for vibrant nightlife; many clubs that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city. The most recognisable nightlife features of Belgrade are the barges (\"splav\") spread along the banks of the Sava and Danube.\nMany weekend visitors\u2014particularly from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia\u2014prefer Belgrade nightlife to that of their own capitals due to its perceived friendly atmosphere, plentiful clubs and bars, cheap drinks, lack of significant language barriers, and a lack of night life regulation.\nOne of the most famous sites for alternative cultural happenings in the city is the SKC (Student Cultural Centre), located right across from Belgrade's highrise landmark, the Belgrade Palace tower. Concerts featuring famous local and foreign bands are often held at the centre. SKC is also the site of various art exhibitions, as well as public debates and discussions.\nA more traditional Serbian nightlife experience, accompanied by traditional music known as \"Starogradska\" (roughly translated as \"Old Town Music\"), typical of northern Serbia's urban environments, is most prominent in Skadarlija, the city's old bohemian neighbourhood where the poets and artists of Belgrade gathered in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Skadar Street (the centre of Skadarlija) and the surrounding neighbourhood are lined with some of Belgrade's best and oldest traditional restaurants (called kafanas in Serbian), which date back to that period. At one end of the neighbourhood stands Belgrade's oldest beer brewery, founded in the first half of the 19th century. One of the city's oldest kafanas is the Znak pitanja ('?').\n\"The Times\" reported that Europe's best nightlife can be found in Belgrade. In the Lonely Planet \"1000 Ultimate Experiences\" Guide of 2009, Belgrade was placed at the 1st spot among the top 10 party cities in the world.\nFashion and design.\nSince 1996, semiannual (autumn/winter and spring/summer seasons) fashion weeks are held citywide. Numerous Serbian and foreign designers and fashion brands have their shows during Belgrade Fashion Week. The festival, which collaborates with London Fashion Week, has helped launch the international careers of local talents such as George Styler and Ana Ljubinkovi\u0107. British fashion designer Roksanda Ilin\u010di\u0107, who was born in the city, also frequently presents her runway shows in Belgrade.\nIn addition to fashion, there are two major design shows held in Belgrade every year which attract international architects and industrial designers such as Karim Rashid, Daniel Libeskind, Patricia Urquiola, and Konstantin Grcic. Both the Mikser Festival and Belgrade Design Week feature lectures, exhibits and competitions. Furthermore, international designers like Sacha Lakic, Ana Kra\u0161, Bojana Sentaler, and Marek Djordjevic are originally from Belgrade.\nMedia.\nBelgrade is the most important media hub in Serbia. The city is home to the main headquarters of the national broadcaster Radio Television Serbia (RTS), which is a public service broadcaster. The most popular commercial broadcaster is RTV Pink, a Serbian media multinational, known for its popular entertainment programmes. One of the most popular commercial broadcasters is B92, another media company, which has its own TV station, radio station, and music and book publishing arms, as well as the most popular website on the Serbian internet. Other TV stations broadcasting from Belgrade include 1Prva (formerly \"Fox televizija\"), Nova, N1 and others which only cover the greater Belgrade municipal area, such as Studio B.\nHigh-circulation daily newspapers published in Belgrade include , \"Blic\", \"Alo!\", \"Kurir\" and \"Danas\". There are two sporting dailies, \"Sportski \u017eurnal\" and \"Sport\", and one economic daily, \"Privredni pregled\". A new free distribution daily, \"24 sata\", was founded in the autumn of 2006. Also, Serbian editions of licensed magazines such as \"Harper's Bazaar\", \"Elle\", \"Cosmopolitan\", \"National Geographic\", \"Men's Health\", \"Grazia\" and others have their headquarters in the city.\nSport and recreation.\nThere are approximately one-thousand sports facilities in Belgrade, many of which are capable of serving all levels of sporting events.\nAda Ciganlija island, with its lake and beaches, is one of the most important recreational areas in the city. With a total of 8\u00a0km beaches, and a variety of bars, caf\u00e9s, restaurants and sport facilities, Ada Ciganlija attracts many visitors, especially in summertime.\nKo\u0161utnjak Park Forest has numerous running and bike trails, sports facilities for a variety of sports, and indoor and outdoor pools. It is a popular destination that is located only 2\u00a0km from Ada Ciganlija.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s Belgrade held a number of major international events such as the first ever World Aquatics Championships in 1973, 1976 European Football Championship and 1973 European Cup Final, European Athletics Championships in 1962 and European Indoor Games in 1969, European Basketball Championships in 1961 and 1975, European Volleyball Championship for men and women in 1975 and World Amateur Boxing Championships in 1978.\nSince the early 2000s Belgrade again hosts major sporting events nearly every year. Some of these include EuroBasket 2005, European Handball Championship (men's and women's) in 2012, World Handball Championship for women in 2013, European Volleyball Championships for men in 2005 for men and 2011 for women, the 2006 and 2016 European Water Polo Championship, the European Youth Olympic Festival 2007 and the 2009 Summer Universiade. More recently, Belgrade hosted European Athletics Indoor Championships in 2017 and the basketball EuroLeague Final Four tournaments in 2018 and 2022. Global and continental championships in other sports such as tennis, futsal, judo, karate, wrestling, rowing, kickboxing, table tennis, and chess have also been held in recent years.\nThe city is home to Serbia's two biggest and most successful football clubs, Red Star Belgrade and Partizan Belgrade. Red Star won the UEFA Champions League (\"European Cup\") in 1991, and Partizan was runner-up in 1966. The two major stadiums in Belgrade are \"Marakana\" (Red Star Stadium) and Partizan Stadium. The rivalry between Red Star and Partizan is one of the fiercest in world football.\nWith a capacity of 19,384 spectators, Belgrade Arena is one of the largest indoor arenas in Europe. It is used for major sporting events and large concerts. In May 2008, it was the venue for the 53rd Eurovision Song Contest.Aleksandar Nikoli\u0107 Hall is the main venue of basketball clubs KK Partizan, the European champion of 1992, and KK Crvena Zvezda.\nIn recent years, Belgrade has also given rise to several world-class tennis players such as Ana Ivanovic, Jelena Jankovi\u0107 and Novak Djokovic. Ivanovic and Djokovic are the first female and male Belgraders, respectively, to win Grand Slam singles titles and been ATP number 1 with Jelena Jankovi\u0107. The Serbian national team won the 2010 Davis Cup, beating the French team in the finals played in the Belgrade Arena.\nThe Belgrade Marathon is held annually since 1988. Belgrade was a candidate to host the 1992 and the 1996 Summer Olympic Games.\nEducation.\nBelgrade has two state universities and several private institutions of higher education. The University of Belgrade, founded in 1808 as a \"grande \u00e9cole\", is the oldest institution of higher learning in Serbia. Having developed with much of the rest of the city in the 19th century, several university buildings are recognised as forming a constituent part of Belgrade's architecture and cultural heritage. With enrolment numbers of nearly 90,000 students, the university is one of Europe's largest.\nThe city is also home to 195 primary (elementary) schools and 85 secondary schools. The primary school system has 162 regular schools, 14 special schools, 15 art schools, and 4 adult schools, while the secondary school system has 51 vocational schools, 21 gymnasiums, 8 art schools and 5 special schools. The 230,000 pupils are managed by 22,000 employees in over 500 buildings, covering around .\nTransportation.\nBelgrade has an extensive public transport system consisting of buses (118 urban lines and more than 300 suburban lines), trams (12 lines), trolleybuses (8 lines) and S-Train BG Voz (6 lines). Buses, trolleybuses and trams are run by GSP Beograd and SP Lasta in cooperation with private companies on some bus routes. The S-train network, BG Voz, run by city government in cooperation with Serbian Railways, is a part of the integrated transport system, and has three lines (Batajnica-Ov\u010da and Ov\u010da-Resnik and Belgrade centre-Mladenovac), with more announced. As of 2024[ [update]] tickets may be purchased either via SMS or in physical paper form via the system. Daily connections link the capital to other towns in Serbia and many other European destinations through the city's central bus station. Since January 2025 all public transport in Belgrade is free.\nBeovoz was the suburban/commuter railway network that provided mass-transit services in the city, similar to Paris's RER and Toronto's GO Transit. The main usage of system was to connect the suburbs with the city centre. Beovoz was operated by Serbian Railways. However, this system was abolished back in 2013, mostly due to introduction of more efficient BG Voz. Belgrade is one of the last big European capitals and cities with over a million people to have no metro or subway or other rapid transit system. As of 2025, the Belgrade Metro is currently under construction, which will have 2 lines. The first line is expected to be operational by August 2028.\nThe new Belgrade Centre railway station is the hub for almost all national and international trains. The high-speed rail that connects Belgrade with Novi Sad started its service on 19 March 2022. The extension towards Subotica and Budapest is under construction, and there are plans for a southwards extension towards Ni\u0161 and North Macedonia.\nThe city is placed along the Pan-European corridors X and VII. The motorway system provides for easy access to Novi Sad and Budapest to the north, Ni\u0161 to the south, and Zagreb to the west. Expressway is also toward Pan\u010devo and new Expressway construction toward Obrenovac (Montenegro) is scheduled for March 2017. Belgrade bypass is connecting the E70 and E75 motorways and is under construction.\nSituated at the confluence of two major rivers, the Danube and the Sava, Belgrade has 11 bridges, the most important of which are Branko's Bridge, Gazela Bridge, Ada Bridge and Pupin Bridge, the first two of which connect the core of the city to New Belgrade. In addition, an 'inner magistral semi-ring' is almost done and includes a new Ada bridge across the Sava river (opened in 2012) and a new Pupin bridge (opened in 2014) across the Danube, which ease commuting within the city and unload traffic from the Gazela Bridge and Branko's Bridge.\nThe Port of Belgrade is on the Danube, and allows the city to receive goods by river. The city is also served by Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport, west of the city centre, near Sur\u010din. At its peak in 1986, almost 3\u00a0million passengers travelled through the airport, though that number dwindled to a trickle in the 1990s. Following renewed growth in 2000, the number of passengers reached approximately 2\u00a0million in 2004 and 2005, over 2.6\u00a0million passengers in 2008, reaching over 3\u00a0million passengers. A record with over 4\u00a0million passengers was broken in 2014, when Belgrade Nikola Tesla Airport became the second fastest growing major airport in Europe. The numbers continued to grow steadily and the all-time peak of over 6 million passengers was reached in 2019.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nList of Belgrade's sister and twin cities:\nPartner cities.\nOther friendships and cooperations, protocols, memorandums:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSome of the city's municipalities are also twinned to small cities or districts of other big cities; for details see their respective articles.\nBelgrade has received various domestic and international honours, including the French L\u00e9gion d'honneur (proclaimed 21 December 1920; Belgrade is one of four cities outside France, alongside Li\u00e8ge, Luxembourg and Volgograd, to receive this honour), the Czechoslovak War Cross (awarded 8 October 1925), the Yugoslavian Order of the Kara\u0111or\u0111e's Star (awarded 18 May 1939) and the Yugoslavian Order of the People's Hero (proclaimed on 20 October 1974, the 30th anniversary of the overthrow of Nazi German occupation during World War II). All of these decorations were received for the war efforts during World War I and World War II. In 2006, \"Financial Times\"' magazine \"Foreign Direct Investment\" awarded Belgrade the title of \"City of the Future of Southern Europe\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55905", "revid": "35922184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55905", "title": "Beograd", "text": ""}
{"id": "55906", "revid": "49983941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55906", "title": "Zagreb", "text": "Capital city and county in Croatia\nZagreb ( ) is the capital and largest city of Croatia. It is in the north of the country, along the Sava river, at the southern slopes of the Medvednica mountain. Zagreb stands near the international border between Croatia and Slovenia at an elevation of approximately above sea level. At the 2021 census, the city itself had a population of 767,131, while the population of Zagreb metropolitan area is 1,086,528.\nThe oldest settlement in the vicinity of the city was the Roman Andautonia, in today's \u0160\u0107itarjevo. The historical record of the name \"Zagreb\" dates from 1134, in reference to the foundation of the settlement at Kaptol in 1094. Zagreb became a free royal city in 1242. In 1851, Janko Kamauf became Zagreb's first mayor. Zagreb has special status as a Croatian administrative division\u2014it comprises a consolidated city-county (but separate from Zagreb County), and is administratively subdivided into 17 city districts. Most of the city districts lie at a low elevation along the valley of the river Sava, whereas northern and northeastern city districts, such as Podsljeme and Sesvete districts are spread out across the foothills of the Medvednica mountain, making the city's geographical image rather diverse. The city spans about 30\u00a0km from east to west, while stretching about 20\u00a0km from north to south. Zagreb ranks as a global city, with a 'Beta-' rating from the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\nThe transport connections, the concentration of industry, scientific, and research institutions and industrial tradition underlie its leading economic position in Croatia. Zagreb is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and almost all government ministries. Almost all of the largest Croatian companies, media, and scientific institutions have their headquarters in the city. Zagreb is the most important transport hub in Croatia: here Central Europe, the Mediterranean and Southeast Europe meet, making the Zagreb area the centre of the road, rail and air networks of Croatia. It is a city known for its diverse economy, high quality of living, museums, sporting, and entertainment events. Major branches of Zagreb's economy include high-tech industries and the service sector.\nName.\nThe etymology of the name \"Zagreb\" is unclear. It was used for the united city only from 1852, but it had been in use as the name of the Zagreb Diocese since the 12th century and was increasingly used for the city in the 17th century.\nThe name is first recorded in a charter by Felician, Archbishop of Esztergom, dated 1134, mentioned as .\nThe name is probably derived from Proto-Slavic word which means \"hill\" or \"uplift\". An Old Croatian reconstructed name is manifested through the city's former German name, Agram. Some linguists (\"e.g.\" Nada Klai\u0107, Miroslav Kravar) propose a metathesis of *\"Zabreg\", which would originate from Old Slavic \"breg\" (see Proto-Slavic ) in the sense of \"riverbank\", referring to River Sava. This metathesis has been attested in Kajkavian, but the meaning of \"riverbank\" is lost in modern Croatian and folk etymology associates it instead with \"breg\" \"hill\", ostensibly referring to Medvednica. Hungarian linguist Gyula D\u00e9csy similarly uses metathesis to construct *\"Chaprakov(o)\", a putative Slavicisation of a Hungarian hypocorism for \"Cyprian\", similar to the etymology of Csepreg, Hungary. The most likely derivation is *\"Zagr\u0119b\u044a\" in the sense of \"embankment\" or \"rampart\", \"i.e.\" remains of the 1st millennium fortifications on Gri\u010d.\nIn Middle Latin and Modern Latin, Zagreb is known as \"Agranum\" (the name of an unrelated Arabian city in Strabo), \"Zagrabia\" or \"Mons Graecensis\" (also \"Mons Crecensis\", in reference to Gri\u010d (Gradec)).\nThe most common folk etymology of the name of the city has been from the verb stem , meaning \"to scoop\" or \"to dig\". A folk legend illustrating this derivation, attested but discarded as a serious etymology by Ivan Tkal\u010di\u0107,\nties the name to a drought of the early 14th century, during which Augustin Ka\u017eoti\u0107 (c. 1260\u20131323) is said to have dug a well which miraculously produced water.\nIn another legend, a city governor is thirsty and orders a girl named Manda to \"scoop\" water from the Mandu\u0161evac well (nowadays a fountain in Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 Square), using the imperative: \"Zagrabi, Mando!\" (\"Scoop, Manda!\").\nHistory.\nThe oldest known settlement located near present-day Zagreb, the Roman town of Andautonia, now \u0160\u010ditarjevo, existed between the 1st and the 5th centuries AD.\nThe first recorded appearance of the name \"Zagreb\" dates from 1094, at which time the city existed as two different city centers: the smaller, eastern Kaptol, inhabited mainly by clergy and housing Zagreb Cathedral, and the larger, western Gradec, inhabited mainly by craftsmen and merchants. In 1851 the Ban of Croatia, Josip Jela\u010di\u0107, united Gradec and Kaptol; the name of the main city square, Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 Square honors him.\nWhile Croatia formed part of Yugoslavia (1918 to 1991), Zagreb remained an important economic centre of that country, and was the second largest city. After Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1991, the Parliament of the Republic of Croatia proclaimed Zagreb as the capital of the Republic of Croatia.\nEarly Zagreb.\nThe history of Zagreb dates as far back as 1094 when the Hungarian King Ladislaus, returning from his campaign against the Kingdom of Croatia, founded a diocese. Alongside the bishop's see, the canonical settlement Kaptol developed north of Zagreb Cathedral, as did the fortified settlement Gradec on the neighbouring hill, with the border between the two formed by the Medve\u0161\u010dak stream. Today the latter is Zagreb's Upper Town (\"Gornji grad\") and is one of the best-preserved urban nuclei in Croatia. Both settlements came under Mongol attack in 1242. As a sign of gratitude for offering him a safe haven from the Mongols, the Croatian and Hungarian King B\u00e9la IV granted Gradec the Golden Bull of 1242, which gave its citizens exemption from county rule and autonomy, as well as their own judicial system.\nRelationship between Kaptol and Gradec throughout history.\nThe development of Kaptol began in 1094 after the foundation of the diocese, while the growth of Gradec began after the Golden Bull was issued in 1242. In the history of the city of Zagreb, there have been numerous conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol, mainly due to disputed issues of rent collection and due to disputed properties.\nThe first known conflicts took place in the middle of the 13th century and continued with interruptions until 1667. Because of the conflict, it was recorded that the Bishop of Kaptol excommunicated the residents of Gradec twice.\nIn the conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol, there were several massacres of the citizens, destruction of houses and looting of citizens. In 1850, Gradec and Kaptol, with surrounding settlements, were united into a single settlement, today's city of Zagreb.\n16th to 18th centuries.\nThere were numerous connections between the Kaptol diocese and the free sovereign town of Gradec for both economic and political reasons, but they were not known as an integrated city, even as Zagreb became the political center, and the regional Sabor () representing Croatia, Slavonia and Dalmatia, first convened at Gradec. Zagreb became the Croatian capital in 1557, with city also being chosen as the seat of the Ban of Croatia in 1621 under ban Nikola IX Frankopan.\nAt the invitation of the Croatian Parliament, the Jesuits came to Zagreb and built the first grammar school,\nthe St. Catherine's Church (built 1620-1632)\nand monastery. In 1669, they founded an academy where philosophy, theology, and law were taught, the forerunner of today's University of Zagreb.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries, Zagreb was badly devastated by fire and by the plague. In 1776, the royal council (government) moved from Vara\u017edin to Zagreb and during the reign of the Emperor Joseph II Zagreb became the headquarters of the Vara\u017edin and Karlovac general command.\n19th to mid-20th century.\nIn the 19th century, Zagreb was the center of the Croatian National Revival and saw the foundation of important cultural and historic institutions.\nIn 1850, the town was united under its first mayor \u2013 Janko Kamauf.\nThe first railway line to connect Zagreb with Zidani Most and Sisak opened in 1862 and in 1863 Zagreb received a gasworks. Since 1 January 1877, the Gri\u010d cannon fires daily from the Lotr\u0161\u010dak Tower on Gri\u010d to mark midday. The Zagreb waterworks opened in 1878.\nAfter the 1880 Zagreb earthquake, up to the 1914 outbreak of World War I, development flourished and the town received the characteristic layout which it has today.\nThe first horse-drawn tram dated from 1891. The construction of railway lines enabled the old suburbs to merge gradually into Donji Grad, characterized by a regular block pattern that prevails in Central European cities. This bustling core includes many imposing buildings, monuments, and parks as well as a multitude of museums, theatres, and cinemas. An electric-power plant was built in 1907.\nThe first half of the 20th century saw a considerable expansion of Zagreb. Before World War I, the city expanded and neighborhoods like Stara Pe\u0161\u010denica in the east and \u010crnomerec in the west grew up. The Rokov perivoj neighbourhood, noted for its Art Nouveau features, was established at the start of the century.\nAfter the war, working-class districts such as Trnje emerged between the railway and the Sava, whereas the construction of residential districts on the hills of the southern slopes of Medvednica was completed between the two World Wars.\nIn the 1920s, the population of Zagreb increased by 70 percent \u2013 the largest demographic boom in the history of the town. In 1926, the first radio station in the region began broadcasting from Zagreb, and in 1947 the Zagreb Fair opened.\nDuring World War II, Zagreb became the capital of the Independent State of Croatia (1941\u20131945), which was backed by Nazi Germany and by the Italians. The history of Zagreb in World War II became rife with incidents of r\u00e9gime terror and resistance sabotage - the Usta\u0161a r\u00e9gime had thousands of people executed during the war in and near the city. Partisans took the city at the end of the war. From 1945 until 1990, Zagreb functioned as the capital of the Socialist Republic of Croatia, one of the six constituent socialist republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.\nContemporary era.\nThe area between the railway and the Sava river witnessed a new construction-boom after World War II. After the mid-1950s, construction of new residential areas south of the Sava river began, resulting in Novi Zagreb (Croatian for \"New Zagreb\"), originally called \"Ju\u017eni Zagreb\" (\"Southern Zagreb\").\nFrom 1999 Novi Zagreb has comprised two city districts: Novi Zagreb \u2013 zapad (\"New Zagreb \u2013 West\") and Novi Zagreb \u2013 istok (\"New Zagreb \u2013 East\")\nThe city also expanded westward and eastward, incorporating Dubrava, Podsused, Jarun, Blato, and other settlements.\nThe cargo railway hub and the international airport (Pleso) were built south of the Sava river. The largest industrial zone (\u017ditnjak) in the south-eastern part of the city, represents an extension of the industrial zones on the eastern outskirts of the city, between the Sava and the Prigorje region. Zagreb hosted the Summer Universiade in 1987. This event initiated the creation of pedestrian-only zones in the city centre and extensive new sport infrastructure, lacking until then, all around the city.\nDuring the 1991\u20131995 Croatian War of Independence, the city saw some sporadic fighting around its JNA army barracks, but escaped major damage. In May 1995, it was targeted by Serb rocket artillery in two rocket attacks which killed seven civilians and wounded many.\nAn urbanized area connects Zagreb with the surrounding towns of Zapre\u0161i\u0107, Samobor, Dugo Selo, and Velika Gorica. Sesvete was the first and the closest area to become a part of the agglomeration and is already included in the City of Zagreb for administrative purposes and now forms the easternmost city district.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Zagreb is classified as an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), bordering a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\").\nZagreb has four distinct seasons. Summers are generally warm, sometimes hot. In late May it gets significantly warmer, temperatures start rising and it often becomes very warm or even hot with occasional afternoon and evening thunderstorms. Heatwaves can occur but are short-lived. Temperatures rise above on average 14.6 days each summer. During summertime, rainfall is abundant and it mainly falls during thunderstorms. With 840\u00a0mm of precipitation per year, Zagreb is Europe's ninth wettest capital, receiving less precipitation than Luxembourg but more than Brussels, Paris or London. Compared to these cities, however, Zagreb has fewer rainy days, but the annual rainfall is higher due to heavier showers occurring mainly in late spring and summer. Autumn in its early stage often brings pleasant and sunny weather with occasional episodes of rain later in the season. Late autumn is characterized by a mild increase in the number of rainy days and a gradual decrease in daily temperature averages. Morning fog is common from mid-October to January, with northern city districts at the foothills of the Medvednica mountain as well as south-central districts along the Sava river being more prone to longer fog accumulation.\nWinters are relatively cold, bringing overcast skies and a precipitation decrease pattern. February is the driest month, averaging 39\u00a0mm of precipitation. On average there are 29 days with snowfall, with the first snow usually falling in early December. However, in recent years, the number of days with snowfall in wintertime has decreased considerably. Spring is characterized by often pleasant but changeable weather. As the season progresses, sunny days become more frequent, bringing higher temperatures. Sometimes cold spells can occur as well, mostly in the season's early stages. The average daily mean temperature in the winter is around (from December to February) and the average temperature in the summer is .\nThe highest recorded temperature at the Maksimir weather station was in July 1950, and lowest was in February 1956. A temperature of was recorded on the since defunct Borongaj Airfield in February 1940.\nSince records began in 1981, the highest temperature recorded at the Rim weather station in Zagreb was , on 8 August 2018. The coldest temperature was , on 12 January 1985.\nCityscape.\nThe most important historical high-rise constructions are Neboder (1958) on Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 Square, Cibona Tower (1987), and Zagrep\u010danka (1976) on Savska Street, Mamutica in Travno (Novi Zagreb \u2013 istok district, built in 1974) and Zagreb TV Tower on Sljeme (built in 1973).\nIn the 2000s, the City Assembly approved a new plan that allowed for the many recent high-rise buildings in Zagreb, such as the Almeria Tower, Eurotower, HOTO Tower, Zagrebtower, Sky Office Tower and the tallest high-rise building in Zagreb Strojarska Business Center.\nIn Novi Zagreb, the neighbourhoods of Blato and Lani\u0161te expanded significantly, including the Zagreb Arena and the adjoining business centre.\nDue to a long-standing restriction that forbade the construction of 10-story or higher buildings, most of Zagreb's high-rise buildings date from the 1970s and 1980s and new apartment buildings on the outskirts of the city are usually 4\u20138 floors tall. Exceptions to the restriction have been made in recent years, such as permitting the construction of high-rise buildings in Lani\u0161te or Kajzerica.\nSurroundings.\nThe wider Zagreb area has been continuously inhabited since the prehistoric period, as witnessed by archaeological findings in the Veternica cave from the Paleolithic and excavation of the remains of the Roman Andautonia near the present village of \u0160\u0107itarjevo.\nPicturesque former villages on the slopes of Medvednica, \u0160estine, Gra\u010dani, and Remete, maintain their rich traditions, including folk costumes, \u0160estine umbrellas, and gingerbread products.\nTo the north is the Medvednica mountain (), with its highest peak Sljeme (1,035 m), where one of the tallest structures in Croatia, Zagreb TV Tower is located. The Sava and the Kupa valleys are to the south of Zagreb, and the region of Hrvatsko Zagorje is located on the other (northern) side of the Medvednica hill. In mid-January 2005, Sljeme held its first World Ski Championship tournament.\nFrom the summit, weather permitting, the vista reaches as far as Velebit Range along Croatia's rocky northern coast, as well as the snow-capped peaks of the towering Julian Alps in neighboring Slovenia. There are several lodging villages, offering accommodation and restaurants for hikers. Skiers visit Sljeme, which has four ski-runs, three ski-lifts, and a chairlift.\nThe old Medvedgrad, a recently restored medieval burg was built in the 13th century on Medvednica hill. It overlooks the western part of the city and also hosts the \"Shrine of the Homeland\", a memorial with an eternal flame, where Croatia pays reverence to all its heroes fallen for homeland in its history, customarily on national holidays. The ruined medieval fortress Susedgrad is located on the far-western side of Medvednica hill. It has been abandoned since the early 17th century, but it is visited during the year.\nZagreb occasionally experiences earthquakes, due to the proximity of \u017dumberak-Medvednica fault zone. It's classified as an area of high seismic activity. The area around Medvednica was the epicentre of the 1880 Zagreb earthquake (magnitude 6.3), and the area is known for occasional landslide threatening houses in the area. The proximity of strong seismic sources presents a real danger of strong earthquakes. Croatian Chief of Office of Emergency Management Pavle Kalini\u0107 stated Zagreb experiences around 400 earthquakes a year, most of them being imperceptible. However, in case of a strong earthquake, it's expected that 3,000 people would die and up to 15,000 would be wounded. In 2020 the city experienced a 5.5 magnitude earthquake, which damaged various buildings in the historic downtown area. The city's iconic cathedral lost the cross off of one of its towers. This earthquake was the strongest one to affect the city since the destructive 1880 Zagreb earthquake.\nDemographics.\nZagreb is by far the largest city in Croatia in terms of population, which was 767,131 in 2021.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nZagreb metropolitan area population is slightly above one million inhabitants, as it includes the Zagreb County. Zagreb metropolitan area makes approximately a quarter of the total population of Croatia. In 1997, the City of Zagreb was given its own special County status, separating it from Zagreb County, although it remains the administrative centre of both.\nThe majority of its citizens are Croats, making up 93.53% of the population. The other 6.47% of the population are residents belonging to ethnic minorities: 12,035 Serbs (1.57%), 6,566 Bosniaks (0.86%), 3,475 Albanians (0.45%), 2,167 Romani (0.28%), 1,312 Slovenes (0.17%), 1,036 Macedonians (0.15%), 865 Montenegrins (0.11%), and a number of other smaller communities.\nAfter the easing of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, thousands of foreign workers immigrated to Zagreb due to a shortage of labor in Croatia. These workers primarily come from countries such as Nepal, the Philippines, India, and Bangladesh, as well as some European countries including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Kosovo and North Macedonia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Croatian population data graph/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCity districts.\nSince 1999, the City of Zagreb is divided into 17 city districts:\nSettlements.\nThe city itself is not the only standalone settlement in the City of Zagreb administrative area \u2013 there are a number of larger urban settlements such as Sesvete and Lu\u010dko and a number of smaller villages attached to it whose population is tracked separately.\nThere are 70 settlements in the City of Zagreb administrative area:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics and government.\nZagreb is the capital of the Republic of Croatia, its political center and the center of various state institutions.\nOn the St. Mark's Square are the seats of the Government of the Republic of Croatia in the Banski Dvori complex, the Croatian Parliament (\"Sabor\"), as well as the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia. Various ministries and state agencies are located in the wider area of the City of Zagreb.\nCity governance.\nAccording to the constitution, the city of Zagreb, as the capital of Croatia, has a special status. As such, Zagreb performs self-governing public affairs of both city and county. It is also the seat of the Zagreb County which encircles Zagreb. The city administration bodies are the Zagreb City Assembly as the representative body and the Mayor of Zagreb who is the executive head of the city. The current mayor is Tomislav Toma\u0161evi\u0107 (We Can!), elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections, the second round of which was held on 30 May 2021. There are two deputy mayors elected from the same list, Danijela Dolenec and Luka Korlaet.\nThe 47 representatives of the City Assembly is elected for a four-year term on the basis of universal suffrage in direct elections by secret ballot using proportional system with d'Hondt method in a manner specified by law. The president and vice-presidents of the assembly are elected by the representatives. All changes to urban planning documents and the budget must be passed through the assembly.\nThe Office of the Mayor and the deputies are elected on a four year term. Before 2009, the mayor was elected by the City Assembly, but was changed to direct elections by majoritarian vote with a two-round system. They, along with the deputies, may be recalled by a referendum according to the law from not less than 20% of all electors or two-thirds of the assembly. The mayor is responsible for the state administration due to the city's special status, including appointing all heads of city offices and services. The city administration is divided into 12 city offices which are responsible for managing everything from urban planning to culture, the City institute for the Protection of Cultural and Natural Monuments, System Information and Technical Affairs Service, City Administration Expert Service and the City Assembly Expert Service, which is managed by a secretary appointed by the assembly. The city owns Zagreb Holding, a city enterprise which operates many branches carrying out all operating tasks, and Zagreb Electric Tram, the city transit authority.\nLocal government is organized into 17 city districts represented by City District Councils which are elected by the district's residents. Districts have to adopt plans for the maintenance of infrastructure and for community programs and projects, and can propose changes to urban development documents. The city is further subdivided into 218 local committees, the second level of local self-government. They are in charge of organizing cultural or other events in the area and listening to the problems of citizens living there. Since 2024, as part of participatory budgeting, residents can propose and discuss new projects in their neighborhoods.\nMinority councils and representatives.\nDirectly elected minority councils and representatives are tasked with consulting tasks for the local or regional authorities in which they are advocating for minority rights and interests, integration into public life and participation in the management of local affairs. At the 2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections Albanians, Bosniaks, Czechs, Hungarians, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Roma, Slovenes and Serbs of Croatia each fulfilled legal requirements to elect 25 members minority councils of the City of Zagreb while Bulgarians, Poles, Pannonian Rusyns, Russians, Slovaks, Italians, Turks, Ukrainians and Jews of Croatia elected individual representatives, with a representative of the Germans of Croatia remaining unelected due to the lack of candidates.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nZagreb is twinned with the following towns and cities:\nPartner cities.\nThe city has partnership arrangements with:\nCulture.\nTourism.\nZagreb is an important tourist center, not only in terms of passengers traveling from the rest of Europe to the Adriatic Sea but also as a travel destination itself. Since the end of the war, it has attracted close to a million visitors annually, mainly from Austria, Germany, and Italy, and in recent years many tourists from far east (South Korea, Japan, China, and last two years, from India). It has become an important tourist destination, not only in Croatia, but considering the whole region of southeastern Europe.\nThere are many interesting sights and happenings for tourists to attend in Zagreb, for example, the two statues of Saint George, one at the Republic of Croatia Square, the other at the Stone Gate, where the image of the Virgin Mary is said to be the only thing that did not burn in the 17th-century fire. Also, there is an art installation starting in the Bogovi\u0107eva Street, called Nine Views.\nZagreb is also famous for its award-winning Christmas market that had been named the one in Europe for three consecutive years (2015, 2016 and 2017) by \"European Best Destinations\".\nThe capital is also known for its many restaurants that serve not only traditional Croatian food and classic dishes. In addition to that, a lot of international hotel chains are offering their accommodations in Zagreb, including: Best Western, Hilton Worldwide: (DoubleTree by Hilton, Hilton Garden Inn &amp; Canopy by Hilton), Marriott International: (Sheraton Hotels &amp; The Westin Zagreb), Radisson Hotel Group, M\u00f6venpick Hotels &amp; Resorts, Novotel Hotels, Pullman Hotels and a former Regent Hotels &amp; Resorts which is now Esplanade Zagreb Hotel.\nThe historical part of the city to the north of Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 Square is composed of the Gornji Grad and Kaptol, a medieval urban complex of churches, palaces, museums, galleries and government buildings that are popular with tourists on sightseeing tours. The historic district can be reached on foot, starting from the Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 Square, the center of Zagreb, or by a funicular on nearby Tomi\u0107eva Street. Each Saturday, (from April until the end of September), on St. Mark's Square in the Upper Town, tourists can meet members of the Order of The Silver Dragon (\"Red Srebrnog Zmaja\"), who reenact famous historical conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol.\nSome famous Zagreb souvenirs are the tie or \"cravat\", an accessory named after Croats who wore characteristic scarves around their necks in the Thirty Years' War in the 17th century, and the ball-point pen, a tool developed from the inventions by Slavoljub Eduard Penkala, an inventor and a citizen of Zagreb.\nIn 2010 more than 600,000 tourists visited the city, with a 10% increase seen in 2011. In 2012 a total of 675 707 tourists visited the city. A record number of tourists visited Zagreb in 2017, 1.286.087, up 16% compared to the year before, which generated 2.263.758 overnight stays, up 14,8%.\nGastronomy.\nDomestic dishes include turkey, duck or goose with \"mlinci\" (flat pasta, soaked in roast juices), famous z\"agreba\u010dki odrezak\" (type of cordon bleu), \"fa\u0161iranci\" (fried minced meat mixed with onions and bread crumbs), and \"sarma\" (sauerkraut rolls filed with minced pork meat and rice, served with mashed potato). Strudel dishes include \"\u0161trukli,\" cottage cheese strudels, and \"bu\u010dnica\", a strudel with pumpkin or other fillings (dependent on the region). Cottage cheese with cream is a side dish that is eaten for breakfast. Desserts include \"krem\u0161nite,\" custard slices in flaky pastry, and \"orehnja\u010da\", traditional walnut rolls. Licitar, often called \"licitar's heart\", is a colorfully decorated biscuit made of sweet honey dough, written across with poems, traditional names or citations. Some are made out of permanent materials to be sold as souvenirs.\nZagreb is home to two Michelin star restaurants. Many restaurants offer various specialties of national and international cuisine. Bakeries sell regional pastries like burek, strudels and pies. \"Pe\u010denjara\" are restaurants specialized in serving grilled meats such as \u0107evapi, patties and lamb. \u201c\u0160pica\u201d refers to a coffee break with friends at cafe\u2019s in the city centre, and is usually paired with dressing well. It is busiest on Saturdays around noon, when many \u201ccelebrities\u201d can be seen walking in the city centre.\nCultural institutions.\nZagreb's museums reflect the history, art, and culture not only of Zagreb and Croatia, but also of Europe and the world. Around thirty collections in museums and galleries comprise more than 3.6 million various exhibits, excluding church and private collections.\nThe Archaeological Museum collections, today consisting of nearly 450,000 varied archaeological artefacts and monuments, have been gathered over the years from many different sources. These holdings include evidence of Croatian presence in the area. The most famous are the Egyptian collection, the Zagreb mummy and bandages with the oldest Etruscan inscription in the world (\"Liber Linteus Zagrabiensis\"), as well as the numismatic collection.\nThe Modern Gallery () holds the most important and comprehensive collection of paintings, sculptures and drawings by 19th- and 20th-century Croatian artists. The collection numbers more than 10,000 works of art, housed since 1934 in the historic Vranyczany Palace in the center of Zagreb, overlooking the Zrinjevac Park. A secondary gallery is the Josip Ra\u010di\u0107 Studio.\nThe Croatian Natural History Museum holds one of the world's most important collections of Neanderthal remains found at one site. These are the remains, stone weapons, and tools of prehistoric \"Krapina man\". The holdings of the Croatian Natural History Museum comprise more than 250,000 specimens distributed among various collections.\nThe Technical Museum was founded in 1954 and it maintains the oldest preserved machine in the area, dating from 1830, which is still operational. The museum exhibits numerous historic aircraft, cars, machinery and equipment. There are some distinct sections in the museum: the Planetarium, the Apisarium, the Mine (model of mines for coal, iron and non-ferrous metals, about long), and the Nikola Tesla study.\nThe Museum of the City of Zagreb was established in 1907 by the Association of the Bra\u0107a Hrvatskog Zmaja. It is located in a restored monumental complex (Popov toranj, the Observatory, Zakmardi Granary) of the former Convent of the Poor Clares, of 1650. The Museum deals with topics from the cultural, artistic, economic and political history of the city spanning from Roman finds to the modern period. The holdings comprise over 80,000 items arranged systematically into collections of artistic and mundane objects characteristic of the city and its history.\nThe Arts and Crafts Museum was founded in 1880 with the intention of preserving the works of art and craft against the new predominance of industrial products. With its 160,000 exhibits, the Arts and Crafts Museum is a national-level museum for artistic production and the history of material culture in Croatia.\nThe Ethnographic Museum was founded in 1919. It lies in the fine Secession building of the one-time Trades Hall of 1903. The ample holdings of about 80,000 items cover the ethnographic heritage of Croatia, classified in three cultural zones: the Pannonian, Dinaric and Adriatic.\nThe Mimara Museum an art museum, that was founded with a donation from Ante Topi\u0107 Mimara and opened to the public in 1987. It is located in a late 19th-century neo-Renaissance palace. The holdings comprise 3,750 works of art of various techniques and materials, and different cultures and civilizations, including paintings from great European masters like: Caravaggio, Raphael, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Rembrandt, Hieronymus Bosch, Francisco Goya, Diego Vel\u00e1zquez and many others.\nThe Croatian Museum of Na\u00efve Art is one of the first museums of na\u00efve art in the world. The museum holds works of Croatian na\u00efve expression of the 20th century. It is located in the 18th-century Raffay Palace in the Gornji Grad. The museum holdings consist of almost 2000 works of art \u2013 paintings, sculptures, drawings, and prints, mainly by Croatians but also by other well-known world artists. From time to time, the museum organizes topics and retrospective exhibitions by na\u00efve artists, expert meetings and educational workshops and playrooms.\nThe Museum of Contemporary Art was founded in 1954. Its new building hosts a rich collection of Croatian and international contemporary visual art which has been collected throughout the decades from the nineteen-fifties until today. The museum is located in the center of Novi Zagreb and opened in 2009. The old location is now part of the Kulmer Palace in the Gornji Grad.\nThe Institute for Contemporary Art (\"Institut za suvremenu umjetnost\"), successor to the Soros Center for Contemporary Art \u2013 Zagreb (SCCA \u2013 Zagreb), was founded in 1993, and registered as an independent nonprofit organization in 1998. It was founded and run by art historians, curators, artists, photographers, designers, publishers, academics, and journalists, and initially located at the Museum of Contemporary Art. After moving a number of times, the institute has a gallery at the Academia Moderna. Its aims are to promote contemporary Croatian artists and the visual and other creative arts; to start documenting contemporary artists; and to build a body of contemporary art. It established the Radoslav Putar Award in 2002.\nThe Strossmayer Gallery of Old Masters offers permanent holdings presenting European paintings from the 14th to 19th centuries, and the Ivan Me\u0161trovi\u0107 Studio, with sculptures, drawings, lithography portfolios and other items, was a donation of this great artist to his homeland. The Museum and Gallery Center introduces on various occasions the Croatian and foreign cultural and artistic heritage. The Art Pavilion by Viennese architects Hellmer and Fellmer who were the most famous designers of theatres in Central Europe is a neo-classical exhibition complex and one of the landmarks of the downtown. The exhibitions are also held in the Me\u0161trovi\u0107 building on the Square of the Victims of Fascism \u2013 the Home of Croatian Fine Artists. The World Center \"Wonder of Croatian Na\u00efve Art\" exhibits masterpieces of Croatian na\u00efve art as well as the works of a new generation of artists. The Modern Gallery comprises all relevant fine artists of the 19th and 20th centuries. The Museum of Broken Relationships at 2 \u0106irilometodska holds people's mementos of past relationships. It is the first private museum in the country. Lauba House presents works from the Filip Trade Collection, a large private collection of modern and contemporary Croatian art and current artistic production.\nOther museums and galleries are also found in the Croatian School Museum, the Croatian Hunting Museum, the Croatian Sports Museum, the Croatian Post and Telecommunications Museum, the HAZU (Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts) Glyptotheque (collection of monuments), and the HAZU Graphics Cabinet.\nThere are five castles in Zagreb: Dvorac Brezovica, Ka\u0161ina (Castrum antiquum Paganorum), Medvedgrad, Susedgrad and Kulmerovi dvori.\nZagreb Zoo is a 7-hectare zoo located in Maksimir Park opened in 1925. It holds 6754 animals from more than 370 species from all around the world, and is the most visited zoo in Croatia with almost half of million visitors in 2023.\nEvents.\nZagreb has hosted some of the most popular mainstream musical artists in recent years, including those of Queen, Rolling Stones, U2, Guns N' Roses, Eric Clapton, Deep Purple, Bob Dylan, David Bowie, Elton John, Roger Waters, Depeche Mode, Prodigy, Beyonc\u00e9, Lady Gaga, Britney Spears, Ed Sheeran, Justin Bieber, Shakira, Nick Cave, Jamiroquai, George Michael, Sade, Sting, Rod Stewart, Eros Ramazzotti, Manu Chao, Massive Attack, Andrea Bocelli, Metallica, 50 Cent, Snoop Dogg, Duran Duran as well as some of world most recognised underground artists such as Dimmu Borgir, Sepultura, Melvins, Mastodon and more.\nZagreb is also the home of the INmusic festival, one of the biggest open-air festivals in Croatia which is held every year, usually at the end of June, hosting a lot of big names like Hozier, Lily Allen, Arctic Monkeys, Rokia Traor\u00e9, Anthrax and many more. There is also the Zagreb Jazz Festival which has featured popular jazz artists like Pat Metheny or Sonny Rollins. Many other festivals occur in Zagreb like \u017dedno uho featuring indie, rock, metal and electronica artists such as Animal Collective, Melvins, Butthole Surfers, Crippled Black Phoenix, NoMeansNo, The National, Mark Lanegan, Swans, Mudhoney around the clubs and concert halls of Zagreb.\nPerforming arts.\nThere are about 20 permanent or seasonal theatres and stages. The Croatian National Theater in Zagreb was built in 1895 and opened by emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria. The most renowned concert hall named \"Vatroslav Lisinski\", after the composer of the first Croatian opera, was built in 1973.\nThe World Theatre Festival and International Puppet Festival both take place in Zagreb in September and October.\n\"Animafest\", the World Festival of Animated Films, takes place every even-numbered year, and the \"Music Biennale\", the international festival of avant-garde music, every odd-numbered year. It also hosts the annual \"ZagrebDox\" documentary film festival. The \"Festival of the Zagreb Philharmonic\" and the flowers exhibition \"Floraart\" (end of May or beginning of June), the \"Old-timer Rally\" annual events. In the summer, theatre performances and concerts, mostly in the Upper Town, are organized either indoors or outdoors. The stage on Opatovina hosts the \"Zagreb Histrionic Summer\" theatre events.\nZagreb is also the host of \"Zagrebfest\", the oldest Croatian pop-music festival, as well as of several traditional international sports events and tournaments. The \"Day of the City of Zagreb\" on 16 November is celebrated every year with special festivities, especially on the Jarun lake in the southwestern part of the city.\nRecreation and sports.\nParks.\nZagreb is home to numerous sports and recreational parks. Recreational Sports Center Jarun, situated on the Jarun Lake in the southwest of the city, has shingle beaches, a regatta course used for training and sports competitions, a jogging and a bike lane around the lake, and several restaurants and night clubs. Its sports and recreation opportunities include swimming, sunbathing, waterskiing, angling, and other water sports, for which it is most popular, but also beach volleyball, football, basketball, handball, table tennis, and mini-golf. To the east in Novi Zagreb lays Bundek, a park with two small lakes near the Sava river, which were created in the 60s because of heavy excavations in the area, from which the material was used to build the Zagreb Fair and the Youth Bridge. The location had then been used until the 1970s, when it went into neglect until its complete renovation in 2006. In the north-east is Maksimir Park, an urban forest that was gifted to the city by bishop Maksimilijan Vrhovac. Because of its many meadows and lakes, which are well connected by a series of pathways, it is a popular place for walking, running and cycling.\nSports.\nIn northern Tre\u0161njevka lays Dom sportova, a sports center that features six halls, of which the largest two have a seating capacity of 5,000 and 3,100 people. This center is used for various sports: basketball, handball, volleyball, hockey, gymnastics, tennis, and others, as well as music events. Sports Park Mladost, situated on the embankment of the Sava river, has an Olympic-size swimming pool, smaller indoor and outdoor swimming pools, a sunbathing terrace, 16 tennis courts as well as basketball, volleyball, handball, football and field hockey courts. A volleyball sports hall is within the park. Sports and recreational center \"\u0160alata\", located in the neighborhood \u0160alata only a couple hundred meters from the Ban Jela\u010di\u0107 Square, includes nine tennis courts, four of which are covered in the winter to protect from the cold, as well as swimming pools which are open during the summer, basketball courts and football fields. Many of the fields are used by sports clubs. Outdoor ice skating is available during the winter. Maksimir Tennis Center, located in the neighborhood of Ravnice, east of downtown, consists of 22 outside and 4 inside tennis courts, and one squash court. There are currently seven pool complexes across the city. Since the city doesn't have many skate parks, skaters can only skate in a few locations in Zagreb, them being Jarun, \u0160pansko and Vrap\u010de (which is a DIY skate park built by volunteers). Zagreb Hippodrome offers recreational horseback riding and horse races, able to house 175 horses. It has been used for mass gatherings and concerts.\nArena Zagreb is the main and the biggest arena in the city, with a total of 16,500 seats. It hosted the 2009 World Men's Handball Championship. The Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107 Basketball Hall is the home arena of Cibona, one of the main basketball clubs in the city, with a seating capacity of 5017 people. It is located next to the tall Cibona Tower. The 35,123-seat Maksimir Stadium is the largest stadium in the city and home to Dinamo Zagreb. Opened in 1912, it has undergone many transformations, but was never completely finished. The stadium is located next to the Svetice Recreational and Sports Complex and Maksimir Park.\nSome of the most notable sport clubs in Zagreb are: GNK Dinamo Zagreb, KHL Medve\u0161\u010dak Zagreb, RK Zagreb, KK Cibona, KK Zagreb, KK Cedevita, NK Zagreb, HAVK Mladost and others.\nReligion.\nThe Archdiocese of Zagreb is a metropolitan see of the Catholic Church in Croatia, serving as its religious center. The Archbishop is Dra\u017een Kutle\u0161a. The Catholic Church is the largest religious organization in Zagreb, Catholicism being the predominant religion of Croatia, with over 1.1 million adherents. Zagreb is also the episcopal see of the Metropolitanate of Zagreb and Ljubljana of the Serbian Orthodox Church. Islamic religious organization of Croatia has the see in Zagreb. President is Mufti Aziz Hasanovi\u0107. There used to be a mosque in the Me\u0161trovi\u0107 Pavilion during World War II at the Square of the Victims of Fascism, but it was relocated to the neighborhood of Borovje in Pe\u0161\u010denica. Mainstream Protestant churches have also been present in Zagreb \u2013 Evangelical (Lutheran) Church and Reformed Christian (Calvinist) Church. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is also present in the Zagreb neighborhood of Jarun whereas Jehovah's Witnesses have their headquarters in Central Zagreb. In total there are around 40 non-Catholic religious organizations and denominations in Zagreb with their headquarters and places of worship across the city making it a large and diverse multicultural community. There is also significant Jewish history through the Holocaust.\nEconomy.\nImportant branches of industry are: production of electrical machines and devices, chemical, pharmaceutical, textile, food and drink processing. Zagreb is an international trade and business centre, as well as an essential transport hub placed at the crossroads of Central Europe, the Mediterranean and the Southeast Europe. Almost all of the largest Croatian as well as Central European companies and conglomerates such as Agrokor, INA, Hrvatski Telekom have their headquarters in the city.\nThe only Croatian stock exchange is the Zagreb Stock Exchange, which is located in Eurotower, one of the tallest Croatian skyscrapers.\nAccording to 2008 data, the city of Zagreb has the highest PPP and nominal gross domestic product per capita in Croatia at $32,185 and $27,271 respectively, compared to the Croatian averages of US$18,686 and $15,758.\nAs of May 2015, the average monthly net salary in Zagreb was 6,669 kuna, about \u20ac870 (Croatian average is 5,679 kuna, about \u20ac740). At the end of 2012, the average unemployment rate in Zagreb was around 9.5%.\n34% of companies in Croatia have headquarters in Zagreb, and 38.4% of the Croatian workforce works in Zagreb, including almost all banks, utility and public transport companies.\nCompanies in Zagreb create 52% of the total turnover and 60% of the total profit of Croatia in 2006 as well as 35% of Croatian export and 57% of Croatian import.\nThe following table includes some of the main economic indicators for the period 2011\u20132019, based on the data provided by the Croatian Bureau of Statistics. A linear interpolation was used for the population data between 2011 and 2021. While data on the yearly averaged conversion rates between HRK, EUR and USD is provided by the Croatian National Bank.\nTransport.\nHighways.\nZagreb is the hub of five major Croatian highways. The A6 highway was upgraded in October 2008 and leads from Zagreb to Rijeka, forming a part of the Pan-European Corridor Vb. The upgrade coincided with the opening of the bridge over the Mura river on the A4 and the completion of the Hungarian M7, which marked the opening of the first freeway corridor between Rijeka and Budapest. The A1 starts at the Lu\u010dko interchange and concurs with the A6 up to the Bosiljevo 2 interchange, connecting Zagreb and Split. A further extension of the A1 up to Dubrovnik is under construction. Both highways are tolled by the Croatian highway authorities Hrvatske autoceste and Autocesta Rijeka - Zagreb.\nThe A3 highway (formerly named Bratstvo i jedinstvo) was the showpiece of Croatia in the SFRY. It is the oldest Croatian highway. A3 forms a part of the Pan-European Corridor X. The highway starts at the Bregana border crossing, bypasses Zagreb forming the southern arch of the Zagreb bypass, and ends at Lipovac near the Bajakovo border crossing. It continues in Southeast Europe in the direction of Near East. This highway is tolled except for the stretch between Bobovica and Ivanja Reka interchanges.\nThe A2 highway is a part of the Corridor Xa. It connects Zagreb and the frequently congested Macelj border crossing, forming a near-continuous motorway-level link between Zagreb and Western Europe. Forming a part of the Corridor Vb, highway A4 starts in Zagreb forming the northeastern wing of the Zagreb bypass and leads to Hungary until the Gori\u010dan border crossing. It is often used highway around Zagreb.\nThe railway and the A3 highway along the Sava river that extend to Slavonia (towards Slavonski Brod, Vinkovci, Osijek and Vukovar) are some of the busiest traffic corridors in the country. The railway running along the Sutla river and the A2 highway (Zagreb-Macelj) running through Zagorje, as well as traffic connections with the Pannonian region and Hungary (the Zagorje railroad, the roads and railway to Vara\u017edin \u2013 \u010cakovec and Koprivnica) are linked with truck routes. The southern railway connection to Split operates on a high-speed tilting trains line via the Lika region (renovated in 2004 to allow for a five-hour journey); a faster line along the Una river valley is in use only up to the border between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nRoads.\nThe city has an extensive avenue network with numerous main arteries up to ten lanes wide. The busiest roads are the main east\u2013west arteries, former Highway \"Brotherhood and Unity\", consisting of Ljubljana Avenue, Zagreb Avenue and Slavonia Avenue; and the Vukovar Avenue, the closest bypass of the city center. The avenues were supposed to alleviate the traffic problem, but most of them are nowadays gridlocked during rush hour and others, like Branimirova Avenue and Dubrovnik Avenue which are gridlocked for the whole day. European routes E59, E65 and E70 serve Zagreb.\nBridges.\nThe first bridge with a steel construction was built in 1892 at the end of the Sava road, replacing the previous wooden bridge. Today, Zagreb has six road traffic bridges across the river Sava, and they all span both the river and the levees, making them all by and large longer than . In downstream order, these are:\nCycling.\nThe conditions for cycling in Zagreb are favorable because of its flat terrain under the Medvednica mountain and little snowfall during winter. Zagreb has warm summers and cold winters, which can make cycling more difficult. The biking infrastructure in the city are a series of unconnected bike lanes that start and end abruptly instead of forming a connected network. Most of the existing lanes are located on sidewalks and are indicated by a painted line. The city had a Nextbike bike-sharing system from 2013 to 2025, when it was replaced by a \u20ac11.6 million city-funded \"Bajs\" system. It is maintained by a Nextbike licensed partner \"Public bicycle system\", since they were the only ones to make an offer\".\"\nPublic transportation.\nPublic transportation in the city is organized in multiple layers: the inner parts of the city are mostly covered by trams, while the outer city areas and suburbs are linked with buses and rapid transit commuter rail. The public transportation company Zagreb Electric Tram operates all tram and city bus lines, and most of the suburban bus lines. The Zagreb Funicular (\"uspinja\u010da\"), which was built in the 19th century and is only long 66 meters, is a popular tourist attraction. It was built before the Jubilee Economic-Forestry Exhibition to easily travel between the growing lower part of the city and the administrative and political center on the Upper Town. To the north, Sljeme, the peak of the Medvednica mountain, is accessible by a gondola lift. The ride lasts for just over 16 minutes and has an elevation of 754 m. Zagreb Bus Station also serves as important hub for bus transport, which is very well connected with rest of the Europe. \nThe national rail operator Croatian Railways runs a network of urban and suburban train lines in the metropolitan Zagreb area and is a government-owned corporation.\nThe taxi market has been liberalized in early 2018, and numerous transport companies (including Uber) have been allowed to enter the market. Despite this liberalization, taxi prices were prevented from increasing too much via legislation that capped them on one tenth of the average monthly salary.\nTram network.\nZagreb has an extensive tram network with 15 day and 4 night lines covering much of the inner- and middle-suburbs of the city. The first tram line was opened on 5 September 1891 and trams have been serving as a vital component of Zagreb mass transit ever since. Many new lines were introduced in the coming years, and by 1911, the whole network was electrified. New tracks were continuously added to the network throughout the 20th century, even during World War II under the leadership of Dragutin Mandl. The last expansion happened in 2000. The average speed of trams is only , one of the slowest in Europe. On narrower streets, the tracks are either shared with car traffic or separated by a painted yellow line, which can still be used by taxis, buses and emergency vehicles, which can slow down trams during rush hour, whereas on larger avenues the tracks are situated inside green belts.\nThe rolling stock consists of the newer Croatian-built Crotram TMK 2100, TMK 2200, TMK 2300 and TMK 2400 tram types, and older Tatra T4YU and KT4YU types. The city also bought 11 used GT6M trams to replace the older TMK 201 trams. Trams transported 121.83 million people in 2024, or roughly 333,773 a day.\nRail.\nThe train tracks form a circle around the inner-city and have branches going in four directions: Zapre\u0161i\u0107, Dugo Selo, Jastrebarsko and Velika Gorica. Zagreb is connected with all major cities in Croatia, including Vinkovci, Karlovac, Rijeka and Split, as well with cities in other European countries - Ljubljana, Budapest, Munich and Zurich. A 2024 Greenpeace study found out that Zagreb had much unused potential in connecting with other major European cities, instead prioritizing air travel.\nSuburban rail.\nThe commuter rail network in Zagreb has existed since 1992, with the introduction of the Savski Marof - Zagreb - Dugo Selo line. In 2005, suburban rail services were increased to a 15-minute frequency serving the middle and outer suburbs of Zagreb, primarily in the east\u2013west direction and to the southern districts. This has enhanced the commuting opportunities across the city. The cities connected by the suburban lines include Harmica, Savski Marof, Zapre\u0161i\u0107, Dugo Selo and Velika Gorica. The passenger trains ride on the same tracks as freight trains, which can cause delays. The Zagreb Electric Tram and the Croatian Railways offer combined monthly and yearly ticket passes with discounted prices.\nAir traffic.\nZagreb Franjo Tu\u0111man Airport () is the main Croatian international airport, a drive southeast of Zagreb in the city of Velika Gorica. The airport is also the main Croatian airbase featuring a fighter squadron, helicopters, as well as military and freight transport aircraft. The airport had 3.45 million passengers in 2019 with a new passenger terminal being opened in late March 2017 that can accommodate up to 5.5 million passengers, and in 2024 it hit record number of passengers with 4.31 million, making it the busiest airport in Croatia and one of the busiest airports in Europe. Zagreb Airport is the only airport in Croatia that has direct flights with Canada, and one of two (with Dubrovnik Airport) to have direct flights with North America. The airport is served by a bus line from Eugen Kvaternik Square.\nZagreb also has a second, smaller airport, Lu\u010dko Airfield (). It is home to sports airplanes and a Croatian special police unit, as well as being a military helicopter airbase. Lu\u010dko used to be the main airport of Zagreb from 1947 to 1959.\nA third, small grass airfield, Bu\u0161evec, is located just outside Velika Gorica. It is primarily used for sports purposes.\nEducation.\nZagreb has 136 primary schools and 100 secondary schools, including 30 gymnasia. There are 5 public higher education institution and 9 private professional higher education schools.\nThere are 4 international schools in Zagreb:\nUniversity of Zagreb.\nFounded in 1669, the University of Zagreb is the oldest continuously operating university in Croatia and one of the largest and oldest universities in the Southeastern Europe. Ever since its foundation, the university has been continually growing and developing and now consists of 29 faculties, three art academies and the Croatian Studies Centre. More than 200,000 students have attained the Bachelor's degree at the university, which has also assigned 18,000 Master's and 8,000 Doctor's degrees.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], the University of Zagreb is ranked among 500 Best Universities of the world by the Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities.\nZagreb is the seat of two private universities: the Catholic University of Croatia and the Libertas International University. It also hosts numerous public and private polytechnics, colleges and higher professional schools.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55908", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55908", "title": "Security-Enhanced Linux", "text": "Linux kernel security module \nSecurity-Enhanced Linux (SELinux) is a Linux kernel security module that provides a mechanism for supporting access control security policies, including mandatory access controls (MAC).\nSELinux is a set of kernel modifications and user-space tools that have been added to various Linux distributions. Its architecture strives to separate enforcement of security decisions from the security policy, and streamlines the amount of software involved with security policy enforcement. The key concepts underlying SELinux can be traced to several earlier projects by the United States National Security Agency (NSA).\nOverview.\nThe NSA Security-enhanced Linux Team describes NSA SELinux as\na set of patches to the Linux kernel and utilities to provide a strong, flexible, mandatory access control (MAC) architecture into the major subsystems of the kernel. It provides an enhanced mechanism to enforce the separation of information based on confidentiality and integrity requirements, which allows threats of tampering, and bypassing of application security mechanisms, to be addressed and enables the confinement of damage that can be caused by malicious or flawed applications. It includes a set of sample security policy configuration files designed to meet common, general-purpose security goals.\nA Linux kernel integrating SELinux enforces mandatory access control policies that confine user programs and system services, as well as access to files and network resources. Limiting privilege to the minimum required to work reduces or eliminates the ability of these programs and daemons to cause harm if faulty or compromised (for example via buffer overflows or misconfigurations). This confinement mechanism operates independently of the traditional Linux (discretionary) access control mechanisms. It has no concept of a \"root\" superuser, and does not share the well-known shortcomings of the traditional Linux security mechanisms, such as a dependence on setuid/setgid binaries.\nThe security of an \"unmodified\" Linux system (a system without SELinux) depends on the correctness of the kernel, of all the privileged applications, and of each of their configurations. A fault in any one of these areas may allow the compromise of the entire system. In contrast, the security of a \"modified\" system (based on an SELinux kernel) depends primarily on the correctness of the kernel and its security-policy configuration. While problems with the correctness or configuration of applications may allow the limited compromise of individual user programs and system daemons, they do not necessarily pose a threat to the security of other user programs and system daemons or to the security of the system as a whole.\nFrom a purist perspective, SELinux provides a hybrid of concepts and capabilities drawn from mandatory access controls, mandatory integrity controls, role-based access control (RBAC), and type enforcement architecture. Third-party tools enable one to build a variety of security policies.\nHistory.\nThe earliest work directed toward standardizing an approach providing mandatory and discretionary access controls (MAC and DAC) within a UNIX (more precisely, POSIX) computing environment can be attributed to the National Security Agency's Trusted UNIX (TRUSIX) Working Group, which met from 1987 to 1991 and published one Rainbow Book (#020A), and produced a formal model and associated evaluation evidence prototype (#020B) that was ultimately unpublished.\nSELinux was designed to demonstrate the value of mandatory access controls to the Linux community and how such controls could be added to Linux. Originally, the patches that make up SELinux had to be explicitly applied to the Linux kernel source; SELinux was merged into the Linux kernel mainline in the 2.6 series of the Linux kernel.\nThe NSA, the original primary developer of SELinux, released the first version to the open source development community under the GNU GPL on 22 December 2000. The software was merged into the mainline Linux kernel 2.6.0-test3, released on 8 August 2003. Other significant contributors include Red Hat, Network Associates, Secure Computing Corporation, Tresys Technology, and Trusted Computer Solutions. Experimental ports of the FLASK/TE implementation have been made available via the TrustedBSD Project for the FreeBSD and Darwin operating systems.\nSecurity-Enhanced Linux implements the Flux Advanced Security Kernel (FLASK). Such a kernel contains architectural components prototyped in the Fluke operating system. These provide general support for enforcing many kinds of mandatory access control policies, including those based on the concepts of type enforcement, role-based access control, and multilevel security. FLASK, in turn, was based on DTOS, a Mach-derived Distributed Trusted Operating System, as well as on Trusted Mach, a research project from Trusted Information Systems that had an influence on the design and implementation of DTOS.\nOriginal and external contributors.\nA comprehensive list of the original and external contributors to SELinux was hosted at the NSA website until maintenance ceased sometime in 2009. The following list reproduces the original as https:// by the Internet Archive Wayback Machine. The scope of their contributions was listed in the page and has been omitted for brevity, but it can be accessed through the archived copy.\nUsers, policies and security contexts.\nSELinux users and roles do not have to be related to the actual system users and roles. For every current user or process, SELinux assigns a three string context consisting of a username, role, and domain (or type). This system is more flexible than normally required: as a rule, most of the real users share the same SELinux username, and all access control is managed through the third tag, the domain. The circumstances under which a process is allowed into a certain domain must be configured in the policies. The command codice_1 allows for the launching of a process into an explicitly specified context (user, role, and domain), but SELinux may deny the transition if it is not approved by the policy.\nFiles, network ports, and other hardware also have an SELinux context, consisting of a name, role (seldom used), and type. In the case of file systems, mapping between files and the security contexts is called labeling. The labeling is defined in policy files but can also be manually adjusted without changing the policies. Hardware types are quite detailed, for instance, codice_2 (all files in the folder /bin) or codice_3 (PostgreSQL port, 5432). The SELinux context for a remote file system can be specified explicitly at mount time.\nSELinux adds the codice_4 switch to the shell commands codice_5, codice_6, and some others, allowing the security context of the files or process to be seen.\nTypical policy rules consist of explicit permissions, for example, which domains the user must possess to perform certain actions with the given target (read, execute, or, in case of network port, bind or connect), and so on. More complex mappings are also possible, involving roles and security levels.\nA typical policy consists of a mapping (labeling) file, a rule file, and an interface file, that define the domain transition. These three files must be compiled together with the SELinux tools to produce a single policy file. The resulting policy file can be loaded into the kernel to make it active. Loading and unloading policies does not require a reboot. The policy files are either hand written or can be generated from the more user friendly SELinux management tool. They are normally tested in permissive mode first, where violations are logged but allowed. The codice_7 tool can be used later to produce additional rules that extend the policy to allow all legitimate activities of the application being confined.\nFeatures.\nSELinux features include:\nAdoption.\nSELinux has been implemented in Android since version 4.3.\nAmong free community-supported Linux distributions, Fedora was one of the earliest adopters, including support for it by default since Fedora Core 2. Other distributions include support for it such as Debian as of version 9 Stretch release and Ubuntu as of 8.04 Hardy Heron. As of version 11.1, openSUSE contains SELinux \"basic enablement\". SUSE Linux Enterprise (SLE) 11 features SELinux as a \"technology preview\".\nSELinux is popular in systems based on Linux containers, such as CoreOS Container Linux and rkt. It is useful as an additional security control to help further enforce isolation between deployed containers and their host.\nSELinux is available since 2005 as part of Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) version 4 and all future releases. This presence is also reflected in corresponding versions of derived systems such as CentOS, Scientific Linux, AlmaLinux and Rocky Linux. The supported policy in RHEL4 is targeted policy which aims for maximum ease of use and thus is not as restrictive as it might be. Future versions of RHEL are planned to have more targets in the targeted policy which will mean more restrictive policies. RHEL version 5 introduced multilevel security (MLS) policy for servers only. Fedora Linux 10 introduced a minimum policy, designed for certain platforms such as low-memory devices and virtual machines.\nopenSUSE Tumbleweed transitioned from AppArmor to SELinux for new installation since 11 February 2025, upcoming SLE/openSUSE Leap 16 will be shipped with SELinux by default as well. openSUSE/SLE adopted RHEL/Fedora policies for its SELinux implementation although with some differences. AppArmor is retained for existing Tumbleweed and SLE/openSUSE Leap 15.x installation (users can manually migrate their existing installation to SELinux). AppArmor is also available as install-time selection for users who prefer it.\nUse case scenarios.\nSELinux can potentially control which activities a system allows each user, process, and daemon, with very precise specifications. It is used to confine daemons such as database engines or web servers that have clearly defined data access and activity rights. This limits potential harm from a confined daemon that becomes compromised.\nCommand-line utilities include:\ncodice_8,\ncodice_9,\ncodice_10,\ncodice_1,\ncodice_12,\ncodice_13,\ncodice_14,\ncodice_15,\ncodice_16,\ncodice_17,\ncodice_18,\ncodice_19\ncodice_20,\ncodice_21,\ncodice_22,\ncodice_23,\ncodice_24,\ncodice_25,\ncodice_26,\ncodice_27,\nand codice_28\nExamples.\nTo put SELinux into enforcing mode:\ncodice_29\nTo query the SELinux status:\ncodice_30\nComparison with AppArmor.\nSELinux represents one of several possible approaches to the problem of restricting the actions that installed software can take. Another popular alternative is called AppArmor and is available on SUSE Linux Enterprise Server (SLES), openSUSE, and Debian-based platforms. AppArmor was developed as a component to the now-defunct Immunix Linux platform. Because AppArmor and SELinux differ radically from one another, they form distinct alternatives for software control. Whereas SELinux re-invents certain concepts to provide access to a more expressive set of policy choices, AppArmor was designed to be simple by extending the same administrative semantics used for DAC up to the mandatory access control level.\nThere are several key differences:\nSimilar systems and enhancements.\nIsolation of processes can also be accomplished by mechanisms such as virtualization; the OLPC project, for example, in its first implementation sandboxed individual applications in lightweight Vservers. Also, the NSA has adopted some of the SELinux concepts in Security-Enhanced Android.\nGeneral Dynamics builds and distributes PitBull Trusted Operating System, a multilevel security (MLS) enhancement for Red Hat Enterprise Linux.\nMulti-Category Security (MCS) is an enhancement to SELinux for Red Hat Enterprise Linux that allows users to label files with categories, in order to further restrict access through discretionary access control and type enforcement. Categories provide additional compartments within sensitivity levels used by multilevel security (MLS).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55909", "revid": "49417305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55909", "title": "Laurel and Hardy", "text": "English-American comedy duo\nLaurel and Hardy were a comedy duo during the early Classical Hollywood era of American cinema, consisting of Englishman Stan Laurel (1890\u20131965) and American Oliver Hardy (1892\u20131957). Starting their career as a duo in the silent film era, they later successfully transitioned to \"talkies\". From the late 1920s to the mid-1950s, they were internationally famous for their slapstick comedy, with Laurel playing the clumsy, childlike friend to Hardy's pompous bully. Their signature theme song, known as \"The Cuckoo Song\", \"Ku-Ku\", or \"The Dance of the Cuckoos\" (by Hollywood composer T. Marvin Hatley) was heard over their films' opening credits, and became as emblematic of them as their bowler hats.\nPrior to emerging as a team, both had well-established film careers. Laurel had acted in over 50 films, and worked as a writer and director, while Hardy was in more than 250 productions. Both had appeared in \"The Lucky Dog\" (1921), but were not teamed at the time. They first appeared together in a short film in 1926, when they signed separate contracts with the Hal Roach film studio. They officially became a team in 1927 when they appeared in the silent short \"Putting Pants on Philip\". They remained with Roach until 1940, and then appeared in eight B movie comedies for 20th Century Fox and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer from 1941 to 1945. After finishing their film commitments at the end of 1944, they concentrated on performing stage shows, and embarked on a music hall tour of the British Isles. They made their last film in 1950, a French\u2013Italian co-production called \"Atoll K\". Afterward, they resumed their stage appearances until 1954.\nThey appeared as a team in 107 films, starring in 32 short silent films, 40 short sound films and 23 full-length feature films. They also made 12 guest or cameo appearances, including in the \"Galaxy of Stars\" promotional film of 1936. On December 1, 1954, they made their sole American television appearance, when they were surprised and interviewed by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program \"This Is Your Life\".\nSince the 1930s, their works have been released in numerous theatrical reissues, television revivals, 8-mm and 16-mm home movies, feature-film compilations, and home videos. In 2005, they were voted the seventh-greatest comedy act of all time by a UK poll of professional comedians. The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is The Sons of the Desert, after a fictional fraternal society in the film of the same name.\nEarly careers.\nStan Laurel.\nStan Laurel (June 16, 1890 \u2013 February 23, 1965) was born Arthur Stanley Jefferson in Ulverston, Lancashire, England, into a theatrical family. His father, Arthur Joseph Jefferson, was a theatrical entrepreneur and theater owner in northern England and Scotland who, with his wife, was a major force in the industry. In 1905, the Jefferson family moved to Glasgow to be closer to their business mainstay of the Metropole Theatre, and Laurel made his stage debut in a Glasgow hall called the Britannia Panopticon one month short of his 16th birthday. Arthur Jefferson secured Laurel his first acting job with the juvenile theatrical company of Levy and Cardwell, which specialized in Christmas pantomimes. In 1909, Laurel was employed by Britain's leading comedy impresario Fred Karno as a supporting actor, and as an understudy for Charlie Chaplin. Laurel said of Karno, \"There was no one like him. He had no equal. His name \"was\" box-office.\"\nIn 1912, Laurel left England with the Fred Karno Troupe to tour the United States. Laurel had expected the tour to be merely a pleasant interval before returning to London; however, he decided to remain in the U.S. In 1917, Laurel was teamed with Mae Dahlberg as a double act for stage and film; they were living as common-law husband and wife. The same year, Laurel made his film debut with Dahlberg in \"Nuts in May\". While working with Mae, he began using the name \"Stan Laurel\" and changed his name legally in 1931. Dahlberg demanded roles in his films, but her tempestuous nature made her difficult to work with. Dressing room arguments were common between the two; it was reported that producer Joe Rock paid her to leave Laurel and to return to her native Australia. In 1925, Laurel joined the Hal Roach film studio as a director and writer. From May 1925 to September 1926, he received credit in at least 22 films. Laurel appeared in over 50 films for various producers before teaming up with Hardy. Prior to that, he experienced only modest success. It was difficult for producers, writers, and directors to write for his character, with American audiences knowing him either as a \"nutty burglar\" or as a Charlie Chaplin imitator.\nOliver Hardy.\nOliver Hardy (January 18, 1892 \u2013 August 7, 1957) was born Norvell Hardy in Harlem, Georgia, United States. By his late teens, Hardy was a popular stage singer and he operated a movie house in Milledgeville, Georgia, the Palace Theater, financed in part by his mother. For his stage name he took his father's first name, calling himself \"Oliver Norvell Hardy\", while offscreen his nicknames were \"Ollie\" and \"Babe\". The nickname \"Babe\" originated from an Italian barber near the Lubin Studios in Jacksonville, Florida, who would rub Hardy's face with talcum powder and say \"That's nice-a baby!\" Other actors in the Lubin company mimicked this, and Hardy was billed as \"Babe Hardy\" in his early films.\nSeeing film comedies inspired him to take up comedy himself and, in 1913, he began working with Lubin Motion Pictures in Jacksonville. He started by helping around the studio with lights, props, and other duties, gradually learning the craft as a script-clerk for the company. It was around this time that Hardy married his first wife, Madelyn Saloshin. In 1914, Hardy was billed as \"Babe Hardy\" in his first film, \"Outwitting Dad\". Between 1914 and 1916 Hardy made 177 shorts as Babe with the Vim Comedy Company, which were released up to the end of 1917. Exhibiting a versatility in playing heroes, villains and even female characters, Hardy was in demand for roles as a supporting actor, comic villain or second banana. For 10 years he memorably assisted star comic and Charlie Chaplin imitator Billy West, and appeared in the comedies of Jimmy Aubrey, Larry Semon, and Charley Chase. In total, Hardy starred or co-starred in more than 250 silent shorts, of which roughly 150 have been lost. He was rejected for enlistment by the Army during World War I due to his large size. In 1917, following the collapse of the Florida film industry, Hardy and his wife Madelyn moved to California to seek new opportunities.\nHistory as Laurel and Hardy.\nHal Roach.\nHal Roach recounted how Laurel and Hardy became a team: Hardy was already working for Roach (and others) when Roach hired Laurel, whom he had seen in vaudeville. Laurel had very light blue eyes, and Roach discovered that, due to the technology of film at that time, Laurel's eyes would not photograph properly \u2014blue photographed as white. This problem is apparent in their first silent film together, \"The Lucky Dog\", where an attempt was made to compensate for the problem by applying heavy makeup to Laurel's eyes. For about a year, Roach had Laurel work at the studio as a writer. Then panchromatic film was developed; they tested Laurel, and found the problem was solved. Laurel and Hardy were then put together in a film, and they seemed to complement each other. Comedy teams were usually composed of a straight man and a funny man, but these two were both comedians; however, each knew how to play the straight man when the script required it. Roach said, \"You could always cut to a close-up of either one, and their reaction was good for another laugh.\"\nLeo McCarey.\nScreenwriter, director and producer for Hal Roach Studios, Leo McCarey recounted a story on the NBC television program \"This Is Your Life\" on December 1, 1954 of how a leg of lamb brought Laurel and Hardy together.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Babe (Oliver Hardy) was cooking a leg of lamb and for some reason he left his arm in the oven too long or something and he got it so badly blistered that we had to cut down his part in the next picture. So we decided to put Stan in the picture to bolster up the comedy; and so when we saw the two of them on the screen together we decided: \"There's a real team.\" And from that time on they really went places. All on account of - \"Hardy had a little lamb.\"\u2014\u200a\nStyle of comedy and characterizations.\nThe humor of Laurel and Hardy was highly visual, with slapstick used for emphasis. They often had physical arguments (in character) which were quite complex and involved a cartoonish style of violence. Their ineptitude and misfortune precluded them from making any real progress, even in the simplest endeavors. Much of their comedy involves \"milking\" a joke, where a simple idea provides a basis for multiple, ongoing gags without following a defined narrative.\nStan Laurel was of average height and weight, but appeared comparatively small and slight next to Oliver Hardy, who was and weighed about in his prime. Details of their hair and clothing were used to enhance this natural contrast. Laurel kept his hair short on the sides and back, growing it long on top to create a natural \"fright wig\". Typically, at times of shock, he simultaneously screwed up his face to appear as if crying while pulling up his hair. In contrast, Hardy's thinning hair was pasted on his forehead in spit curls and he sported a toothbrush moustache. To achieve a flat-footed walk, Laurel removed the heels from his shoes. Both wore bowler hats, with Laurel's being narrower than Hardy's, and with a flattened brim. The characters' normal attire called for wing collar shirts, with Hardy wearing a necktie which he would twiddle when he was particularly self-conscious; and Laurel, a bow tie. Hardy's sports jacket was a little small and done up with one straining button, whereas Laurel's double-breasted jacket was loose-fitting.\nA popular routine was a \"tit for tat\" fight with an adversary. It could be with their wives\u2014often played by Mae Busch, Anita Garvin, or Daphne Pollard\u2014or with a neighbor, often played by Charlie Hall or James Finlayson. Laurel and Hardy would accidentally damage someone's property, and the injured party would retaliate by ruining something belonging to Laurel or Hardy. After calmly surveying the damage, one or the other of the \"offended\" parties found something else to vandalize, and the conflict escalated until both sides were simultaneously destroying items in front of each other. An early example of the routine occurs in their classic short \"Big Business\" (1929), which was added to the National Film Registry in 1992. Another short film which revolves around such an altercation was titled \"Tit for Tat\" (1935).\nOne of their best-remembered dialogue devices was the \"Tell me that again\" routine. Laurel would tell Hardy a genuinely smart idea he came up with, and Hardy would reply, \"Tell me that again.\" Laurel would then try to repeat the idea, but, having instantly forgotten it, babble utter nonsense. Hardy, who had difficulty understanding Laurel's idea when expressed clearly, would then understand the jumbled version perfectly. While much of their comedy remained visual, humorous dialogue often occurred in Laurel and Hardy's talking films as well. Examples include:\nIn some cases, their comedy bordered on the surreal, in a style Laurel called \"white magic\". For example, in the 1937 film \"Way Out West\", Laurel flicks his thumb upward as if working a lighter. His thumb ignites and he matter-of-factly lights Hardy's pipe. Amazed at seeing this, Hardy unsuccessfully attempts to duplicate it throughout the film. Much later he finally succeeds, only to be terrified when his thumb catches fire. Laurel expands the joke in the 1938 film \"Block-Heads\" by pouring tobacco into his clenched fist and smoking it as though it were a pipe, again to Hardy's bemusement. This time, the joke ends when a match Laurel was using relights itself, Hardy throws it into the fireplace, and it explodes with a loud bang.\nRather than showing Hardy suffering the pain of misfortunes, such as falling down stairs or being beaten by a thug, banging and crashing sound effects were often used so the audience could visualize the mayhem. The 1927 film \"Sailors, Beware!\" was a significant one for Hardy because two of his enduring trademarks were developed. The first was his \"tie twiddle\" to demonstrate embarrassment. Hardy, while acting, had received a pail of water in the face. He said, \"I had been expecting it, but I didn't expect it at that particular moment. It threw me mentally and I couldn't think what to do next, so I waved the tie in a kind of tiddly-widdly fashion to show embarrassment while trying to look friendly.\" His second trademark was the \"camera look\", where he breaks the fourth wall and, in frustration, stares directly at the audience. Hardy said: \"I had to become exasperated, so I just stared right into the camera and registered my disgust.\" Offscreen, Laurel and Hardy were quite the opposite of their movie characters: Laurel was the industrious \"idea man\", while Hardy was more easygoing.\nCatchphrases.\nLaurel and Hardy's best-known catchphrase is, \"Well, here's another nice mess you've gotten me into!\" It was earlier used by W. S. Gilbert in both \"The Mikado\" (1885) and \"The Grand Duke\" (1896). It was first used by Hardy in \"The Laurel-Hardy Murder Case\" in 1930. In popular culture, the catchphrase is often misquoted as \"Well, here's another \"fine\" mess you've gotten me into\", which was never spoken by Hardy\u2014a misunderstanding that stems from the title of their film \"Another Fine Mess\". When Hardy said the phrase, Laurel's frequent, iconic response was to start to cry, pull his hair up, exclaim \"Well, I couldn't help it...\", then whimper and speak gibberish.\nSome variations on the phrase occurred. For example, in \"Chickens Come Home\", Ollie impatiently says to Stan, \"Well...\", and Stan continues for him: \"Here's another nice mess I've gotten you into.\" The films \"Thicker than Water\" and \"The Fixer Uppers\" use the phrase \"Well, here's another nice kettle of fish you've pickled me in!\" In \"Saps at Sea\", the phrase becomes \"Well, here's another nice bucket of suds you've gotten me into!\" The catchphrase, in its original form, was used as the last line of dialogue in the duo's last film, \"Atoll K\" (1951).\nIn moments of particular distress or frustration, Hardy often exclaims, \"Why don't you do something to \"help\" me?\", as Laurel stands helplessly by.\n\"OH!\" (or drawn out as \"Ohhhhh-OH!\") was another catchphrase used by Hardy. He uses the expression in the duo's first sound film, \"Unaccustomed As We Are\" (1929), when his character's wife smashes a record over his head.\nMustachioed Scottish actor James Finlayson, who appeared in 33 Laurel and Hardy films, used a variation: \"D'oh!\" The phrase, expressing surprise, impatience, or incredulity, inspired the trademark \"D'oh!\" of character Homer Simpson (voiced by Dan Castellaneta) in the long-running animated comedy \"The Simpsons\".\nFilms.\nLaurel and Hardy appeared together in 107 films over three decades, beginning with separate appearances before officially teaming in 1927. Their work progressed from silent shorts to sound films and feature-length productions, while retaining their signature comedic style throughout evolving industry trends.\nSilent films.\nLaurel's and Hardy's first film pairing, although as separate performers, was in the silent \"The Lucky Dog\". Its production details have not survived, but film historian Bo Berglund has placed it between September 1920 and January 1921. According to interviews they gave in the 1930s, the pair's acquaintance at the time was casual, and both had forgotten their initial film entirely. The plot sees Laurel's character befriended by a stray dog which, after some lucky escapes, saves him from being blown up by dynamite. Hardy's character is a mugger attempting to rob Laurel. They later signed separate contracts with the Hal Roach Studios, and next appeared in the 1926 film \"45 Minutes From Hollywood\".\nHal Roach is considered the most important person in the development of Laurel's and Hardy's film careers. He brought them together, and they worked for Roach for almost 20 years. Director Charley Rogers, who worked closely with the three men for many years, said, \"It could not have happened if Laurel, Hardy, and Roach had not met at the right place and the right time.\" Wes D. Gehring identifies their first \"official\" film together as \"Putting Pants on Philip\", released December 3, 1927. The plot involves Laurel as Philip, a young Scotsman who arrives in the United States in full kilted splendor, and suffers mishaps involving the kilts. His uncle, played by Hardy, tries to put trousers on him. William K. Everson identifies The Second Hundred Years as the first \"official\" Laurel and Hardy film in which they are presented as a team. Also in 1927, the pair starred in \"The Battle of the Century\", a classic pie-throwing short involving over 3,000 real pies; only a fragment of the film was known to exist until the first half resurfaced in the 1970s; a more complete print was discovered in 2015 by historian Jon Mirsalis.\nLaurel said to the duo's biographer John McCabe: \"Of all the questions we're asked, the most frequent is, how did we come together? I always explain that we came together naturally.\" Laurel and Hardy were joined by accident and grew by indirection. In 1926, both were part of the Roach Comedy All Stars, a stock company of actors who took part in a series of films. Laurel's and Hardy's parts gradually grew larger, while those of their fellow stars diminished, because Laurel and Hardy had superior pantomime skills. Their teaming was suggested by Leo McCarey, their supervising director from 1927 to 1930. During that period, McCarey and Laurel jointly devised the team's format. McCarey also influenced the slowing of their comedy action from the silent era's typically frantic pace to a more natural one. The formula worked so well that Laurel and Hardy played the same characters for the next 30 years.\nAlthough Roach employed writers and directors such as H. M. Walker, Leo McCarey, James Parrott, and James W. Horne on the Laurel and Hardy films, Laurel, who had a considerable background in comedy writing, often rewrote entire sequences and scripts. He also encouraged the cast and crew to improvise, then meticulously reviewed the footage during editing. By 1929, he was the pair's head writer, and it was reported that the writing sessions were gleefully chaotic. Stan had three or four writers who competed with him in a perpetual game of 'Can You Top This?' Hardy was quite happy to leave the writing to his partner. He said, \"After all, just doing the gags was hard enough work, especially if you have taken as many falls and been dumped in as many mudholes as I have. I think I earned my money.\" Laurel eventually became so involved in their films' productions, many film historians and aficionados consider him an uncredited director. He ran the Laurel and Hardy set, no matter who was in the director's chair, but never asserted his authority. Roach remarked: \"Laurel bossed the production. With any director, if Laurel said 'I don't like this idea,' the director didn't say 'Well, you're going to do it anyway.' That was understood.\" As Laurel made so many suggestions, there was not much left for the credited director to do.\nTheir 1929 release \"Big Business\" is by far the most critically acclaimed of the silents. Laurel and Hardy are Christmas tree salesmen who are drawn into a classic tit-for-tat battle, with a character played by James Finlayson, that eventually destroys his house and their car. \"Big Business\" was added to the United States National Film Registry as a national treasure in 1992.\nSound films.\nIn 1929 the silent era of film was coming to an end. Many silent-film actors failed to make the transition to \"talkies\"\u2014some, because they felt sound was irrelevant to their craft of conveying stories with body language; and others, because their spoken voices were considered inadequate for the new medium. However, the addition of spoken dialogue only enhanced Laurel's and Hardy's performances; both had extensive theatrical experience and could use their voices to great comic effect. Their films also continued to feature much visual comedy. In these ways, they made a seamless transition to their first sound film, \"Unaccustomed As We Are\" (1929), whose title was a play on the familiar phrase, \"Unaccustomed as I am to public speaking\". In the opening dialogue, Laurel and Hardy began by spoofing the slow and self-conscious speech of the early talking actors\u2014a routine they would use regularly.\n\"The Music Box\" (1932), with the pair delivering a piano up a long flight of steps, won an Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Subject. \"The Music Box\" remains one of the duo's most widely known films.\nLaurel and Hardy were favorites around the world, and Hal Roach catered to international audiences by filming many of their early talkies in other languages. They spoke their dialogue phonetically, in Spanish, Italian, French, or German. The plots remained similar to the English versions, although the supporting actors were often changed to those fluent in the native language. \"Pardon Us\" (1931) was reshot in all four foreign languages. \"Blotto\", \"Hog Wild\" and \"Be Big!\" were remade in French and Spanish versions. \"Night Owls\" was remade in both Spanish and Italian, and \"Below Zero\" and \"Chickens Come Home\" in Spanish.\nFeature films.\nJust as Laurel and Hardy's teaming was accidental, so was their entry into the field of feature films. In the words of biographer John McCabe, \"Roach planned to use the MGM set [built for \"The Big House\"] for a simple prison-break two-reeler but MGM suddenly added a proviso: Laurel and Hardy would have to do a picture for them in exchange. Roach would not agree so he built his own prison set, a very expensive item for a two-reeler. So expensive was it indeed that he added four more reels to bring it into the feature category and, it was hoped, the bigger market.\" The experiment was successful, and the team continued to make features along with their established short subjects until 1935, when they converted to features exclusively.\n\"Sons of the Desert\" (1933) is often cited as Laurel and Hardy's best feature-length film. The situation-comedy script by actor-playwright Frank Craven and screenwriter Byron Morgan is stronger than usual for a Laurel &amp; Hardy comedy, and versatile director William A. Seiter, who had made light comedies with Reginald Denny as well as outlandish ones with Wheeler and Woolsey, handled the film with a more controlled sense of pace and style than other directors of the team's features. Stan and Ollie are henpecked husbands who want to attend a convention held by the Sons of the Desert fraternal lodge. They tell their wives that Ollie requires an ocean voyage to Honolulu for his health, and they sneak off to the convention. They are unaware that the Honolulu-bound ship they were supposedly aboard is sinking, and the wives confront their errant husbands when they get home.\n\"Babes in Toyland\" (1934) remains a perennial on American television during the Christmas season. When interviewed, Hal Roach spoke scathingly about the film and Laurel's behavior. Roach himself had written a treatment detailing the characters and storyline, only to find that Laurel considered Roach's effort totally unsuitable. Roach, affronted, tried to argue in favor of his treatment, but Laurel was adamant. Roach angrily gave up and allowed Laurel to make the film his way. The rift damaged Roach-Laurel relations to the point that Roach said that after \"Toyland\", he did not want to produce for Laurel and Hardy. Although their association continued for another six years, Roach no longer took an active hand in Laurel and Hardy films.\n\"Way Out West\" (1937) was a personal favorite of both Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy. A satire of the Gene Autry musical westerns sweeping America at the time, the film combines Laurel and Hardy's slapstick routines with songs and dances performed by the stars.\nIt appeared that the team would split permanently in 1938. Hal Roach had become dissatisfied with his distribution arrangement with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and had begun releasing his films through United Artists. He still owed MGM one last feature, and made the Laurel and Hardy comedy \"Block-Heads\", with the announcement that this would be Laurel and Hardy's farewell film. Stan Laurel's contract with Roach then expired, and Roach did not renew it. Oliver Hardy's contract was still in force, however, and Roach starred Hardy solo in the antebellum comedy \"Zenobia\" (1939), with Harry Langdon as Hardy's comic foil. This fueled rumors that Laurel and Hardy had split on bad terms.\nAfter \"Zenobia\", Laurel rejoined Hardy and the team signed with independent producer Boris Morros for the comedy feature \"The Flying Deuces\" (1939). Meanwhile, Hal Roach wanted to demonstrate his new idea of making four-reel, 40-minute featurettes\u2014twice the length of standard two-reel, 20-minute comedies\u2014which Roach felt could fit more conveniently into double-feature programs. He referred to these extended films as \"streamliners\". To test his theory, Roach rehired Laurel and Hardy. The resulting films, \"A Chump at Oxford\" and \"Saps at Sea\" (both 1940), were prepared as featurettes. United Artists overruled Roach and insisted that they be released as full-length features.\nHoping for greater artistic freedom, Laurel and Hardy split with Roach, and signed with 20th Century-Fox in 1941 and MGM in 1942. However, their working conditions were now completely different: they were simply hired actors, relegated to both studios' B-film units, and not initially allowed to contribute to the scripts or improvise, as they had always done. When their films proved popular, the studios allowed them more input, and they starred in eight features until the end of 1944. These films, while far from their best work, were still very successful. Budgeted between $300,000 and $450,000 each, they earned millions at the box office for Fox and MGM. The Fox films were so profitable that the studio kept making Laurel and Hardy comedies after it discontinued its other \"B\" series films.\nThe busy team decided to take a rest during 1946, but 1947 saw their first European tour in 15 years. A film based in the characters of \"Robin Hood\" was planned during the tour, but not realized. In 1947, Laurel and Hardy famously attended the reopening of the Dungeness loop of the Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway, where they performed improvised routines with a steam locomotive for the benefit of local crowds and dignitaries.\nIn 1948, on the team's return to America, Laurel was sidelined by illness and temporarily unable to work. He encouraged Hardy to take movie roles on his own. Hardy's friend John Wayne hired him to co-star in \"The Fighting Kentuckian\" for Republic Pictures, and Bing Crosby got him a small part in Frank Capra's \"Riding High\".\nIn 1950\u201351, Laurel and Hardy made their final feature-length film together, \"Atoll K\". A French-Italian co-production directed by L\u00e9o Joannon, it was plagued by problems with language barriers, production issues, and both actors' serious health issues. When Laurel received the script's final draft, he felt its heavy political content overshadowed the comedy. He quickly rewrote it, with screen comic Monte Collins contributing visual gags, and hired old friend Alfred Goulding to direct the Laurel and Hardy scenes. During filming, Hardy developed an irregular heartbeat, while Laurel experienced painful prostate complications that caused his weight to drop to 114 pounds. Critics were disappointed with the storyline, English dubbing, and Laurel's sickly physical appearance. The film was not commercially successful on its first release, and brought an end to Laurel and Hardy's film careers. \"Atoll K\" did finally turn a profit when it was rereleased in other countries. In 1954, an American distributor removed 18 minutes of footage and released it as \"Utopia\"; widely released on film and video, it is the film's best-known version.\nAfter \"Atoll K\" wrapped in April 1951, Laurel and Hardy returned to America and used the remainder of the year to rest. Stan appeared, in character, in a silent TV newsreel, \"Swim Meet\", judging a local California swimming contest.\nMost Laurel and Hardy films have survived and are still in circulation. Only three of their 107 films are considered lost and have not been seen in complete form since the 1930s. The silent film \"Hats Off\" from 1927 has vanished completely. The first half of \"Now I'll Tell One\" (1927) is lost, and the second half has yet to be released on video. \"The Battle of the Century\" (1927), after years of obscurity, is now almost complete but a few minutes are missing. In the 1930 operatic Technicolor musical \"The Rogue Song\", Laurel and Hardy appeared as comedy relief in 10 sequences; only one exists. The complete soundtrack has survived.\nRadio.\nLaurel and Hardy made at least two audition recordings for radio: a half-hour NBC series based on the skit \"Driver's License\", and a 1944 NBC pilot for \"The Laurel and Hardy Show\", casting Stan and Ollie in different occupations each episode. The surviving audition record, \"Mr. Slater's Poultry Market,\" has Stan and Ollie as meat-market butchers mistaken for vicious gangsters. A third attempt was commissioned by BBC Radio in 1953: \"Laurel and Hardy Go to the Moon\", a series of science-fiction comedies. A sample script was written by Tony Hawes and Denis Gifford, and the comedians staged a read-through, which was not recorded. The team was forced to withdraw due to Hardy's declining health, and the project was abandoned.\nFinal years.\nFollowing the making of \"Atoll K\", Laurel and Hardy took some months off to deal with health issues. On their return to the European stage in 1952, they undertook a well-received series of public appearances, performing a short Laurel-written sketch, \"A Spot of Trouble\". The following year, Laurel wrote a routine titled \"Birds of a Feather\". On September 9, 1953, their boat arrived in Cobh in Ireland. Laurel recounted their reception:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The love and affection we found that day at Cobh was simply unbelievable. There were hundreds of boats blowing whistles and mobs and mobs of people screaming on the docks. We just couldn't understand what it was all about. And then something happened that I can never forget. All the church bells in Cobh started to ring out our theme song \"Dance of the Cuckoos\" and Babe [Oliver Hardy] looked at me and we cried. I'll never forget that day. Never.\nOn May 17, 1954, Laurel and Hardy made their last live stage performance in Plymouth, UK at the Palace Theatre. On December 1, 1954, they made their only American television appearance when they were surprised and interviewed by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program \"This Is Your Life\". Lured to the Knickerbocker Hotel under the pretense of a business meeting with producer Bernard Delfont, the doors opened to their suite, #205, flooding the room with light and Edwards' voice. The telecast was preserved on a kinescope and later released on home video. Partly due to the broadcast's positive response, the team began renegotiating with Hal Roach Jr. for a series of color NBC Television specials, to be called \"Laurel and Hardy's Fabulous Fables\". However, the plans had to be shelved as the aging comedians continued to suffer from declining health. In 1955, \"TV Guide\" ran a color spread on the team with current photos. That year, they made their final public appearance together while taking part in \"This Is Music Hall\", a BBC Television program about the Grand Order of Water Rats, a British variety organization. Laurel and Hardy provided a filmed insert where they reminisced about their friends in British variety. They made their final appearance on camera in 1956 in a private home movie, shot by a family friend at the Reseda, California home of Stan Laurel's daughter, Lois. The three-minute film has no audio.\nIn 1956, while following his doctor's orders to improve his health due to a heart condition, Hardy lost over , but nonetheless suffered several strokes causing reduced mobility and speech. Despite his long and successful career, Hardy's home was sold to help cover his medical expenses. He died of a stroke on August 7, 1957, and longtime friend Bob Chatterton said Hardy weighed just at the time of his death. Hardy was laid to rest at Pierce Brothers' Valhalla Memorial Park, North Hollywood. Following Hardy's death, scenes from Laurel and Hardy's early films were seen again in theaters, featured in Robert Youngson's silent-film compilation \"The Golden Age of Comedy\".\nFor the remaining eight years of his life, Stan Laurel refused to perform, and declined Stanley Kramer's offer of a cameo in the 1963 film \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\". In 1960, Laurel was given a special Academy Award for his contributions to film comedy, but was unable to attend the ceremony due to poor health. Actor Danny Kaye accepted the award on his behalf. Despite not appearing on screen after Hardy's death, Laurel did contribute gags to several comedy filmmakers. His favorite TV comedy was Leonard B. Stern's \"I'm Dickens, He's Fenster\", co-starring John Astin and Marty Ingels as carpenters. Laurel enjoyed the Astin\u2013Ingels chemistry and sent two-man gags to Stern.\nDuring this period, most of his communication was in the form of written correspondence, and he insisted on personally answering every fan letter. Late in life, he welcomed visitors from the new generation of comedians and celebrities, including Dick Cavett, Jerry Lewis, Peter Sellers, Marcel Marceau, Johnny Carson, and Dick Van Dyke. Jerry Lewis offered Laurel a job as consultant, but he chose to help only on Lewis's 1960 feature \"The Bellboy\".\nDick Van Dyke was a longtime fan and based his comedy and dancing styles on Laurel's. When he discovered Laurel's home number in the phone book and called him, Laurel invited him over for the afternoon. Van Dyke hosted a television tribute to Stan Laurel the year he died.\nLaurel lived to see the duo's work rediscovered through television and classic film revivals. He died on February 23, 1965, in Santa Monica and is buried at Forest Lawn\u2013Hollywood Hills in Los Angeles.\nSupporting cast members.\nLaurel and Hardy's films included a supporting cast of comic actors, some of whom appeared regularly:\nMusic.\nThe duo's famous signature tune, known variously as \"The Cuckoo Song\", \"Ku-Ku\" or \"The Dance of the Cuckoos\", was composed by Roach musical director Marvin Hatley as the on-the-hour chime for KFVD, the Roach studio's radio station.\nLaurel heard the tune on the station and asked Hatley if they could use it as the Laurel and Hardy theme song. The original theme, recorded by two clarinets in 1930, was recorded again with a full orchestra in 1935. Leroy Shield composed the majority of the music used in the Laurel and Hardy short sound films.\nA compilation of songs from their films, titled \"Trail of the Lonesome Pine\", was released in 1975. The title track was released as a single in the UK and reached number 2 in the UK Singles Chart.\nInfluence and legacy.\nLaurel and Hardy's influence over a very broad range of comedy and other genres has been considerable. Lou Costello of the famed duo Abbott and Costello stated, \"They were the funniest comedy team in the world.\" Many critics and film scholars throughout the years have agreed with this assessment; writers, artists, and performers as diverse as Samuel Beckett, Jerry Lewis, Lucille Ball, Peter Sellers, Marcel Marceau, Steve Martin, John Cleese, Harold Pinter, Alec Guinness, J. D. Salinger, Ren\u00e9 Magritte, and Kurt Vonnegut have acknowledged an artistic debt.\nStarting in the 1960s, the widespread exposure of their short films on television ensured a continued influence on generations of comedians and fans.\nPosthumous revivals and popular culture.\nSince the 1930s, the works of Laurel and Hardy have been reissued in numerous theatrical revivals, television airings (particularly on public and cable television), 16 mm and 8 mm home movies, feature-film compilations, and home video. After Stan Laurel's death in 1965, two major motion-picture tributes were released: \"Laurel and Hardy's Laughing '20s\", a compilation of the team's silent-film highlights by Robert Youngson, and \"The Great Race\" (1965), a large-scale salute to slapstick dedicated by director Blake Edwards to \"Mr. Laurel and Mr. Hardy\". The duo were later impersonated by Jim MacGeorge (as Laurel) and Chuck McCann (as Hardy) in children's television shows and commercials for various products.\nNumerous colorized versions of Laurel and Hardy features and shorts have been reproduced by several studios. The process was introduced in 1983 by Colorization, Inc., in partnership with Hal Roach Studios, then a Canadian concern licensing its name and films. Early efforts included \"Helpmates\", \"Way Out West\", and \"The Music Box\", which were released to television and issued on VHS. Most of the team's sound shorts were ultimately colorized for distribution in Europe. The pixel-based color process and conversion from the American NTSC system to the European PAL system often affected image sharpness, so since 2011, video distributors have issued the original black-and-white editions.\nThere are three Laurel and Hardy museums. One is in Laurel's birthplace of Ulverston, England, another is in Hardy's birthplace of Harlem, Georgia, United States, and the third is in Solingen, Germany.\nMaurice Sendak featured three Oliver Hardy-like bakers in his 1970 Caldecott Medal-winning book \"In the Night Kitchen\". Cut-outs of the duo appear on the cover of \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" (1967) by The Beatles. In 2005, a Channel 4 documentary, \"The Comedian's Comedian\", ranked Laurel and Hardy the seventh-greatest comedy act of all time\u2014the highest-ranking double act.\nLarry Harmon claimed ownership of Laurel and Hardy's likenesses and issued toys, coloring books, and an animated series in 1966, co-produced with Hanna-Barbera. Animated versions of Laurel and Hardy also guest-starred in a 1972 episode of \"The New Scooby-Doo Movies\". In 1999, Harmon produced the direct-to-video feature \"The All New Adventures of Laurel &amp; Hardy in For Love or Mummy\", starring Bronson Pinchot and Gailard Sartain as the nephews of the famous duo.\nThe North American rights to much of the Laurel and Hardy library are now owned by Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment, successor to Cabin Fever, RHI, Hallmark, and Sonar. International rights are held by the CCA, while Harmon's estate owns their trademarks and likenesses.\nIn 2011, Arte and ZDF co-produced a 90-minute documentary, \"Laurel &amp; Hardy: Their Lives and Magic\", written and directed by German filmmaker Andreas Baum. The film included rare footage, interviews, and photos, and was later released as a 105-minute Director's Cut with 70 minutes of bonus material on DVD.\nIn 2024, Baum and co-author Michael Ehret published \"Laurel and Hardy: A True Love Story \u2013 The Pictorial History of Stan &amp; Ollie: Their Life and Work\" (Volume 1), a 500-page illustrated book accompanied by a documentary DVD.\nAppreciation society.\nThe official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is known as The Sons of the Desert, after a fraternal society in their film of the same name (1933). It was established in New York City in 1965 by Laurel and Hardy biographer John McCabe, with Orson Bean, Al Kilgore, Chuck McCann, and John Municino as founding members, with the sanction of Stan Laurel. Since the group's inception, well over 150 chapters of the organization have formed across North America, Europe, and Australia. An Emmy-winning film documentary about the group, \"Revenge of the Sons of the Desert\", has been released on DVD as part of \"The Laurel and Hardy Collection, Vol.\u00a01\".\nAround the world.\nLaurel and Hardy are popular around the world but are known under different names in various countries and languages.\nBiopic.\nA biographical film titled \"Stan &amp; Ollie\" directed by Jon S. Baird and starring Steve Coogan as Stan and John C. Reilly as Oliver was released in 2018 and chronicled the duo's 1953 tour of Great Britain and Ireland. The film received positive reviews from critics, garnering a 94% \"Fresh\" rating on Rotten Tomatoes. For their performances, Reilly was nominated for a Golden Globe and Coogan was nominated for a BAFTA.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55913", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55913", "title": "Gouraud shading", "text": "Interpolation method in computer graphics\nGouraud shading ( ), named after Henri Gouraud, is an interpolation method used in computer graphics to produce continuous shading of surfaces represented by polygon meshes. In practice, Gouraud shading is most often used to achieve continuous lighting on triangle meshes by computing the lighting at the corners of each triangle and linearly interpolating the resulting colours for each pixel covered by the triangle. Gouraud first published the technique in 1971. However, enhanced hardware support for superior shading models has yielded Gouraud shading largely obsolete in modern rendering.\nDescription.\nGouraud shading works as follows: An estimate to the surface normal of each vertex in a polygonal 3D model is either specified for each vertex or found by averaging the surface normals of the polygons that meet at each vertex. Using these estimates, lighting computations based on a reflection model, e.g. the Phong reflection model, are then performed to produce colour intensities at the vertices. For each screen pixel that is covered by the polygonal mesh, colour intensities can then be interpolated from the colour values calculated at the vertices.\nComparison with other shading techniques.\nGouraud shading is considered superior to flat shading and requires significantly less processing than Phong shading, but usually results in a faceted look.\nIn comparison to Phong shading, Gouraud shading's strength and weakness lies in its interpolation. If a mesh covers more pixels in screen space than it has vertices, interpolating colour values from samples of expensive lighting calculations at vertices is less processor intensive than performing the lighting calculation for each pixel as in Phong shading. However, highly localized lighting effects (such as specular highlights, e.g. the glint of reflected light on the surface of an apple) will not be rendered correctly, and if a highlight lies in the middle of a polygon, but does not spread to the polygon's vertex, it will not be apparent in a Gouraud rendering; conversely, if a highlight occurs at the vertex of a polygon, it will be rendered correctly at this vertex (as this is where the lighting model is applied), but will be spread unnaturally across all neighboring polygons via the interpolation method.\nThe problem is easily spotted in a rendering which ought to have a specular highlight moving smoothly across the surface of a model as it rotates. Gouraud shading will instead produce a highlight continuously fading in and out across neighboring portions of the model, peaking in intensity when the intended specular highlight aligns with a vertex of the model. While this problem can be fixed by increasing the density of vertices in the object, at some point the diminishing returns of this approach will favour switching to a more detailed shading model.\nLinear vs. hyperbolic interpolation.\nGouraud's original paper described linear color interpolation. In 1992, Blinn published an efficient algorithm for hyperbolic interpolation that is used in GPUs as a perspective correct alternative to linear interpolation. Both the linear and hyperbolic variants of interpolation of colors from vertices to pixels are commonly called \"Gouraud shading\".\nMach bands.\nAny linear interpolation of intensity causes derivative discontinuities which triggers Mach bands, a common visual artifact of Gouraud shading.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55914", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55914", "title": "Richard Leveridge", "text": "English singer and composer (1670\u20131758)\nRichard Leveridge (or Leueridge) (19 July 1670 \u2013 22 March 1758) was an English bass singer of the London stage and a composer of baroque music, including many popular songs.\nLife.\nRichard Leveridge was born in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, in 1670, and in 1695 became the leading bass singer in the United Company managed by Christopher Rich at Drury Lane, after the defection of several leading singers from Rich's company. His first important role of which anything is known was as the magician Ismeron in Henry Purcell's opera \"The Indian Queen\", which included the aria \"Ye twice ten hundred deities\". Purcell himself remained loyal to the company, and for several months Leveridge worked closely with him. It is likely that \"Arise, ye subterranean winds\" in the music (attributed to Purcell) for \"The Tempest\" was written for him. After Purcell's death he continued to work with composers Daniel Purcell and Jeremiah Clarke, and took a leading part in Clarke's Ode upon the death of Mr Purcell at Drury Lane. Leveridge also composed, and in February 1699 all three provided music for Motteux's adaptation of Fletcher's \"The Island Princess\", in which Leveridge's performance, particularly his 'Enthusiastick Song', engendered great enthusiasm among its hearers.\nAt various times between 1697 and 1728 Leveridge published volumes of his own songs, and numerous single items including his popular theatre songs appeared as separate printed sheets throughout his career. After a spell in Dublin he returned to London in 1702 for a revival of \"The Island Princess\" and a new production of \"Macbeth\" billed as \"with music Vocal and Instrumental, all new Composed by Mr Leveridge\". He sang the role of Hecate in this work for nearly 50 years, and the music remained popular for more than a century after his death.\nLeveridge continued to sing Purcell's operas and masques in the revivals, at Drury Lane in 1703\u201308, of \"The Fairy-Queen\", \"Timon of Athens\", \"Amphitrion\", \"Libertine Destroyed\", \"Tempest\", \"King Arthur\", \"Indian Queen\", and \"\u0152dipus\". He also participated in the introduction of opera in the Italian style from 1705, appearing in \"Arsino\u00eb\" (1705), \"Camilla\" (1706), \"Rosamond\" (1707), \"Thomyris\" (1707), and \"Love's Triumph\" (1708). Some of these productions had mixed English and Italian singers (bilingual performances), but when the fashion became entirely Italian Leveridge was replaced in the bass roles by the Italian basso Giuseppe Maria Boschi. He then began a short association with Handel, in 1713 to 1714, and acted in the first performances of \"Il pastor fido\" and \"Teseo\" and played Argantes in a revival of \"Rinaldo\". In this period he sang with Nicolini, who was in London from 1708 to 1712 and in the seasons of 1714\u201317. Later in his career, in 1731, he is known to have taken the role of Polypheme (who has the aria \"O ruddier than the cherry\") in a performance of \"Acis and Galatea\".\nIn 1714, he moved to work at the new theatre at Lincoln's Inn Fields, managed by entrepreneur John Rich. Remaining there for most of his career, he returned to his English repertoire and a new form, the musical Afterpiece. These lightweight works were often comic, and in 1716 Leveridge produced his own afterpiece, \"Pyramus and Thisbe\". For this comic parody of Italian opera, he wrote the music, adapting the words from Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", and sang the role of Pyramus. He was apparently absent from the stage around 1720\u201324, during which time he was occupied with the coffee house in Tavistock Street near Covent Garden, at the sign of 'The Harlequin and Pierot', which he held by lease from 1714 to 1736. However Rich drew him back, and Leveridge scored a success in 1726 in \"Apollo and Daphne\" with Silenus's song \"Tho' envious old age seems in part to impair me\", composed by Johann Ernst Galliard. From that time forth he became the leading bass at Lincoln's Inn Fields and later transferred to Covent Garden.\nHis repertoire exploited his firm and powerful voice, and several of his songs became popular favourites. Although most renowned for his comic-patriotic ballad \"The Roast Beef of Old England\", and above all for his setting of John Gay's lyric of \"Black Eyed Susan\", others are lover's complaints or addresses, anacreontics, hunting songs (notably \"The sweet rosy morning peeps over the hills\"), fairy songs, dramatic pieces, and the like, to the number of more than 150. In addition to \"A New Book of Songs\" 1697 and \"A Second Book of Songs\" 1699, and \"A New Book of Songs\" 1711, further volumes were printed in 1727 (with a frontispiece by William Hogarth), and 1728. A number of the 1727 songs are settings of words by Abraham Cowley. Some songs written no doubt for his own performance contain roulades and word-painting, giving an impression of his vocal range and flexibility, and some have recitatives or short sections of part-writing, introducing dramatic structure into the context of concise set-pieces.\nLeveridge enjoyed good health and reduced his performances only in the last few seasons before retiring in 1751. He died aged 87 at his lodgings in High Holborn, London, in 1758.\nDescriptions.\nSir John Hawkins (1776) remarked, \"Though he had been a performer in the opera at the same time with Nicolino and Valentini\" (possibly meaning Roberto Valentini) \"he had no notion of grace or elegance in singing; it was all strength and compass...\" Hawkins's opinion of Leveridge was coloured by social perceptions: \"Being a man of rather coarse manners, and able to drink a great deal, he was by some thought a good companion. The humour of his songs, and indeed of his conversation, consisted in exhortations to despise riches and the means of attaining them; to drown care by drinking; to enjoy the present hour, and to set reflection and death at defiance. With such a disposition as this, Leveridge could not fail to be a welcome visitor at all clubs and assemblies, where the avowed purpose of meeting was an oblivion of care; and being ever ready to contribute to the promotion of social mirth, he made himself many friends, from whose bounty he derived all the comforts that in an extreme old age he was capable of enjoying.\"\nIn 1789 Charles Burney wrote of him: \"I remember his singing \"Ghosts of every occupation\", and several of Purcell's base songs, occasionally, in a style which forty years ago seemed antediluvian: but as he generally was the representative of Pluto, Neptune, or some ancient divinity, it corresponded perfectly with his figure and character. He was not only a celebrated singer of convivial songs, but the writer and composer of many that were in great favour with singers and hearers of a certain class, who more piously performed the rites of Comus and Bacchus, than those of Minerva and Apollo.\"\nPortraits.\nThe National Portrait Gallery, London has an oil portrait of the young Richard Leveridge, c. 1710\u201320, by an unknown artist, which is on display at the Handel House Museum, London. It also has copies of two other likenesses, one a mezzotint by William Pether after the oil portrait by Thomas Frye, and the other a mezzotint by Andreas van der Mijn after the portrait by Frans van der Mijn. Both show Leveridge in advanced old age. There are more versions than one of the original oil portrait by Thomas Frye, including that in the collections of Warwick Town council, and the better-known example in the Gerald Coke Handel Collection at the Foundling Museum.\nRecorded works.\nRecordings of works by Richard Leveridge include the songs \"Black and gloomy as the grave\", \"When daisies pied and violets blue\", and \"The Roast Beef of Old England\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55915", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55915", "title": "Keith Emerson", "text": "English keyboardist, songwriter, and composer (1944\u20132016)\nKeith Noel Emerson (2 November 1944\u00a0\u2013 11 March 2016) was an English keyboardist, songwriter, composer and record producer. He played keyboards in a number of bands before finding his first commercial success with the Nice in the late 1960s. He became internationally famous for his work with the Nice, which included writing rock arrangements of classical music. After leaving the Nice in 1970, he was a founding member of Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (ELP), one of the early progressive rock supergroups.\nEmerson, Lake &amp; Palmer were commercially successful through much of the 1970s, becoming one of the best-known progressive rock groups of the era. Emerson wrote and arranged much of ELP's music on albums such as \"Tarkus\" (1971) and \"Brain Salad Surgery\" (1973), combining his own original compositions with classical or traditional pieces adapted into a rock format. Following ELP's break-up at the end of the 1970s, Emerson pursued a solo career, composed several film soundtracks, and formed the bands Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell and 3 to carry on in the style of ELP. In the early 1990s, ELP reunited for two more albums and several tours before breaking up again in the late 1990s. Emerson also reunited The Nice in 2002 and 2003 for a tour.\nDuring the 2000s, Emerson resumed his solo career, including touring with his own Keith Emerson Band featuring guitarist Dave Kilminster, then replaced by Marc Bonilla, and collaborating with several orchestras. He reunited with ELP bandmate Greg Lake in 2010 for a duo tour, culminating in a one-off ELP reunion show in London to celebrate the band's 40th anniversary. Emerson's last album, \"The Three Fates Project\", with Marc Bonilla and Terje Mikkelsen, was released in 2012. Emerson reportedly suffered from depression, and since 1993 developed nerve damage that hampered his playing, making him anxious about upcoming performances. He died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound on 11 March 2016 at his home in Santa Monica, California.\nEmerson is widely regarded as one of the greatest keyboard players of the progressive rock era. AllMusic describes Emerson as \"perhaps the greatest, most technically accomplished keyboardist in rock history\". In 2019, readers of \"Prog\" voted him the greatest keyboard player in progressive rock.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nEmerson was born on 2 November 1944 in Todmorden, West Riding of Yorkshire. The family had been evacuated from southern England during World War II, after which they returned south and settled in Goring-by-Sea, West Sussex. Emerson attended West Tarring School (now Thomas A'Becket Middle School) in Tarring. His mother Dorothy was not musical, but his father Noel was an amateur pianist and taught Emerson basic piano. When Emerson was eight, his parents arranged formal tuition, learning to play and read music with \"local little old ladies\" until he was around thirteen, with whom he studied to ABRSM Grade 7. Emerson's teacher put him in competitions at the Worthing Music Festival and suggested he finish studying music in London, but Emerson had little interest in classical music at the time and chose jazz piano. His studies in Western classical music largely inspired his own style in his professional career which often incorporated jazz and rock elements.\nAlthough Emerson did not own a record player, he enjoyed listening to music on the radio, particularly Floyd Cramer's 1961 slip note-style \"On the Rebound\" and the work of Dudley Moore. He used jazz sheet music from Dave Brubeck and George Shearing and learned about jazz piano from books and Andre Previn's version of \"My Fair Lady\". He also listened to boogie-woogie, and to country-style pianists including Joe \"Mr Piano\" Henderson, Russ Conway and Winifred Atwell. Emerson later described himself: \"I was a very serious child. I used to walk around with Beethoven sonatas under my arm. However, I was very good at avoiding being beaten up by the bullies. That was because I could also play Jerry Lee Lewis and Little Richard songs. So, they thought I was kind of cool and left me alone.\"\nEmerson became interested in the Hammond organ after hearing jazz organist Jack McDuff perform \"Rock Candy\", and the Hammond became his instrument of choice in the late 1960s. Emerson acquired his first Hammond organ, an L-100 model, at the age of 15 or 16, on hire purchase and a loan from his father. He had saved money to buy a Bird electric organ with built-in speakers on each side, but then spotted a Hammond in the shop and thought it was a better purchase. Emerson's initial plan was for a non-musical career while playing the piano on the side. Upon leaving school he worked at Lloyds Bank Registrars where he played the piano in the bar at lunch times and local pubs at nights. He was ultimately fired from the bank. Emerson played in a local 20-piece swing band run by Worthing Council, performing Count Basie and Duke Ellington tunes. This led to the formation of the Keith Emerson Trio, with the group's drummer and bassist.\nCareer.\n1965\u20131970: Early groups and The Nice.\nWhile performing in the Worthing and Brighton area, Emerson played in John Brown's Bodies where members of The T-Bones, the backing band of blues singer Gary Farr, offered him a place in their group. After a subsequent UK and European tour with the T-Bones, the band split. Emerson then joined The V.I.P.'s,\nwhich he described as a \"purist blues band\"; his noted flamboyance began when a fight broke out during a performance in France. Instructed by the band to keep playing, he produced some explosion and machine gun sounds with the Hammond organ, which stopped the fight. His band members told him to repeat the stunt at the next concert, where Emerson played the organ back to front.\nIn 1967, Emerson formed The Nice with Lee Jackson, also of the T-Bones, David O'List, and Ian Hague, after soul singer P. P. Arnold asked him to form a backing band. After replacing Hague with Brian Davison, the group set out on its own, quickly developing a strong live following. The group's sound was centred on Emerson's Hammond organ showmanship and theatrical abuse of the instrument, and their radical rearrangements of classical music themes as \"symphonic rock\". To increase the visual interest of his show, Emerson abused his Hammond L-100 organ by, among other things, hitting it, beating it with a whip, pushing it over, riding it across the stage like a horse, playing with it lying on top of him, and wedging knives into the keyboard. Some of these actions also produced musical sound effects: hitting the organ caused it to make explosion-like sounds, turning it over made it feed back, and the knives held down keys, thus sustaining notes. Emerson's show with The Nice has been cited as having a strong influence on heavy metal musicians.\nAway from The Nice, Emerson was involved in the 1969 \"Music from Free Creek\" \"supersession\" project that included Eric Clapton and Jeff Beck. For the session, Emerson performed with drummer Mitch Mitchell and bassist Chuck Rainey covering, among other tunes, the Eddie Harris instrumental \"Freedom Jazz Dance\".\nEmerson first heard a Moog synthesizer when a record shop owner played him \"Switched-On Bach\" (1968) by Wendy Carlos, and thought the instrument looked like \"an electronic skiffle\". He got into contact with keyboardist Mike Vickers, who had paid \u00a34,000 to have one shipped from the US, and organised to play it at an upcoming The Nice concert at the Royal Festival Hall with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, in February and March 1970. Vickers helped patch the Moog, and the concert saw Emerson perform \"Also sprach Zarathustra\" by Richard Strauss with Vickers behind the machine to swap patches.\n1970\u20131979: Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer.\nAfter The Nice split in March 1970, Emerson formed a new band, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (ELP), with bassist Greg Lake from King Crimson and drummer Carl Palmer from Atomic Rooster. After four months of rehearsal, the band played its first shows and recorded its first album, having quickly obtained a record deal with Atlantic Records. ELP became popular immediately after their 1970 Isle of Wight Festival performance, and continued to tour regularly throughout the 1970s. Not all were impressed, with BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel describing their Isle of Wight set as a \"tragic waste of talent and electricity\". Their set, with a half-million onlookers, involved \"annihilating their instruments in a classical-rock blitz\" and firing cannons from the stage, which had been tested out on a field near Heathrow Airport.\nUse of synthesizers.\nELP's record deal provided funds for Emerson to buy his own Moog modular synthesiser from the US, which was a preset model that had fewer leads and punch cards to call up certain patches. He used the patch that Vickers provided, which contained six distinctive Moog sounds and became the foundation of ELP's sound. It was a temperamental device, with the oscillators often going out of tune with temperature change. Emerson was the first artist to tour with a Moog synthesiser. His \"Monster Moog\", built from numerous modules, weighed , stood tall and took four roadies to move. Even with its unpredictability, it became an indispensable component of not only ELP's concerts, but also Emerson's own. His use of the Moog was so critical to the development of new Moog models that he was given prototypes, such as the Constellation, which he took on one tour, and the Apollo, which had its d\u00e9but on \"Jerusalem\" on \"Brain Salad Surgery\" (1973). As synthesiser technology evolved, Emerson went on to use a variety of other synthesisers, including the Minimoog, Yamaha GX-1, and several models by Korg.\nAs composer and arranger.\nEmerson performed several notable rock arrangements of classical compositions, ranging from J. S. Bach and Modest Mussorgsky to 20th-century composers such as B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, Aaron Copland, Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek and Alberto Ginastera. Occasionally Emerson quoted from classical and jazz works without giving credit, particularly early in his career. An early example of Emerson's arranging was the song \"Rondo\" by The Nice, which is a 4/4 interpretation of Dave Brubeck's 9/8 composition \"Blue Rondo \u00e0 la Turk\". During live performances the piece is introduced by an extensive excerpt from the 3rd movement of Bach's \"Italian Concerto\".\nOn ELP's eponymous first album, Emerson's classical quotes went largely uncredited. In the 1973 reissue on the group's personal label, Manticore Records, the songs are credited correctly. By 1971, with the releases \" Pictures at an Exhibition\" and \"Trilogy\", ELP began to fully credit classical composers, including Modest Mussorgsky for the piano piece which inspired the \"Pictures\" album, and Aaron Copland for \"Hoedown\" on the \"Trilogy\" album. Emerson indicated in an interview that he based his version of \"Pictures at an Exhibition\" on Mussorgsky's original piano composition, rather than on Maurice Ravel's later orchestration of the work.\nFollowing ELP's 1974 tour, the members agreed to put the band on temporary hiatus and pursue individual solo projects. During this time, Emerson composed his \"Piano Concerto No. 1\" and recorded it with the London Philharmonic Orchestra. According to Emerson, he was motivated by critical comments suggesting that he relied upon adapting classical works because he was unable to write his own music, and further motivated by the London Philharmonic \"who weren't that helpful to begin with\" and \"had the attitude of 'What's a rock musician doing writing a piano concerto?'\" Emerson said, \"I wanted people to say, look, I'm a composer, I do write my own music, and what greater challenge than to write a piano concerto.\" The recording later appeared on ELP's album \"Works Volume 1\". Emerson's concerto has since been performed by classical pianists, most notably Jeffrey Biegel, who has performed it several times and recorded it with Emerson's permission.\nIn 1976, while still in ELP, Emerson also released his first solo record, the single \"Honky Tonk Train Blues\" b/w \"Barrelhouse Shake-Down\". \"Honky Tonk Train Blues\", Emerson's cover of a 1927 boogie-woogie piano song by Meade Lux Lewis, reached No.\u202f21 on the UK Singles Chart.\nTheatrics.\nIn addition to his technical skills at playing and composing, Emerson was a theatrical performer. He cited guitarist Jimi Hendrix and organist Don Shinn as his chief theatrical influences. While in ELP, Emerson continued to some degree the physical abuse of his Hammond organ that he had developed with The Nice, including playing the organ upside down while having it lie over him and using knives to wedge down specific keys and sustain notes during solos. He also engaged in knife throwing using a target fastened in front of his Leslie speakers. He was given his trademark knife, an authentic Nazi dagger, by Lemmy Kilmister, who was a roadie for The Nice in his earlier days.\nEmerson toned down his theatrics with the organ when ELP used more stage props for their shows. While touring \"Brain Salad Surgery\" from 1973 to 1974, at the end of the show, a sequencer in Emerson's Moog Modular synthesiser was set running at an increasing rate, with the synthesiser pivoting to face the audience while emitting smoke and deploying a large pair of silver bat wings from its back. The same tour featured one of Emerson's memorable live show stunts with ELP, which involved playing a piano suspended as high as 20 feet in mid-air and then rotated end-over-end with Emerson sitting at it. This was purely for visual effect, as the piano was fake and had no works inside, leaving Emerson to mime playing. Emerson was introduced to Bob McCarthy, former circus employee on Long Island, New York who demonstrated the stunt piano for him at his home. It was used for shows at Madison Square Garden in December 1973 and the California Jam in April 1974, which was filmed. Emerson said: \"After that every TV show I did came the question\u00a0... Keith, how do you spin around on that piano? I'd say what about my music?'\" The stunt caused Emerson to suffer multiple finger injuries and a broken nose. He wished to use it at the band's reunion concert in 2010, but was forbidden by the local authority who said that the plans did not meet health and safety standards.\n1979\u20131991: Solo and group projects.\nAfter ELP disbanded in 1979, Emerson pursued a variety of projects during the 1980s and 1990s, including solo releases, soundtrack work and other bands, including supergroup the Best. In the early 1990s, Emerson rejoined the reunited ELP, but the group broke up again by the end of that decade.\nSolo career.\nIn 1981, Emerson released his debut solo album, \"Honky\". Recorded in the Bahamas with local musicians, it departed from Emerson's usual style in featuring calypso and reggae songs, and was generally not well received, except in Italy where it was a hit. Emerson's subsequent solo releases were sporadic, including a Christmas album in 1988, and the album \"Changing States\" (also known as \"Cream of Emerson Soup\") recorded in 1989 but not released until 1995, after several of its songs had already been re-recorded and released in different versions on ELP's 1992 comeback album \"Black Moon\". \"Changing States\" also contained an orchestral remake of the ELP song \"Abaddon's Bolero\" with the London Philharmonic Orchestra, and \"The Church\", which Emerson composed for the 1989 Michele Soavi horror film of the same name.\nSoundtrack work.\nIn the 1980s, Emerson began to write and perform music for films, as his orchestral and classical style was more suited for film work than for the new wave-dominated pop/ rock market. He was given the script for \"Chariots of Fire\", but turned down the offer to score it. Films for which Emerson contributed soundtrack music include Dario Argento's \"Inferno\" (1980), the action thriller \"Nighthawks\" (1981) starring Sylvester Stallone, (1984 film) Best Revenge, notable because he collaborated with Brad Delp from the rock band Boston and Levon Helm from The Band both on vocals, and Garth Hudson also from The Band on accordion, that also featured an instrumental piece called \"Dream Runner\" that became a standard solo performance piece for Emerson at ELP shows throughout the next decade, Lucio Fulci's \"Murder Rock\" (1984), and Michele Soavi's \"The Church\" (also known as \"La chiesa\") (1989). He was also the composer for the short-lived 1994 US animated television series \"Iron Man\".\n1980s and 1990s bands.\nStarting in the mid-1980s, Emerson formed several short-lived supergroups. The first two, Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell (with Lake and ex-Rainbow drummer Cozy Powell) and 3 (with Palmer and American multi-instrumentalist Robert Berry), were intended to carry on in the general style of ELP in the absence of one of the original members. Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell had some success, and their sole album is considered one of the best of both Emerson's and Lake's careers. Stylistically, it was a departure from their 1980s progressive rock peers, Genesis and Asia. Progressive rock analyst Edward Macan wrote that Emerson, Lake &amp; Powell were closer to the \"classic ELP sound\" than ELP's own late-1970s output. By contrast, 3's only album sold poorly and drew comparisons to \"the worst moments of \"Love Beach\"\" (which had been a commercial disaster for ELP).\nEmerson also toured briefly in 1990 with The Best, a supergroup including John Entwistle of The Who, Joe Walsh of the Eagles, Jeff \"Skunk\" Baxter of Steely Dan and The Doobie Brothers, and Simon Phillips. This project focused on covering songs from each of the members' past bands.\nIn the early 1990s, Emerson formed the short-lived group Aliens of Extraordinary Ability with Stuart Smith, Richie Onori, Marvin Sperling and Robbie Wyckoff. The group's name came from the application process for a US work visa, and the members included several British musicians who, like Emerson, had come to Los Angeles to further their careers. The group turned down a record deal with Samsung because of Emerson's commitment to an ELP reunion and Smith's involvement with a possible reformation of The Sweet.\n1991\u20131998: Reunion with ELP.\nIn 1991, ELP reformed for two more albums (\"Black Moon\" (1992) and \"In the Hot Seat\" (1994)) and world tours in 1992\u20131993. After the 1993 tour, Emerson was forced to take a year off from playing due to a nerve condition affecting his right hand (see Health issues). Following his recovery, ELP resumed touring in 1996, including a successful US tour with Jethro Tull, but broke up again in August 1998.\n1998\u20132016.\nEmerson participated in The Nice's reunion tour and a 40th anniversary show for ELP, preceded by a short duo tour with Greg Lake. Apart from these reunions, he continued his solo career, releasing solo and soundtrack albums, touring with his own Keith Emerson Band, and making occasional guest appearances. Starting in 2010, he increasingly focused on orchestral collaborations. A documentary film based on his autobiography was reportedly in production at the time of his death in 2016.\nReunion shows.\nIn 2002 Emerson reformed and toured with The Nice, though performing a longer set of ELP music using a backing band including guitarist/vocalist Dave Kilminster. During the spring of 2010, he toured with Greg Lake in the United States and Canada, doing a series of \"Intimate Evening\" duo shows in which they performed newly arranged versions of the music of Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, The Nice, and King Crimson as well as Emerson's new original composition. On 25 July 2010, a one-off Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer reunion concert closed the High Voltage Festival as the main act in Victoria Park, East London, to commemorate the band's 40th anniversary.\nSolo career and Keith Emerson Band.\nEmerson continued his solo and soundtrack work into the 2000s. His solo releases included the all-piano album \"Emerson Plays Emerson\" (2002), several compilations, and contributions to Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin tribute albums (see Discography). He was also one of three composers who contributed to the soundtrack for the Japanese \"kaiju\" film \"\" (2004).\nFollowing the August 2008 release of the album \"Keith Emerson Band Featuring Marc Bonilla\", Emerson also toured with his own self-named band in Russia, the Baltic States and Japan between August and October 2008. The tour band members were Marc Bonilla, Travis Davis and Tony Pia.\nOrchestral collaborations.\nJapanese composer Takashi Yoshimatsu worked with Emerson to create an arrangement of ELP's song \"Tarkus\", which premiered on 14 March 2010, performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra. Yoshimatsu's arrangement has been featured in multiple live performances and two live recordings.\nIn September 2011, Emerson began working with Norwegian conductor Terje Mikkelsen, along with the Keith Emerson Band featuring Marc Bonilla and the Munich Radio Orchestra, on new orchestral renditions of ELP classics and their new compositions. The project \"The Three Fates\" was premiered in Norway in early September 2012, supervised by Norwegian professor and musician Bj\u00f8rn Ole Rasch for the Norwegian Simax label. The work received its UK live premiere on 10 July 2015 at London's Barbican Centre, with the BBC Concert Orchestra, as part of the celebration of the life and work of Robert Moog.\nEmerson made his conducting debut with Orchestra Kentucky of Bowling Green, Kentucky in September 2013. In October 2014, Emerson conducted the South Shore Symphony at his 70th birthday tribute concert at Molloy College in Rockville Centre, New York. The concert also featured the premiere of his \"Three String Quartets\", and a performance of Emerson's \"Piano Concerto No. 1\" by Jeffrey Biegel.\nOther appearances and activities.\nIn 2000, Emerson was a featured panelist and performer at \"The Keyboard Meets Modern Technology\", an event honouring Moog presented by the Smithsonian in Washington, D.C., in conjunction with a gallery exhibition celebrating the 300th anniversary of the piano. Emerson later headlined both the first and third Moogfest, a festival held in honour of Robert Moog, at the B. B. King Blues Club &amp; Grill at Times Square in New York City, in 2004 and 2006 respectively.\nEmerson opened the Led Zeppelin reunion/Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert at the O2 Arena in London on 10 December 2007, along with Chris Squire and Alan White (Yes) and Simon Kirke (Bad Company/Free). The supergroup played a new arrangement of \"Fanfare for the Common Man\". Emerson also made a guest appearance in 2009 on Spinal Tap's album \"Back from the Dead\", and played on several songs at Spinal Tap's \"One Night Only World Tour\" at Wembley Arena on 30 June 2009.\nIn 2004 Emerson published his autobiography entitled \"Pictures of an Exhibitionist\", which dealt with his life up to his nearly career-ending nerve-graft surgery in 1993. In 2007, Emerson began working with Canadian independent filmmaker Jason Woodford to make a documentary film based on his autobiography. As of March 2016, production was still ongoing and the filmmakers were seeking funding to finish the film, according to the webpage of an artists' management company representing Emerson.\nPersonal life.\nAround the Christmas of 1969, Emerson married his Danish girlfriend Elinor Lund. They had two sons, Aaron and Damon, before they divorced in 1994. Emerson said it was his fault, as he had \"fallen in love with someone else.\" Emerson then had a long-term relationship with Mari Kawaguchi.\nIn April 1975, Emerson's Sussex house burned down and he relocated to London.\nEmerson enjoyed flying as a hobby, and he obtained his pilot's licence in 1972. When Emerson moved to Santa Monica, California in the mid-1990s, John Lydon, who had openly and harshly criticised ELP during the 1970s when Lydon was a member of the punk rock band Sex Pistols, was Emerson's neighbour. The two became friends, with Lydon saying in a 2007 interview, \"He's a great bloke\". In 2002, Emerson was in the process of returning to live in England.\nHealth issues.\nIn 1993, Emerson was forced to take a year off from playing after he developed a nerve-related condition affecting his right hand that he likened to \"writer's cramp\", and that was also reported as a form of arthritis. It marked a low period for Emerson, who was going through a divorce and having financial difficulties. He turned to alcohol, before a course of psychotherapy led to his move to Santa Monica. During his time off, he ran marathons, customised a Harley-Davidson motorcycle, and wrote film scores and his autobiography, \"Pictures of an Exhibitionist\", which opens and closes with an account of his illness and subsequent arm operation.\nIn 2002, Emerson had regained the full use of his hands and could play to his usual strength. In 2016, he was corresponding with a carpal-tunnel syndrome expert about his struggle with focal dystonia, who said \"Musicians can't talk about it because they won't get another gig if word gets out that they're in pain so they keep quiet.\"\nIn September 2010, Emerson underwent immediate surgery after a routine colonoscopy had revealed a \"rather dangerous\" polyp in his lower colon.\nDeath.\nEmerson died on 11 March 2016 in Santa Monica, California, of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. His body was found at his Santa Monica home. Following a post-mortem, the medical examiner ruled Emerson's death a suicide, and concluded that he had also had heart disease and depression associated with alcohol. According to Emerson's girlfriend Mari Kawaguchi, Emerson had become \"depressed, nervous, and anxious\" because nerve damage had hampered his playing, and he was worried that he would perform poorly at upcoming concerts in Japan and disappoint his fans.\nEmerson was buried on 1 April 2016 at Lancing and Sompting Cemetery, Lancing, West Sussex. Although his death had been reported by news sources and an official Emerson, Lake and Palmer social media page as having occurred on the night of 10 March, his grave memorial gives his date of death as 11 March 2016.\nHis former ELP bandmates, Carl Palmer and Greg Lake, both issued statements on his death. Palmer said, \"Keith was a gentle soul whose love for music and passion for his performance as a keyboard player will remain unmatched for many years to come.\" Lake said, \"As sad and tragic as Keith's death is, I would not want this to be the lasting memory people take away with them. What I will always remember about Keith Emerson was his remarkable talent as a musician and composer and his gift and passion to entertain. Music was his life and despite some of the difficulties he encountered I am sure that the music he created will live on forever.\" Lake died later that same year of pancreatic cancer.\nA tribute concert featuring Brian Auger, Jordan Rudess, Eddie Jobson, Aaron Emerson, Steve Lukather, Steve Porcaro, Marc Bonilla, and Rachel Flowers took place at the El Rey Theatre. Proceeds from sales of the DVD go to the Dystonia Medical Research Foundation.\nPlaying style.\nEmerson sometimes reached into the interior of his piano and hit, plucked, or strummed the strings with his hand. He said that as a keyboard player, he hated the idea of being \"static\" and that to avoid it, he \"wanted to get inside the piano, brush the strings, stick Ping-Pong balls inside\". \"Take a Pebble\" included Emerson strumming the strings of his piano, a technique pioneered by avant-garde composer Henry Cowell, referred to as string piano. In the Nice's 1968 live performance of \"Hang on to a Dream\" on the German television program \"Beat-Club\" (later released on DVD in 1997), Emerson can be seen and heard reaching inside his grand piano at one point and plucking its strings.\nIn addition to such experimentation, Emerson also incorporated unique musical stylization into his work. Emerson is recognized for having integrated different sounds into his writing, utilizing methods of both horizontal and vertical contrast. Horizontal contrast is the use of distinct styles in a piece of music, combined by alternating between two different segments (in Emerson's case, most frequently alternating classical and non-classical); this technique can be seen in numerous works, such as \"Rondo\", \"Tantalising Maggie\", \"The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack\" and others. Vertical contrast is the combination of multiple styles simultaneously; Emerson frequently played a given style with one hand and a contrasting one with the other. This structure can be seen in works such as \"Intermezzo from the Karelia Suite\", \"Rondo\", and others. Emerson's love of modern music such as Copland and Bartok was evident in his open voicings and use of fifths and fourths, \"Fanfare\" emulated guitar power chords. He also used dissonance, atonality, sonata and fugue forms, exposing rock and roll audiences to myriad classical styles from Bach to Stravinsky.\nInstrumentation.\nEmerson used a variety of electronic keyboard instruments during his career, including several Hammond organs and synthesisers by Moog Music, Yamaha, and Korg. From time to time he also used other instruments such as pipe organs, a grand piano, a clavinet, and very briefly, a Mellotron. During his ELP years, Emerson toured with a large amount of gear, taking thirteen keyboard units to a December 1973 show at Madison Square Garden, and later travelling with a large Yamaha GX-1 that required eight roadies to move it. Michael \"Supe\" Granda of The Ozark Mountain Daredevils recalled Emerson's organ rig as being \"as large as [the Daredevils'] entire stage plot\".\nPre-ELP equipment and Hammond organs.\nInitially a piano player, Emerson obtained his first Hammond organ, an L-100, after hearing jazz organist Jack McDuff and becoming frustrated with broken hammers inside pianos. Around 1968, during his time with the Nice, he added a second Hammond organ, the more expensive C-3, and placed the two organs sideways and facing each other so he could stand between the two keyboards and play both with his unobstructed body facing the audience. Emerson preferred the sound of the C-3 as being \"far superior\" to the cheaper L-100, and used the L-100 to \"throw around and make it feed back\". Emerson got the L-100 to feed back by placing it close to the onstage speakers and using a fuzzbox. He continued to perform physical abuse stunts with the L-100 to some degree throughout his years with ELP.\nThroughout his career, Emerson owned a number of L-100 models in various states of repair to support his act. These organs were also specially reinforced and modified to enhance their sound and help prevent damage while on tour, and were reported to weigh 300 to 350 pounds. By contrast, his C-3 organ was not used for stunts and Emerson continued to play his original C-3 for many years, using it on all the ELP albums and tours throughout the 1970s. He also owned several other Hammond organ models in addition to the L-100s and the C-3. When Emerson sold much of his gear in the mid-1990s, his Hammond organs were among the items he kept as being \"too personal to let go\". The remains of one L-100 that failed and burned during a 1990s ELP show in Boston were donated to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nELP equipment and Moog synthesisers.\nWith ELP, Emerson added the Moog synthesiser behind the C-3 with the keyboard and ribbon controller stacked on the top of the organ. The ribbon controller allowed Emerson to vary pitch, volume or timbre of the output from the Moog by moving his finger up and down the length of a touch-sensitive strip. It also could be used as a phallic symbol, and outfitted with a small rocket launcher, it quickly became a feature of the act. He continued to divide his keyboard setup into two banks so that he could play between them with his body in view. When the ultra-compact Moog Minimoog first appeared it was placed where needed, such as on top of the grand piano. A Hohner clavinet L, with reversed black and white keys, was also part of Emerson's keyboard rig. Although it could be heard on numerous album pieces, according to Emerson, it was only used for one song, \"Nut Rocker\" in concert.\nDuring the \"Brain Salad Surgery\" tour of 1974, Emerson's keyboard setup included the Hammond C-3 organ, run through multiple Leslie speakers driven by HiWatt guitar amplifiers, the Moog 3C modular synthesiser (modified by addition of various modules and an oscilloscope) with ribbon controller, a Steinway concert grand piano with a Minimoog synthesiser on top of it, an upright acoustic-electric piano that was used for honky-tonk piano sounds, a Hohner Clavinet and another Minimoog synthesiser. Emerson also used a prototype polyphonic synthesiser produced by Moog, which was the test bed for the Moog Polymoog polyphonic synthesiser. The original synthesiser setup as envisioned by Moog was called the Constellation, and consisted of three instruments \u2013 the polyphonic synthesiser, called the Apollo, a monophonic lead synthesiser called the Lyra, and a bass-pedal synthesiser, called the Taurus, but Emerson never used the Taurus.\nPipe organs.\nOccasionally Emerson used a pipe organ, when available, in live performances and on recordings. He played the Royal Albert Hall Organ at a show with The Nice on 26 June 1968, where the band controversially burned a painting of an American flag onstage to protest against the Vietnam War. The stunt caused a storm of objections in the US and The Nice received a lifetime ban from the venue.\nWith ELP, Emerson used the Royal Festival Hall organ for the \"Clotho\" segment of \"The Three Fates\" on the 1970 eponymous debut album by ELP. He played this organ again in 2002 to open The Nice reunion tour show, but according to a reviewer, the organ failed to operate at the expected volume.\nThe Newcastle City Hall organ was used for the introductory section of \"Pictures at an Exhibition\", recorded there live on 26 March 1971. Emerson was recorded playing the organ at St. Mark's Church in London for \"The Only Way (Hymn)\" on the 1971 ELP album \"Tarkus\".\nYamaha Electone GX-1 synthesiser.\nAfter founder Robert Moog left Moog Music in the late 1970s, Emerson began to consider using synthesisers made by other companies. Emerson became one of the few buyers of the Yamaha GX-1 polyphonic synthesiser, which reportedly cost almost $50,000. The GX-1 was subsequently used on the ELP album \"Works Volume 1\", particularly on the song \"Fanfare for the Common Man\", and on tour. It can be seen in ELP's \"Works Orchestral Tour\" video and in promotional photos and videos from 1977 featuring the band playing \"Fanfare\" outdoors during a snowstorm in Montreal's Olympic Stadium. Emerson later bought a second GX-1 from John Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin, and used parts from it to repair his original GX-1, which was damaged by a tractor crashing into Emerson's home studio.\nEmerson sold much of his keyboard equipment in the 1990s when he relocated from England to Santa Monica, California. The John Paul Jones GX-1 was sold to film composer Hans Zimmer, while Emerson's original GX-1 was sold to Italian keyboardist Riccardo Grotto.\nKorg synthesisers.\nIn the late 1970s, Emerson also began to use the Korg PS-3300 and PS-3100, which at the time were among the world's first fully polyphonic synthesizers. These Korgs appeared on the ELP album \"Love Beach\", and Emerson continued to use them into the 1980s for his solo album \"Honky\" and his soundtrack work. He also became an official endorser for the PS-3300 and PS-3100 in the early 1980s.\nBy the late 2000s, Emerson was employing \"a host of Korg gear\" including the Korg OASYS and Korg Triton Extreme music workstation synthesisers. A review of the DVD release of ELP's 2010 one-off reunion show said that the Korg OASYS \"appear[ed] to be Emerson's go-to instrument\", although he also used a Hammond C-3 and a Moog with a ribbon controller onstage.\nHonours and awards.\nIn December 1980 \"Contemporary Keyboard\" magazine announced, in their Fifth Annual Readers' Poll, that Emerson had\u2014for the fifth time in a row\u2014captured first place in two categories \u2013 '\"Overall Best Keyboardist\" and \"Best Multi-Keyboardist\". The five-time wins put Emerson in their \"Gallery Of The Greats\" for both categories. The same poll also saw Emerson take \"Best Rock Organist\" for the fourth time and \"Best Lead Synthesist\".\nIn March 2010 Emerson received the annual Frankfurt Music Prize for his achievements, awarded in Frankfurt on the eve of the annual Musikmesse fair.\nIn September 2013 Orchestra Kentucky of Bowling Green gave Emerson their Lifetime Achievement Award in the Arts and Humanities \"for his role in bringing classical music to the masses\".\nIn 2014 Emerson was inducted into the Hammond Hall of Fame by the Hammond Organ Company.\nPieces based on other works.\nEmerson occasionally covered or sampled other musical works in his compositions. Permission to use pieces was sometimes denied by the composer or his family; for example Gustav Holst's daughter refused to grant official permission for rock bands to perform her late father's composition \"Mars, the Bringer of War\". However, a number of composers did grant permission for their works to be used. Aaron Copland said that there was \"something that attracted [him]\" about ELP's version of \"Fanfare for the Common Man\", and so approved its use, although he said, \"What they do in the middle (i.e., the modal section between repeats of Copland's theme), I'm not sure exactly how they connect that with my music\". Alberto Ginastera, on the other hand, enthusiastically approved Emerson's electronic realisation of the fourth movement of his first piano concerto, which appeared on their album \"Brain Salad Surgery\" under the title \"Toccata\". Ginastera said, \"You have captured the essence of my music, and no one's ever done that before.\"\nSongs composed by Emerson (alone or with contributions from others).\nBesides his \"Piano Concerto\", there are several examples of Emerson creativity in original composition. Since the late Sixties he wrote a wide typology of pieces in different musical styles ranging from pop rock songs such as \"Flower King of Flies\", \"The Thoughts of Emerlist Davjack\", \"Happy Freuds\" to complex pieces including transversal influences from baroque to contemporary and jazz, anticipating the progressive genre (\"For Example\", \"Five Bridges Suite\"). During the seventies alongside arrangements of classic tracks and Lake's ballads, a decisive element of EL&amp;P's albums are the compositions featuring music entirely written by Emerson. His trademark is a very varied range of musical approach: songs with a hard rock impact with a jazz flavour such as \"Bitches Crystal\", \"A Time and a Place\", \"Living Sin\", examples of country or stride piano such as \"Jeremy Bender\" or \"Benny the Bouncer\", and adventurous instrumentals difficult to classify in one genre, such as \"The Three Fates\", \"Tank\" and \"Abaddon's Bolero\". The more structured and complex epic tracks such as \"Tarkus\", \"Trilogy\", \"The Endless Enigma\", \"Karn Evil 9\", \"Pirates\", \"Memoirs of an Officer and a Gentleman\" are all Emerson\u2019s compositions. As a soloist, after his \"Piano Concerto\" a period of compositions recorded with the orchestra opened during the early Eighties (\"Inferno\", \"Nighthawks\", \"Orchestral Suite to Best Revenge\"). In the following decades Emerson composed many pieces for piano, such as \"The Dreamer\", \"And Then January\", \"Outgoing Tide\", \"Broken Bough\" and \"Soulscapes\", displaying an intimate and crepuscular inspiration, also reiterated in orchestral pieces such as \"Glorietta Pass\" and \"After All of This\". Funky and dance rhythms can be found in several songs present in the \"Murderock\" and \"Nighthawks\" soundtracks, whereas in some tracks of \"Godzilla Final Wars\" the sound are those of the 2000s. A return to the visionary and tumultuous style of progressive music is represented by the album recorded under the name of the Keith Emerson Band, which includes the long suite \"The House Of Ocean Born Mary\" co-written with Marc Bonilla.\nSee the section below for a list of songs composed or co-composed by Emerson.\nIn popular culture.\nOn the UK surreal television comedy series \"Big Train\", Kevin Eldon portrayed Emerson as a Roman slave fighting his enemies with progressive rock.\nThe long-running comic-strip character Keef da Blade in the Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge student newspaper \"Lachesis\" (1970s) is based largely on Emerson, the character's name being presumably a reference to his trademark stage antics with knives.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55917", "revid": "22771722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55917", "title": "Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar", "text": "Venezuelan statesman and military officer (1783\u20131830)\nSim\u00f3n Jos\u00e9 Antonio de la Sant\u00edsima Trinidad Bol\u00edvar y Palacios (24July 1783\u00a0\u2013 17December 1830) was a Venezuelan statesman and military officer who led what are currently the countries of Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, Panama, and Bolivia to independence from the Spanish Empire. He is known colloquially as \"El Libertador\", or the \"Liberator of America\".\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar was born in Caracas in the Captaincy General of Venezuela into a wealthy family of American-born Spaniards (criollo) but lost both parents as a child. Bol\u00edvar was educated abroad and lived in Spain, as was common for men of upper-class families in his day. While living in Madrid from 1800 to 1802, he was introduced to Enlightenment philosophy and married Mar\u00eda Teresa Rodr\u00edguez del Toro y Alaysa, who died in Venezuela from yellow fever in 1803. From 1803 to 1805, Bol\u00edvar embarked on a Grand Tour that ended in Rome, where he swore to end the Spanish rule in the Americas. In 1807, Bol\u00edvar returned to Venezuela and promoted Venezuelan independence to other wealthy creoles. When the Spanish authority in the Americas weakened due to Napoleon's Peninsular War, Bol\u00edvar became a zealous combatant and politician in the Spanish-American wars of independence.\nBol\u00edvar began his military career in 1810 as a militia officer in the Venezuelan War of Independence, fighting Royalist forces for the first and second Venezuelan republics and the United Provinces of New Granada. After Spanish forces subdued New Granada in 1815, Bol\u00edvar was forced into exile on Jamaica. In Haiti, Bol\u00edvar met and befriended Haitian revolutionary leader Alexandre P\u00e9tion. After promising to abolish slavery in Spanish America, Bol\u00edvar received military support from P\u00e9tion and returned to Venezuela. In 1817, he established a third republic. In 1819, he crossed the Andes to liberate New Granada. Bol\u00edvar and his allies defeated the Spanish in New Granada in 1819, Venezuela and Panama in 1821, Ecuador in 1822, Peru in 1824, and Bolivia in 1825. Venezuela, New Granada, Ecuador, and Panama were merged into the Republic of Colombia (Gran Colombia), with Bol\u00edvar as president there and in Peru and Bolivia.\nIn his final years, Bol\u00edvar became increasingly disillusioned with the South American republics, and distanced from them because of his centralist ideology. He was successively removed from his offices until he resigned the presidency of Colombia and died of tuberculosis in 1830. His legacy is diverse and far-reaching within Latin America and beyond. He is regarded as a hero and national and cultural icon throughout Latin America. The nations of Bolivia and Venezuela (as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) are named after him, and he has been memorialized all over the world in the form of public art or street names and in popular culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and family.\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar was born on 24 July 1783 in Caracas, capital of the Captaincy General of Venezuela, the fourth and youngest child of Juan Vicente Bol\u00edvar y Ponte and Mar\u00eda de la Concepci\u00f3n Palacios y Blanco. He was baptized as Sim\u00f3n Jos\u00e9 Antonio de la Sant\u00edsima Trinidad Bol\u00edvar y Palacios on 30 July. The first of Bol\u00edvar's family to have emigrated to the Americas was a similarly named minor Spanish governmental official named Sim\u00f3n de Bol\u00edvar, who had been a notary in the Spanish Basque region, and who had later arrived in Venezuela in the 1580s. The earlier Sim\u00f3n de Bol\u00edvar's descendants had served in the colonial bureaucracy and had married into various wealthy Caracas families over the years. By the time Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar was born, the Bol\u00edvar family was one of the wealthiest and most prestigious \"criollo\" (creole) families in the Spanish Americas.\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar's childhood was described by British historian John Lynch as \"at once privileged and deprived.\" Juan Vicente died of tuberculosis on 19 January 1786, leaving Mar\u00eda de la Concepci\u00f3n Palacios and her father, Feliciano Palacios y Sojo, as legal guardians over the Bol\u00edvar children's inheritances. Those children \u2013 Mar\u00eda Antonia (born 1777), Juana (born 1779), Juan Vicente (born 1781), and Sim\u00f3n \u2013 were raised separately from each other and their mother, and, following colonial custom, by African house slaves; Sim\u00f3n was raised by a slave named Hip\u00f3lita whom he viewed as both a motherly and fatherly figure. On 6 July 1792, Mar\u00eda de la Concepci\u00f3n also died of tuberculosis. Believing that his family would inherit the Bol\u00edvars' wealth, Feliciano Palacios arranged marriages for Mar\u00eda Antonia and Juana and, before dying on 5 December 1793, assigned custody of Juan Vicente and Sim\u00f3n to his sons, Juan F\u00e9lix Palacios and Carlos Palacios y Blanco, respectively. Bol\u00edvar came to loathe Carlos Palacios, who had no interest in the boy other than his inheritance.\nEducation and first journey to Europe: 1793\u20131802.\nAs a child, Bol\u00edvar was notoriously unruly and neglected his studies. Before his mother died, he spent two years under the tutelage of the Venezuelan lawyer Miguel Jos\u00e9 Sanz at the direction of the Real Audiencia of Caracas, the Spanish court of appeals in Caracas. In 1793, Carlos enrolled Bol\u00edvar at a rudimentary primary school run by Venezuelan educator Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez. In June 1795, Bol\u00edvar fled his uncle's custody for the house of his sister Mar\u00eda Antonia and her husband. The couple sought formal recognition of his change of residence, but the Real Audiencia decided the matter in favor of Palacios, who sent Sim\u00f3n to live with Rodr\u00edguez.\nAfter two months there, the Real Audiencia directed that he be returned to the Palacios family home. Bol\u00edvar promised the Real Audiencia that he would focus on his education and was subsequently taught full-time by Rodr\u00edguez and the Venezuelan intellectuals Andr\u00e9s Bello and Francisco de And\u00fajar. In 1797, Rodr\u00edguez's connection to the pro-independence Gual and Espa\u00f1a conspiracy forced him to go into exile, and Bol\u00edvar was enrolled in an honorary militia force. When he was commissioned as an officer after a year, his uncles Carlos and Esteban Palacios y Blanco decided to send Bol\u00edvar to join the latter in Madrid. There, Esteban was friends with Queen Maria Luisa's favorite, Manuel Mallo.\nOn 19 January 1799, Bol\u00edvar boarded the Spanish warship \"San Ildefonso\" at the port of La Guaira, bound for C\u00e1diz. He arrived in Santo\u00f1a, on the northern coast of Spain, in May 1799. A little over a week later, he arrived in Madrid and joined Esteban, who found Bol\u00edvar to be \"very ignorant.\" Esteban asked Ger\u00f3nimo Enrique de Uzt\u00e1riz y Tovar, a Caracas native and government official, to educate Bol\u00edvar. Bol\u00edvar moved into Uzt\u00e1riz's residence in February 1800 and was educated in the Classics, literature, and social studies.\nAt the same time, Mallo fell out of the Queen's favor and Manuel Godoy, her previous favorite, returned to power. As members of Mallo's faction at court, Esteban was arrested on pretense, and Bol\u00edvar was banished from court following a public incident at the Puerta de Toledo over the wearing of diamonds without royal permission. Bol\u00edvar also at this time met Mar\u00eda Teresa Rodr\u00edguez del Toro y Alaysa, the daughter of another wealthy Caracas creole. They were engaged in August 1800, but were separated when the del Toros left Madrid for their summer home in Bilbao. After Uzt\u00e1riz left Madrid for a government assignment in Teruel in 1801, Bol\u00edvar himself left for Bilbao and remained there when the del Toros returned to the capital in August 1801. Early in 1802, Bol\u00edvar traveled to Paris while he awaited permission to return to Madrid, which was granted in April.\nReturn to Venezuela and second journey to Europe: 1802\u20131805.\nBol\u00edvar and del Toro, aged 18 and 21 respectively, were married in Madrid on 26 May 1802. The couple boarded the \"San Ildefonso\" in La Coru\u00f1a on 15 June and sailed for La Guaira, where they arrived on 12 July. They settled in Caracas, where del Toro fell ill and died of yellow fever on 22 January 1803. Bol\u00edvar was devastated by del Toro's death and later told Louis Peru de Lacroix, one of his generals and biographers, that he swore to never remarry. By July 1803, Bol\u00edvar had decided to leave Venezuela for Europe. He entrusted his estates to an agent and his brother and in October boarded a ship bound for C\u00e1diz.\nBol\u00edvar arrived in Spain in December 1803, then traveled to Madrid to console his father-in-law. In March 1804, the municipal authorities of Madrid ordered all non-residents in the city to leave to alleviate a bread shortage brought about by Spain's resumed hostilities with Britain. Over April, Bol\u00edvar and Fernando Rodr\u00edguez del Toro, a childhood friend and relative of his wife, made their way to Paris and arrived in time for Napoleon to be proclaimed Emperor of the French on 18 May 1804. They rented an apartment on the Rue Vivienne and met with other South Americans such as Carlos de Mont\u00fafar, Vicente Rocafuerte, and Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez, who joined Bol\u00edvar and del Toro in their apartment. While in Paris, Bol\u00edvar began a with the Countess Dervieu du Villars, at whose salon he likely met the naturalists Alexander von Humboldt and Aim\u00e9 Bonpland, who had traveled through much of Spanish America from 1799 to 1804. Bol\u00edvar allegedly discussed Spanish American independence with them.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI swear before you... that I will not rest body or soul until I have broken the chains binding us to the will of Spanish might!\nSim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, 15 August 1805\nIn April 1805, Bol\u00edvar left Paris with Rodr\u00edguez and del Toro on a Grand Tour to Italy. Beginning in Lyon, they traveled through the Savoy Alps and then to Milan. The trio arrived on 26 May 1805 and witnessed Napoleon's coronation as King of Italy. From Milan, they traveled down the Po Valley to Venice, then to Florence, and then finally Rome, where Bol\u00edvar met, among others, Pope Pius VII, French writer Germaine de Sta\u00ebl, and Humboldt again. Rome's sites and history excited Bol\u00edvar. On 18 August 1805, when he, del Toro, and Rodr\u00edguez traveled to the Mons Sacer, where the plebs had seceded from Rome in the 4th century BC, Bol\u00edvar swore to end Spanish rule in the Americas.\nPolitical and military career.\nBy April 1806, Bol\u00edvar had returned to Paris and desired passage to Venezuela, where Venezuelan revolutionary Francisco de Miranda had just attempted an invasion with American volunteers. Britain's command of the sea after the 1805 Battle of Trafalgar obliged Bol\u00edvar to board an American ship in Hamburg in October 1806. Bol\u00edvar arrived in Charleston, South Carolina, in January 1807, and from there traveled to Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, New York City, and Boston. After six months in the United States, Bol\u00edvar returned to Philadelphia and sailed for Venezuela, where he arrived in June 1807. He began to meet with other creole elites to discuss independence from Spain. Finding himself to be far more radical than the rest of Caracas high society, however, Bol\u00edvar occupied himself with a property dispute with a neighbor, Antonio Nicol\u00e1s Brice\u00f1o.\nIn 1807\u201308, Napoleon invaded the Iberian peninsula and replaced the rulers of Spain with his brother, Joseph. This news arrived in Venezuela in July 1808. Napoleonic rule was rejected and Venezuelan creoles, though still loyal to Ferdinand VII of Spain, sought to form their own local government in place of the existing Spanish government. On 24 November 1808, a group of creoles presented a petition demanding an independent government to Juan de Casas, the Captain-General of Venezuela, and were arrested. Bol\u00edvar, though he did not sign the petition and thus was not arrested, was warned to cease hosting or attending seditious meetings. In May 1809, Casas was replaced by Vicente Empar\u00e1n and his staff, which included Fernando Rodr\u00edguez del Toro. The creoles also resisted Empar\u00e1n's government, despite his friendlier disposition towards them.\nBy February 1810, French victories in Spain prompted the dissolution of the anti-French Spanish government in favor of a five-man regency council for Ferdinand VII. This news, and two delegates that included Carlos de Mont\u00fafar, arrived in Venezuela on 17 April 1810. Two days later, the creoles succeeded in deposing and then expelling Empar\u00e1n, and created the Supreme Junta of Caracas, independent from the Spanish regency but not Ferdinand VII. Absent from Caracas for the coup, Bol\u00edvar and his brother returned to the city and offered their services to the Supreme Junta as diplomats. In May 1810, Juan Vicente was sent to the United States to buy weapons, while Sim\u00f3n secured a place in a diplomatic mission to Britain with the lawyer Luis L\u00f3pez M\u00e9ndez and Andr\u00e9s Bello by paying for the mission. The trio boarded a British ship in June 1810 and arrived at Portsmouth on 10 July 1810.\nThe three delegates first met Miranda at his London residence, despite instructions from the Supreme Junta to avoid him, and thereafter received the benefit of his connections and consultation. On 16 July 1810, the Venezuelan delegation met Britain's foreign secretary, Richard Wellesley, at Apsley House. Led by Bol\u00edvar, the Venezuelans argued in favor of Venezuelan independence, which Wellesley stated that it was intolerable for Anglo-Spanish relations. Subsequent meetings produced no recognition or concrete support from Britain. Finding that he had many shared beliefs with Miranda, however, Bol\u00edvar convinced him to come back to Venezuela. On 22 September 1810, Bol\u00edvar left for Venezuela while L\u00f3pez and Bello remained in London as diplomats, and arrived in La Guaira on 5 December. Although the British government wanted Miranda to remain in Britain, they could not prevent his departure, and he arrived in Venezuela later in December.\nVenezuela: 1811\u20131812.\nWhile Bol\u00edvar was in England, the Supreme Junta passed liberal economic reforms and began to hold elections for representatives to a congress to be held in Caracas. It had also alienated Caracas from the Venezuelan provinces of Coro, Maracaibo, and Guayana, which professed loyalty to the regency council, and began hostilities with them. Co-founding the Patriotic Society, a political organization advocating for independence from Spain, Bol\u00edvar and Miranda campaigned for and secured the latter's election to the congress. The congress first met on 2 March 1811 and declared its allegiance to Ferdinand VII. After it was discovered that one of the men leading the congress was a Spanish agent who had escaped with military documents, however, discourse \u2013 which Bol\u00edvar was prominent in \u2013 changed decidedly in favor of independence over 3 and 4 July. Finally, on 5 July, the congress declared Venezuela's independence.\nThe declaration of independence created the first Republic of Venezuela. It had a weak base of support and enemies in conservative whites, disenfranchised people of color, and the already hostile Venezuelan provinces, which received troops and supplies from the Captaincy-Generals of Puerto Rico and Cuba. On 13 July 1811, the republic raised militias to fight the pro-Spanish Royalists. The congress appointed Francisco Rodr\u00edguez del Toro, the Marquis of Toro, to command these forces, which opened a breach between Bol\u00edvar and Miranda. Bol\u00edvar and del Toro were close friends, while del Toro and Miranda and their families were enemies. After he failed to suppress a Royalist uprising in the city of Valencia later in July, the congress replaced del Toro with Miranda, and he recaptured Valencia on 13 August. As a condition of assuming command of the Republican forces, Miranda had Bol\u00edvar stripped of his command of a militia unit. Bol\u00edvar nonetheless fought in the Valencia campaign as part of del Toro's militia and was selected by Miranda to bring news of its recapture to Caracas, where he argued for more punitive and forceful campaigning against the Royalists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI left my house for the Cathedral... and the earth began to shake with a huge roar... I saw the church of San Jacinto collapse on its own foundations... I climbed over the ruins and entered, and I immediately saw about forty persons dead or dying under the rubble. I climbed out again and I shall never forget that moment. On the top of the ruins I found Don Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar... He saw me and [said], \"We will fight nature itself if it opposes us, and force it to obey.\"\nRoyalist historian Jos\u00e9 Domingo D\u00edaz, quoted by John Lynch\nBeginning in November 1811, Royalist forces began pushing back the Republicans from the north and east. On 26 March 1812, a powerful earthquake devastated Republican Venezuela; Caracas itself was almost totally destroyed. Bol\u00edvar, who was still near Caracas, rushed into the city to participate in the rescue of survivors and exhumation of the dead. The earthquake destroyed public support for the republic, as it was believed to have been divine retribution for declaring independence from Spain. By April, a Royalist army under the Spanish naval officer Juan Domingo de Monteverde overran western Venezuela. Miranda, retreating east with a disintegrating army, ordered Bol\u00edvar to assume command of the coastal city of Puerto Cabello and its fortress, which contained Royalist prisoners and most of the republic's remaining arms and ammunition.\nBol\u00edvar arrived at Puerto Cabello on 4 May 1812. On 30 June, an officer of the fort's garrison loyal to the Royalists released its prisoners, armed them, and turned its cannons on Puerto Cabello. Weakened by shelling, defections, and lack of supplies, Bol\u00edvar and his remaining troops fled for La Guaira on 6 July. Believing the republic to be doomed, Miranda decided to capitulate, shocking Bol\u00edvar and other Republican officers. After formally surrendering his command to Monteverde on 25 July, Miranda made his way to La Guaira, where a group of officers including Bol\u00edvar arrested Miranda on 30 July on charges of treason against the republic. La Guaira declared for the Royalists the next day and closed its port on Monteverde's orders. Miranda was taken into Spanish custody and moved to a prison in C\u00e1diz, where he died on 16 July 1816.\nNew Granada and Venezuela: 1812\u20131815.\nBol\u00edvar escaped La Guaira early on 31 July 1812 and rode to Caracas, where he hid from arrest in the home of Esteban Fern\u00e1ndez de Le\u00f3n, the Marquis de Casa Le\u00f3n. Bol\u00edvar and Casa Le\u00f3n convinced Francisco Iturbe, a friend of the Bol\u00edvar family and of Monteverde, to intercede on Bol\u00edvar's behalf and secure escape from Venezuela for him. Iturbe persuaded Monteverde to issue Bol\u00edvar a passport for his role in Miranda's arrest, and on 27 August he sailed for the island of Cura\u00e7ao. He and his uncles Francisco and Jos\u00e9 F\u00e9lix Ribas arrived on 1 September. Late in October, the exiles arranged for passage west to the city of Cartagena to offer their services as military leaders to the United Provinces of New Granada against the Royalists. They arrived in November and were welcomed by Manuel Rodr\u00edguez Torices, president of the Free State of Cartagena, who instructed his commanding general, Pierre Labatut, to give Bol\u00edvar a military command. Labatut, a former partisan of Miranda, begrudgingly obliged and on 1 December 1812 placed Bol\u00edvar in command of the 70-man garrison of a town on the lower Magdalena River.\nWhile en route to his posting, Bol\u00edvar issued the Cartagena Manifesto, outlining what he believed to be the causes of the Venezuelan republic's defeat and his political program. In particular, Bol\u00edvar called for the disparate New Granadan republics to help him invade Venezuela to prevent a Royalist invasion of New Granada. Bol\u00edvar arrived on the Magdalena River on 21 December and, in spite of orders from Labatut to not act without his direction, launched an offensive that secured control of the Magdalena River from Royalist forces by 8 January 1813. In February, he joined forces with Republican colonel Manuel del Castillo y Rada, who requested Bol\u00edvar's assistance with stopping a Royalist advance into New Granada from Venezuela, and captured the city of C\u00facuta from the Royalists.\nIn early March 1813, Bol\u00edvar set up his headquarters in C\u00facuta and sent Jos\u00e9 F\u00e9lix Ribas to request permission to invade Venezuela. Though rewarded with honorary citizenship in New Granada and a promotion to the rank of brigadier general, that permission did not come until 7 May because of del Castillo's opposition to the invasion. When a limited invasion was permitted, Castillo resigned his command and was succeeded by Francisco de Paula Santander. On 14 May, Bol\u00edvar launched the Admirable Campaign, in which he issued the Decree of War to the Death, ordering the death of all Spaniards in South America not actively aiding his forces. Within six months, Bol\u00edvar pushed all the way to Caracas, which he entered on 6 August, and then drove Monteverde out of Venezuela in October. Bol\u00edvar returned to Caracas on 14 October and was named \"The Liberator\" (\"El Libertador\") by its town council, a title first given to him by the citizens of the Venezuelan town of M\u00e9rida on 23 May.\nOn 2 January 1814, Bol\u00edvar was made the dictator of a Second Republic of Venezuela, which retained the weaknesses of the first republic. Though all of Venezuela but Maracaibo, Coro, and Guayana was controlled by Republicans, Bol\u00edvar only governed western Venezuela. The east was controlled by Santiago Mari\u00f1o, a Venezuelan Republican who had fought Monteverde in the east throughout 1813 and was unwilling to subordinate himself to Bol\u00edvar. Venezuela was economically devastated and could not support the republic's armies, and people of color remained disenfranchised and thus unsupportive of the republic. The republic was assailed from all sides by slave revolts and Royalist forces, especially the Legion of Hell, an army of \"llaneros\" \u2013 the horsemen of the Llanos, to the south \u2013 led by the Spanish warlord Jos\u00e9 Tom\u00e1s Boves. Beginning in February 1814, Boves surged out of the Llanos and overwhelmed the republic, occupying Caracas on 16 July and then destroying Mari\u00f1o's powerbase on 5 December at the Battle of Urica, where Boves died.\nAs Boves approached Caracas, Bol\u00edvar ordered the city stripped of its gold and silver, which was moved through La Guaira to Barcelona, Venezuela, and from there to Cuman\u00e1. Bol\u00edvar then led 20,000 of its citizens east. He arrived in Barcelona on 2 August, but following another defeat at the Battle of Aragua de Barcelona on 17 August 1814, he moved to Cuman\u00e1. On 26 August, he sailed with Mari\u00f1o to Margarita Island with the treasure. The officer in control of the island, Manuel Piar, declared Bol\u00edvar and Mari\u00f1o to be traitors and forced them to return to the mainland. There, Ribas also accused Bol\u00edvar and Mari\u00f1o of treachery, confiscated the treasure, and then exiled the two on 8 September.\nBol\u00edvar arrived in Cartagena on 19 September and then met with the New Granadan congress in Tunja, which tasked him with subduing the rival Free and Independent State of Cundinamarca. On 12 December, Bol\u00edvar captured Cundinamarca's capital, Bogot\u00e1, and was given command of New Granada's armies in January 1815. Bol\u00edvar next grappled with del Castillo, who had taken control of Cartagena. Bol\u00edvar besieged the city for six weeks. His change of focus allowed the Royalist forces to regain control of the Magdalena. On 8 May, Bol\u00edvar made a truce with del Castillo, resigned his command, and sailed for self-exile on Jamaica as a result of this error. In July, 8,000 Spanish soldiers commanded by Spanish general Pablo Morillo landed at Santa Marta and then besieged Cartagena, which capitulated on 6 December; del Castillo was executed.\nJamaica, Haiti, Venezuela, and New Granada: 1815\u20131819.\nBol\u00edvar arrived in Kingston, Jamaica, on 14 May 1815 and, as in his earlier exile on Cura\u00e7ao, ruminated on the fall of the Venezuelan and New Granadan republics. He wrote extensively, requesting assistance from Britain and corresponding with merchants based in the Caribbean. This culminated in September 1815 with the Jamaica Letter, in which Bol\u00edvar again laid out his ideology and vision of the future of the Americas. On 9 December, the Venezuelan pirate Renato Beluche brought Bol\u00edvar news from New Granada and asked him to join the Republican community in exile in Haiti. Bol\u00edvar tentatively accepted and escaped assassination that night when his manservant mistakenly killed his paymaster as part of a Spanish plot. He left Jamaica eight days later, arrived in Les Cayes on 24 December, and on 2 January 1816 was introduced to Alexandre P\u00e9tion, President of the Republic of Haiti by a mutual friend. Bol\u00edvar and P\u00e9tion impressed and befriended each other and, after Bol\u00edvar pledged to free every slave in the areas he occupied, P\u00e9tion gave him money and military supplies.\nReturning to Les Cayes, Bol\u00edvar held a conference with the Republican leaders in Haiti and was made supreme leader with Mari\u00f1o as his chief of staff. The Republicans departed Les Cayes for Venezuela on 31 March 1816 and followed the Antilles eastward. After a delay to allow a lover of Bol\u00edvar's to join the fleet, it arrived on 2 May at Margarita Island, controlled by Republican commander Juan Bautista Arismendi. Bol\u00edvar next moved to the mainland, where he declared the emancipation of all slaves and annulled of the Decree of War to the Death. He seized Car\u00fapano on 31 May and sent Mari\u00f1o and Piar into Guayana to build their own army, then took and held Ocumare de la Costa from 6 to 14 July, when it was recaptured by the Royalists. Bol\u00edvar fled by sea to G\u00fciria where, on 22 August, he was deposed by Mari\u00f1o and Venezuelan Republican Jos\u00e9 Francisco Berm\u00fadez.\nBol\u00edvar returned to Haiti by early September, where P\u00e9tion again agreed to assist him. In his absence, the Republican leaders scattered across Venezuela, concentrating in the Llanos, and became disunited warlords. Unwilling to recognize Mari\u00f1o's leadership, Arismendi wrote to Bol\u00edvar and dispatched New Granadan Republican Francisco Antonio Zea to convince him to return. Bol\u00edvar and Zea set sail for Venezuela on 21 December with Luis Bri\u00f3n, a Dutch merchant, and arrived ten days later at Barcelona. There, Bol\u00edvar announced his return and called for a congress for a new, third republic. He wrote to the Republican leaders, especially Jos\u00e9 Antonio P\u00e1ez, who controlled most of the western Llanos, to unite under his leadership. On 8 January 1817, Bol\u00edvar marched towards Caracas but was defeated at the Battle of Clarines and pursued to Barcelona by a larger Royalist force. At Bol\u00edvar's request, Mari\u00f1o arrived on 8 February with Berm\u00fadez, who then reconciled with Bol\u00edvar, and forced a Royalist withdrawal. \nEven with their combined forces, however, Bol\u00edvar, Mari\u00f1o, and Berm\u00fadez could not hold Barcelona. Instead, on 25 March 1817, Bol\u00edvar began moving south to join Piar in Guayana, Piar's power base, and establish his own economic and political base there. Bol\u00edvar met Piar on 4 April, promoted him to the rank of general of the army, and then joined a force of Piar's troops besieging the city of Angostura (now Ciudad Bol\u00edvar) on 2 May. Meanwhile, Mari\u00f1o went east to reestablish his power base and on 8 May convened a congress of ten men, including Bri\u00f3n and Zea, that named Mari\u00f1o as supreme commander of the Republican forces. This backfired and provoked the defection of 30 officers, including Rafael Urdaneta and Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre, to Bol\u00edvar. On 30 June, Bol\u00edvar granted Piar leave of absence at his request, and then issued an arrest warrant on 23 July after Piar began fomenting rebellion, alleging that Bol\u00edvar had dismissed him because of his mulatto heritage. Piar was captured on 27 September as he fled to join Mari\u00f1o and was brought to Angostura, where he was executed by firing squad on 16 October. Bol\u00edvar then sent Sucre to reconcile with Mari\u00f1o, who pledged loyalty to Bol\u00edvar on 26 January 1818.\nOn 17 July 1817, Angostura fell to Bol\u00edvar's forces, which gained control of the Orinoco River in early August. Angostura became the provisional Republican capital and in September, Bol\u00edvar began creating formal political and military structures for the republic. Following a meeting at San Juan de Payara on 30 January 1818, P\u00e1ez recognized Bol\u00edvar as supreme leader. In February 1818, the Republicans moved north and took Calabozo, where they defeated Morillo, who had returned to Venezuela a year earlier after conquering Republican New Granada. Bol\u00edvar next advanced towards Caracas, but was defeated while en route at the Third Battle of La Puerta on 16 March. He escaped assassination by Spanish infiltrators in April. Illness and additional Republican defeats obliged Bol\u00edvar to return to Angostura in May. For the rest of the year, he focused on administering the republic, rebuilding its armed forces, and organizing elections for a national congress that would meet in 1819.\nGran Colombia: 1819\u20131830.\nThe congress met in Angostura on 15 February 1819. There, Bol\u00edvar gave a speech in which he advocated for a centralized government modeled on the British government and racial equality, and relinquished civil authority to the congress. On 16 February, the congress elected Bol\u00edvar as president and Zea as vice president. On 27 February, Bol\u00edvar left Angostura to rejoin P\u00e1ez in the west and resumed campaigning against Morillo, albeit ineffectively. In May, as the annual wet season was beginning in the Llanos, Bol\u00edvar met with his officers and revealed his intention to invade and liberate New Granada from Royalist occupation, which he had prepared for by sending Santander to build up Republican forces in Casanare Province in August 1818. On 27 May, Bol\u00edvar marched with more than 2,000 soldiers toward the Andes and left P\u00e1ez, Mari\u00f1o, Urdaneta, and Berm\u00fadez to tie down Morillo's forces in Venezuela.\nBol\u00edvar entered Casanare Province with his army on 4 June 1819, then met up with Santander at Tame, Arauca, on 11 June. The combined Republican force reached the Eastern Range of the Andes on 22 June and began a grueling crossing. On 6 July, the Republicans descended from the Andes at Socha and into the plains of New Granada. After a brief convalescence, the Republicans made rapid progress against the forces of Spanish colonel Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Barreiro Manj\u00f3n until, on 7 August, the Royalists were routed at the Battle of Boyac\u00e1. On 10 August, Bol\u00edvar entered Bogot\u00e1, which the Spanish officials had hastily abandoned, and captured the viceregal treasury and armories. After sending forces to secure Republican control of central New Granada, Bol\u00edvar paraded through Bogot\u00e1 on 18 September with Santander.\nDesiring to merge New Granada and Venezuela into a \"greater republic of Colombia\", Bol\u00edvar first established a provisional government in Bogot\u00e1 with Santander, and then left to resume campaigning against the Royalists in Venezuela on 20 September 1819. En route, he learned that Zea had been replaced as vice president in September 1819 by Arismendi, who was conspiring with Mari\u00f1o against Urdaneta and Berm\u00fadez. Bol\u00edvar arrived in Angostura on 11 December and, by being conciliatory, defused the plot. He then proposed the merging of New Granada and Venezuela to the congress on 14 December, which was approved. On 17 December, the congress issued a decree creating the Republic of Colombia, including the regions of Venezuela, New Granada, and the still Spanish-controlled Real Audiencia of Quito, and elected Bol\u00edvar and Zea president and vice president respectively.\nAfter Christmas Day, 1819, Bol\u00edvar left Angostura to direct campaigns against Royalist forces along the Caribbean coasts of Venezuela and New Granada. He met with Santander in Bogot\u00e1 in March 1820, then rode to C\u00facuta and inspected Republican forces in northern Colombia over April and May 1820. Meanwhile, Morillo's military and political position was fatally undermined by the mutiny of Spanish soldiers in C\u00e1diz on 1 January, which forced Ferdinand VII to accept a liberal constitution in March. News of the mutiny and its consequences arrived in Colombia in March and was followed by orders from Spain to Morillo to publicize the constitution and negotiate a peace that would return Colombia to the Spanish Empire. Bol\u00edvar and Morillo, seeking to gain leverage over each other, delayed talks until 21 November, when Colombian and Royalist delegates met in Trujillo, Venezuela. The delegates completed two treaties on 25 November, establishing a six-month truce, a prisoner exchange, and basic rights for combatants. Bol\u00edvar and Morillo signed the treaties on 25 and 26 November, then met the next day at Santa Ana de Trujillo. After this meeting, Morillo turned his command over to Spanish general Miguel de la Torre and departed for Spain on 17 December.\nIn February 1821, as Bol\u00edvar was traveling from Bogot\u00e1 to C\u00facuta in anticipation of the opening of a new congress there, he learned that Royalist-controlled Maracaibo had defected to Colombia and been occupied by Urdaneta. La Torre protested to Bol\u00edvar, who refused to return Maracaibo, leading to a renewal of hostilities on 28 April. Over May and June, Colombia's armies made rapid progress until, on 24 June, Bol\u00edvar and P\u00e1ez decisively defeated La Torre at the Battle of Carabobo. All Royalist forces remaining in Venezuela were eliminated by August 1823. Bol\u00edvar entered Caracas in triumph on 29 June, and issued a decree on 16 July dividing Venezuela into three military zones governed by P\u00e1ez, Berm\u00fadez, and Mari\u00f1o. Bol\u00edvar then met with the Congress of C\u00facuta, which had ratified the formation of Gran Colombia and elected him as president and Santander as vice president in September. Bol\u00edvar accepted and was sworn in on 3 October, although he protested the establishment of a precedent of military leaders as head of the Colombian state.\nEcuador, Peru, and Bolivia: 1821\u20131826.\nAfter the Battle of Carabobo, Bol\u00edvar turned his attention south, to Pasto, Colombia; Quito and the Free Province of Guayaquil, Ecuador; and the Viceroyalty of Peru. Pasto and Quito were Royalist strongholds, while Guayaquil had declared its independence on 9 October 1820 and had been garrisoned by Sucre on Bol\u00edvar's orders in January 1821. Panama declared its independence on 28 November 1821 and joined Colombia. Peru had been invaded by a Republican army led by Argentine general Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn, who had liberated Chile and Peru, and Bol\u00edvar feared San Mart\u00edn would absorb Ecuador into Peru. In October 1821, after congress empowered him to secure Ecuador for Colombia, Bol\u00edvar assembled an army in Bogot\u00e1 that departed on 13 December 1821. His advance was halted by illness and a Pyrrhic victory at the Battle of Bombon\u00e1 in southern Colombia on 7 April 1822.\nTo the south, Sucre, who had been trapped in Guayaquil by Royalist advances from Quito, now advanced, decisively defeated the Royalists at the Battle of Pichincha on 24 May 1822, and occupied Quito. On 6 June, Pasto surrendered, and ten days later Bol\u00edvar paraded through Quito with Sucre. He also met the Ecuadorian Republican Manuela S\u00e1enz, the wife of an English doctor, with whom he began a lasting affair. \nFrom Quito, Bol\u00edvar traveled to Guayaquil in anticipation of a meeting with San Mart\u00edn to discuss the city's status and to rally support for its annexation by Colombia. When San Mart\u00edn arrived in Guayaquil on 26 July, Bol\u00edvar had already secured Guayaquil for Colombia, and the two-day Guayaquil Conference produced no agreement between Bol\u00edvar and San Mart\u00edn. Politically isolated, and disillusioned, San Mart\u00edn resigned from his offices and went into exile.\nOver the rest of 1822, Bol\u00edvar traveled around Ecuador to complete its annexation while dispatching officers to suppress repeated rebellions in Pasto and resisting calls to return to Bogot\u00e1 or Venezuela. Meanwhile, Royalist forces under general Jos\u00e9 de Canterac overwhelmed the Peruvian republic. After initially refusing Colombian assistance, the Peruvian congress asked Bol\u00edvar several times in 1823 to assume command of their forces. Bol\u00edvar responded by sending an army under Sucre to assist, then delayed his own departure to Peru until he obtained permission from the Colombian congress on 3 August. When Bol\u00edvar arrived in Lima, Peru's capital, on 1 September, Peru was split between two rival presidents, Jos\u00e9 de la Riva Ag\u00fcero and Jos\u00e9 Bernardo de Tagle, and the Royalists under the Viceroy of Peru, Jos\u00e9 de la Serna.\nIn November 1823, Riva Ag\u00fcero, who plotted with the Royalists against Bol\u00edvar, was betrayed by his officers to Bol\u00edvar and exiled from Peru. While Bol\u00edvar was bedridden with fever over the first two months of 1824, Tagle defected to the Royalists with the garrison and city of Callao and briefly took Lima. In response, the Peruvian congress named Bol\u00edvar dictator of Peru on 10 February 1824. Bol\u00edvar moved to northern Peru in March and began assembling an army. His repeated demands for additional men and money strained his relationship with Santander.\nIn May 1824, conservative Royalist general Pedro Antonio Ola\u00f1eta, based in the region of Upper Peru, rebelled against la Serna. Bol\u00edvar seized the opportunity to advance into the Jun\u00edn region, where he defeated Canterac at the Battle of Jun\u00edn on 6 August, driving them out of Peru. Bol\u00edvar\u2019s victory in the Battle of Jun\u00edn put an end to the military campaigns of the Wars of Independence once and for all. Paradoxically, the defeat of Spain also weakened Bol\u00edvar, whose legitimacy as Liberator depended on the continuity of the Spanish threat. Choosing to ignore Ola\u00f1eta, la Serna ordered his forces to concentrate at Cuzco to face Bol\u00edvar. Heavy rainfall in September halted Bol\u00edvar's advance, and on 6 October he gave command of the army to Sucre and moved to Huancayo to manage political affairs.\nOn 24 October, Bol\u00edvar received a letter from Santander informing him that because he had accepted the dictatorship of Peru the Colombian congress had stripped him of his military and civil authority in favor of Sucre and Santander, respectively. Although indignant and resentful of Santander, Bol\u00edvar wrote to him on 10 November to communicate his acquiescence and reoccupied Lima on 5 December 1824. On 9 December, Sucre decisively defeated la Serna's Royalists at the Battle of Ayacucho and accepted the surrender of all Royalist forces in Peru. The garrison of Callao and Ola\u00f1eta ignored the surrender. Shortly after arriving in Lima, Bol\u00edvar began a siege of Callao that lasted until January 1826, and sent Sucre into Upper Peru to eliminate Ola\u00f1eta. Ole\u00f1eta was killed at the Battle of Tumusla prior to Sucre's arrival. With Irish volunteer Francisco Burdett O'Connor serving as his second in command, Sucre completed the liberation of Upper Peru in April 1825.\nIn early 1825, Bol\u00edvar resigned from his offices in Colombia and Peru, but neither nation's congress accepted his resignation. On 10 February 1825, the Peruvian congress extended his dictatorship for another year. Accepting the extension, Bol\u00edvar settled into governing Peru and passing reforms that were largely not carried out, such as a school system based on the principles of English educator Joseph Lancaster that was managed by Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez. \nIn April 1825, Bol\u00edvar began a tour of southern Peru that took him to the cities of Arequipa and Cuzco by August. As Bol\u00edvar approached Upper Peru, a congress gathered in the city of Chuquisaca, now Sucre. On 6 August, it declared the region to be the nation of Bolivia, named Bol\u00edvar president, and asked him to write a constitution. Bol\u00edvar arrived in Potos\u00ed on 5 October and met with two Argentine agents, Carlos Mar\u00eda de Alvear and Jos\u00e9 Miguel D\u00edaz V\u00e9lez, who tried without success to convince him to intervene in the Cisplatine War against the Empire of Brazil. The absolute hegemony of Bol\u00edvar\u2019s army in the region encouraged peripheral elites in Upper Peru to form a new country, independent from Lima. They declared, \"If from Romulus, Rome; from Bol\u00edvar, it is Bolivia\" and offered the presidency to the Liberator. From Potos\u00ed, a flattered Bol\u00edvar traveled to Chuquisaca and appointed Sucre to govern Bolivia on 29 December 1825.\nHe departed for Peru on 1 January 1826. Bol\u00edvar arrived in Lima on 10 February and dispatched his draft of the Bolivian constitution to Sucre on 12 May. That constitution was ratified with modification by the Bolivian congress in July 1826. Peru, whose elites chafed at Bol\u00edvar's rule and the presence of his soldiers, was also induced to accept a modified version of Bol\u00edvar's constitution on 16 August. In Venezuela, P\u00e1ez revolted against Santander, and in Panama, a congress of American nations organized by Bol\u00edvar convened without his attendance and produced no change in the hemispheric \"status quo\". On 3 September, responding to pleas for his return to Colombia, Bol\u00edvar departed Peru and left it under a governing council led by Bolivian general Andr\u00e9s de Santa Cruz.\nFinal years: 1826\u20131830.\nBol\u00edvar arrived in Guayaquil on 13 September 1826 and heard complaints against Santander's governance from the people of Guayaquil and Quito, who declared him their dictator. From Ecuador, he continued north and heard more complaints, promoted civil and military officers, and commuted prison sentences. As he approached Bogot\u00e1, Bol\u00edvar was met by Santander, who hoped to persuade Bol\u00edvar to his cause in the conflict with P\u00e1ez. Although Santander was annoyed at Bol\u00edvar for his desire to return to power and ratify a version of the Bolivian constitution in Colombia, they reconciled and agreed that Bol\u00edvar would resume the presidency of Colombia; congress had reelected them to a second four-year term beginning on 2 January 1827. Bol\u00edvar arrived in Bogot\u00e1 on 14 November 1826.\nOn 25 November, Bol\u00edvar left Bogot\u00e1 with an army supplied by Santander and arrived at Puerto Cabello on 31 December, where he issued a general amnesty to P\u00e1ez and his allies if they submitted to his authority. P\u00e1ez accepted and in January 1827, Bol\u00edvar confirmed P\u00e1ez's military authority in Venezuela and entered Caracas with him to much jubilation; for two months, Bol\u00edvar attended balls celebrating his return and the amnesty. That amnesty, and clashes over Santander's handling of Colombia's finances, caused a break between Bol\u00edvar and Santander that became an open enmity in 1827. In February 1827, Bol\u00edvar submitted his resignation from the Presidency of Colombia, which its congress rejected. Meanwhile, the Colombian soldiers garrisoned in Lima mutinied, arrested their Venezuelan officers, and occupied Guayaquil until September 1827, allowing Bol\u00edvar's opponents in Peru to depose him as president and repeal his constitution.\nBol\u00edvar departed Venezuela to return to Bogot\u00e1 in July 1827. He arrived on 10 September with an army he had gathered at Cartagena and secured the calling of a new congress to meet at the city of Oca\u00f1a in early 1828 to modify the Colombian constitution. The elections for this congress were held in November 1827 and, as Bol\u00edvar declined to campaign because he did not wish to be perceived as personally influencing the elections, were very favorable to his political opponents. In January 1828, Bol\u00edvar was joined in Bogot\u00e1 by S\u00e1enz, but on 16 March 1828 he left the capital after being informed of a Spanish-backed rebellion in Venezuela. As that revolt was crushed before he arrived, Bol\u00edvar turned his attention to the occupation of Cartagena by Jos\u00e9 Prudencio Padilla, a New Granadan admiral and Santander loyalist. Padilla's rebellion was also crushed before Bol\u00edvar arrived, however, and he was arrested and imprisoned in Bogot\u00e1. As the Convention of Oca\u00f1a opened on 9 April, Bol\u00edvar based himself at Bucaramanga to monitor its proceedings through his aides.\nThe convention appeared likely to adopt a federalist system. To prevent this, on 11 June 1828 Bol\u00edvar's allies staged a walkout, leaving the convention without a quorum. Two days later, Pedro Alc\u00e1ntara Herr\u00e1n, a Bol\u00edvar loyalist and the governor of New Granada, called a meeting of the city's elite that denounced the Convention of Oca\u00f1a and called on Bol\u00edvar to assume absolute power in Colombia. Bol\u00edvar returned to Bogot\u00e1 on 24 June and on 27 August assumed supreme power as the \"president-liberator\" of Colombia, abolished the office of the vice president, and assigned Santander to a diplomatic posting in Washington, D.C. On 25 September 1828, a group of young liberals that included Santander's secretary made an attempt to assassinate Bol\u00edvar and overthrow his government. The attempt was thwarted by S\u00e1enz, who bought time for Bol\u00edvar to escape as the assassins entered the Palacio de San Carlos, and the Colombian Army. Bol\u00edvar spent the night hiding under a bridge until soldiers loyal to his regime rescued him.\nIn the aftermath of the attempted coup, Santander and the conspirators were arrested. Bol\u00edvar, depressed and ill, considered resigning from politics and pardoning the conspirators, but was dissuaded from this by his officers. Padilla, though uninvolved with the attempted coup, was executed for treason for his earlier rebellion; Santander, whom Bol\u00edvar thought responsible for the plot, was pardoned but exiled from Colombia. In December 1828, Bol\u00edvar left Bogot\u00e1 to respond to Peru's intervention in Bolivia and invasion of Ecuador and a revolt in Popay\u00e1n and Pasto led by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Obando. He left behind a council of ministers led by Urdaneta to govern Colombia and announced that a congress would convene in January 1830 to devise a new constitution. Over 1829, Obando was defeated by Colombian general Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda C\u00f3rdova at Bol\u00edvar's direction in January and then pardoned, while Sucre and Venezuelan general Juan Jos\u00e9 Flores defeated the Peruvians at the Battle of Tarqui in February, leading to an armistice in July and then the Treaty of Guayaquil in September..\nWhile Bol\u00edvar was away, Urdaneta and the council of ministers planned with French envoys to have a member of the House of Bourbon succeed Bol\u00edvar on his death as King of Colombia. This plan was widely unpopular, and inspired C\u00f3rdova to launch a revolt that was crushed in October 1829 by Daniel Florence O'Leary, Bol\u00edvar's aide-de-camp. In November, Bol\u00edvar ordered the council to cease its planning; instead they resigned. Venezuelans, encouraged by a circular letter Bol\u00edvar had published in October, voted to secede from Colombia. On 15 January 1830, Bol\u00edvar arrived in Bogot\u00e1 and on 20 January the Admirable Congress convened in the city. Bol\u00edvar submitted his resignation from the presidency, which the congress did not accept until 27 April, following the appointment of New Granadan politician Domingo Caycedo as interim President. The end of the war in a stalemate demonstrated to Bol\u00edvar, who dreamed of a federated Latin America, that its capacity to project power had limits.\nDeath and burial.\nDetermined to go into exile, Bol\u00edvar, who had given away or lost his fortune over his career, sold most of his remaining possessions and departed from Bogot\u00e1 on 8 May 1830. He traveled down the Magdalena to Cartagena, where he arrived by the end of June to wait for a ship to take him to England. On 1 July, Bol\u00edvar was informed that Sucre had been assassinated near Pasto while en route to Quito, and wrote to Flores to ask him to avenge Sucre. In September, Urdaneta installed a conservative government in Bogot\u00e1 and asked Bol\u00edvar to return, but he refused. With his health deteriorating and no ship forthcoming, Bol\u00edvar was moved by his staff to Barranquilla in October and then, at the invitation of a Spanish landowner in the area, to the Quinta de San Pedro Alejandrino near Santa Marta. There, on 17 December 1830, at the age of 47, Bol\u00edvar died of tuberculosis.\nBol\u00edvar's body, dressed in a borrowed shirt, was interred in the Cathedral Basilica of Santa Marta on 20 December 1830. In 1842, P\u00e1ez secured the repatriation of Bol\u00edvar's remains, which were paraded through Caracas and then laid to rest in its cathedral in December together with his wife and parents; Bol\u00edvar's heart remained in Santa Marta. His remains were moved again in October 1876 into the National Pantheon of Venezuela in Caracas, created that year by President Antonio Guzm\u00e1n Blanco. \nBol\u00edvar's death has been the subject of conspiracy theories advanced by the United Socialist Party of Venezuela. In January 2008, President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez set up a commission to investigate his claim that Bol\u00edvar had been poisoned by \"New Granada traitors.\" The commission exhumed Bol\u00edvar's remains on 16 July 2010. The results, made public on 26 July 2011, were inconclusive; Vice President of Venezuela El\u00edas Jaua announced that the commission could not prove Ch\u00e1vez's claim. Ch\u00e1vez continued to claim that Bol\u00edvar had been assassinated via arsenic poisoning, citing a paper by infectious disease specialist Paul Auwaerter. Following Ch\u00e1vez's remarks, Auwaerter stated that the arsenic likely came from medicines Bol\u00edvar had ingested to treat his illnesses.\nPersonal beliefs.\nBol\u00edvar's personal beliefs were liberal and republican, and formed by Classical and Enlightenment philosophy; among his favorite authors were Hobbes, Spinoza, the Baron d'Holbach, Hume, Montesquieu, and Rousseau. The tutelage of Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez, a student of Rousseau, has been traditionally seen as foundational for Bol\u00edvar's beliefs. Also important to Bol\u00edvar's intellectual development were his stays in Paris from 1804 to 1806 and in London in 1810. Bol\u00edvar was an Anglophile, and sought British aid in securing Latin American independence. The extent of Bol\u00edvar's religiosity is debated; while Bol\u00edvar resented the social capital of the Catholic Church and its Royalist leanings during the wars of independence, he sought to co-opt its social capital for the benefit of the republics he established rather than dismember the Church.\nThroughout his political career, Bol\u00edvar concerned himself with the construction of liberal democracy in Latin America and the region's place in the Atlantic world. By the 1820s, his goal was to create a federation of Latin American republics in Spanish America, each governed by a strong executive and a constitution modeled on the British constitution. Inspired by Montesquieu, Bol\u00edvar believed that a government should conform to the needs and character of its region and inhabitants; in the Cartagena Manifesto, Bol\u00edvar stated that federalism as practiced in the United States was the \"perfect\" government but was unworkable in Spanish America because, he believed, Spanish imperialism had left Spanish Americans unprepared for federalism. Bol\u00edvar sought to prepare Colombia for a more liberal democracy via free, public education. Over the 1820s, Bol\u00edvar became increasingly disillusioned and authoritarian until, in 1830, he declared to Flores, \"all who have served the Revolution have plowed the sea.\"\nLegacy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBol\u00edvar is the preeminent symbol of Latin America and the focus of what could seem almost unrivaled posthumous attention, seen from his own times forward as a force now for liberalism or other forms of modernity, now for old regime values and authoritarianism, now for a mix of the two, with the debate over the meaning of his figure having no end in sight.\nRobert T. Conn, \"Bol\u00edvar's Afterlife in the Americas\"\nBol\u00edvar has had an immense legacy, becoming the essential personality of Latin America. The currencies of Venezuela and Bolivia\u2014the bol\u00edvar and boliviano respectively\u2014are named after Bol\u00edvar. In the English-speaking world, Bol\u00edvar is known as Latin America's George Washington. He has been memorialized across the world in literature, public monuments, and historiography, and paid tribute to in the names of towns, cities, provinces, and other people. The Quinta near Santa Marta has been preserved as a museum to Bol\u00edvar and the house in which he was born was opened as a museum and archive of his papers on 5 July 1921. In 1978, UNESCO created the International Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar Prize \"to reward an activity of outstanding merit in accordance with the ideals of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar.\" In 1997, the Archive of the Liberator Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar was inscribed by UNESCO in the Memory of the World International Register and in the Regional Register for Latin America and the Caribbean in 2011.\nInitial historical evaluations of Bol\u00edvar were at first negative, consisting of criticism of his conduct of the war, execution of Piar, betrayal of Miranda, and authoritarianism. These and other criticisms endure in studies of Bol\u00edvar. Beginning in 1842, popular opinion about Bol\u00edvar in Venezuela became overwhelmingly positive and eventually became what has been described by scholars as the \"cult of Bol\u00edvar\", led by succeeding heads of the Venezuelan state. In 1998, President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, who had made extensive use of Bol\u00edvar's image for government projects and initiatives, changed the official name of Venezuela to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. \nIn Colombia, allegiance or opposition to Bol\u00edvar formed the bedrock of the Conservative and Liberal parties respectively. Bol\u00edvar continued to have such a cultural influence in Colombia that in 1974 the 19th of April Movement, an insurgent leftist group that later joined an alliance thereof called the Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar Guerrilla Coordinating Board, stole a sword alleged to belong to Bol\u00edvar from his Bogot\u00e1 residence.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBiographies of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks by Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral reference\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n* \n* \n* \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55918", "revid": "1320012403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55918", "title": "Stanley Fish", "text": "American literary theorist, legal scholar, author and public intellectual (born 1938)\nStanley Eugene Fish (born April 19, 1938) is an American literary theorist, legal scholar, author and public intellectual. He is the Floersheimer Distinguished Visiting Professor of Law at Yeshiva University's Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in New York City. Fish has previously served as the Davidson-Kahn Distinguished University Professor of Humanities and a professor of law at Florida International University and is dean emeritus of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago.\nFish is associated with postmodernism, although he views himself instead as an advocate of anti-foundationalism. He is also viewed as having influenced the rise and development of reader-response theory.\nFish has also taught at the Cardozo School of Law, University of California, Berkeley, Johns Hopkins University, The University of Pennsylvania, Yale Law School, Columbia University, The John Marshall Law School, and Duke University.\nEarly life and education.\nFish was born in Providence, Rhode Island. He was raised Jewish. His father, an immigrant from Poland, was a plumber and contractor who made it a priority for his son to get a university education. Fish became the first member of his family to attend college in the US, earning a B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania in 1959 and an M.A. from Yale University in 1960. He completed his Ph.D. in 1962, also at Yale University.\nAcademic career.\nFish taught English at the University of California at Berkeley and Johns Hopkins University before serving as Arts and Sciences Professor of English and professor of law at Duke University from 1986 to 1998. From 1999 to 2004, he was dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and he served as distinguished visiting professor at the John Marshall Law School from 2000 until 2002. Fish also held joint appointments in the Departments of Political Science and Criminal Justice and was the chairman of the Religious Studies Committee.\nDuring his tenure there, he recruited professors respected in the academic community, and attracted attention to the college. After resigning as dean in a high-level dispute with the state of Illinois over funding UIC, Fish spent a year teaching in the Department of English. The Institute for the Humanities at UIC named a lecture series in his honor, which is still ongoing. In June 2005, he accepted the position of Davidson-Kahn Distinguished University Professor of Humanities and Law at Florida International University, teaching in the FIU College of Law.\nIn November 2010 he joined the board of visitors of Ralston College, a start-up institution in Savannah, Georgia. He has also been a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences since 1985.\nIn April 2024, New College of Florida described him as presidential scholar in residence in invitations to a discussion with Mark Bauerlein on free speech, academic freedom, and political expression.\nMilton.\nFish started his career as a medievalist. His first book, published by Yale University Press in 1965, was on the late-medieval/early-Renaissance poet John Skelton. Fish explains in his partly biographical essay, \"Milton, Thou Shouldst be Living at this Hour\" (published in \"There's No Such Thing as Free Speech . . . And It's a Good Thing, Too\"), that he came to Milton by accident. In 1963, the year Fish started as an assistant professor at the University of California, Berkeley, its resident Miltonist, Constantinos Patrides, received a grant. The chair of the department asked Fish to teach the Milton course, notwithstanding that Fish \"had never\u2014either as an undergraduate or in graduate school\u2014taken a Milton course\" (269). The eventual result was \"Surprised by Sin: The Reader in Paradise Lost\" (1967; rpt. 1997). Fish's 2001 book \"How Milton Works\" reflects five decades of his scholarship on Milton. Academic and critic John Mullan disagrees with Fish's interpretation:\n His book needs to presume that we find Milton's beliefs, and even more the sheer force of those beliefs, inimical. It never occurs to Fish that the ever-abused \"reader\" might share any values with Milton\u2026 Even when he has a point, Fish is wrestling Milton to his cause. There is no room to consider that Milton's poetry might be wise about human weakness, and that \"Paradise Lost\", for instance, might be more notable for its sense of tragedy than for its doctrinal correctness.\nInterpretive communities.\nFish is best known for his analysis of interpretive communities \u2014 an offshoot of reader-response criticism. His work in this field examines how the interpretation of a text is dependent upon each reader's own subjective experience in one or more communities, each of which is defined as a 'community' by a distinct epistemology. For Fish, a large part of what renders a reader's subjective experience valuable \u2014 that is, why it may be considered \"constrained\" as opposed to an uncontrolled and idiosyncratic assertion of the self \u2014 comes from a concept native to the field of linguistics called linguistic competence.\nIn Fish's source the term is explained as \"the idea that it is possible to characterize a linguistic system that every speaker shares.\" In the context of literary criticism, he uses this concept to argue that a reader's approach to a text is not completely subjective, and that an internalized understanding of language shared by the native speakers of that given language makes possible the creation of normative boundaries for one's experience with language.\nFish and university politics.\nFish has written extensively on the politics of the university, having taken positions supporting campus speech codes and criticizing political statements by universities or faculty bodies on matters outside their professional areas of expertise.\nHe argued in January 2008 on his \"New York Times\"-syndicated blog that the humanities are of no instrumental value, but have only intrinsic worth. He explains, \"To the question 'of what use are the humanities?', the only honest answer is none whatsoever. And it is an answer that brings honor to its subject. Justification, after all, confers value on an activity from a perspective outside its performance. An activity that cannot be justified is an activity that refuses to regard itself as instrumental to some larger good. The humanities are their own good. There is nothing more to say, and anything that is said diminishes the object of its supposed praise.\"\nFish has lectured across the US at many universities and colleges including Florida Atlantic University, Brown University, Baylor University, the University of Pennsylvania, Harvard University, University of Toronto, Columbia University, the University of Vermont, the University of Georgia, the University of Louisville, San Diego State University, the University of Kentucky, Bates College, the University of Central Florida, the University of West Florida, and the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.\nFish as university politician.\nAs chair of the Duke English department from 1986 to 1992, Fish attracted attention and controversy. Fish, according to \"Lingua Franca,\" used \"shameless\u2014and in academe unheard-of\u2014entrepreneurial gusto\" to take \"a respectable but staid Southern English department and transform it into the professional powerhouse of the day\", in part through the payment of lavish salaries. His time at Duke saw comparatively quite light undergraduate and graduate coursework requirements for students, matched by their heavy graduate teaching requirements. This permitted professors to reduce their own teaching. In April 1992, near the end of Fish's time as department chair, an external review committee considered evidence that the English curriculum had become \"a hodgepodge of uncoordinated offerings\", lacking in \"broad foundational courses\" or faculty planning. The department's dissipating prominence in the 1990s was featured on the front page of \"The New York Times\".\nCriticisms of his work.\nAs a frequent contributor to \"The New York Times\" and \"The Wall Street Journal\" editorial page, Fish has been the target of wide-ranging criticism.\nWriting in \"Slate\" magazine, Judith Shulevitz reported that not only does Fish openly proclaim himself \"unprincipled\" but also rejects wholesale the concepts of \"fairness, impartiality, reasonableness.\" To Fish, \"ideas have no consequences.\" For taking this stance, Shulevitz characterizes Fish as \"not the unprincipled relativist he's accused of being. He's something worse. He's a fatalist.\"\nLikewise, among academics, Fish has endured vigorous criticism. The conservative R. V. Young writes, {\nTerry Eagleton, a prominent British Marxist, excoriates Fish's \"discreditable epistemology\" as \"sinister\". According to Eagleton, \"Like almost all diatribes against universalism, Fish's critique of universalism has its own rigid universals: the priority at all times and places of sectoral interests, the permanence of conflict, the a priori status of belief systems, the rhetorical character of truth, the fact that all apparent openness is secretly closure, and the like.\" Of Fish's attempt to co-opt the critiques leveled against him, Eagleton responds, \"The felicitous upshot is that nobody can ever criticise Fish, since if their criticisms are intelligible to him, they belong to his cultural game and are thus not really criticisms at all; and if they are not intelligible, they belong to some other set of conventions entirely and are therefore irrelevant.\"\nIn the essay \"Sophistry about Conventions\", philosopher Martha Nussbaum argues that Fish's theoretical views are based on \"extreme relativism and even radical subjectivism.\" Discounting his work as nothing more than sophistry, Nussbaum claims that Fish \"relies on the regulative principle of non-contradiction in order to adjudicate between competing principles\", thereby relying on normative standards of argumentation even as he argues against them. Offering an alternative, Nussbaum cites John Rawls's work in \"A Theory of Justice\" to highlight \"an example of a rational argument; it can be said to yield, in a perfectly recognizable sense, ethical truth.\" Nussbaum appropriates Rawls's critique of the insufficiencies of Utilitarianism, showing that a rational person will consistently prefer a system of justice that acknowledges boundaries between separate persons rather than relying on the aggregation of the sum total of desires. \"This\", she claims, \"is altogether different from rhetorical manipulation.\"\nCamille Paglia, author of \"Sexual Personae\" and public intellectual, denounced Fish as a \"totalitarian Tinkerbell,\" charging him with hypocrisy for lecturing about multiculturalism from the perspective of a tenured professor at the homogeneous and sheltered ivory tower of Duke.\nDavid Hirsch, a critic of post-structuralist influences on hermeneutics, censured Fish for \"lapses in logical rigor\" and \"carelessness toward rhetorical precision.\" In an examination of Fish's arguments, Hirsch attempts to demonstrate that \"not only was a restoration of New Critical methods unnecessary, but that Fish himself had not managed to rid himself of the shackles of New Critical theory.\" Hirsch compares Fish's work to Penelope's loom in the \"Odyssey\", stating, \"what one critic weaves by day, another unweaves by night.\" \"Nor,\" he writes, \"does this weaving and unweaving constitute a dialectic, since no forward movement takes place.\" Ultimately, Hirsch sees Fish as left to \"wander in his own Elysian fields, hopelessly alienated from art, from truth, and from humanity.\"\nPersonal life.\nHe is married to literary critic Jane Tompkins.\nLiterary references.\nStanley Fish has been parodied in two novels by David Lodge in which he appears as \"Morris Zapp\".\nAwards.\nFish received the PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay in 1994 for \"There's No Such Thing As Free Speech, and it's a Good Thing, Too.\"\nThe title essay and an additional essay, \"Jerry Falwell's Mother,\" focus on free speech issues. In the latter piece, Fish argues that, if one has some answer in mind to the question \"what is free speech good for?\" along the lines of \"in the free and open clash of viewpoints the truth can more readily be known,\" then it makes no sense to defend deliberate malicious libel (such as that which was at issue in the U.S. Supreme Court case of \"Hustler Magazine v. Falwell\") in the name of \"free speech.\"\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "55919", "revid": "3780800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55919", "title": "Charles Murray", "text": "Charles Murray may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "55920", "revid": "896748001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55920", "title": "Politically correct", "text": ""}
{"id": "55921", "revid": "46564645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55921", "title": "Liberals", "text": ""}
