{"id": "44944", "revid": "1184287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44944", "title": "'Ndrangheta", "text": "Criminal organization in Italy\nThe 'Ndrangheta (, , ) is a mafia-type criminal syndicate originating from the Calabria region of Italy. Emerging in the 19th century, it has developed into one of the world's most powerful and pervasive organized crime entities. Characterized by a decentralized, horizontal structure composed of autonomous operating units known as \"'ndrine\", the organization's foundational structure is based on family and blood relationships. Beginning in the mid-20th century, coinciding with significant emigration from Calabria, 'Ndrangheta clans expanded their operations across Northern and Central Italy, Europe, Australia, and the Americas. The syndicate is reportedly involved in a wide array of illegal activities, including drug trafficking, arms trafficking, money laundering, racketeering, extortion, and loan sharking.\nThe 'Ndrangheta has historically had a significant ability to influence local, regional and national politics through systemic corruption, intimidation, and collusion, and continues to infiltrate various sectors of the legal economy both within Italy and internationally. Estimates in 2013 suggested the organization's revenue reached \u20ac53 billion. A U.S. diplomatic cable from 2010 purportedly estimated that the 'Ndrangheta's illicit activities, encompassing drug trafficking, extortion, and money laundering, accounted for approximately three percent of Italy's GDP. While its origins are contemporary with the Sicilian Cosa Nostra, formal legal designation of the 'Ndrangheta as a Mafia-type organization under Article 416 bis of the Italian penal code occurred in 2010. The Italian Supreme Court of Cassation had reached a similar conclusion in March of the same year.\nEtymology.\nIn folk culture surrounding the 'Ndrangheta in Calabria, references to the Spanish Gardu\u00f1a often appear. Aside from these references, however, there is nothing to substantiate a link between the two organizations. The Calabrian word 'Ndrangheta derives from the Greek word \u1f00\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u03b1\u03b3\u03b1\u03b8\u03af\u03b1 \"andragath\u00eda\" meaning \"gallantry\" or \"manly virtue\" or \u1f00\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u03ac\u03b3\u03b1\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2 \"andr\u00e1gathos\", a compound of the words \u1f00\u03bd\u03ae\u03c1, \"an\u1e17r\" (gen. \u1f00\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u00f3\u03c2, \"andr\u00f3s\"), i.e. man, and \u1f00\u03b3\u03b1\u03b8\u03cc\u03c2, \"agath\u00f3s\", i.e. good, brave, meaning a courageous man. In many areas of Calabria the verb ndranghitiari\", from the Greek verb \"andragath\u00edzesthai\", means \"to engage in a defiant and valiant attitude\".\nThe etymological approach is criticised by some historians. John Dickie argues that \"the flattering connotations of the word 'Ndrangheta (courage, martial prowess, manliness) indicate that the 'Ndrangheta as a social phenomenon was rooted in the same positive values, and that it only later degenerated into criminality.\" A historical and sociological approach shows that 'Ndrangheta is actually the most recent of many earlier descriptions of the phenomenon of organised crime in Calabria. Historical evidence suggests, according to Dickie, that the use of 'Ndrangheta as a name for the Calabrian mafia was adopted by Calabrian mafiosi themselves around the time it first appeared in the documentary sources of the Carabinieri in the late 1920s. The word 'Ndrangheta was brought to a wider audience by the Calabrian writer Corrado Alvaro in the in September 1955.\nStructure.\nOrganizational structure.\nSimilar to the Sicilian Cosa Nostra, the 'Ndrangheta is structured as a loose confederation of approximately one hundred groups, referred to as or families. Each group asserts authority over a specific territory, typically a town or village, although their control over the monopoly of violence in these areas is not always absolute or fully legitimized. Estimates suggest that there are around 100 of these families, encompassing between 4,000 and 5,000 members within Reggio Calabria. Other estimates indicate a membership of 6,000\u20137,000 individuals, with a potential worldwide membership reaching approximately 10,000.\nThe majority of these groups, numbering around 86, are active in the Province of Reggio Calabria. It is also believed that a portion of the reported 70 criminal groups based in the Calabrian provinces of Catanzaro and Cosenza maintain formal affiliations with the 'Ndrangheta. These family groups are primarily concentrated in impoverished towns and villages within Calabria, including Plat\u00ec, Locri, San Luca, Africo, and Altomonte, as well as in Reggio Calabria, the main city and provincial capital. San Luca is widely regarded as a significant stronghold of the 'Ndrangheta. According to testimony from a former 'ndranghetista, \"almost all the male inhabitants belong to the 'Ndrangheta,\" and the Sanctuary of Polsi has historically served as a meeting place for affiliates. Bosses from regions outside Calabria, including Canada and Australia, are reported to regularly attend meetings at the Sanctuary of Polsi, suggesting that \"'ndrine\" globally perceive themselves as part of a unified collective entity.\nThe fundamental local organizational unit within the 'Ndrangheta is the \"locale\" (local or place), which exercises jurisdiction over a town or a specific area within a larger urban center. A \"locale\" may encompass branches known as \" 'ndrina\" (plural: \" 'ndrine\"), which can be situated in different districts of the same city, in neighbouring towns or villages, or even outside Calabria. Notably, 'ndrine have been established in cities and towns in Northern Italy, particularly in the industrial regions around Turin and Milan. \nThe presence of the 'Ndrangheta in Northern Italy can be traced back to the early 1960s, driven by a wave of labour migration from Calabria and the implementation of \"soggiorno obbligato\" \u2013 a policy of mandatory internal exile intended to isolate crime bosses from their home towns and criminal base in Calabria and Sicily. However, lawmakers failed to foresee that this strategy would backfire, effectively facilitating the northward expansion of mafia activity. A notable case is that of Bardonecchia, an alpine town in Piedmont near Turin, where Rocco Lo Presti was relocated in 1963. He was later joined by his cousin, Francesco Mazzaferro. Their criminal involvement in the local construction sector drew the attention of the Parliamentary Antimafia Commission, which conducted its first-ever inspection in Northern Italy in 1973, focusing on Bardonecchia. Lo Presti and Mazzaferro were identified as the dominant figures of the 'Ndrangheta in the Val di Susa area. Ultimately, in 1995, Bardonecchia became the first municipality in Northern Italy to be dissolved for suspected mafia infiltration, resulting in Lo Presti\u2019s arrest.\nThe towns of Corsico and Buccinasco in Lombardy are also considered to be 'Ndrangheta strongholds. Sub-units known as \"sotto 'ndrine\" are sometimes established. These subunits possess considerable autonomy, with their own leadership and staff. In some instances, \" 'ndrine\" have reportedly become more influential than the \"locale\" to which they are formally subordinate. Other perspectives suggest that the \" 'ndrina\" itself is the fundamental organizational unit. According to the Antimafia Commission, each \" 'ndrina\" operates autonomously within its territory, with no formal authority above the \" 'ndrina\" boss. Typically, an \" 'ndrina\" controls a small town or a neighborhood. In cases where multiple \" 'ndrine\" operate within the same town, they may form a \"locale\".\nWithin the 'Ndrangheta, membership in a crime family and blood relations are significantly intertwined. \" 'Ndrine\" predominantly consist of individuals from the same family lineage. Salvatore Boemi, an anti-mafia prosecutor in Reggio Calabria, informed the Italian Antimafia Commission that membership is often acquired \"for the simple fact of being born into a mafia family.\" While other factors may attract individuals to seek membership, and non-kin have been admitted, familial ties remain central. Marriages serve to strengthen relationships within \" 'ndrine\" and expand membership. Consequently, each group is often composed of a few core blood families, leading to situations where \"a high number of people with the same last name often end up being prosecuted for membership of a given \"'ndrina\".\" Given the absence of membership limits within a unit, bosses may prioritize maximizing descendants to strengthen their group.\nThe hierarchy within an \" 'ndrina\" includes various ranks. At the base are the \"picciotti d'onore\" (soldiers), expected to execute tasks with unquestioning obedience, until promotion to the level of \"cammorista\". \"Cammoristi\" are granted command over their own group of soldiers. Above the \" 'ndrina\" level, but still within the 'Ndrangheta structure, is the rank of \"santista\", followed by \"vangelista\". Aspiring \"vangelisti\" are required to swear an oath of dedication to a life of crime upon the Bible. The \"Quintino\", also referred to as \"Padrino\", represents the second-highest level of command within an 'Ndrangheta clan (\"Ndrina\"). This level comprises five privileged members who report directly to the boss, known as the \"capobastone\" (head of command).\nDuring a 2018 trial in Toronto, former mobster Carmine Guido testified that the 'Ndrangheta is a collective of family-based clans, each with its own boss, operating within a unified structure and under a board of control.\nPower structure.\nHistorically, individual family power structures served as the primary governing bodies within both Cosa Nostra and the 'Ndrangheta. These family structures have remained central to power dynamics, even after the establishment of superordinate bodies. While Cosa Nostra created the Sicilian Mafia Commission in the 1950s, the 'Ndrangheta established a superordinate body only in 1991, following negotiations to resolve prolonged inter-family conflicts. However, the notion of absolute autonomy for Calabrian crime families prior to this period is not universally supported by historical evidence. Evidence suggests that mechanisms for coordination and dispute resolution have existed since at least the late 19th century, with frequent interactions and meetings among bosses of \"locali\". Operation Crimine, a significant investigation culminating in the arrest of 305 'Ndrangheta members in July 2010, indicated a more hierarchical, unified, and pyramidal structure than previously understood. Italy's chief anti-mafia prosecutor, Pietro Grasso, described the organization as not solely clan-based.\nWhile the legal classification of the 'Ndrangheta as a hierarchical structure is advantageous for Italian criminal law, enabling broader convictions through the doctrine of criminal association, some criminologists dispute the view of the 'Ndrangheta as a consistently monolithic organization. Criminologist Anna Sergi suggests that while coordinating structures exist, they primarily serve to facilitate business ventures and risk sharing among distinct clans. According to this perspective, clans remain independent territorial units rooted in family ties, and do not consistently operate under a unified strategic plan. Sergi argues that \"'Ndrangheta\" functions more as a brand than a description of a tightly integrated organization. She posits that the misconception of the 'Ndrangheta as a singular entity may inadvertently benefit these groups, allowing them to leverage the organization's international reputation to exploit political vulnerabilities, invest in new enterprises, and expand their influence.\nSince at least the 1950s, chiefs of 'Ndrangheta \"locali\" have reportedly convened regularly near the Sanctuary of Our Lady of Polsi in San Luca during the September Feast. These annual gatherings, known as the \"crimine\", have traditionally provided a forum for discussing future strategies and resolving disputes among \"locali\". The assembly exercises limited supervisory authority over the activities of all 'Ndrangheta groups. Emphasis is placed on the temporary nature of the \"crimine\" boss's position, with a new representative elected at each meeting. Contrary to the \"boss of bosses\" concept, the \"capo crimine\" is believed to possess relatively limited power to intervene in family conflicts or regulate inter-family violence.\nDuring these meetings, each boss is expected to \"give account of all the activities carried out during the year and of all the most important facts taking place in his territory such as kidnappings, homicides, etc.\" The historical prominence of the San Luca family is such that any new group or \"locale\" is reportedly required to obtain authorization from San Luca to operate. Furthermore, each 'Ndrangheta group \"still has to deposit a small percentage of illicit proceeds to the \"principale\" of San Luca in recognition of the latter's primordial supremacy\".\nSecurity concerns within the 'Ndrangheta have led to the formation of a secret society within the larger organization, known as \"La Santa\". Membership in \"La Santa\" is exclusive, known only to fellow members. In a departure from traditional code, \"La Santa\" allowed bosses to cultivate close relationships with state officials, with some even becoming affiliated with \"La Santa\". These connections were often facilitated through Freemasonry, which \"santisti\" were permitted to join, despite it being another breach of traditional 'Ndrangheta code.\nSince the conclusion of the Second 'Ndrangheta war in 1991, the 'Ndrangheta has been governed by a collegial body or Commission, known as \"La Provincia\". Its primary function is to mediate and resolve inter-family disputes. This body, also referred to as the Commission in reference to the Sicilian counterpart, comprises three subordinate bodies known as \"mandamenti\". These include a \"mandamento\" for clans on the Ionic side of Calabria (including the Aspromonte mountains and Locride), a second for the Tyrrhenian side (the plains of Gioia Tauro), and a central \"mandamento\" for the city of Reggio Calabria.\nA July 2019 article published in Canada summarized the traditional 'Ndrangheta structure. According to this report:\n\"For decades, the 'Ndrangheta families of Siderno operating in Canada\u2014about seven of them\u2014have been governed by a board of directors, called the \"camera di controllo\", or chamber of control. The local board, as in other countries around the world and other regions of Italy where clans have spread, have all been subservient to the mother clans of Calabria, under a body known as 'il Crimine di Siderno'.\"\nHowever, by mid-2019, law enforcement in both Italy and Canada reportedly believed that the 'Ndrangheta's presence in Canada had become so powerful that the board north of Toronto possessed the authority to make decisions not only within Canada's underworld but also internationally, potentially even superseding the authority of clans in Siderno.\nCharacteristics.\nIn 2007, Italian anti-organized crime agencies estimated the 'Ndrangheta's annual revenue to be approximately \u20ac35\u201340 billion (equivalent to US$35\u201340 billion), representing roughly 3.5% of Italy's GDP. This revenue is primarily generated from illicit drug trafficking, but also from ostensibly legitimate businesses such as construction, restaurants, and supermarkets. The 'Ndrangheta is considered to exert significant control over the economy and governance of Calabria. According to a leaked US Embassy cable, the organization controls substantial portions of the region's territory and economy, accounting for at least three percent of Italy's GDP through activities including drug trafficking, extortion, skimming of public contracts, and usury.\nA key distinction between the 'Ndrangheta and other mafia-type organizations, such as the Sicilian Mafia, lies in recruitment methods. The 'Ndrangheta primarily recruits members based on blood relations, fostering strong cohesion within family clans, which presents considerable challenges for law enforcement investigations. Sons of ndranghetisti are generally expected to follow in their fathers' criminal careers, undergoing a socialization process from a young age to become \"giovani d'onore\" ('boys of honour') before formally joining the ranks as \"uomini d'onore\" ('men of honour'). Compared to the Sicilian Mafia during the early 1990s, relatively few Calabrian mafiosi have become collaborators with the state; by the end of 2002, there were 157 Calabrian witnesses in the state witness protection program. Furthermore, the 'Ndrangheta has generally avoided direct, overt confrontations with the Italian state.\nProsecutions in Calabria are reportedly hampered by the tendency of Italian judges and prosecutors who achieve high exam scores to preferentially choose postings outside of Calabria. Those assigned to Calabria often seek immediate transfers. Combined with a limited government presence and instances of official corruption, a climate of fear and reluctance to cooperate with law enforcement prevails among civilians in the region.\nAlex Perry's 2018 book, \"The Good Mothers: The True Story of the Women Who Took on the World's Most Powerful Mafia\", asserts that over the past decade, the Calabrian 'Ndrangheta has been supplanting the Sicilian Cosa Nostra as the dominant drug trafficking organization in North America.\nActivities.\nAccording to the Italian DIA (\"Direzione Investigativa Antimafia\", Department of the Police of Italy against organized crime) and Guardia di Finanza (Italian Financial Police and Customs Police), the 'Ndrangheta is considered \"one of the most powerful criminal organizations in the world.\" The 'Ndrangheta's economic activities encompass international smuggling of cocaine and weapons. Italian investigators have estimated that approximately 80% of Europe's cocaine transits through the Calabrian port of Gioia Tauro and is controlled by the 'Ndrangheta. However, a report by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) and Europol indicates that the Iberian peninsula is considered the primary entry point for cocaine into Europe and a major gateway to the European market. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) estimated that in 2007, cocaine interceptions in Spain (almost 38 metric tons) were nearly ten times greater than in Italy (almost 4 metric tons).\n'Ndrangheta and Sicilian Cosa Nostra groups are known to engage in joint ventures in cocaine trafficking operations. Additional activities include skimming funds from large public works projects, money laundering, and traditional criminal activities such as usury and extortion. The 'Ndrangheta reportedly invests illicit profits in legitimate real estate and financial ventures. In February 2017, Italian Carabinieri reportedly arrested 33 individuals suspected of involvement with the Piromalli 'ndrina, a clan associated with the 'Ndrangheta. The arrests were linked to allegations of exporting fraudulently labeled olive oil to the United States. According to reports, inexpensive olive pomace oil was being marketed as more expensive extra virgin olive oil. Earlier, in 2016, the American television program 60 Minutes broadcast a segment that cautioned about the infiltration of the olive oil industry by organized crime, stating that \"Agromafia\" constituted a $16 billion per year enterprise.\nEstimates from Eurispes (Institute of Political, Economic and Social Studies), an Italian private research institute, placed the 'Ndrangheta's business volume at approximately \u20ac44 billion in 2007. This figure represented about 2.9% of Italy's GDP. Drug trafficking was identified as the most lucrative activity, accounting for 62% of the total revenue.\nHistory.\nIn 1861, the prefect of Reggio Calabria noted the presence of groups referred to as \"camorristi\". This term was used at the time as a general descriptor for organized crime in the region, as the 'Ndrangheta was not yet formally identified, and the Camorra in Naples was a more established and recognized criminal organization. Police reports and local court sentences from the 1880s onward provide substantial evidence of 'Ndrangheta-type groups. During this period, they were often referred to by various names, including \"picciotteria\", \"onorata societ\u00e0\" (honored society), \"'ndrina\", \"Famiglia Montalbano\", \"fibbia\", or simply \"camorra\" and \"mafia\". These clandestine societies operating in Calabria's olive and vine-rich areas were distinct from more anarchic forms of local banditry. According to an 1890 court sentence in Reggio Calabria, they were hierarchically organized and adhered to a code of conduct that included omert\u00e0, the code of silence. An 1897 court sentence from Palmi referenced a written code of rules discovered in Seminara. This code emphasized honour, secrecy, violence, solidarity (often based on blood relations), and mutual assistance.\nModern history.\nUntil the 1960s, the 'Ndrangheta primarily confined its operations within Italy to Calabria, focusing mainly on extortion and blackmail. Their involvement in cigarette smuggling expanded their reach and facilitated contacts with the Sicilian Mafia and the Neapolitan Camorra. With the initiation of large public works projects in Calabria, skimming of public contracts became a significant revenue stream. Disagreements over the distribution of illicit gains led to the First 'Ndrangheta war (1974\u201377), resulting in approximately 233 fatalities. Factions involved in the conflict began kidnapping wealthy individuals in Northern Italy for ransom. A notable case was the 1973 kidnapping of John Paul Getty III, during which his severed ear was sent to a newspaper in November. He was eventually released in December following a negotiated ransom payment of $2.2 million by his grandfather, J. Paul Getty. It is estimated that the 'Ndrangheta was responsible for over 200 kidnappings between the 1970s and mid-1990s.\nThe Second 'Ndrangheta war occurred from 1985 to 1991. This six-year conflict between the Condello-Imerti-Serraino-Rosmini clans and the De Stefano-Tegano-Libri-Latella clans resulted in over 600 fatalities. The Sicilian Mafia is believed to have played a role in mediating the end of this conflict, possibly suggesting the establishment of a superordinate body, La Provincia, to prevent future internal disputes.\nFrancesco Fortugno, Deputy President of the regional parliament of Calabria, was assassinated by the 'Ndrangheta on 16 October 2005 in Locri. This event prompted public demonstrations against the organization, with young protesters displaying banners reading \"Ammazzateci tutti!\" (Italian for \"Kill us all\"). In response, the Italian national government initiated a large-scale law enforcement operation in Calabria, leading to the arrest of numerous 'ndranghetisti, including those responsible for Fortugno's murder.\nIn June 2014, Pope Francis publicly condemned the 'Ndrangheta for their \"adoration of evil and contempt of the common good.\" He stated that the Church would actively combat organized crime and asserted that mafiosi were excommunicated. A Vatican spokesperson clarified that the Pope's statement did not constitute a formal excommunication under canon law, as such a measure requires a formal legal process.\nOn 12 July 2025, an alleged leader of the Italian 'ndrangheta mafia in Latin America Giuseppe Palermo, also known as \"Peppe,\" was arrested in Colombia.\nLaw enforcement operations in Italy.\nThe 'Ndrangheta has expanded its operations into Northern Italy, primarily for drug trafficking and investment in legitimate businesses, which can be used for money laundering. In May 2007, twenty individuals identified as 'Ndrangheta members were arrested in Milan. On 30 August 2007, a large-scale police raid involving hundreds of officers targeted San Luca, a town central to the San Luca feud between rival 'Ndrangheta clans. Over 30 individuals, both men and women, with alleged links to the killings of six Italian men in Germany, were apprehended.\nOn 4 June 2012, a multinational law enforcement operation resulted in numerous arrests across Spain, Croatia, Slovenia, Italy, the Netherlands, Bulgaria, and Finland. This operation followed an investigation by the Milan District Anti-Mafia Prosecutor's Office into Swiss bank accounts and a fleet of ships allegedly used to transport cocaine to Europe from Venezuela, Argentina, and the Dominican Republic.\nOn 9 October 2012, after a months-long central government investigation, the City Council of Reggio Calabria, led by Mayor Demetrio Arena, was dissolved due to alleged ties to the 'Ndrangheta. Mayor Arena and all 30 city councilors were removed from office to prevent potential \"mafia contagion\" within the local government. This marked the first instance of a provincial capital's government being dismissed. Three administrators appointed by the central government governed the city for 18 months until new elections were held. The action followed suspicions that unnamed councilors had ties to the 'Ndrangheta during the 10-year center-right administration of Mayor Giuseppe Scopelliti.\n'Ndrangheta infiltration of political offices extends beyond Calabria. On 10 October 2012, Domenico Zambetti of People of Freedom (PDL), Milan's regional government commissioner in charge of public housing, was arrested. He was accused of paying the 'Ndrangheta to secure election victories and to solicit favors and contracts, including construction tenders for World Expo 2015 in Milan. This vote-buying investigation highlighted the 'Ndrangheta's infiltration into the political structures of Lombardy, Italy's affluent northern region. Zambetti's arrest was described as the most significant case of 'Ndrangheta infiltration uncovered in Northern Italy to date, prompting calls for the resignation of Lombardy governor Roberto Formigoni.\nOn 12 December 2017, 48 individuals identified as 'Ndrangheta members were arrested on charges including mafia association, extortion, criminal damage, fraudulent asset transfer, and illegal firearm possession. Of those arrested, four were placed under house arrest, and 44 were ordered to be jailed. Among those indicted were a two-time mayor of Taurianova, Calabria and a former cabinet member. Investigators alleged that 'Ndrangheta clans had infiltrated public works construction, real estate brokerage, the food industry, greenhouse production, and renewable energy sectors.\nOn 9 January 2018, law enforcement operations in Italy and Germany resulted in the arrest of 169 individuals linked to the 'Ndrangheta, specifically the \"Farao\" and \"Marincola\" clans based in Calabria. Assets valued at \u20ac50 million (\u00a344/$59m) were seized. The indictment detailed how owners of German restaurants, ice cream parlors, hotels, and pizzerias were coerced into purchasing wine, pizza dough, pastries, and other products sourced from Southern Italy. The Farao clan, reportedly led by the imprisoned Giuseppe Farao, who allegedly relayed orders to his sons, controlled businesses including bakeries, vineyards, olive groves, funeral homes, launderettes, plastic recycling plants, and shipyards.\nThe 'Ndrangheta also infiltrated the waste disposal operations of Ilva steel company in Taranto. Charges in these operations included mafia association, attempted murder, money laundering, extortion, and illegal weapons possession and trafficking. Italian prosecutor Nicola Gratteri characterized these arrests as the most significant action against the 'Ndrangheta in the preceding 20 years. Eleven suspects arrested in Germany were accused of blackmail and money laundering and were subsequently deported to Italy. Alessandro Figliomeni, former mayor of Siderno, Calabria, received a 12-year prison sentence on 7 May 2018 for mafia association, allegedly being a member of the Commisso 'ndrina clan and holding a high-ranking position.\nIn December 2019, over 300 individuals were arrested in Calabria on suspicion of 'Ndrangheta membership in an operation involving 2,500 police officers. Among those arrested was Giancarlo Pittelli, a prominent lawyer and former member of Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia party. Nicola Gratteri, chief prosecutor in Catanzaro, described these arrests as the second largest in Italian organized crime history, surpassed only by the arrests leading to the \"Maxi Trial\" of Sicilian Mafia bosses in Palermo between 1986 and 1992. The trial of these more than 300 'Ndrangheta members commenced on 13 January 2021.\nIn early May 2023, a police crackdown targeting the 'Ndrangheta network resulted in the arrest of 108 individuals in Italy by Carabinieri and 30 in Germany by over 1,000 police officers. The operation, prompted by suspicions of cocaine smuggling, money laundering, and other offenses, followed four years of covert investigations and involved coordinated probes by investigators in Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Major investigative efforts included gaining insights into the organization's internal operations, including their use of crypto phones and services such as EncroChat and Sky ECC, which the 'Ndrangheta reportedly utilized due to movement restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nAlso in 2023, allegations emerged regarding links between the 'Ndrangheta and the Gambino family, suggesting that the 'Ndrangheta uses New York as a training ground for new recruits.\nIn November 2023, over 200 individuals associated with the 'Ndrangheta were convicted in what was described as the largest mafia trial in three decades. Despite over 100 acquittals following the three-year trial, the convictions were considered a significant setback to the organization's activities in Europe. Almost all defendants had been initially arrested in 2019.\nOutside Italy.\nThe 'Ndrangheta has established branches abroad, mainly through migration. The overlap of blood and mafia family seems to have helped the 'Ndrangheta expand beyond its traditional territory: \"The familial bond has not only worked as a shield to protect secrets and enhance security, but also helped to maintain identity in the territory of origin and reproduce it in territories where the family has migrated.\" \" 'Ndrine\" are reported to be operating in northern and central Italy, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, France, the rest of Europe, the Americas, Australia, West Africa, and Asia. One group of 'ndranghetisti discovered outside Italy was in Ontario, Canada, several decades ago. They were dubbed the Siderno Group by Canadian judges as most of its members hailed from and around Siderno.\nIn 2007, magistrates in Calabria warned about the international scale of the 'Ndrangheta's operations. It is now believed to have surpassed the traditional axis between the Sicilian and American Cosa Nostra, to become the major importer of cocaine to Europe. Outside Italy the 'Ndrangheta operates in several countries, such as:\nAlbania.\nIn a report that was leaked to a Berlin newspaper, the Bundesnachrichtendienst, the German federal intelligence service, stated that the 'Ndrangheta \"act in close co-operation with Albanian mafia families in moving weapons and narcotics across Europe's porous borders\".\nArgentina.\nIn November 2006, a cocaine trafficking network that operated in Argentina, Spain and Italy was dismantled. The Argentinian police said the 'Ndrangheta had roots in the country and shipped cocaine through Spain to Milan and Turin. In October 2022, an Italian 'Ndrangheta mafia leader, Carmine Alfonso Maiorano, who was responsible for drug and arms trafficking operations between South America and Europe was captured in Guernica, Buenos Aires after years-long of manhunt.\nAustralia.\nKnown by the name \"The Honoured Society,\" the 'Ndrangheta controlled Italian-Australian organized crime all along the east coast of Australia since the early 20th century. 'Ndrangheta operating in Australia include the Sergi, Barbaro and Papalia clans. Similarly in Victoria the major families are named as Italiano, Arena, Muratore, Benvenuto, and Condello. In the 1960s warfare among 'Ndrangheta clans broke out over the control of the Victoria Market in Melbourne, where an estimated $45 million worth of fruits and vegetables passed through each year. After the death of Domenico Italiano, known as Il Papa, different clans tried to gain control over the produce market. At the time it was unclear that most involved were affiliated with the 'Ndrangheta.\nThe 'Ndrangheta began in Australia in Queensland, where they continued their form of rural organised crime, especially in the fruit and vegetable industry. After the 1998\u20132006 Melbourne gangland killings which included the murder of 'Ndrangheta Godfather Frank Benvenuto. In 2008, the 'Ndrangheta were tied to the importation of 15 million ecstasy pills to Melbourne, at the time the world's largest ecstasy haul. The pills were hidden in a container-load of tomato cans from Calabria. Australian 'Ndrangheta boss Pasquale Barbaro was arrested. Pasquale Barbaro's father Francesco Barbaro was a boss throughout the 1970s and early 1980s until his retirement. Several of the Barbaro clan, including among others, Francesco, were suspected in orchestrating the murder of Australian businessman Donald Mackay in July 1977 for his anti-drugs campaign.\nItalian authorities believe that former Western Australian mayor of the city of Stirling, Tony Vallelonga, is an associate of Giuseppe Commisso, boss of the Siderno clan of the 'Ndrangheta. In 2009, Italian police overheard the two discussing 'Ndrangheta activities. Since migrating from Italy to Australia in 1963, Vallelonga has \"established a long career in grass-roots politics.\"\nThe 'Ndrangheta are also tied to large cocaine imports. Up to 500 kilograms of cocaine was documented relating to the mafia and Australian associates smuggled in slabs of marble, plastic tubes and canned tuna, coming from South America to Melbourne via Italy between 2002 and 2004. A report in 2016 by Vice Media indicated that the activities continued to be profitable: \"Between 2004 and 2014, the gang's members amassed more than $10 million [$7.6 million USD] in real estate and race horses in Victoria alone pouring money into wholesalers, cafes, and restaurants\".\nA June 2015 report by BBC News discussed an investigation by Fairfax Media and \nFour Corners which alleged that \"the 'Ndrangheta, runs a drugs and extortion business worth billions of euros\" in Australia and that \"politicians have been infiltrated by the Calabrian mafia\".\nIn February 2020, two individuals, said to be \"multimillionaire fruit and vegetable kings\" were alleged to be 'Ndrangheta \"capos\", having a relationship with the \"secretive criminal organisation\". The Sydney Morning Herald report specified that the two \"are not accused of any crime in either Italy or Australia\". The alleged information was obtained during investigations of other individuals during Operation Eyphemos in Calabria, which \"led to the arrest ... of 65 men for alleged mafia activities including extortion and political corruption in Calabria\".\nBelgium.\n'Ndrangheta clans purchased almost \"an entire neighbourhood\" in Brussels with laundered money originating from drug trafficking. On 5 March 2004, 47 people were arrested, accused of drug trafficking and money laundering to purchase real estate in Brussels for some 28 million euros. The activities extended to the Netherlands where large quantities of heroin and cocaine had been purchased by the Pesce-Bellocco clan from Rosarno and the Strangio clan from San Luca.\nBrazil.\nThe 'Ndrangheta has operated in Brazil since the 1970s, but an alliance between various 'ndrine clans and the Primeiro Comando da Capital since the mid-2010s has increased the mafia's presence in the country. A reliable stream of cocaine from Brazil is crucial to the 'Ndrangheta's grip on the European cocaine market, and the alliance has enabled a massive overseas expansion for the PCC through access to different markets across Africa, Europe and Asia.\nA share of cocaine exported by the PCC and the 'Ndrangheta moves through West Africa, and international and regional law enforcement investigations have implicated 'Ndrangheta elements in cocaine trafficking in several countries across the region, including Senegal, Niger, Ghana and C\u00f4te d'Ivoire. 'Ndrine clans operate in West Africa through the stable presence of individuals in certain countries, as well as through trusted brokers established through visits by 'Ndrangheta clan family members.\nIn May 2021, a joint operation by the Federal Police of Brazil, Interpol and Italian police arrested Italian mobster Vincenzo Pasquino, in a flat in Jo\u00e3o Pessoa, along with Rocco Morabito, one of the most wanted Italian drug traffickers at the time. Pasquino held a leadership position in the Calabrian mafia, the 'Ndrangheta.\nSeveral important 'Ndrangheta bosses have been arrested in Brazil, such as Domenico Pelle, Nicola Assisi and Rocco Morabito.\nAssisi and Morabito (according to investigations by the Brazilian Federal Police) resided in Brazil, where they pretended to be legitimate businessmen and lived in luxury properties, while negotiating with important members of the PCC.\nIn 2022, a Federal Police investigation on the PCC's usage of the Port of Rio de Janeiro for part of its cocaine exports to Europe revealed a criminal network that included Chendal Wilfrido Rosa, a member of the No Limit Soldiers who was acting as a representative for 'Ndrangheta in Brazil.\nIn June 2023, the S\u00e3o Paulo Civil Police arrested Garip U\u00e7, a Turkish chemist associated with Hezbollah during an operation in Praia Grande. Investigations later pointed to Moroccan hashish being imported to Brazil by a criminal network that involved the PCC, 'Ndrangheta, the Balkan Mafia and Hezbollah, by way of Barakat clan entrepreneurs who operated in the Triple Frontier region.\nIn July 2024, Vincenzo Pasquino who was arrested in Brazil decided to tell the authorities in his country about the criminal factions PCC and CV's secrets. He signed a kind of plea bargain with the Italian justice system.\nCanada.\nAccording to a May 2018 news report, \"Siderno's Old World 'Ndrangheta boss sent acolytes to populate the New World\" including Michele (Mike) Racco who settled in Toronto in 1952, followed by other mob families. By 2010, investigators in Italy said that Toronto's 'Ndrangheta had climbed \"to the top of the criminal world\" with \"an unbreakable umbilical cord\" to Calabria.\nThe Canadian 'Ndrangheta is believed to be involved in various activities including the smuggling of unlicensed tobacco products through ties with criminal elements in cross-border Native American tribes. According to Alberto Cisterna of the Italian National Anti-Mafia Directorate, the 'Ndrangheta has a heavy presence in Canada. \"There is a massive number of their people in North America, especially in Toronto. And for two reasons. The first is linked to the banking system. Canada's banking system is very secretive; it does not allow investigation. So Canada is the ideal place to launder money. The second reason is to smuggle drugs.\" The 'Ndrangheta have found Canada a useful North American entry point. The organization used extortion, loan sharking, theft, electoral crimes, mortgage and bank fraud, crimes of violence and cocaine trafficking.\nA Canadian branch labelled the Siderno Group has been active in Canada since the 1950s; it was formed originally by Michele (Mike) Racco, who was the head of the Group until his death in 1980. Siderno is also home to one of the 'Ndrangheta's biggest and most important clans, heavily involved in the global cocaine business and money laundering. Antonio Commisso, the alleged leader of the Siderno group, is reported to lead efforts to import \"illicit arms, explosives and drugs\". Elements of 'Ndrangheta have been reported to have been present in Hamilton, Ontario as early as 1911. Historical crime families in the Hamilton area include the Musitanos, Luppinos and Papalias.\nAccording to an agreed Statement of Fact filed with the court, \"the Locali [local cells] outside of Calabria replicate the structure from Calabria, and are connected to their mother-Locali in Calabria. The authority to start Locali outside Calabria comes from the governing bodies of the organization in Calabria. The Locali outside of Calabria are part of the same 'Ndrangheta organization as in Calabria, and maintain close relationships with the Locali where its members come from.\" The group's activities in the Greater Toronto Area were controlled by a group known as the 'Camera di Controllo' which \"makes all of the final decisions\", according to the witness' testimony. It consists of six or seven Toronto-area men, who co-ordinate activities and resolves disputes among Calabrian gangsters in Southern Ontario. In 1962, Racco established a \"crimini\" or Camera di Controllo in Canada with the help of Giacomo Luppino and Rocco Zito. One of the members was Giuseppe Coluccio, before he was arrested and extradited to Italy. Other members are Vincenzo DeMaria, Carmine Verduci before his death, and Cosimo Stalteri before his death. In August 2015, the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB) issued a deportation order for Carmelo Bruzzese. Bruzzese appealed the decision to Canada's Federal Court, but it was rejected, and on 2 October 2015, Bruzzese was escorted onto a plane in Toronto, landing in Rome, where he was arrested by Italian police. Major Giuseppe De Felice, a commander with the Carabinieri, told the IRB that Bruzzese \"assumed the most important roles and decisions. He gave the orders.\"\nAfter living in Richmond Hill, Ontario for five years until 2010, Antonio Coluccio was one of 29 people named in arrest warrants in Italy in September 2014. Police said they were part of the Commisso 'ndrina ('Ndrangheta) crime family in Siderno. In July 2018, Coluccio was sentenced to 30 years in prison for corruption. His two brothers, including Salvatore and Giuseppe Coluccio, were already in prison due to Mafia-related convictions.\nIn June 2018, Cosimo Ernesto Commisso, of Woodbridge, Ontario, and an unrelated woman were shot and killed in his vehicle whilst outside his home. According to sources contacted by the \"Toronto Star\", \"Commisso was related to Cosimo \"The Quail\" Commisso of Siderno, Italy, who has had relations in Ontario, is considered by police to be a \"'Ndrangheta organized crime boss\". The \"National Post\" reported that Cosimo Ernesto Commisso, while not a known criminal, \"shares a name and family ties with a man who has for decades been reputed to be a Mafia leader in the Toronto area\". The cousin of \"The Quail\", Antonio Commisso, was on the list of most wanted fugitives in Italy until his capture on 28 June 2005, in Woodbridge.\nIn June 2015, RCMP led police raids across the Greater Toronto Area, named Project OPhoenix, which resulted in the arrest of 19 men, allegedly affiliated with the 'Ndrangheta. In March 2018, during the resultant criminal trial north of Toronto, the court heard from a Carabinieri lieutenant-colonel that 'Ndrangheta is active in Germany, Australia and the Greater Toronto Area. \"People in Italy have to be responsible for their representatives here but the final word comes from Italy\". A member of the Greater Toronto Area's 'Ndrangheta cell, Carmine Guido, who had been a police informant, testified at length in 2018 about the structure and activities of the organization which had been under the control of Italian-born Bradford, Ontario resident, Giuseppe (Pino) Ursino and Romanian-born Cosmin (Chris) Dracea of Toronto. The latter two faced two counts of cocaine trafficking for the benefit of a criminal organization and one charge of conspiracy to commit an indictable offence. Guido was paid $2.4 million by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police between 2013 and 2015 to secretly tape dozens of conversations with suspected 'Ndrangheta members. In February 2019, Ursino was sentenced to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;11+1\u20442 years in prison on drug trafficking charges, with Dracea sentenced to nine years in prison on cocaine trafficking conspiracy. Neither had a previous criminal record. At the sentencing, the presiding judge made this comment: \"Based on the evidence at trial, Giuseppe Ursino is a high-ranking member of the 'Ndrangheta who orchestrated criminal conduct and then stepped back to lessen his potential implication. ... Cosmin Dracea knew he was dealing with members of a criminal organization when he conspired to import cocaine\".\nDuring the Ursino/Dracea trial, an Italian police expert testified that the 'Ndrangheta operated in the Greater Toronto Area and in Thunder Bay particularly in drug trafficking, extortion, loan sharking, theft of public funds, robbery, fraud, electoral crimes and crimes of violence. After the trial, Tom Andreopoulos, deputy chief federal prosecutor, said that this was the first time in Canada that the 'Ndrangheta was targeted as an organized crime group since 1997, when the Criminal Code was amended to include the offence of criminal organization. He offered this comment about the organization:\"We're talking about structured organized crime. We're talking about a political entity, almost; a culture of crime that colonizes across the sea from Italy to Canada. This is one of the most sophisticated criminal organizations in the world.\"\nIn June 2018, a Mafia expert wrote that \"A new alliance between Bonanno associates and the Violi family ... is significant, as it suggests a growing prominence for Calabrian mafia \u2013 the 'Ndrangheta \u2013 within the New York families and in Canada\". Criminologist Anna Sergi of the University of Essex added that drug trafficking was the most active pursuit in North America.\nOn 18 July 2019, the York Regional Police announced the largest organized crime bust in Ontario, part of an 18-month long operation called Project Sindicato that was also coordinated with the Italian State Police. York Regional Police had arrested 15 people in Canada, 12 people in Calabria, and seized $35 million worth of homes, sports cars and cash in a major trans-Atlantic probe targeting the most prominent wing of the 'Ndrangheta in Canada headed by Angelo Figliomeni. On 14 and 15 July, approximately 500 officers raided 48 homes and businesses across the GTA, seizing 27 homes worth $24 million, 23 cars, including five Ferraris, and $2 million in cash and jewelry. Nine of the 15 arrests in Canada included major crime figures: Angelo Figliomeni, Vito Sili, Nick Martino, Emilio Zannuti, Erica Quintal, Salvatore Oliveti, Giuseppe Ciurleo, Rafael Lepore and Francesco Vitucci. The charges laid included tax evasion, money laundering, defrauding the government and participating in a criminal organization.\nDuring a press conference in Vaughan, Ontario, Fausto Lamparelli of the Italian State Police, offered this comment about the relationship between the 'Ndrangheta in Ontario and Calabria:\"This investigation allowed us to learn something new. The 'Ndrangheta crime families in Canada are able to operate autonomously, without asking permission or seeking direction from Italy. Traditionally, 'Ndrangheta clans around the world are all subservient to the mother ship in Calabria. It suggests the power and influence the Canadian-based clans have built.\"\nOn 9 August 2019, as part of the same joint investigation, several former Greater Toronto Area residents were arrested in Calabria, including Giuseppe DeMaria, Francesco Commisso, Rocco Remo Commisso, Antonio Figliomeni and Cosimo Figiomeni. Vincenzo Mui\u00e0 had visited Toronto on 31 March 2019 to meet with Angelo and Cosimo Figliomeni, seeking answers to who had ambushed and killed his brother, Carmelo Mui\u00e0, in Siderno on 18 January 2018; Mui\u00e0's smartphone was unwittingly and secretly transmitting his closed-door conversations to authorities in Italy.\nIn 2020, the charges laid against three individuals as a result of Project Sindicato were \"stayed\" (the prosecution discontinued), unless the prosecutors could find new evidence and proceeded with the charges again within one year. In January 2021, the charges against the remaining six were also stayed, including that of Angelo Figliomeni, \"the head of the 'Ndrangheta in Toronto\" according to York Regional Police. The charges were stayed after an investigation \"into the use of the privileged conversations\" that found \"improper use of wiretapping\" and \"significant breaches of solicitor-client privilege\". All property seized by police must now be returned \u2013 with the exception of illegal possessions.\nColombia.\nThe 'Ndrangheta clans were closely associated with the AUC paramilitary groups led by Salvatore Mancuso, a son of Italian immigrants; he surrendered to \u00c1lvaro Uribe's government to avoid extradition to the U.S. According to Giuseppe Lumia of the Italian Parliamentary Antimafia Commission, 'Ndrangheta clans are actively involved in the production of cocaine. The Mancuso 'ndrina is a powerful 'Ndrangheta family.\nGermany.\nAccording to a study by the German foreign intelligence service, the Bundesnachrichtendienst, 'Ndrangheta groups are using Germany to invest cash from drugs and weapons smuggling. Profits are invested in hotels, restaurants and houses, especially along the Baltic coast and in the eastern German states of Thuringia and Saxony. Investigators believe that the mafia's bases in Germany are used primarily for clandestine financial transactions. In 1999, the state Office of Criminal Investigation in Stuttgart investigated an Italian from San Luca who had allegedly laundered millions through a local bank, the Sparkasse Ulm. The man claimed that he managed a profitable car dealership, and authorities were unable to prove that the business was not the source of his money. The Bundeskriminalamt concluded in 2000 that \"the activities of this 'Ndrangheta clan represent a multi-regional criminal phenomenon.\"\nA war between the two 'Ndrangheta clans Pelle-Romeo (Pelle-Vottari) and Strangio-Nirta from San Luca that had started in 1991 in their home town in Calabria and resulted in several deaths, spilled into Germany in 2007; six men were shot dead in front of an Italian restaurant in Duisburg on 15 August 2007. (See San Luca feud.)\nIn 2009, a confidential report by the Bundeskriminalamt said some 'Ndrangheta families were living in Germany, and were involved in gun-running, money laundering, drug-dealing and racketeering, as well as legal businesses. Some 900 people were involved in criminal activity, and were also legal owners of hundreds of restaurants, as well as being major players in the property market in the former East. The most represented 'Ndrangheta family originated from the city of San Luca (Italy), with some 200 members in Germany. According to the head of the German federal police service, J\u00f6rg Ziercke, \"Half of the criminal groups identified in Germany belong to the 'Ndrangheta. It has been the biggest criminal group since the 1980s. Compared to other groups operating in Germany, the Italians have the strongest organization.\"\nNetherlands.\nSebastiano Strangio allegedly lived for 10 years in the Netherlands, where he managed his contacts with Colombian cocaine cartels. He was arrested in Amsterdam on 27 October 2005. The seaports of Rotterdam and Amsterdam are used to import cocaine. The Giorgi, Nirta and Strangio clans from San Luca have a base in the Netherlands and Brussels (Belgium). In March 2012, the head of the Dutch National Crime Squad (\"Dienst Nationale Recherche\", DNR) stated that the DNR will team up with the Tax and Customs Administration and the Fiscal Information and Investigation Service to combat the 'Ndrangheta.\nMalta.\nDavid Gonzi, a son of former Prime Minister of Malta Lawrence Gonzi, was accused of illegal activities by acting as a trustee shareholder in a gaming company. The company in question was operated by a Calabrian associate of the 'Ndrangheta in Malta. His name appeared several times on an investigation document of over 750 pages that was commissioned by the tribunal of the Reggio Calabria. Gonzi called the document unprofessional. A European arrest warrant was published for Gonzi to appear at the tribunal but this never materialised. Gonzi, however, was completely exonerated from the list of potential suspects in the 'Ndrangheta gaming bust.\nAfter investigation of the presence of the 'Ndrangheta, 21 gaming outlets had their operation license temporarily suspended in Malta due to irregularities in a period of one year.\nIn a Notice of the Conclusion of the Investigation dated 30 June 2016, criminal action was commenced in Italy against 113 persons originally mentioned in the investigation.\nMexico.\nAccording to some reports, the 'Ndrangheta works in conjunction with Mexican drug cartels in the drug trade, such as with the mercenary army known as Los Zetas.\nSlovakia.\nIn February 2018, Slovak investigative journalist J\u00e1n Kuciak was shot dead at his home together with his fianc\u00e9e. At the time of his murder, Kuciak was working on a report about Slovak connections with the 'Ndrangheta. He had previously reported on organized tax fraud involving businesspeople close to the ruling Smer-SD party. On 28 February, Aktuality.sk published Kuciak's last, unfinished story. The article details the activities of Italian businessmen with ties to organised crime who have settled in eastern Slovakia, and have spent years embezzling European Union funds intended for the development of this relatively poor region, as well as their connections to high-ranking state officials, such as Viliam Jasa\u0148, a deputy and the Secretary of the State Security Council of Slovakia, and M\u00e1ria Tro\u0161kov\u00e1, a former nude model who became Chief Adviser of Prime Minister Robert Fico. Both Jasa\u0148 and Tro\u0161kov\u00e1 took leave of absence on the same day, stating that they would return to their positions once the investigations were concluded.\nSpain.\nAccording to Giuseppe Lombardo, Public Prosecutor at the Anti-Mafia District Directorate of Reggio Calabria, the \u2018Ndrangheta has established a strong and discreet presence in Spain, which he describes as the crossroads of international drug trafficking in Europe. For decades, the 'Ndrangheta has maintained branches and operatives in Spain, engaging in business with various criminal organizations, including Latin American drug cartels, Chinese triads, and local Galician mafias. Unlike other criminal organizations competing for influence in the region, the \u2018Ndrangheta\u2019s stability and international connections allow it to act as a key intermediary in major illegal operations. Spain\u2019s legal system, which lacks specialized anti-mafia laws and has relatively lenient controls over assets and finances compared to Italy, provides a fertile ground for such activities. Geographically, Spain\u2019s extensive maritime borders and proximity to North Africa further enhance its strategic value for illicit trade. Javier Zaragoza, Chief Prosecutor of Spain\u2019s National Court, acknowledges that if organized crime in Spain reached the levels seen in Italy, the country would need to adopt similar legal measures. Meanwhile, Jesus Duva, editor-in-chief at \"El Pa\u00eds\", admits that Spanish media rarely report on the \u2018Ndrangheta due to limited information, which inadvertently benefits the mafia by keeping its operations under the radar and enabling its dominance in international drug trafficking.\nIn 2022, a major joint operation in Spain led to the arrest of 32 individuals linked to the \u2018Ndrangheta for drug trafficking and money laundering. Coordinated by the Guardia Civil, Carabinieri, Guardia di Finanza, Europol, and Eurojust, the operation included 40 property searches across Ibiza, Barcelona, M\u00e1laga, and Tenerife. Authorities seized \u20ac300,000 in cash, drugs (amphetamines and cocaine), firearms, and dismantled a cannabis plantation. The criminal network operated between Spain and Italy, using vehicles and speedboats to transport drugs. Linked to multiple murders and acts of violence, the group laundered illicit profits through Spanish real estate. Europol provided intelligence support, while Eurojust facilitated judicial coordination.\nIn August 2025, three members of the \u2018Ndrangheta were arrested in Ibiza while attempting to establish a local cell in eastern Spain. The suspects, in their thirties and with prior criminal records, were wanted by Italian authorities for drug trafficking and criminal organization. They had been active in Spain for about a year, operating mainly in Catalonia and the Levante region. The arrests followed a joint operation by Spain\u2019s National Police and Italy\u2019s Carabinieri, based on European Arrest Warrants. Searches in Ibiza and Barcelona yielded \u20ac35,000 in cash, valuable jewelry (including a watch worth \u20ac120,000), false identity documents, narcotics, mobile devices, and other evidence.These fugitives fled Italy months before the conclusion of the \u201cAnemone\u201d investigation, which dismantled a \u2018Ndrangheta cell in Rome linked to international drug trafficking and allied with Albanian criminal groups. The organization is known for its secrecy, family ties, and violent enforcement, including torture. Spanish authorities have been monitoring the \u2018Ndrangheta\u2019s expansion since 2024, recognizing Spain\u2019s strategic geographic position as key for the mafia\u2019s growth. The operation, involving specialized tactical units, highlighted the importance of fluid international cooperation.\nSwitzerland.\nThe crime syndicate has a significant presence in Switzerland since the early 1970s but has operated there with little scrutiny due to the inconspicuous life styles of their members, the Swiss legal landscape, and solid foundations in local businesses. In the aftermath of the San Luca feud in 2007 and subsequent arrests in Italy (Operation \"Crimine\"), it became clear that the group had also infiltrated the economically proliferous regions of Switzerland and Southern Germany. In March 2016, Swiss law enforcement in cooperation with Italian state prosecutors arrested a total of 15 individuals, 13 in the city of Frauenfeld, 2 in the canton of Valais, accusing them of active membership to an organized crime syndicate also known as \"Operazione Helvetica\".\nSince 2015, the Swiss federal police has conducted undercover surveillance and recorded the group's meetings in a restaurant establishment in a small village just outside of Frauenfeld. The meetings were taking place in a relatively remote location using the now defunct entity the \"W\u00e4ngi Boccia Club\" as its cover. According to the Italian prosecutor Antonio De Bernardo, there are several cells operating within the jurisdiction of the Swiss Federation, estimating the number of operatives per cell to about 40, and a couple of 100 in total. All of the arrested persons are Italian citizens, the two men arrested in the Valais have already been extradited to Italy, and as of August 2016, one individual arrested in Frauenfeld has been approved for extradition to Italy.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn London, the Aracri and Fazzari clans are thought to be active in money laundering, catering and drug trafficking.\nUnited States.\nThe earliest evidence of 'Ndrangheta activity in the U.S. points to an intimidation scheme run by the syndicate in Pennsylvania mining towns; this scheme was unearthed in 1906. Current 'Ndrangheta activities in the United States mainly involve drug trafficking, arms smuggling, and money laundering. It is known that the 'Ndrangheta branches in North America have been associating with Italian-American organized crime. The Suraci family from Reggio Calabria has moved some of its operations to the U.S. The family was founded by Giuseppe Suraci, who has been in the United States since 1962. His younger cousin, Antonio Rogliano runs the family in Calabria.\nIn February 2014, both FBI and Italian Police joint operation named \"New Bridge\", intercepted the transatlantic network of U.S. and Italian crime families. The raid targeted the Gambino and Bonanno families in the U.S. while in Italy, it targeted the Ursino \"'ndrina\" from Gioiosa Jonica. The defendants were charged with drug trafficking, money laundering and firearms offenses, based, in part, on their participation in a transnational heroin and cocaine trafficking conspiracy involving the 'Ndrangheta. The operation began in 2012 when investigators detected a plan by members of the Ursino clan of the 'Ndrangheta to smuggle large amounts of drugs. An undercover agent was dispatched to Italy and was successful in infiltrating the clan. An undercover agent was also involved in the handover of 1.3\u00a0kg of heroin in New York as part of the infiltration operation.\nIn June 2018, a Mafia expert wrote that \"A new alliance between Bonanno associates and the Violi family, is significant, as it suggests a growing prominence for Calabrian mafia \u2013 the 'Ndrangheta \u2013 within the New York families and in Canada\". Criminologist Anna Sergi of the University of Essex added that drug trafficking was the most active pursuit in North America.\nUruguay.\nOn 24 June 2019, 'Ndrangheta leader Rocco Morabito, dubbed the \"cocaine king of Milan\", escaped from Central Prison in Montevideo, together with three other inmates, \"through a hole in the roof of the building\". Morabito was awaiting extradition to Italy for international drug trafficking, having been arrested at a Montevideo hotel in 2017 after living in Punta del Este under a false name for 13 years.\nIn popular culture.\nBeginning in 2000, music producer Francesco Sbano released three CD compilations of Italian mafia folk songs over a five-year period. Collectively known as \"La musica della mafia\", these compilations consist mainly of songs written by 'Ndrangheta musicians, often sung in Calabrian and dealing with themes such as vengeance (\"Sangu chiama sangu\"), betrayal (\"I cunfirenti\"), justice within the 'Ndrangheta (\"Nun c'\u00e8 pirdunu\"), and the ordeal of prison life (\"Canto di carcerato\"). The 2013 book \"ZeroZeroZero\" by Roberto Saviano investigates the activities of the 'Ndrangheta in Italy. Stefano Sollima adapted the book into a 2020 TV series of the same name.\nThe popular Canadian crime drama series \"Bad Blood\" features the 'Ndrangheta as an important part of the series' storyline, as in the second season the series' main criminal organization, the Rizzuto crime family, led by Declan Gardiner (played by Kim Coates) becomes embroiled in a bloody mafia feud with two powerful 'Ndrangheta families: the Cosoleto crime family, led by brothers Domenic Cosoleto and Lorenzo \"Enzo\" Cosoleto (played by Louis Ferreira and Daniel Kash respectively) and the Langana crime family, whose Canadian branch is headed by Teresa Langana (played by Anna Hopkins) and her twin brother Christian Langana (played by Gianni Falcone), who are the children of the unnamed boss of the Langana crime family's main branch in Italy.\nIn 2023, the Italian-language TV series \"The Good Mothers\" depicting the 'Ndrangheta premiered. It was based on the novel of the same name by British author Alex Perry, and appeared in the 73rd Berlin International Film Festival.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44945", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44945", "title": "Camorra", "text": "Criminal organization in Italy\nThe Camorra (; ) is an Italian Mafia-type criminal organization and criminal society originating in the region of Campania. It is one of the oldest and largest criminal organizations in Italy, dating to the 18th century. The Camorra's organizational structure is divided into individual groups called \"clans\". Every \"capo\" or \"boss\" is the head of a clan, in which there may be tens or hundreds of affiliates, depending on the clan's power and structure. The Camorra's main businesses are drug trafficking, racketeering, counterfeiting, and money laundering. It is also not unusual for Camorra clans to infiltrate the politics of their respective areas.\nSince the early 1980s and its involvement in the drug trafficking business, the Camorra has acquired a strong presence in other European countries, particularly Spain. Usually, Camorra clans maintain close contact with South American drug cartels, which facilitates the arrival of drugs in Europe.\nAccording to Naples public prosecutor Giovanni Melillo, during a 2023 speech of the Antimafia Commission, the most powerful groups of the Camorra in the present day are the Mazzarella clan and the Secondigliano Alliance. The latter is an alliance of the Licciardi, Contini and Mallardo clans.\nHistory.\nThe most accepted hypothesis is that the term \"Camorra\" was born directly in Campania, around the 16th-17th century, finding its original etymological root in the same expression in Neapolitan and being formed from the junction of the words \"c' 'a-morra\" (with the morra), in reference to the homonymous street game. The first official use of \"camorra\" as a word dates from 1735, when a royal decree authorised the establishment of eight gambling houses in Naples. By virtue of the historical information confirmed, it is widely agreed that the birth of the Neapolitan Camorra, intended as a secret criminal organization, in the form in which it is known today, was created around the 18th century.\nThe ancestors of the Camorra existed in Campania, in particular in Naples, in the centuries preceding it and were called \"compagniani\" who moved in groups of four and lived off prostitutes, controlling gambling and committing robberies. In every Neapolitan neighborhood there was a group of \"compagniani\" of which some nobleman was also a member. Their meeting place was the \"del Crispano\" tavern, near the current Napoli Centrale station. Even the canon Giulio Genoino, the inspirer of Masaniello's revolt, was protected by \"compagniani\". There were also the \"cappiatori\", street thieves, and the \"campeatori\", robbers with knives. At the end of the 17th century in Naples there were 1338 hanged, 17 executed leaders, 57 beheaded, 913 condemned to prison. During those centuries, some of the most famous \"compagniani\" were Fucillo Micone in the 16th century and Cesare Riccardi, called \"abate Cesare\", in the 17th century, both heads of groups of \"compagniani\".\nThe Camorra, known in that period as \"Bella Societ\u00e0 Riformata,\" emerged during the chaotic power vacuum between 1799 and 1815, when the Parthenopean Republic was proclaimed on the wave of the French Revolution and the Bourbon Restoration. The first official mention of the Camorra as an organisation dates from 1820, when police records detail a disciplinary meeting of the Camorra, a tribunal known as the \"Gran Mamma\". That year the first written statute of the Camorra, the \"frieno\", was discovered, indicating a stable organisational structure in the underworld. Another statute was discovered in 1842, related to initiation rites and funds set aside for the families of those imprisoned.\nThe Camorristi in that period also defined their organization as \"\"Societ\u00e0 della Umirt\u00e0\" or \"Annurata Suggit\u00e0\"\" (\"Honoured Society\") to allude to the defense of their \"honour\", which consisted of omert\u00e0 (\"Umirt\u00e0\"), that is, the criminal code of silence and the obligation not to speak about the internal affairs of the organization with the police.\nThe evolution into more organised formations indicated a qualitative change: the Camorra and \"camorristi\" were no longer local gangs living off theft and extortion; they had a fixed structure and some kind of hierarchy. Another qualitative leap was the agreement between the liberal opposition and the Camorra, following the defeat of the 1848 revolution. The liberals realised that they needed popular support to overthrow the king. They turned to the Camorra and paid them because the \"camorristi\" were the leaders of the city's poor. The new police chief, Liborio Romano, appealed to the head of the Camorra, Salvatore De Crescenzo, to maintain order and appointed him as head of the municipal guard. In a few decades, the Camorra had developed into power brokers. In 1869, Ciccio Cappuccio was elected as the \"capintesta\" (head-in-chief) of the Camorra by the twelve district heads (\"capintriti\"), succeeding De Crescenzo after a short interregnum. Nicknamed \"The king of Naples\" (\"o rre 'e Napole\"), he died in 1892.\nFollowing Italian unification in 1861, the government made attempts to suppress the Camorra. From 1882, it conducted a series of manhunts. The Saredo Inquiry (1900\u20131901), established to investigate corruption and bad governance in Naples, identified a system of political patronage run by what the report called the \"high Camorra\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The original \"low camorra\" held sway over the poor plebs in an age of abjection and servitude. Then there arose a \"high camorra\" comprising the most cunning and audacious members of the middle class. They fed off trade and public works contracts, political meetings and government bureaucracy. This high camorra strikes deals and does business with the low camorra, swapping promises for favours and favours for promises. The high camorra thinks of the state bureaucracy as being like a field it has to harvest and exploit. Its tools are cunning, nerve and violence. Its strength comes from the streets. And it is rightly considered to be more dangerous, because it has re-established the worst form of despotism by founding a regime based on bullying. The high camorra has replaced free will with impositions, it has nullified individuality and liberty, and it has defrauded the law and public trust.\nThe inquiry introduced the terminology of \"high Camorra\", as having a bourgeois character, and distinct from the plebeian Camorra proper. The two groups were in close contact through the figure of the intermediary (\"faccendiere\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholars dispute whether the \"high Camorra\" was an integral part of the Camorra proper. Although the inquiry did not prove specific collusion between the Camorra and politics, it did reveal the patronage mechanisms that contributed to corruption in the municipality. The society's influence was weakened, which was exemplified by the defeat of all of their candidates in the 1901 Naples election.\nThe Camorra received another blow with the Cuocolo Trial (1911\u20131912). The trial was ostensibly to prosecute those charged with the murder on 6 June 1906 of the Camorra boss Gennaro Cuocolo and his wife, who were suspected of being police spies. The main investigator, Carabinieri Captain Carlo Fabbroni, transformed the trial into one against the Camorra as a whole, intending to use it to strike the final blow to the Camorra.\nThe trial attracted much attention among newspapers and the general public, both in Italy and the United States, including by Path\u00e9's Gazette. The hearings began in 1911. After 17 months, the often tumultuous proceedings ended with a guilty verdict on 8 July 1912 against defendants who included 27 leading Camorra bosses. They were sentenced to a total of 354 years' imprisonment. Enrico Alfano, the main defendant and nominal head of the Camorra, was sentenced to 30 years.\nThe Camorra has never been a unified, centralised organisation, but instead a loose confederation of different, independent clans, groups or families. Each group is bound by kinship ties and controlled economic activities that took place in its particular geographic territory. Each clan takes care of its own business, protects its territory, and sometimes tries to expand at another group's expense. There is some minimal coordination to avoid mutual interference. The families compete to maintain a system of checks and balances among equal powers.\nOne of the Camorra's strategies to gain social prestige was and remains political patronage. The family clans became the preferred go-betweens of local politicians and public officials because of their grip on the community. In turn, the family bosses used their political sway to assist and protect their clients against the local authorities. Through a mixture of brute force, political status, and social leadership, the Camorra clans gained ground as middlemen between the local community and bureaucrats and politicians at national level. They granted privileges and protection, and intervened in favour of their clients, in return for their silence and connivance against local authorities and the police. With their political connections, the heads of the major Neapolitan families became power brokers in local and national political contexts, providing Neapolitan politicians with broad electoral support, and in return receiving benefits for their constituency.\nFrom the 1950s until the 1980s, the Camorra played a central role in the cigarette smuggling trade, making Naples the hub of this illicit activity. The smuggling networks extended throughout Italy and beyond, with the trade offering economic relief in a post-war economy struggling with hardships. Smuggling became a key economic lifeline, and fast boats, known as \"scafi blu,\" were used to transport the contraband while evading authorities. Prominent figures like Pio Vittorio Giuliano and Michele Zaza profited from this illegal trade, using the proceeds to expand their criminal empires. The competition for control over smuggling routes led to increased violence between rival clans. For many Neapolitans, cigarette smuggling became a vital part of life, not only as a criminal endeavor but also as a means of survival amid economic hardship.\nActivities.\nCompared to the Sicilian Mafia's pyramidal structure, the Camorra has more of a 'horizontal' structure. As a result, Camorra clans act independently of one another and are more prone to feuding. This, however, makes the Camorra more resilient when top leaders are arrested or killed, as new clans and organisations emerge from the remnants of old ones. Clan leader Pasquale Galasso stated in court, \"Campania can get worse because you could cut into a Camorra group, but another ten could emerge from it.\"\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, Raffaele Cutolo made an unsuccessful attempt to unify the Camorra families in the manner of the Sicilian Mafia, by forming the New Organized Camorra (\"Nuova Camorra Organizzata\" or \"NCO\"). Drive-by shootings by \"camorristi\" often result in casualties among the local population but such episodes are often difficult to investigate because of the widespread practise of omert\u00e0 (code of silence). According to a report published in 2007 by Confesercenti, the second-largest Italian trade organisation, the Camorra control the milk and fish industries, the coffee trade, and over 2,500 bakeries in Naples.\nIn 1983, Italian law enforcement estimated that there were about a dozen Camorra clans. By 1987, the estimate had risen to 26, and in the following year to 32. Roberto Saviano, an investigative journalist and author of \"Gomorra\", an expos\u00e9 of the activities of the Camorra, says that this sprawling network of clans now dwarfs the Sicilian Mafia, the 'Ndrangheta and southern Italy's other organised gangs, in numbers, in economic power and in ruthless violence.\nIn 2004 and 2005, the Di Lauro clan and the so-called Scissionisti di Secondigliano fought a bloody feud which came to be known in the Italian press as the Scampia feud. The result was over 100 street killings. At the end of October 2006 a new series of murders took place in Naples between 20 competing clans, costing 12 lives in 10 days. The Interior Minister, Giuliano Amato, decided to send more than 1,000 extra police and carabinieri to Naples to fight crime and protect tourists. Despite this, in the following year there were over 120 murders.\nIn 2001, the businessman Domenico Noviello from Caserta testified against a Camorra extortionist and subsequently received police protection. In 2008 he refused further protection and was killed one week later.\nIn recent years, various Camorra clans have been allegedly using alliances with Nigerian drug gangs and the Albanian mafia. Augusto La Torre, the former La Torre clan boss who became a pentito, is married to an Albanian woman; the first foreign pentito, a Tunisian, admitted to being involved with the feared Casalesi clan of Casal di Principe. The first town in which the Camorra sanctioned stewardship by a foreign clan was Castel Volturno, which was given to the Rapaces, clans from Lagos and Benin City in Nigeria. This allowed them to traffic cocaine and women in sexual slavery before sending them across Europe.\nWaste crisis.\nSince the 1980s, the Camorra has taken over the handling of waste disposal in the region of Campania. By December 1999, all regional landfills had reached capacity. Reports in 2008 stated that the crisis was caused at least in part by the Camorra, which created a lucrative business in the municipal waste disposal business, mostly in the triangle of death. With the complicity of industrial companies, heavy metals, industrial waste, and chemicals and household waste are frequently mixed together, then dumped near roads and burned to avoid detection, leading to severe soil and air pollution.\nAccording to Giacomo D'Alisa et al., \"the situation worsened during this period as the Camorra diversified their illegal waste disposal strategy: 1) transporting and dumping hazardous waste in the countryside by truck; 2) dumping waste in illegal caves or holes; 3) mixing toxic waste with textiles to avoid explosions and then burning it; and 4) mixing toxic with urban waste for disposal in landfills and incinerators.\"\nA Camorra member, Nunzio Perella was arrested in 1992, and began collaborating with authorities; he had stated \"the rubbish is gold.\" The boss of the Casalesi clan, Gaetano Vassallo, admitted to systematically working for 20 years to bribe local politicians and officials to gain their acquiescence to dumping toxic waste.\nThe triangle of death and the waste management crisis is primarily a result of government failure to control illegal waste dumping. The government had attempted to mandate recycling and waste management programs, but were unable, causing the expansion of opportunities for illegal activities, which caused further barriers to solve the waste crisis.\nIn November 2013, a demonstration by tens of thousands of people was held in Naples in protest against the pollution caused by the Camorra's control of refuse disposal. Over a twenty-year period, it was alleged, about ten million tonnes of industrial waste had been illegally dumped, with cancers caused by pollution increasing by 40\u201347%.\nEfforts to fight the Camorra.\nThe Camorra has proven to be an extremely difficult organisation to fight within Italy. During the 1911\u201312 trial, Fabroni gave testimony on how complicated it was to successfully prosecute the Camorra: \"The Camorrist has no political ideals. He exploits the elections and the elected for gain. The leaders distribute bands throughout the town, and they have recoursed to violence to obtain the vote of the electors for the candidates whom they have determined to support. Those who refuse to vote as instructed are beaten, slashed with knives, or kidnapped. All this is done with assurance of impunity, as the Camorrists will have the protection of successful politicians, who realize that they cannot be chosen to office without paying toll to the Camorra.\"\nUnlike the Sicilian Mafia, which has a clear hierarchy and a division of interests, the Camorra's activities are much less centralised. This makes the organisation much more difficult to combat through crude repression. In Campania, where unemployment is high and opportunities are limited, the Camorra has become an integral part of the fabric of society. It offers a sense of community and provides the youth with jobs. Members are guided in the pursuit of criminal activities, including cigarette smuggling, drug trafficking, and theft.\nThe government has made an effort to combat the Camorra's criminal activities in Campania. The solution ultimately lies in Italy's ability to offer values, education and work opportunities to the next generation. However, the government has been hard pressed to find funds for promoting long-term reforms that are needed to improve the local economic outlook and create jobs. Instead, it has had to rely on limited law enforcement activity in an environment that has a long history of tolerance and acceptance of criminality and is governed by the omert\u00e0.\nDespite the overwhelming magnitude of the problem, law enforcement officials continue their pursuit. The Italian police are coordinating their efforts with Europol and Interpol to conduct special operations against the Camorra. The Carabinieri and the Financial Police (\"Guardia di Finanza\") are also fighting criminal activities related to tax evasion, border controls, and money laundering. Prefect Gennaro Monaco, Deputy Chief of Police and Chief of the Section of Criminal Police cites \"impressive results\" against the Camorra in recent years, yet the Camorra continues to grow in power.\nIn 1998, police took a leading Camorra figure into custody. Francesco Schiavone was caught hiding in a secret apartment near Naples behind a sliding wall of granite. The mayor of Naples, Antonio Bassolino, compared the arrest to that of Sicilian Mafia chief Salvatore Riina in 1993. Schiavone is now serving a life sentence after a criminal career which included arms trafficking, bomb attacks, armed robbery, and murder.\nMichele Zagaria, a senior member of the Casalesi clan, was arrested in 2011 after eluding police for 16 years. He was found in a secret bunker in the town Casapesenna, near Naples. In 2014, clan boss Mario Riccio was arrested for drug trafficking in the Naples area. Around the same time 29 suspected Camorra members were also arrested in Rome.\nThe arrests in the Campania region demonstrate that the police are not allowing the Camorra to operate without intervention. However, progress remains slow, and these minor victories have done little to loosen the Camorra's grip on Naples and the surrounding regions.\nIn 2008, Italian police arrested three members of the Camorra crime syndicate on 30 September 2008. According to Gianfrancesco Siazzu, commander of the Carabinieri police, the three were captured in small villas on the coast of Naples. All three had been on Italy's 100 top most wanted list. Police seized assets valued at over 100 million euros and also weapons, including two AK-47 assault rifles that may have been used in the shooting of six Africans on 18 September 2008. Police found pistols, Carabinieri uniforms and other outfits that were used to disguise members of the operation. During the same week, a separate operation netted 26 additional suspects in Caserta. All were believed to belong to the powerful Camorra crime syndicate that operates in and around Naples. The suspects were charged with extortion and weapons possession. In some cases, the charges also included murder and robbery. Giuseppina Nappa, the 48-year-old wife of a jailed crime boss, was among those arrested. She is believed to be the Camorra's local paymaster.\nThe Italian state confiscated \u20ac30\u00a0million including real estate in Luxembourg belonging to Angelo Grillo, a businessman from Marcianise, considered very close to the Belforte clan. Grillo also owned the company Lynch Invest SA based in the country. In the name of this company, he purchased real estate in Campania and Sardinia.\nIn November 2018, Italian police announced the arrest of Antonio Orlando, suspected of being a major figure in the Camorra.\nIn February 2019, Ciro Rinaldi, boss of the Rinaldi clan, was arrested in a house in the region of San Pietro a Patierno, he is accused of the double murder of Raffaele Cepparulo, member of a small gang linked to the Mazzarella clan, and Ciro Colonna, an innocent victim. Rinaldi is also considered responsible for the murder of Vincenzo De Bernardo, also linked to the Mazzarellas. At the time of his arrest, his clan was considered one of the most powerful clans of the Camorra, having all the eastern area of the city of Naples under its control and having as allies the Secondigliano Alliance. On 18 September 2019, Ciro Rinaldi was sentenced to life imprisonment, considered to be the mastermind behind the murders of Cepparulo and Colonna. According to the reports, Rinaldi reportedly ordered Cepparulo's death believing Cepparulo was planning to kill him to give \"pleasure\" to the Mazzarella clan, historical enemies of the Rinaldi clan.\nIn March 2019, Marco Di Lauro, the second most wanted man in Italy, was arrested after spending 14 years on the run. He is the fourth son of ex-Camorra boss Paolo Di Lauro. In 2010, an informant said that he was responsible for at least four murders.\nIn June 2019, the Italian police arrested more than 120 members of the Secondigliano Alliance, the alliance created by the Licciardi, Contini and Mallardo clans, in an \"anti-Camorra\" operation. The police also confiscated \u20ac130 million. Among those who were arrested were the wives of the bosses of the Bosti, Mallardo, Licciardi and Contini clans, but also their lieutenants, children, grandchildren and entrepreneurs who worked for the alliance. The historical female boss Maria Licciardi managed to escape from the arrest in the operation, and is now considered a fugitive. Seven members of the organization were arrested in Spain, Netherlands, South America and in the Balkans, places where they were running illicit business on behalf of the Alliance.\nOn 12 July 2019, the Italian police confiscated \u20ac300 million, including 600 houses, lands, 16 cars and bank accounts belonging to Antonio Passarelli, a businessman believed to be connected to the Di Lauro clan, Puca clan, Aversano clan, Mallardo clan, Verde clan, Perfetto clan and to the Scissionisti di Secondigliano.\nOn 10 August 2019, an operation of the police arrested six important members of the Rinaldi clan, particularly members of the Reale faction. They are accused of drug trafficking, extortion and illegal possession of weapons. The organization, once considered one of the most prominent, suffered hard blows in 2019, with the arrests of most of its leaders and important figures.\nOn 21 August 2019, Giuseppe Chirico, included in the list of the most dangerous fugitives in Italy, was arrested in the Ciampino airport, where he landed after a brief holiday abroad. Chirico is considered a prominent member of the Scarpa, linked to the powerful Gallo-Cavalieri clan from Torre Annunziata, dedicated in particular to international drug trafficking. He was wanted since January 2018 and was using a fake identity at the time of his arrest.\nOn 24 September 2019, the Italian police arrested Salvatore Ferro, step brother of Gaetano Beneduce, head of the historical Beneduce-Longobardi clan, based in Pozzuoli. Ferro, according to investigations, led the Ferro faction of the clan since the death of his brother Rosario Ferro, known as 'Capatosta, in 1998. Now he will serve two years and five months in prison.\nIn September 2019, Pasquale Puca, known as \u2018o minorenne, head of the Puca clan and nephew of Giuseppe Puca, was sentenced to life in prison. Puca is held responsible for the murder of Francesco Verde, known as \u2018o negus, then leader of the Verde clan, happened in 2007. Between the end of the 1980s and the 1990s, the Verde clan fought with the Puca and Ranucci clans, a clash to which numerous murders were attributed.\nIn October 2019, the Direzione Investigativa Antimafia seized \u20ac1.5 million belonging to Annalisa De Martino, the former partner of the boss Giuseppe Gallo. The Gallo clan has control over illegal activities such as extortion, drug trafficking and money laundering in the areas of Boscotrecase, Boscoreale and Torre Annunziata. De Martino was considered to be in charge of the financial management of the organization.\nOn 23 October 2019, the Italian police dismantled the Montescuro clan, arresting 23 important members of the organisation. The clan was headed by the elderly boss Carmine Montescuro, nicknamed \" 'Z\u00ec Menuzzo' \", a leader of remarkable criminal charisma, who for at least 20 years played the role of mediator in the wars between various clans. According to the investigations, due to his mediation skills, he was able to put the Missos, the Mazzarellas and the Continis at the same table when the war between their organisations was at its peak in the early 2000s. Montescuro also had a good relationship with Marco Mariano, boss of the Mariano clan in the 1990s. Despite his advanced age, the Court of Naples authorized his arrest and transfer to prison; however, after less than two weeks, he was transferred from jail to house arrest for health reasons. Montescuro was also known for his passion for gambling, and was often in Monte Carlo, where he reportedly spent large amounts of money.\nIn November 2019, Raffaele Romano, a prominent affiliate of the De Luca Bossa clan, decided to move to the side of the State, becoming a pentito. According to reports, the De Luca Bossa clan, now the most powerful clan of Ponticelli and of much of the Vesuvian area, could soon crumble under the declarations of the new pentito.\nOn 6 November 2019, the Carabinieri arrested Federico Rapprese, linked to the Rannucci clan and included in the list of the most dangerous fugitives. Rapprese was wanted since February 2018, accused of the attempted murder of Antonio Marrazzo, brother of the head of the Marazzo clan, happened in December 2006.\nOn 8 November 2019, Antonio Abbinante, considered the new boss of Scampia and the current head of the Abbinante clan, was arrested by the police. Abbinante was intercepted in Mugnano di Napoli along with two bodyguards.\nOn 11 November 2019, Marco Di Lauro was sentenced to life imprisonment, considered the mastermind behind the ambush in which Attilio Roman\u00f2, an innocent victim, was killed. The murder took place in January 2005, when the assassins of the Di Lauro clan mistook Roman\u00f2 for the nephew of the boss Rosario Pariante, one of the Scissionistis with whom the Di Lauro clan was at war.\nOn 12 November 2019, 20 members of the Cesarano clan were arrested, accused of Camorra association, extortion and drug trafficking. The organization is particularly active in Ponte Persica and Pompei. In May 2019, the police dismantled a scheme in which the clan had a privileged channel to the Netherlands, obtaining the monopoly on shipments of flowers, bulbs and pottery from the country.\nOn 11 December 2019, Giuseppe Polverino and Giuseppe Simioli, former leaders of the Polverino clan, were sentenced to life imprisonment. They were held responsible for the murder of Giuseppe Candela, which happened in July 2009. According to the investigations, Candela, who was a member of the clan, was killed because he was managing his business independently and no longer responding to the clan.\nIn February 2020, four members affiliated to the Rinaldi clan were arrested, among which are also Rita and Francesco Rinaldi, sons of the late boss of the clan, Antonio Rinaldi known as \"'O Giallo\" (killed in 1989), as well nephews of Ciro Rinaldi. They are accused of usury, extortion and attempted extortion with the aggravating circumstance of the mafia method.\nAlso in February 2020, the Guardia di Finanza seized a company that, according to the Antimafia, belonged to the Cesarano clan, from Castellammare di Stabia, and was headed by Antonio Martone and Giovanni Esposito, both in prison, and brothers-in-law of Luigi Di Martino, boss of the Cesarano clan. The purpose of this company was to stand between traders and carriers in order to impose the services and tariffs of the clan on them. The Guardia di Finanza estimated the turnover of the business was around \u20ac2 million.\nOn 17 March 2020, the Italian police arrested five members of the Aprea-Cuccaro clan accused of extortion and attempted extortion with aggravating circumstances. According to the investigators, the building contractors in the area of Barra, the clan's stronghold, victims of extortion by part of the clan, were summoned to the 'villa' of the boss Antonio Acanfora, also arrested in the operation and considered the current regent of the Aprea's wing inside the organizations. The current actions by members of the Aprea-Cuccaro clan would be an expression of the new criminal alliance formed with the De Luca Bossa clan and the Rinaldi clan in order to control the entire eastern territory of Naples.\nIn May 2020, a small group of drug dealers led by Anna Gallo, a 74-year-old woman, was overthrown by the Italian police in Torre Annunziata. Anna Gallo, known as \"ninnacchera\", is the widow of a local Camorra affiliate Ernesto Venditto, killed in an ambush in 1999. In the operation were arrested 22 people, including 9 women.\nAlso in May 2020, the Italian State confiscated \u20ac7 million to a businessman linked to the Zagaria's faction of the Casalesi clan. Among the seized goods were 25 bank accounts, eight companies, 18 commercial premises, 32 houses, seven garages and four plots of land. In the same week, authoritires confiscated more assets for a total value of over \u20ac22 million belonging to Vincenzo Zangrillo, another businessman linked to the Casalesi. In this operation were seized 200 vehicles, 21 hectares of land, six companies and 21 bank accounts. In the past, Zangrillo had been accused of international drug trafficking.\nOn 3 June 2020, the Italian police dismantled the monopoly of the drug market led by the D'Alessandro clan. According to the police the clan had the total control of the cocaine market in the Sorrento Peninsula, where they also sold drugs to wealthy businessmen. The D'Alessandro clan also used a network of brokers by which they accessed new supply channels, having contacts even with the Bellocco and Pesce 'ndrine, historical 'Ndrangheta groups from Rosarno in Calabria.\nIn June 2020, five Camorra affiliates were arrested in the Province of Naples, that operated between the cities of Nola and Saviano. According to the investigations, they were involved in public contracts in Saviano, such as in the redevelopment of the sewage system and in the management of the waste collection service. The group was also active in the drug market, supplying the local drug dealers.\nAfter months of investigations and joint activities of the Interpol, on 3 June 2020, the Italian government finally obtained the extradition of Salvatore Vittorio from Dominican Republic to Italy. Vittorio was considered the money launderer of the Contini clan in Santo Domingo. According to the Italian authorities, he is accused of mafia-type criminal association and money laundering.\nOn 5 June 2020, the Direzione Distrettuale Antimafia seized \u20ac10 million of assets from the Polverino clan. Among the seized assets were two villas, two garages, two warehouse-depots, six commercial premises, three plots of land, a school building and a nursery.\nOn 9 June 2020, a Senator of centre-right opposition Forza Italia party, Luigi Cesaro, was placed under investigation, after a police investigation that led to the arrest of 59 affiliates of Camorra clans based in the comune of Sant'Antimo, including three brothers of the politician. The Cesaro family is a well known family in Sant'Antimo, having vast businesses especially in the field of private health and affiliated with the National Health Service. According to the investigations, the Cesaros were involved in a scheme between entrepreneurs, municipal technicians, politicians and well-known representatives of the local organized crime, such as members of the Puca clan.\nOutside Italy.\nDespite its origins, it presently has secondary ramifications in other Italian regions, like Lazio, Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna and Piedmont in connection with the centres of national economic power. \nFrom the 1980s onwards, with its massive involvement in drug trafficking, the Camorra expanded its operations to other countries, particularly Spain. The organization established strong ties with international drug cartels, notably in South America, and began to use Spain and other countries as a key transit point for smuggling cocaine and other illicit substances into Europe. This expansion allowed the Camorra to strengthen its control over the European drug trade while also diversifying its criminal activities across the continent. In addition to drug trafficking, the Camorra has been notorious for its sophisticated money laundering operations. It uses legitimate businesses, such as restaurants, hotels, construction companies, and financial institutions, to clean the proceeds from their illegal activities. This web of money laundering extends globally, with the organization using international banking systems and offshore accounts to conceal and legitimize their earnings.\nFrance.\nThe Camorra has been present in France since the early 1980s. The locations with the biggest presence of the organization in the country are the French Riviera, Paris and Lyon. Their biggest objective in the country has always been to create contacts for drug trafficking but also money laundering.\nIn 1993, the Camorra and the Sicilian Mafia were accused of running a $1.5\u00a0billion operation to launder drug money through banks, insurance companies, hotels and casinos in Italy and on the French Riviera, arresting 36 suspects.\nPaolo Di Lauro funnelled the proceeds into real estate, buying dozens of flats in Naples, owning shops in France and the Netherlands, as well as businesses importing fur, fake fur and lingerie.\nIn 2014, Antonio Lo Russo, member of the powerful Lo Russo clan and considered the new regent of the clan, and his cousin Carlo Lo Russo were arrested by agents of National Gendarmerie Section de recherches and by Carabinieri when quietly in a bar in Nice. The clan is accused of extortion, drug trafficking and murder. According to the then Minister of the Interior of France, Bernard Cazeneuve, the arrest of Lo Russo was a hard blow for the organized crime in the country.\nIvory Coast.\nThe La Torre clan was known to launder money in the country with the help of the former chancellor of Salerno, Cesare Salomone.\nIn June 2019 the operation \"Spaghetti Connection\" dismantled an international drug network involving the Camorra and the 'Ndrangheta in Abidjan and Tabou. The police seized 1.19 tons of cocaine, with the value of \u20ac250 million in the European market. This operation was the third of its kind in Ivory Coast in less than three years, but the largest by its magnitude. Six Italians, one French and three Ivorians were arrested.\nAccording to Silvain Cou\u00e9, a French liaison officer, who participated of the operation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For 20 years, West Africa has become, if not a hub, a very important rebound zone for traffickers.This operation proves that if they thought that Ivory Coast and West Africa could be a sanctuary, they were wrong.\nThe drug trafficking in the country is said to contribute to the financing of the various jihadist groups in the Sahel, Africa.\nMorocco.\nGiuseppe Polverino, the leader of the Polverino clan before his arrest, was considered the 'hashish king', due to his monopoly on the importation of hashish from Morocco to Italy via Spain supplying not only all the Camorra clans, but also the 'Ndrangheta, the Sicilian Mafia and the Sacra Corona Unita. The Polverino clan had a monopoly of the hashish trade since 1992. According to one of the pentitos of the clan, Domenico Verde, the hashish was cultivated in the region of Ketama, and arrived by mules in the beginning, but later was modernized and accessible on trucks and cars.\nOn 18 March 2019 an Italian, suspected of being one of the leaders of the Mazzarella clan, was arrested in the Ourika region, near Marrakesh. He had a pursuant to a red notice issued against him by Interpol in January 2019.\nOn 29 May 2019 Raffaele Vallefuoco, an important member of the Polverino clan, was arrested in the Rabat region. Vallefuoco is considered one of the biggest drug traffickers in Italy and was included on the list of the 50 most wanted fugitives.\nNetherlands.\nAccording to Francesco Forgione, the former president of the Antimafia Commission, the Camorra is very active in gambling houses and money laundering in the Netherlands. The Camorra also uses the country to counterfeit clothes, and the clans most involved in this illegal activity are the Licciardi clan, the Di Lauro clan and the Sarno clan.\nAugusto La Torre, the former leader of the La Torre clan is suspected of having hid hundreds of millions of euros in Dutch banks, as the La Torre clan was very active in the country in the 1990s transporting large cocaine shipments from South America to Naples via the Netherlands.\nIn 1996, Raffaele Imperiale bought a coffee shop called Rockland Coffee in Amsterdam, where he sold soft drugs and was involved in large scale cocaine trafficking with the Dutch drug trader Rick van de Bunt. Imperiale worked in Amsterdam until 2008. In 2016, two stolen Van Gogh paintings from the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam in 2002 were recovered in a villa near Naples, connected to Raffaele Imperiale, accused of being one of the Camorra's prolific drug barons. Imperiale was sentenced to 18 years \"in absentia\" for drug offenses. After fleeing the Netherlands to Dubai, he had been seen in the Burj Al Arab hotel.\nOn 27 November 2019, the DIA with the support of the Dutch police arrested Alfredo Marfella, a drug trafficker working for Camorra clans, in The Hague. Marfella is believed to have played a coordinating role in the drug trade from the Netherlands to Italy.\nIn December 2019, the Dutch police arrested in The Hague, Dario Pasutto, a businessman suspected of smuggling thousands of kilos of cocaine and tens of thousands of kilos of hashish from the Netherlands to Italy. According to the Dutch press, the suspect is a well-known flamboyant entrepreneur, and for many years a Camorra affiliate. The arrest of Pasutto is related to the arrests made by the Italian police in Naples in the same week against a group of drug traffickers that were smuggling cocaine from Colombia to the city of Naples with the help of Camorra clans.\nPeru.\nAs Peru is one of the largest cocaine producers in the world, the Camorra's interest in the country is entirely related to the drug trafficking.\nIn the 1980s, Umberto Ammaturo, a Camorra affiliate, established a virtual monopoly of cocaine trafficking to Italy from Peru, where he benefited from the protection and collusion of important personalities. According to the US DEA, due to his trafficking activities, Ammaturo was one of the chief financiers of the Shining Path guerrilla movement in Peru.\nOne of the leaders of the Mazzarella clan, Salvatore Zazo, was allegedly involved in a large scheme of international cocaine trafficking from Peru to Europe, with the intention to acquire total control of the Port of Callao; one of his contacts was Gerald Oropeza, one of the biggest drug traffickers in Peru.\nAccording to the DEA, Zazo would manage more than U$500\u00a0million per year in shipments of cocaine through the ports of the country to Europe.\nA 2021 report made by Ra\u00fal Del Castillo, general of the National Police of Peru, stressed that Europe is today the main destination of Peruvian cocaine, specifying also that Camorra clans are among the international criminal organizations that have their emissaries \"working\" in Peru.\nThe notorious \"super cartel\" headed by Raffaele Imperiale, one of the major drug traffickers of the Camorra, had a virtual monopoly of the Peruvian cocaine trade, in which the drugs were distributed throughout Europe.\nRomania.\nCamorra clans in Romania deal in money laundering. In 2017, Gaetano Manzo, the accountant of the Sacco-Bocchetti clan, was arrested in his villa in Fize\u0219u Gherlii.\nThe Sacco-Bocchetti clan is a subgroup of the Licciardi clan and Manzo took care of the accounting of the clan, and often supervised the supply of drugs from abroad.\nIn 2018, Nicola Inquieto, an Italian businessman with strong ties to Michele Zagaria one of the leaders of the powerful Casalesi clan, was arrested in Romania. Inquieto has built hundreds of apartments through his companies and owns the most modern spa in Arge\u0219 County. The prosecutors have also seized 400 apartments in Pite\u0219ti belonging to his companies. His businesses in the country are valued at several million euros.\nOn 19 October 2019, Vincenzo Inquieto, right-hand man of Michele Zagaria and brother of Nicola Inquieto, was arrested in the Naples International Airport after returning from Bucharest. According to the Romanian media, since the arrest of his brother Nicola, Vincenzo lived permanently in the country, returning rarely to Italy. And was reportedly taking charge of the vast business the Casalesi clan, particularly the Zagaria's faction, held in Romania.\nSpain.\nAccording to the journalist Roberto Saviano, Spain (after Italy) is the country most entwined with the Camorra. It is where the Camorra clans established its massive businesses revolving around drug trafficking and money laundering in real estate.\nCamorra has been in Spain since the 1980s. The most powerful clan acting in the country is the Polverino clan due to the number of people they have installed and because of the potential of their structure. They have influence in the cities of Alicante, Tarragona, M\u00e1laga and C\u00e1diz.\nAccording to the Italian antimafia police, in recent times, the Camorra clans based in Spain have accumulated \u20ac700\u00a0million as a result of drug trafficking and money laundering in the country.\nThe presence of the organization in the Costa del Sol is so strong that Camorra bosses refer to it as \"Costa Nostra\"' (\"Our Coast\"), according to Italian journalist Roberto Saviano, a specialist on the Naples criminal underworld.\nAnother clan with influence in Spain is the Scissionisti di Secondigliano led by Raffaele Amato nicknamed Lo Spagnolo (the Spaniard), because before creating his own clan, he controlled the drug trafficking operation from Galicia to Naples for the Di Lauro clan. Amato was arrested as he left a casino in Barcelona in 2005.\nThe drug trafficker Pasquale Brunese was arrested in Valencia in 2015, after seven years hiding from the Italian police. He was a member of the De Luca Bossa clan, for whom he worked in the drug trade. In Spain, Brunese owned a restaurant and was living with a false name.\nIn February 2019, the Spanish police arrested 14 members of the notorious Marranella clan. According to the Guardia Civil, the clan is one of the most important and violent criminal organizations dedicated to the international drug trade and is based in the Costa del Sol.\nAlfredo Barasso, linked to the bloodthirsty Casalesi boss Giuseppe Setola, was arrested in Valencia and extradited to Italy. Barasso was a \"bridge\" between Italy and Spain, working for the Casalesi clan in the drugs management in the Barcelona area. After his decision to become a pentito, and afraid of retaliation by the Camorra, Barasso would be willing to return to Spain, where he has wife and children, and pay his penalty there, as provided by the bilateral agreements between the two countries.\nAccording to a 2019 documentary of the Spanish television, Barcelona is the nerve center of the organization outside Italy, exposing the endless business of the Camorra in Catalonia, from the massive drug trafficking to the laundering of huge amounts of money in restaurants, clubs and hotels of the region. The documentary also features an interview with Maurizio Prestieri, former member of the Di Lauro clan arrested in Marbella in 2003 and now pentito, who said that Spain is the favorite place for the \"camorristi.\"\nAlso in 2019, relatives of top members belonging to the Polverino clan claim three million euros to the Spanish State of compensation after their relatives were acquitted by the National Court of the crime of money laundering for which they were arrested in 2013 and tried in 2016. Among the assets seized were six yachts, two Ferrari Testarossa, one Lamborghini, one Harley-Davidson, bank accounts and real estate. The plaintiffs are all relatives of the late Giuseppe Felaco, who was allegedly an important member of the Polverino clan based in the Canary Islands, they assure that this Spanish police operation against their family has been a great economic damage, apart from a moral damage.\nOn 20 November 2019, the Italian police with the cooperation of the Spanish police, arrested two members of the Polverino clan, who belonged to a major transnational organizational structure, created by the Polverinos, based in Valencia and Naples, that between 2001 and 2012 imported hashish from Morocco via Spain to arrive in the Campania region.\nSwitzerland.\nThe Camorra has had a presence in Switzerland for more than 50 years, undertaking money laundering but also arms trafficking and drug trafficking. The Casalesi clan is present throughout the country, and according to the investigations into the clan, it has numerous Swiss bank accounts.\nIn 1992, Ciro Mazzarella, the late boss of the Mazzarella clan, decided to move to Switzerland, after losing a war between Camorra clans in Naples. From his logistics base in Lugano, he created an enviable economic empire with cigarette smuggling that arrived from Montenegro.\nIn 2017, assets worth \u20ac20\u00a0million belonging to the Potenza brothers, who are considered to be linked to the Lo Russo clan, were seized in Lugano, including bank accounts in BSI.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAccording to 2020 reports about the Camorra, the United Kingdom is an area of interest to launder money, using finance companies and business activities. The Casalesi clan, through an entrepreneur and alleged financial intermediary, had invested 12 million euros using various companies based in Great Britain.\nAntonio Righi, called \"Tonino il biondo\", was considered by the investigators as a money laudererer on behalf of the Contini and Mazzarella clans in London. Although the two organizations are historically rivals, in England they were represented by the same man. Among the British companies that figured in his scheme, was one registered at a luxurious terraced house not far from Oxford Street in London's West End. The trial built against Righi clearly showed that he understood exactly how modern global finance works. The Italian police confiscated 250 million euros belonging to Righi.\nBetween the mid-1980s and early 2000s, Scotland has had its brush with the Camorra, when Antonio La Torre of Aberdeen was the local \"Boss\". He is the brother of Camorra boss Augusto La Torre of the La Torre clan which had its base in Mondragone, Caserta. The La Torre Clan's empire was worth hundreds of millions of euros. Antonio had several legitimate businesses in Aberdeen, whereas his brother Augusto had several illegal businesses there. Augusto would eventually become a pentito in January 2003. Antonio was convicted in Scotland and extradited to Italy in 2006 to serve a 13-year sentence; he was released in 2014. With the fall of the La Torre clan in the 2000s, Scotland experienced the disappearance of Camorra in the country, in fact the La Torre clan was overthrown in all the countries it had a massive presence, such as in Italy and in the Netherlands.\nUnited States.\nThe Camorra operated in the United States, primarily in New York City, between the mid-19th century and early 20th century. They rivaled the now defunct Morello crime family for power in New York City. Eventually, they melded with early Italian-American Mafia groups.\nIn the 1980s, many Camorra members and associates fled the internecine gang warfare and Italian justice, which was directed at suppressing the groups, and immigrated to the United States. According to the FBI, it is believed that nearly 200 Camorra affiliates operate in the country. Although they did not appear to recreate their clan structure in the United States, Camorra members have established a presence in Los Angeles, New York City, and Springfield, Massachusetts. The US law enforcement considers the Camorra to be a rising criminal enterprise, especially dangerous because of its ability to adapt to new trends and forge new alliances with other criminal organizations.\nIn 2012, the Obama administration imposed sanctions on the Camorra as one of four key transnational organized crime groups, along with the Brothers' Circle from Russia, the Yamaguchi-gumi (Japan's largest yakuza organization), and Los Zetas from Mexico.\nAlliances with other criminal groups.\nCamorra-'Ndrangheta.\nAccording to the media, there have always been alliances between the Camorra and the 'Ndrangheta members. On 26 August 1976, Domenico Tripodo, a powerful 'Ndrangheta boss of the time, was stabbed to death in prison on the request of the De Stefano 'ndrina, and with the help of Camorra boss Raffaele Cutolo, the boss of the Nuova Camorra Organizzata (NCO) who worked with the De Stefano's in drug trafficking.\nThe Tamanaco operation that ended on 22 June 2010, destroyed a drug trafficking operation managed by the La Torre clan from Mondragone and the Barbaro 'ndrina from Plat\u00ec. The operation consisted in transporting the drugs from Venezuela and Colombia, through several European ports including the port of Amsterdam. At the port of Livorno, 700 kilos of cocaine were seized.\nOn 11 May 2016, a criminal alliance between the Sinti criminal organization Casamonica clan, members of the Camorra, and affiliates from the 'Ndrangheta's of Polistena, Taurianova and Melicucco was dismantled by the police. \u20ac25\u00a0million were seized.\nOn 21 March 2018, 19 arrests were made in Rome of alleged members belonging to the Licciardi clan of the Camorra and members of the Filippone 'ndrina and Gallico 'ndrina accused of drug trafficking.\nIn 2019, investigations of the Italian police reveals links between the Contini clan and the Crupi brothers, members of the powerful Commisso 'ndrina. Both organizations are reportedly cooperating in the drug trafficking business.\nCamorra-Cosa Nostra.\nSeveral Camorra clans have lasting relationships with the Cosa Nostra. Prominent elements of the Mafia such as Salvatore Riina, Leoluca Bagarella, Luciano Leggio and Bernardo Provenzano found themselves in contact with Camorra clans such as the Nuvoletta clan, members of the Camorra such as Michele Zaza and Antonio Bardellino, and with other groups that formed the Nuova Famiglia confederation in the 1980s.\nIn the past, the Russo clan had links with the Mafia, particularly in the 1980s and 1990s, at the time of the Corleonesi Mafia era.\nIn 2019, the Direzione Investigativa Antimafia of Catania dismantled a scheme between the Camorra's Mallardo clan and Casalesi clan and members of the powerful Catania Mafia family, led by Vincenzo Enrico Augusto Ercolano, son of Giuseppe Ercolano (deceased, but once an important member of the Catania's mafia) and Grazia Santapaola, the sister of the historical boss Benedetto Santapaola. The DIA also confiscated \u20ac10 million in the operation.\nAccording to the pentito Domenico Verde, the Polverino clan has a good relationship with the Cosa Nostra families from Palermo, in particular thanks to the drug trafficking business.\nCamorra-Sacra Corona Unita.\nIn 1981, Raffaele Cutolo, entrusted Pino Iannelli and Alessandro Fusco the task of founding an organization in Apulia to be directly controlled by the Nuova Camorra Organizzata, the organization was named Nuova Camorra Pugliese, later called Sacra Corona Unita. This organization operated in various cities of Apulia during the 1980s. But with the downfall of Cutolo, the organisation was no longer a subgroup of the Camorra and was under the leadership of Giuseppe Rogoli.\nAccording to the pentito Antonio Accurso, the Di Lauro clan has several links to the Sacra Corona Unita in question with regards to drug trafficking.\nCamorra-Societ\u00e0 foggiana.\nIn September 2019, the Italian police dismantled an international drug trafficking alliance between the powerful Gionta clan of the Camorra, the Societ\u00e0 foggiana, also known as the fifth-mafia, and Moroccan drug traffickers. The investigation started in 2016 against a Maghreb gang based in the region of Trentino-Alto Adige. The vast network of drug traffickers, extended from Morocco, passing through Spain, Switzerland and the Netherlands to finally arrive in Trentino and in Bolzano. Arriving in Italy, the drugs were sold in parks, historic centers and near schools by mainly Tunisian and Moroccan pushers. Nineteen people were arrested, four are still wanted in Italy, Spain and in the Netherlands and seventy-three are under investigation. The operation seized over 1 ton of hashish and 2\u00a0kg of cocaine.\nCamorra-South American drug cartels.\nThe links between the South American drug cartels and Camorra clans dates back to at least the 1980s, having stabilized numerous privileged drug channels from South America to Europe over the years.\nAccording to investigations, the Camorra member Tommaso Iacomino allegedly negotiated with the head of Peruvian and Colombian drug cartels over the cocaine trade.\nGiuseppe Gallo called \" 'o pazz\" (the crazy one), boss of the Limelli-Vangone clan, is said to having contacts with Colombian drug traffickers able to reach agreements for the purchase of large quantities of cocaine, supplying various clans in the Naples area.\nIn 2016, Salvatore Iavarone, a broker in South America representing the Tamarisco clan from Torre Annunziata, was arrested in Ecuador. Iavarone is believed to be the main link for the shipment of narcotics from Ecuador to Europe. Other 28 members were arrested during this operation. The police also confiscated \u20ac11\u00a0million that belonged to Iavarone in Ecuador.\nOn 4 July 2019, the \"Guardia di Finanza\" seized 538\u00a0kg of cocaine, worth \u20ac200 million, destined for the Camorra in the port of Genoa. According to the reports, the drug was found in 19 bags inside a container that arrived from Colombia. On each of the loaves was a fake \u20ac500 note, a symbol known to be that of a new Colombian cartel born of the merger of several other cartels. The container was headed to Naples but was intercepted at the port of Genoa.\nOn 18 December 2019, the Italian police arrested 12 people, including members of an international drug cartel dedicated to the drug trafficking between Colombia and Italy. According to the investigations, the cocaine brought from Colombia was pure and of high quality, and when it arrived in Italy, it was sold at a \"retail\" price of 200 euros per gram, all the scheme was managed by Camorra members. Among those arrested in the operation was Salvatore Nurcaro, a well known member of the Rinaldi clan.\nCamorra-Albanian mafia.\nAccording to the Direzione Investigativa Antimafia, the Albanian mafia has alliances with the Mazzarella clan and with the Scissionisti di Secondigliano, both from Naples and with the Serino clan, from Salerno.\nSaviano spoke of the Albanian mafia as a \"no longer foreign mafia\" to Italy and stressed that the Albanians and Italians have a \"brotherly\" relationship with each other. Saviano notes that the Camorra feels great affinity with the Albanian crime families because both organizations are based on family ties.\nCamorra-Chinese Triads.\nAccording to the expert on terrorist organizations and mafia-type organized crime Antonio De Bonis, there is a close relationship between the Triads and the Camorra, and the port of Naples is the most important landing point of the trades managed by the Chinese groups in cooperation with the Camorra. Among the illegal activities in which the two criminal organizations work together are the human trafficking and illegal immigration aimed at the sexual and labour exploitation of the Chinese compatriots into Italy, the synthetics drug trafficking and the laundering of illicit money through the purchase of real estate.\nIn 2017, investigators discovered a scheme between the Camorra and the Chinese gangs. They exported industrial waste from Italy to China that guaranteed million-dollar revenues for both organizations. The industrial waste left Prato in Italy and arrived in Hong Kong. Among the Camorra clans involved in this alliance were the Casalesi clan, the Fabbrocino clan and the Ascione clan.\nCamorra-Nigerian gangs.\nIn the beginning, Nigerian immigrants to Italy were not tolerated by the Camorra, but in the 2010s Nigerians and the Camorra began making alliances. Cooperation between the Camorra and Nigerian mafia is mainly in the areas of drug trafficking and prostitution. In particular, Camorra members have allowed the Nigerian gangs to organize the trafficking of women in their territory in exchange for a share on the earnings. The Nigerian mafia produces synthetic drugs independently and sells them with the consent of the Camorra. This alliance, however, may not be stable in the future, as the Nigerians have asked to be treated on par with other Italian mafias, for the fact that they are growing both as a military and as an economic force.\nCamorra-Islamic State.\nAccording to numerous articles, the Camorra may be in alliance with the Islamic State. The allegations reached the media after the Italian police seized 14 tonnes of amphetamines produced in Syria by the Islamic State, on July 1, 2020. It is considered the world's largest seizure of amphetamines, with a value of over \u20ac1 billion. Camorra clans reportedly bring the drugs to Italy and take a huge cut for helping to distribute them. According to the investigations, the production of these drugs provides the terrorist group (ISIS) with vital revenue for its militant activities.\nOther alliances.\nIn 1995, the Camorra cooperated with the Russian Mafia in a scheme in which the Camorra would bleach out US$1 bills and reprint them as $100s. These bills would then be transported to the Russian Mafia for distribution in 29 post-Eastern Bloc countries and former Soviet republics. In return, the Russian Mafia paid the Camorra with property (including a Russian bank) and firearms, smuggled into Eastern Europe and Italy.\nIn the 2000s, the Ukrainian mafia cooperated with Camorra clans in the cigarette smuggling business. The Ukrainians would smuggle the cigarettes from Ukraine and Eastern Europe into Italy, where with the help of the Camorra it supplies the Neapolitan market. In recent years, the Contini clan is said to have cooperated in the same scheme with the Ukrainians.\nIn March 2019, a massive international arms trafficking ring was dismantled by the authorities of Italy and Austria and coordinated by Eurojust.\nAccording to the investigations, the alliance between the Camorra and the Austrians lasted for seven years, until the police dismantled the scheme.\nThe Austrians are known to have sold more than 800 new pistols to the Camorra as well as 50 Kalashnikovs and 10 'Scorpion' sub-machine guns, worth a total of \u20ac500,000.\nAccording to Gerhard Jarosch, the National Member for Austria at Eurojust:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I dont know any cases, which are so big and where so many weapons have been sold. The new owners are also not \"juvenile guarantors\" but several members of the Camorra, one of the most dangerous criminal organizations in Europe.\nThe weapons are believed to have come originally from Eastern Europe taken to Carinthia in Austria with the objective to arrive in Terzigno near Naples. On 15 October 2019, father, 73, and son, 47, were convicted in the Court of Klagenfurt to serve 24 and 20 months respectively in jail.\nDEA documents sent to the Dutch police exposed what would be a super drug cartel headed by Raffaele Imperiale (Camorra's drugs and arms dealer), Ridouan Taghi (former Dutch most wanted criminal, now in jail), Daniel Kinahan (Irish drug trafficker) and Edin G. (Bosnian drug trafficker). The group was observed by the DEA having meetings in the Burj Al Arab hotel in Dubai, which is the base of the alleged cartel. The meetings took place in 2017; however, it only reached the Dutch media in October 2019. The DEA regards this as one of the world's fifty largest drug cartels, with a virtually monopoly of the Peruvian cocaine and controlled around a third of the cocaine trade in Europe. Yet, according to the DEA documents, the destination for all the drugs shipments were Dutch ports.\nIn 2005, it was alleged the Camorra created safe houses, forged documents, firearms, and explosives to Al-Qaeda in return for narcotics, which are brought into Italy via the Adriatic Sea.\nCurrent status.\nWith most of the old Camorra clans decapitated, and their bosses either dead or arrested, the organization is experiencing a rise in youth criminal gangs trying to take their places. This phenomenon is called \"Paranza\", Camorra terminology for a criminal group led by youngsters or \"small fish\". Whilst the older bosses often operated out of the limelight, these young criminals broadcast their exploits on social media, posing in designer clothes and with \u20ac200 bottles of champagne.\nIn 2015, 19 year-old Emanuele Sibillo, considered one of the first young and leading bosses of this new generation, was shot dead by a rival baby gang. Most of these young criminals are children of Camorra members that are currently in jail.\nAccording to Felia Allum, author of book \"The Invisible Camorra: Neapolitan Crime Families across Europe\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We can clearly see the baby gangs are criminals, or people who want to have criminal careers. But there's a vacuum, because the traditional families have lost their leaders. In the centre of Naples the bosses are either in prison or they've become state witnesses, so there's this kind of space for younger kids to appear. They're 17 or 18 with criminal ambition, and they've got a sense of identity of what they want to do.\nHowever, according to Peppe Misso, called \"\u2019o nasone\", former boss of the Misso clan for over 40 years and now pentito, this young generation of criminals are managed by the \"real\" Camorra clans, shifting the public attention to these baby gangs while they do their business in silence. According to Misso, the real power of the organization is now in the hands of the Licciardi clan, Mallardo clan, Moccia clan and Contini clan.\nOn 2 September 2018, Ciro Mazzarella, one of the last historical godfathers of the Camorra, and head of the Mazzarella clan, died in his villa in the affluent neighbourhood of Posillipo, Naples, at the age of 78.\nAccording to reports, in 2019, after the arrest of Marco Di Lauro, leader of the Di Lauro clan and fourth son of Paolo Di Lauro, the Contini clan became the most powerful clan of the Camorra, thanks to no internal split, and not having affiliates that became collaborators of justice. The clan is present in the drugs trafficking, extortion, betting and counterfeiting, also investing hundreds of millions of euros in various countries of Europe.\nOn 23 April 2019, the powerful boss Mario Fabbrocino, leader of the Fabbrocino clan, died in the hospital of the Parma prison, where he was serving a life sentence for ordering the murder of Roberto Cutolo, Raffaele Cutolo's only son, in 1990. He was known as the \"boss dei due mondi\" (boss of two worlds) due to his drug trafficking connections in South America.\nSince 26 June 2019, Maria Licciardi was considered the most wanted fugitive belonging to the Camorra, after she managed to escape the huge police operation against her clan. However, on 12 July 2019, the Court of Naples annulled the preventive detention against Licciardi, sharing the legal questions raised by her lawyer, Dario Vannetiello. She was arrested again at Rome's Ciampino airport by Carabinieri on the orders of Naples prosecutors, alleged to have been running extortion rackets as head of the Licciardi Camorra clan, on 7 August 2021 when attempting to travel to Spain.\nOn 11 July 2019, Anna Terracciano, known as \"\u2018a Masculona\", boss of the Terracciano clan, died after suffering from an unknown illness. Terraciano had taken control of the clan after the death of her brother Salvatore, known as \"\u2018o Nirone\", in 2016. She has always been very feared and respected for her impetuous nature. According to the media, she is the figure that has well represented the image of the women inside the Camorra, the female symbol of leadership when men are detained or dead.\nAccording to the reports of the DIA about the Camorra, the Mazzarella clan, despite the bloody war against the Rinaldi clan, is still one of the most powerful organizations in Campania, dominating the territory in various neighbourhoods, and having numerous groups under their influence, as the Ferraiuolo clan.\nAfter a time inactive, the De Luca Bossa clan is believed to be gaining power again in the eastern area of Naples, specifically in Ponticelli, thanks to the merger with emergent groups as the Minichini and Schisa. The clan was founded by Antonio De Luca Bossa, known as \"\u2018O sicco\", in the 1990s, and was famous for the bloody war against the once powerful Sarno clan. In 1998, \"\u2018O sicco\" made the first attack with a car bomb in the Camorra's history, killing Luigi Amitrano, the nephew of the boss Vincenzo Sarno, the real target of the ambush. Antonio's father was a member of the Nuova Camorra Organizzata, and died from natural causes in 2008 after 18 years in jail.\nOn 11 September 2019, Antonino Di Lorenzo, known as \"o' lignammone\", was killed in an ambush near his house in Casola di Napoli. Di Lorenzo was a notorious drug trafficker, dubbed by the media 'the king of drug trafficking in the Monti Lattari region'. According to the Direzione Investigativa Antimafia, he was specialized in the industrial production of marijuana, flooding the illegal drug market, supplying market squares from Castellammare di Stabia to Sorrento and in recent years was at the center of numerous investigations about drug trafficking. His murder is believed to be connected with the feud for control of vast marijuana plantations in the mountainous area of Monti Lattari. Yet, according to the investigations, the killing happened thanks to the 'permission' of the clans from Castellammare di Stabia, who have always supervised the immensely lucrative marijuana trade from the region.\nOn 30 October 2019, the release of two affiliates belonging to the Beneduce-Longobardi clan made the media headlines after they were received with a huge party in the neighborhood of Monterusciello, Pozzuoli. Giovanni Illiano, 48, and Silvio De Luca, 41, were released after 8 years and 10 years in prison, respectively. More than a hundred of relatives and friends were waiting for them for a party with champagne, flashing nightclub lights, a large fireworks display and a concert of Anthony, a well known neomelodic singer of the area. The fact, documented with photos and videos sent through social networks, caused outrage in the population, and is being investigated by the Italian Police, as it was not authorized by the Municipality of Pozzuoli or by the police.\nOn 21 November 2019, Feliciano Mallardo, brother of Giuseppe and Francesco Mallardo, was found dead inside his car. According to the investigations, he would have suffered a heart attack. Feliciano, who had taken the reins of the Mallardo clan after his brothers ended up in jail, was known as \u2018\"o Sfregiato.\"\nAccording to numerous 2019 reports, the most powerful clans of the Camorra are the Secondigliano Alliance and the Mazzarella clan. Both clans remain with full dominance of their territories while most of city experiences the growth of small and violent gangs headed by young guys between 17 and 25 years old.\nIn May 2020, Patrizio Bosti, one of the most powerful Camorra bosses who is still alive and one of the leaders of the Secondigliano Alliance, was released from prison. Bosti also claimed inhumane treatment while in prison, and will be compensated by the Italian state. The Camorra boss, that was serving a prison sentence since his arrest in Spain in 2008, should have been released from prison in 2023, however he was charged for three years and the halfway between early release and the time calculated as credit for the \"inhuman treatment\". On May 16, 2020, Bosti was rearrested. The new prison order concerns a recalculation of the sentence by the Emilia-Romagna judiciary, as he was serving his sentence in the region, on the basis of documents provided by the Naples Public Prosecutor. According to the authorities, Bosti has to serve another six years in jail.\nIn June 2022, the notorious Camorra boss Cosimo Di Lauro died in prison. Di Lauro was considered an icon of the Camorra, a ruthless criminal who has become a role model for young people for his look and the storytelling about him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44946", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44946", "title": "Sacra Corona Unita", "text": "Criminal mafia-type organization\n (; ; acronym: SCU), also known as the Fourth Mafia, is a Mafia-type criminal organization from the Apulia region in Southern Italy, and it is especially active in the areas of Brindisi, Lecce, and Taranto.\nOrigin of the name.\nInformer Cosimo Capodieci said the SCU used \"\"Sacra\" (Sacred) because at the time of the affiliation the new member is \"baptized\", the \"Corona\" because it resembles a crown, meaning the rosary typically used in Church in order to carry out the functions of Jesus Christ and the cross, \"Unita\" because it was necessary to be connected to one another, similar to the rings of a chain.\"\nHistory.\nSacra Corona Unita was formed in the late 1970s and early 1980s and was formally established in a prison in 1983, according to a document found by investigators in the cell of the organisation's founder, Pino Rogoli. The Sacra Corona Unita was created to counter the overwhelming power in the prisons and on the Apulian territory of some of the more established mafia organisations, such as the Campania families united in Raffaele Cutolo's Nuova Camorra Organizzata.\nAccording to one account of Rogoli's rise to leadership, the foundations of Sacra Corona Unita were laid by Rogoli on Christmas night 1981. At the time, Rogoli was a 32-year-old tiler from Mesagnese who was serving a sentence in Trani prison for a bank robbery and murder in Giovinazzo in 1980. In prison, Rogoli had come into contact with exponents of the 'ndrangheta. and had affiliated himself with Umberto Bellocco, capobastone and founder of the Bellocco 'ndrina. Together with Vincenzo Stranieri of Manduria and Mario Papalia, linked to Cosa Nostra, Rogoli set up the Sacra Corona Unita, whose structure and rituals closely resembled that of the 'ndrangheta, and was officially sanctioned as the supreme head of the newly formed organisation. However, the \"Statuto della S.C.U.\" (charter of the Sacra Corona Unita) seized from Rogoli by the Italian law enforcement agencies in 1984 states that the organisation was established on 1 May 1983. \nUnder Rogoli's leadership, the Sacra Corona Unita mixed Apulian interests and opportunities with 'Ndrangheta and Camorra traditions. While it is often referred to as the \"fourth mafia\", it remained only a loose association of some ten to fifteen criminal groups in southern Apulia, whose cohesion, stability and economic and political power were always far inferior to those of the 'Ndrangheta and the Mafia. After the defection of some of its leaders and the arrest of most of its members in the early 2000s, Sacra Corona Unita no longer exists as a single, viable organisation.\nActivities.\nOriginally preying on the region's substantial wine and olive oil industries, the group moved into cigarette smuggling, arms trafficking, drug trafficking, human trafficking, money laundering, extortion, and political corruption.\nAccording to a survey conducted by the \"Eurispes\" the main sources of income of the organization are:\nStructure.\nThe SCU is made up of three distinct groupings or levels. Members can 'graduate' from one level to the next by going through \"riti battesimali\" (baptismal rites). The religious symbolism is probably left over from the SCU's association with the Camorra.\nThe Sacra Corona Unita consists of about 50 clans with approximately 2,000 members and specializes in smuggling cigarettes, drugs, arms, and people. The Sacra Corona Unita collects payoffs from other criminal groups for landing rights on the southeast coast of Italy.\nThe SCU uses a hierarchical structure when running its organization, and the higher you climb the more responsibility and money you gain. Men are the predominant rulers of the group. In recent years, the SCU has been finding ways to exploit people online by scamming and hacking individuals for money. This money is then laundered into countries across Europe, such as the U.K., Spain, and Germany.\nPresence outside Apulia.\nThe Sacra Corona Unita has the Apulian region as their main territory, however, they are known to have a presence in other parts of Italy, especially in Modena, Mantua, and Reggio Emilia. Outside Italy, the organization has a presence in Albania, Spain, Germany, United States and the United Kingdom.\nWith the decreasing importance of the Adriatic corridor as a smuggling channel as the situation in the Balkans normalises, and a series of successful police and judicial operations against it in recent years, the Sacra Corona Unita has been reduced to a fraction of its former power, which peaked around the mid-1990s.\nAlliances of Sacra Corona Unita.\n'Ndrangheta.\nGiuseppe Rogoli, one of the founders of the SCU, was an affiliate of the 'Ndrangheta in Apulia, even before the creation of the Sacra Corona Unita.\nThe SCU, after Cutolo's downfall, can be considered an offshoot of the 'Ndrangheta in the region, due to Rogoli asked for the permission of the Capobastone Umberto Bellocco to create an \"Apulian 'Ndrangheta\", which becomes the today's Sacra Corona Unita.\nOn 13 November 2017, the operation Lampo ended, lasting three years and started from the Sant'Anna operation, which arrested 10 alleged affiliates of the SCU and its alleged head Cataldo Caporosso operating in Massafra, Statte, Palagiano and in the Tamburi district of Taranto. The coterie had entered the fish and local cocaine market. The criminal activities of the criminal association would always have been endorsed by the 'Ndrangheta boss Umberto Bellocco who, after 21 years in prison, would have met the Sacra Corona Unita member Cataldo Caporosso and conferred on him the dowry of \"padrino\".\nOn 14 November 2018, the operation Galassia of the Guardia di Finanza ended, in which the presumed member of the Pesce-Bellocco 'ndrina, Antonio Zungri, some members of the Tegano 'ndrina and perhaps of the Piromalli 'ndrina together with the Camorra and Sacra Corona Unita's Capriati and Parisi clans were illegally included in the commercial network of the online betting companies \"Planetwin365\", \"Betaland\", \"Enjoybet\" and \"Planetwin\". The Apulian clans set up its own foreign bookmaker with interests and projections in Brazil, Colombia, Nigeria, Romania, Vietnam, Panama, Paraguay, Argentina and Russia. In this operation were seized assets worth over \u20ac1 billion, while over 80 searches have been carried out throughout Italy.\nCamorra.\nAlthough the first structured criminal organization in Apulia was created by the Nuova Camorra Organizzata, preceding the SCU, the Apulian underworld frowned upon their region being dominated by an outside organization. Taking advantage of the downfall of Raffaele Cutolo, the local criminals distanced themselves of the Camorra and get more aligned to the 'Ndrangheta.\nHowever, according to the pentito Antonio Accurso, the Camorra's Di Lauro clan has several links to the Sacra Corona Unita in question with regards to drug trafficking.\nBalkan organizations.\nThe Apulian mafias have long been rooted in Albania, a neighbouring country where the Italian language is widespread. The Albanian mafia collaborates with the SCU to make Albania a sorting centre for large amounts of smuggled cigarettes, and drugs from Afghanistan, much of which enter Italy through the coasts of Montenegro, Croatia and Albania. On 27 July 1999 police in Durr\u00ebs (Albania), with Italian assistance, arrested one of the godfathers of the Sacra Corona Unita. This Albanian link seems to confirm that the Sacra Corona Unita and the Albanian mafia are \"partners\" in Apulia and delegate several criminal activities.\nRivals.\nThe internal difficulties of the SCU aided the birth of antagonistic criminal groups such as:\nInternal divisions.\nSociet\u00e0 Foggiana.\nThe murder of Giuseppe Laviano, lieutenant of the Sacra Corona Unita in Foggia (whose body was never found), in January 1989, marked a turning point in the mafia war and the rise of Rocco Moretti, known as \"il porco\" (the pig), in the context of the Foggia organized crime at the expense of Laviano himself. After the murder, Moretti became the head of the new criminal organization \"Societ\u00e0 foggiana\" in Foggia. Following the arrests made by the police in the \"Mantide\" operation, among the many details, macabre revelations also emerged, such as the photo of Laviano's severed head, shown to the main members of the \"Societ\u00e0 Foggiana\" during the summits.\nThe relations between the Foggia delinquency and the Camorra are probably the oldest and deepest ones. The Foggia delinquency has managed to make the qualitative leap thanks to the Camorra, particularly the Nuova Camorra Organizzata; during the NCO period many \"Cutoliani\" spent periods of imprisonment in the prisons of San Severo and Foggia, making contacts with and recruiting local criminals. Raffaele Cutolo's sister Rosetta Cutolo spent time in San Severo. Cutolo even organized a sort of offshoot of the NCO in northern Apulia, the \"Nuova Camorra Pugliese\"; the killing of Don Peppe Sciorio, Lieutenant of Cutolo for Foggia, was another clear sign that the Foggia criminals wanted to become independent.\nThe \"Societ\u00e0 Foggiana\" is considered the most brutal and bloody of all the Italian mafias.\nThe most powerful clans inside the Societ\u00e0 Foggiana are the \"Trisciuoglio clan\", the \"Sinesi-Francavilla clan\" and the \"Moretti-Pellegrino-Lanza clan\".\nIn September 2019, the Italian police dismantled an international drug trafficking alliance between the powerful Gionta clan of the Camorra, the Societ\u00e0 Foggiana, and Moroccan drug traffickers. The investigation started in 2016 against a Maghreb gang based in the region of Trentino-Alto Adige. The vast network of drug traffickers, extended from Morocco, passing through Spain, Switzerland and the Netherlands to finally arrive in Trentino and in Bolzano. Arriving in Italy, the drugs were sold in parks, historic centers and near schools by mainly Tunisian and Moroccan pushers. Nineteen people were arrested, with four still being wanted in Italy, Spain and in the Netherlands at the time, and seventy-three under investigation. Over one ton of hashish and 2\u00a0kg of cocaine were seized.\nIn January 2020 two bomb attempts were made in Foggia to murder a key witness in a major trial against mobsters; nobody was injured. The anti-mafia task force was reinforced after the attacks, and 20,000 people marched through Foggia in a protest organised by the anti-mafia group Libera.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44947", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44947", "title": "209", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 209 (CCIX) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Commodus and Lollianus (or, less frequently, year 962 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 209 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44948", "revid": "1317450807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44948", "title": "211", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 211 (CCXI) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, in the Roman Empire it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Terentius and Bassus (or, less frequently, year 964 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 211 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44949", "revid": "10232273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44949", "title": "Navy Pier", "text": "Historic pier in Chicago, Illinois, US\nNavy Pier is a pier on the shoreline of Lake Michigan, located in the Streeterville neighborhood of the Near North Side community area in Chicago, Illinois, United States. Navy Pier encompasses over of shops, restaurants, live theaters, family attractions, parks (including Polk Bros Park), gardens, and exhibition facilities, and it is one of the top destinations in the Midwestern United States, drawing over nine million visitors annually. It is one of the most visited attractions in the entire Midwest and is Chicago's second-most visited tourist attraction.\nHistory.\nMilitary usage.\nNavy Pier opened to the public on July 15, 1916. Originally known as the \"Municipal Pier\", the pier was built by Charles Sumner Frost, a nationally known architect, with a design based on the 1909 Plan of Chicago by Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett. Its original purpose was to serve as a dock for freighters, passenger ships, and indoor and outdoor recreation; events like expositions and pageants were held there. The pier was built atop 20,000 logs imported from Oregon that were piled into the lake bed of Lake Michigan.\nIn mid-1918, the pier was also used as a jail for draft dodgers. In 1927, the pier was renamed Navy Pier to honor the naval veterans who served in World War I.\nIn 1941, during World War II, the pier became a training center for the United States Navy; about 10,000 people worked, trained and lived there. The pier contained a 2,500-seat theater, gym, 12-chair barber shop, tailor, cobbler shops, soda fountain and a vast kitchen and hospital.\nBeginning in 1946, as the Navy was winding down from its mission, the University of Illinois held classes at the pier, especially to serve the high demand from returning service members. As the maximum capacity was exceeded, the school outgrew the pier, the University of Illinois at Chicago was partly founded as a result. After the university left, Navy Pier became underutilized.\nLater use.\nIn 1959, the St. Lawrence Seaway opened and increased commercial shipping activity at the pier for a short time, though business died down and left for more modern facilities at Lake Calumet. In 1976, the East End buildings were renovated and for a brief period the pier was alive again, home to summer events like ChicagoFest. But maintenance was not done and the pier went into decline.\nIn 1989, the City of Chicago had the Urban Land Institute (ULI) reimagine uses for the pier. The Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority (MPEA) was created; its responsibility was to manage and operate Navy Pier as well as McCormick Place. The MPEA undertook the redevelopment, incorporating some of ULI's recommendations. In 1995, Navy Pier was redesigned and introduced to the public as a mixed-use venue incorporating retail, dining, entertainment and cultural spaces.\nRedevelopment.\nEfforts to update Navy Pier for the 21st century began on January 13, 2006, when the Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority released a proposal for a major renovation of the pier, which including a monorail, a spokeless Ferris wheel, a roller coaster, floating hotel, and a water park with a Great Lakes theme. The plan would have included nearly double the current parking and a replacement theater with a greater capacity. At the time of the announcement, a price tag of $2 billion was announced.\nFollowing the reorganization of the agency that runs Navy Pier and McCormick Place, a new study was commissioned to reinvigorate the upgrade process. The new study, by the Urban Land Institute, was released on November 11, 2010, and recommended a more modest set of enhancements aimed at retaining the pier's role as a public space, rather than turning it into a theme park. Suggested elements include a concert venue, an enlarged Chicago Shakespeare Theater space, new restaurants, a renovated commercial area around the pier's entrance and additional park-like features to bring people closer to the lake. Possibilities, including the enlarged Ferris wheel and a hotel, are mentioned as more remote possibilities.\nIn March 2012, a competition led to selection of a design concept presented by a team led by James Corner of James Corner Field Operations that focuses on the pier's role as a waterfront promenade. In 2013, the Authority announced plans to carry out the first elements of a streamlined version of that concept, with reworked streetscape and a wider pedestrian space, moving tour-boat moorings to improve the view from a new central stairway centered on the Ferris wheel. Work began on the redevelopment plan, called \"The Centennial Vision,\" during the winter of 2013\u20132014. The purpose of the plan is to fulfill the mission to keep Navy Pier as a world-class public space and to renovate the pier so it will have more evening and year-round entertainment and more compelling landscape and design features. The Polk Family Foundation (founded by Sol Polk) donated $20 million to the redevelopment effort; the park and fountain at the entrance to the pier was named the Polk Bros Park and Fountain. The park hosts concerts and screens films.\nA new Ferris wheel for the pier was announced on June 23, 2015. It is tall, taller than its predecessor. Rides now last twelve minutes instead of seven and feature three revolutions. The new wheel has brighter lights and opened in May 2016.\n\"The Centennial Vision\"'s first phase was completed in summer 2016. Work included the redesign of the Pier's public spaces, known as Pierscape, and improvements to the interior of the Family Pavilion and South Arcade. Phase I projects included the transformation of South Dock into a more engaging, greener space, conversion of the South Arcade indoor walkway into a Chicago-themed food experience and creation of a lighted water fountain/ice skating rink in Polk Bros Park. In November 2016, Phase I development achieved Gold certification under the Sustainable SITES Initiative (SITES) rating system, based on its expanded green spaces, improved pedestrian access, energy efficiency, innovative storm water management, and use of recycled local materials.\nPhase II projects include the development of a seven-story, 240-room hotel, adjacent to the south side of Festival Hall; marquee additions to the East End Plaza, including a proposed arched, elevated overlook walkway and reflective water feature; a Welcome Pavilion in the 13-acre Polk Bros Park with 4,000 square feet for guest services and programmatic space; a seasonal ice rink within the footprint of the Polk Bros Park's fountain and plaza; and a short-term, north-side boat docking facility for use by recreational boaters seasonally.\nAttractions.\nThere are many outdoor attractions at the Navy Pier Park, such as the Pepsi Wave Swinger, Light Tower Ride, Remote Control Boats (now removed along with fountain around the Wave Swinger), Teacups and the Carousel. New for 2021 is Drop Tower, an S&amp;S Double Shot relocated from the closed Pleasure Island.\nAmazing Chicago's Funhouse Maze is on the pier. It is a self-paced, full sensory maze experience where a person navigates their way through of tunnels and mazes. Crystal Gardens is a one-acre, botanical garden inside the pier. It is a six-story glass atrium with a arched ceiling. Many schools come here for field-trips to see and experience the attraction.\nThe Chicago Children's Museum is a part of the pier, with many different exhibits and activities for both children and adults to enjoy. Chicago Shakespeare Theater, a theater that performs Shakespeare's productions, is located there.\nThe original Ferris wheel was sold on September 27, 2015, and moved to Branson, Missouri, where it opened in 2016. The new Ferris wheel which replaced it is a DW60 from Dutch Wheels, the Netherlands-based company that built the pier's former wheel. The state-of-the-art DW60 is the first of its kind in the U.S. with similar wheels currently in operation in Hong Kong and Baku, Azerbaijan. Significant features include two-sided cars that allow for easy loading and unloading, a fortified structure to withstand winds of and safety glass capable of weathering intense storms. The new Ferris Wheel was unveiled on May 27, 2016.\nAround April 2019, the pier\u2019s original carousel that had operated since 1995 was dismantled and removed, after the original carousel\u2019s mechanism broke due to cold weather in early 2019. Around late May into June, a new carousel was installed in the site of the original. This new carousel had previously operated at Dorney Park from 1986-2016 under the name Chance Carousel.\nTenants.\nThe \"Chicago Sun-Times\" has its headquarters in Navy Pier. WBEZ, affiliated with the newspaper, is the lessee of of space, which has radio and newspaper functions.\nEvents and art.\nNavy Pier hosts sightseeing tours from companies such as Seadog Ventures, https:// cruises and Water Taxi service, and the tall ship \"Windy\". There are also dinner cruises by Entertainment Cruises on their ships the \"Spirit of Chicago\", \"Odyssey II\", and \"Mystic Blue\". The pier has fireworks on Wednesday and Saturday nights during the summer and Saturday nights during the fall.\nMany outdoor art installations are displayed on the pier. The anchor from the naval vessel USS \"Chicago\" (CA-136/CG-11) is on display at the far end. Other installations include a statue of actor Bob Newhart on a couch as seen on \"The Bob Newhart Show\", the \"Captain on the Helm\" statue dedicated to maritime captains, and the \"Crack the Whip\" sculpture of eight children at play holding hands by J. Seward Johnson Jr.\nThe Festival Halls can be used for sporting events. Festival Halls A and B can be turned into a competition arena. Gymnastics meets have been held in the Festival Halls. The game show \"Wheel of Fortune\" taped episodes on the pier in 2002 and 2008.\nBus routes.\nCTA\nIn popular culture.\nThe halls were used to represent Atlantic City, New Jersey, in the 1986 movie \"The Color of Money\" for the 9-Ball Championship.\nIn both \"Raw Deal\" and \"Cooley High\", the pier was used as a location for car chases.\nThe fourth season finale of \"T. J. Hooker\", titled \"The Chicago Connection\", featured a scene in front of the then-abandoned pier.\nIn the film \"Divergent\", the pier and Ferris wheel are shown abandoned and decayed in a future Chicago and it is stated that they were abandoned by choice a long time before. The Dauntless members play capture the flag in the park. Tris and Four climb the Ferris wheel to spot the opposing team. In the book, the opposing team hides the flag in a park near Navy Pier, while in the film version, the flag is hidden in a tower of the Chicago Children's Museum building.\nIn the video game \"NASCAR 09\", the pier is featured as a fictional race track.\nThe album/DVD \"A Long Day's Night\" by Blue \u00d6yster Cult was recorded live at Navy Pier/Skyline Stage on June 21, 2002.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44950", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44950", "title": "Cagliari", "text": "Largest city in Sardinia, Italy\nCagliari (, , ; ; ; ) is an Italian municipality and the capital and largest city of the island of Sardinia, an autonomous region of Italy. It has about 146,627 inhabitants, while its metropolitan city, 16 other nearby municipalities, has about 417,079 inhabitants. According to Eurostat, the population of the functional urban area, the commuting zone of Cagliari, rises to 476,975. Cagliari is the 26th largest city in Italy.\nAn ancient city with a long history, Cagliari has seen the rule of several civilisations. Under the buildings of the modern city there is a continuous stratification attesting to human settlement over the course of some five thousand years, from the Neolithic to today. Historical sites include the prehistoric Domus de Janas, partly damaged by cave activity, a large Carthaginian era necropolis, a Roman era amphitheatre, a Byzantine basilica, three Pisan-era towers and a strong system of fortification that made the town the core of Spanish Habsburg imperial power in the western Mediterranean Sea. Its natural resources have always been its sheltered harbour, the often powerfully fortified hill of \"Castel di Castro\", the modern \"Casteddu\", the salt from its lagoons, and, from the hinterland, wheat from the Campidano plain and silver and other ores from the Iglesiente mines.\nCagliari was the capital of the Kingdom of Sardinia from 1324 to 1848, when Turin became the formal capital of the kingdom (which in 1861 became the Kingdom of Italy). Today the city is a regional cultural, educational, political and artistic centre, known for its diverse Art Nouveau architecture and several monuments. It is also Sardinia's economic and industrial hub, having one of the biggest ports in the Mediterranean Sea, an international airport, and the 106th highest income level in Italy (among 8,092 comuni), comparable to that of several northern Italian cities.\nIt is also the seat of the University of Cagliari, founded in 1607, and of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cagliari, since the 5th century AD.\nHistory.\nLegend of the founding of Cagliari.\nThe legend, narrated by the Latin writer Gaius Julius Solinus, says that Caralis was founded by Aristaeus, son of the god Apollo and the nymph Cyrene. Aristaeus introduced hunting and agriculture to Sardinia, reconciled the indigenous populations who were fighting among themselves and founded the city of Caralis, over which he later reigned.\nEarly history.\nThe Cagliari area has been inhabited since the Neolithic. It occupies a favourable position between the sea and a fertile plain and is surrounded by two marshes (which provides defence against attacks from the inland). There are high mountains nearby, to which people could evacuate if the settlement had to be given up. Relics of prehistoric inhabitants were found in the hill of Monte Claro (Monte Claro culture) and in Cape Sant'Elia (several domus de janas).\nKaraly (, KRLY) was established around the 8th/7th century BC as one of a string of Phoenician colonies in Sardinia, including Tharros. The etymology of the toponym is unknown. It almost certainly does not come from the Phoenician language, but it has some similarities with other Sardinian or Asia Minor toponyms. Its founding is linked to its position along communication routes with Africa as well as to its excellent port. The Phoenician settlement was located in the Stagno di Santa Gilla, west of the present centre of Cagliari. This was also the site of the Roman \"Portus Scipio\", and when Arab pirates raided the area in the 8th century it became the refuge for people fleeing from the city. Other Phoenician settlements have been found at Cape Sant'Elia.\nIn the late 6th century BC Carthage took control of part of Sardinia, and Cagliari grew substantially under its domination, as testified by the large Tuvixeddu necropolis and other remains. Cagliari was a fortified settlement in what is now the modern Marina quarter, with an annexed holy area in the modern Stampace.\nSardinia and Cagliari came under Roman rule in 238 BC, shortly after the First Punic War, when the Romans defeated the Carthaginians. No mention of it is found on the occasion of the Roman conquest of the island but, during the Second Punic War, Caralis was the headquarters of the praetor, Titus Manlius Torquatus, whence he conducted his operations against Hampsicora and the Carthaginians. At other times it was also the Romans' chief naval station on the island and the residence of its praetor.\nThe Romans built a new settlement east of the old Punic city, the \"vicus munitus Caralis\" (i.e. the fortified community of Caralis) mentioned by Varro Atacinus. The two urban agglomerations merged gradually during the second century BC; to this process is perhaps attributable the plural name Carales.\nFlorus calls it the \"urbs urbium\" or capital of Sardinia. He represents it as taken and severely punished by Gracchus, but this statement is wholly at variance with Livy's account of the wars of Gracchus, in Sardinia, according to which the cities were faithful to Rome, and the revolt was confined to the mountain tribes. In the Civil War between Caesar and Pompey, the citizens of Caralis were the first to declare in favor of the former, an example soon followed by the other cities of Sardinia; and Caesar himself touched there with his fleet on his return from Africa. A few years later, when Sardinia fell into the hands of Menas, the lieutenant of Sextus Pompeius, Caralis was the only city which offered any resistance, but was taken after a short siege.\nCagliari continued to be regarded as the capital of the island under the Roman Empire, and though it did not become a colony, obtained the status of \"municipium\".\nRemains of Roman public buildings were found to the west of Marina in Piazza del Carmine. There was an area of ordinary housing near the modern Via Roma, and richer houses on the slopes of the Marina distinct. The amphitheatre is located to the west of the Castello.\nA Christian community is attested in Cagliari at least as early as the 3rd century, and by the end of that century the city had a Christian bishop. In the middle decades of the 4th century bishop Lucifer of Cagliari was exiled because of his opposition to the sentence against Athanasius of Alexandria at the Synod of Milan. He was banished to the desert of Thebais by the emperor Constantius II.\nClaudian describes the ancient city of Karalis as extending to a considerable length towards the promontory or headland, the projection of which sheltered its port.\nA few decades before the fall of the Western Roman Empire Cagliari fell, together with the rest of Sardinia, into the hands of the Vandals, an East Germanic people, but appears to have retained its importance throughout the Middle Ages.\nJudicate of Cagliari.\nSubsequently, ruled by the Byzantine Empire, apart from a short occupation (551\u2013552) by the Ostrogoths during the Gothic War, Cagliari became the capital of a gradually independent Judicate (from Latin \"Iudex\"). This state was born around 1020 and was overthrown by the Republic of Pisa in 1258. \nDue to the overlap of buildings since the year 800 B.C., and the scarcity of archeological and historical informations, it was believed that the population moved to more inland areas of the territory, along the lagoon, in a city called Santa Ilia or Santa Igia (modern San Gilla) and it was believed that the ancient Roman and Byzantine Caralis had been abandoned because it was too exposed to attacks by Moorish pirates coming from north Africa and Spain. Recent studies have instead hypothesized that the capital of the Giudicato, Santa Igia, was located around the road that it directed towards Sassari, today called Corso Vittorio Emanuele II (in the Sardinian language: \"Su Brugu\", \"the borough\"), although there are not yet archeological confirmations, particularly of the Cathedral and the Judex Palace, destroyed after the Pisan conquest. The Judicate of Cagliari comprised a large area of the Campidano plain, the Sulcis-Iglesiente and the mountain region of Ogliastra.\n11th to 13th century.\nDuring the 11th century, the Republic of Pisa began to extend its political influence over the Judgedom of Cagliari. Pisa and the maritime republic of Genoa had a keen interest in Sardinia because it was a perfect strategic base for controlling the commercial routes between Italy and North Africa.\nIn 1215 the Pisan Lamberto Visconti, husband of Elena of Gallura, forced the judikessa Benedetta of Cagliari to give him the mount located east of Santa Igia. Soon (1216\u201317) Pisan merchants established there a new fortified city, known as \"Castel di Castro\", which can be considered the ancestor of the modern city of Cagliari.\nIn 1258, after the defeat of William III, the last king of Cagliari, the Pisans and their Sardinian allies (Arborea, Gallura and Logudoro) destroyed the old capital of Santa Igia. The Judgedom of Cagliari was then divided into three parts: the northeast third went to Gallura; the central portion was incorporated into Arborea; Sulcis and Iglesiente, on the southwest, were given to the Pisan della Gherardesca family, while the Republic of Pisa maintained control over its colony of Castel di Castro.\nSome of the fortifications that still surround the current district of Castello were built by the Pisans, including the two remaining white limestone towers (early 14th century) designed by the architect Giovanni Capula. Together with the district of Castello, Castel di Castro comprised the districts of Marina (which included the port), and later Stampace and Villanova. Marina and Stampace were guarded by walls, in contrast to Villanova, which was mostly home to peasants.\n14th to 17th centuries.\nIn the second decade of the 14th century the Crown of Aragon conquered Sardinia after a series of battles against the Pisans. During the siege of Castel di Castro (1324\u20131326), the Aragonese, led by Alfonso IV of Aragon, built a stronghold on a more southern hill, that of Bonaria.\nWhen the fortified city was finally conquered by the Aragonese army, Castel di Castro (\"Castell de C\u00e0ller\" or simply C\u00e0ller in Catalan) became the administrative capital of the newborn Kingdom of Sardinia, one of the many kingdoms forming the Crown of Aragon, which later came under the rule of the Spanish Empire. After the expulsion of the Tuscans, the Castello district was repopulated by the Aragonese settlers of Bonaria while the indigenous population was, as in the past, concentrated in Stampace and Villanova.\nThe kings of Sardinia, who were also the kings of Aragon and later the kings of Spain, ruled the island as part of a wider Mediterranean empire. In Cagliari, their authority was exercised by a viceroy, the king's appointed representative, who resided in the Royal Palace of Cagliari, the official seat of government during the Aragonese and Spanish periods.\nIn the 16th century the fortifications of the city were strengthened with the construction of the bastions and the rights and benefits of the Aragonese were extended to all citizens. The intellectual life was relatively lively and in the early years of the 17th century the university was founded.\n18th century.\nIn 1718, after a brief rule by the Habsburgs, Cagliari and Sardinia came under the House of Savoy. As rulers of Sardinia, the Savoys took the title of kings of the Sardinian kingdom. During the Savoyard Era, until 1848, the institutions of the Sardinian kingdom remained unchanged, but with the \"Perfect Fusion\" in that year, all the possessions of the House of Savoy House, comprising Savoy, Nice (now part of France), Piedmont and Liguria, were merged into a unitary state. Although Sardinian by name, the kingdom had its parliament in Turin, where the Savoys resided, and its members were mainly aristocrats from Piedmont or the mainland.\nIn the late 18th century during the French Revolutionary Wars France tried to conquer Cagliari because of its strategic role in the Mediterranean sea (\"Exp\u00e9dition de Sardaigne\"). A French army landed on Poetto beach and advanced towards Cagliari, but the French were defeated by Sardinians who had decided to defend themselves against the revolutionary army. The people of Cagliari hoped to receive some concession from the Savoys in return for their defence of the town. For example, aristocrats from Cagliari asked for a Sardinian representative in the parliament of the kingdom. When the Savoyards refused any concession to the Sardinians, the inhabitants of Cagliari rose up against them and expelled all the representatives of the kingdom along with the Piedmontese rulers. This insurgence is celebrated in Cagliari during \"Sa die de sa Sardigna\" (\"The day of Sardinia\") on the last weekend of April. However, the Savoys regained control of the town after a brief period of autonomous rule.\nModern age.\nThe population by the 1840s had reached 29,000. Starting in the 1870s, in the wake of the unification of Italy, the city experienced a century of rapid growth. Numerous buildings combined influences from Art Nouveau together with the traditional Sardinian taste for floral decoration; an example is the white marble City Hall near the port. Many buildings were erected by the end of the 19th century during the term of office of mayor Ottone Bacaredda. In 1905 he had to face up to the a violent, bloody revolt against the exorbitant cost of living, stoked by his political opponents and which caused a number of victims and extensive material damage. After various other ups and downs, and following another resignation, he was returned to office between 1911 and 1917. Ottone Bacaredda died in his modest house in Via San Giovanni, on 26 December 1921,\nDuring the Second World War Cagliari was heavily bombed by the Allies in February 1943. In order to escape from the danger of bombardments and difficult living conditions, many people were evacuated from the city into the countryside. In total the victims of the bombings were more than 2000 and about 80% of the buildings were damaged. The city received the Gold Medal of Military Valour.\nAfter the Italian armistice with the Allies in September 1943, the German Army took control of Cagliari and the island, but soon retreated peacefully in order to reinforce their positions in mainland Italy. The American Army then took control of Cagliari. Airports near the city (Elmas, Monserrato, Decimomannu, currently a NATO airbase) were used by Allied aircraft to fly to North Africa or mainland Italy and Sicily.\nAfter the war, the population of Cagliari grew again and many apartment blocks and recreational areas were erected in new residential districts.\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And suddenly there is Cagliari: a naked town rising steep, steep, golden-looking, piled naked to the sky from the plain at the head of the formless hollow bay. It is strange and rather wonderful, not a bit like Italy. The city piles up lofty and almost miniature, and makes me think of Jerusalem: without trees, without cover, rising rather bare and proud, remote as if back in history, like a town in a monkish, illuminated missal. One wonders how it ever got there. And it seems like Spain\u2014or Malta: not Italy. It is a steep and lonely city, treeless, as in some old illumination. Yet withal rather jewel-like: like a sudden rose-cut amber jewel naked at the depth of the vast indenture. The air is cold, blowing bleak and bitter, the sky is all curd. And that is Cagliari. It has that curious look, as if it could be seen, but not entered. It is like some vision, some memory, something that has passed away. Impossible that one can actually walk in that city: set foot there and eat and laugh there. Ah, no! Yet the ship drifts nearer, nearer, and we are looking for the actual harbour.\u2014\u200a\nThe city of Cagliari is situated in the south of Sardinia, overlooking the centre of the eponymous gulf, also called Golfo degli Angeli (\"Bay of Angels\") after an ancient legend. The city is spread over and around the hill of the historic district of Castello and nine other limestone hills of the middle-to-late Miocene, unique heights of a little more than above sea level on the long plains of Campidano. The plain is actually a Graben formed during the Alpine orogeny of the Cenozoic, which separated Sardinia from the European continent, roughly where the Gulf of Lion is now. The Graben filled in the course of tectonic movements associated with the breakup of the ancient island Paleozoic skeleton.\nThe repeated intrusion of the sea left calcareous sediments that formed a series of hills that mark the territory of Cagliari. Castello is where the fortified town arose in the Middle Age near the harbour of the port, other hills are those of Mount Urpinu, the St. Elias hill, also known as the \"Sella del Diavolo\" (\"Saddle of the Devil\") for its shape, Tuvumannu and Tuvixeddu, the site of the ancient Punic and Roman necropolis, the small Bonaria hill, where the basilica stands, and the San Michele hill, with the eponymous castle on top. The modern city occupies the flat spaces between the hills and the sea to the south and southeast, along the Poetto beach, the lagoons and ponds of Santa Gilla and Molentargius, and the remains of more recent marine intrusions, in an articulate landscape with many landmarks and panoramas of the bay, the plain, and the mountains that surround it on the east (The Seven Brothers and Serpedd\u00ec) and west (the mountains of Capoterra). On the cold, clear days of winter, the snowy peaks of Gennargentu can be seen from the highest points of the city.\nThe city has four historic neighbourhoods: Castello, Marina, Stampace and Villanova and several modern districts (such as San Benedetto, Monte Urpinu and Genneruxi at the east, Sant'Avendrace at the west, Is Mirrionis/San Michele at north and Bonaria, La Palma and Poetto at the south), grown when part of the ancient walls had been demolished in the middle of the 19th century.\nPirri.\nThe comune of Cagliari has one circoscrizione, the town of Pirri (about 30.000 inhabitants), former village of the Campidano absorbed in the fast growth after the Second World War.\nParks and recreation.\nCagliari is one of the \"greenest\" Italian cities. Every inhabitant of Cagliari has access to of public gardens and parks.\nIts mild climate allows the growth of numerous subtropical plants, such as \"Jacaranda mimosifolia\", \"Ficus macrophylla\", with some huge specimens in Via Roma and in the University Botanic Gardens, \"Erythrina afra\" with its stunning red flowers, \"Ficus retusa\", which provides shade for several of the city's streets, \"Araucaria heterophylla\", the date palm (\"Phoenix dactylifera\"), the Canary Islands palm (\"Phoenix canariensis\") and the Mexican Fan Palm (\"Washingtonia robusta\").\nMajor city parks include: \nThe Molentargius - Saline Regional Park is located near the city. Some mountain parks, such as Monte Arcosu or Maidopis, with large forests and wildlife (Sardinian deer, wild boars, etc.) are also nearby.\nThe city is the starting and ending point of the Path of 100 Towers, which consist of a trekking route named after the 105 towers located along the whole Sardinian coast.\nBeaches.\nThe main beach of Cagliari is the Poetto. It stretches for about , from Sella del Diavolo (\"Devil's Saddle\") up to the coastline of Quartu Sant'Elena. Poetto is also the name of the district located on the western stretch of the strip between the beach and Saline di Molentargius (\"Molentargius's Salt Mine\").\nAnother smaller beach is that of Calamosca near the Sant'Elia district. On the coast between Calamosca and Poetto beaches, among the cliffs of the Sella del Diavolo, lies Cala Fighera, a small bay.\nCagliari is close to other seaside locations such as Santa Margherita di Pula, Chia, Geremeas, Solanas, Villasimius and Costa Rei.\nClimate.\nCagliari has a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSk\"), with hot, dry summers and mild winters like other historical regions along the coast. Its precipitation values also bring it closer to semi-arid conditions. The summer extreme values can be slightly over , sometimes with very high humidity, while in winter, under special and rare conditions, the temperature drops slightly below zero. Heavy snowfalls occur on average every thirty years.\nThe average temperature of the coldest month, January, is about , and of the warmest month, August, about . But heat waves can occur, due to African anticyclone, starting in June. From mid-June to mid-September, rain is a rare event, limited to brief afternoon storms. The rainy season starts in September, and the first cold days come in December.\nWinds are frequent, especially the mistral and sirocco; in summer a marine sirocco breeze (called \"s'imbattu\" in Sardinian language) lowers the temperature and brings some relief from the heat.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to ISTAT, in 2014 there were 154,356 people residing in Cagliari (+3.0% compared with 2011), of whom 71,522 were male and 82,834 female for a sex ratio of 0.86. Minors (children aged 18 and younger) totaled 12.92% of the population, compared to pensioners at 24.81%. The average age of Cagliari residents is 47.44. The ratio of the population over 65 years of age to that under the age of 18, is 53.39%. The elderly population, defined as being over 65 years of age, has increased by 21.95% over the last 10 years. The current birth rate in Cagliari is 6.29 births per 1,000 inhabitants. The average number of people of any age per household is 2.11 and the percentage of households composed of a single person is 42.53%. The population of Cagliari is structured like that of other first world countries, especially as to the prevalence of an elderly population. The trend of these rates in the Cagliari metropolitan area is proportionally reversed in the suburbs, where most younger families move.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], 6.1% (9,034 people) of the population was foreign, of which the largest group were Filipinos (18.65%), followed by Ukrainians (11.01%), Chinese (7.72%), Senegalese (7.29%) and Bangladeshis (7.16%).\nIn 1928, during the fascist regime, the neighbouring municipalities of Pirri, Monserrato, Selargius, Quartucciu and Elmas, were merged with that of Cagliari. Mussolini's regime wanted to streamline the local administration by eliminating many small towns and at the same time show that Italy was a major power with many large cities. After the war these small municipalities gradually regained their autonomy, except for the former town of Pirri.\nThe first table shows the inhabitants of the town in its present borders, the second one the commune population including the merged municipalities.\nMetropolitan City.\nThe Metropolitan City of Cagliari has been established in 2016 by a Sardinia Regional Law and has a population of 417,079. It is composed of 17 municipalities along the coast of the gulf and up to of the inner Campidano plain.\nIt covers an area on the plain of Campidano between large basins (Santa Gilla lagoon and salt mills of about 30 km2 or 3200 acres), ponds (Molentargius), 16,22 km2 (40,10 acres) and the depopulated mountains up to above sea level. The mountains are largely covered by forests mostly managed by the Ente Foreste of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia. To the west these amount to on the Capoterra and Pula mountains. Monte Arcosu WWF Natural Reserve has another , and to the east on Mount Serpedd\u00ec and Sette Fratelli there are a total of of forest.\nThe Metropolitan City is defined by municipalities where the population increased between the last two censuses, in a region where the population is otherwise generally decreasing. These municipalities welcome immigrants to the urban area whose main nucleus, the city of Cagliari, has a high number of elderly people.\nIn the last century, the population of the municipalities of the metropolitan area increased by 354% and in the last 50 years by 158% (1911: 128,444; 1961: 288,683; 2011: 454,819). For the whole of Sardinia this increase was respectively 88% and 15% (1911: 868,181; 1961: 1,419,362; 2011: 1,639,362). The urbanisation towards the area of Cagliari was, in percentage terms, impressive, making the capital of the island a metropolis surrounded by rural areas increasingly depopulated. This urbanisation is also reflected in the concentration in Cagliari of most of the economic activities and wealth.\nEconomy.\nAccording to 2014 data from the Italian Ministry of Economic Affairs, the inhabitants of Cagliari benefited a per capita income of 23,220 euros (being the fifth Regional Capital), that is the 122% of the national average, while all of Sardinia benefited only 16,640 euros, being the 13th Region and 86% of the national average. The metropolitan area benefited an average income of 19,185 euros, 103% of the national average. With the 26% of the island population the Cagliari Metropolitan City produces the 31% of its GDP.\nAs the capital city of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia, Cagliari is the administrative hub and headquarters of the region as well as of the provincial and regional offices of the Italian central administration. Cagliari is also the main trade and industrial centre of the island, with numerous commercial sites and factories within its metropolitan boundaries.\nCagliari is the fourth port of Italy for movement of goods in tons (35,922,468), and the 18th for passengers (705,715), of whom 394,697 cruise passengers (8th in Italy).\nThe first department store, (La Rinascente) opened in 1931 in the centre of the city, and it is still open today. Nowadays there are many commercial centres in the metropolitan area (Le Vele, Santa Gilla, La Corte del Sole, Marconi) hosting many European chain stores such as Auchan, Metro AG, Lidl, MediaWorld, Euronics, Jysk, IKEA, Carrefour and Bata Shoes. Cagliari is also home to an Amazon customer service center.\nCagliari is the main operational headquarters of the Banco di Sardegna, which belongs to the BPER Group and is listed on Borsa Italiana, of the Banca di Cagliari. Banca di Credito Sardo was based in Cagliari until it was absorbed by the parent company Intesa Sanpaolo.\nThe Macchiareddu-Grogastru area between Cagliari and Capoterra is one of the most important industrial areas of Sardinia, in conjunction with a large international container terminal port at Giorgino. Beside having one of the biggest container terminals on the Mediterranean Sea, Cagliari also has one of the largest fish markets in Italy offering for sale a vast array of fish to both the public and traders. The communications provider Tiscali also has its headquarters in Cagliari.\nMultinational corporations like Coca-Cola, Heineken, Unilever, Bridgestone and Eni Group have factories in town. One of the six oil refinery supersites in Europe, Saras, is located within the metropolitan area at Sarroch.\nTourism is one of the major industries of the city, although historical venues such as its monumental Middle Ages and Early modern period defence system, its Carthaginian, Roman and Byzantine ruins are less highlighted compared to the recreational beaches and coastline. Cruise ships touring the Mediterranean often stop for passengers at Cagliari, and the city is a traffic hub to the nearby beaches of Villasimius, Chia, Pula and Costa Rei, as well as to the urban beach of Poettu. Pula is home to the archaeological site of the Punic and Roman city of Nora. Especially in summer many clubs and pubs are goals for young locals and tourists. Pubs and night-clubs are concentrated in the Corso Vittorio Emanuele II, a narrow street in Stampace district, in the Marina district, near the port and in the Castello district, The clubs are mostly to be found on the Poetto Beach (in summer) or in Viale Marconi (in winter).\nMain sights.\nConsiderable remains of the ancient city of Karalis are still visible, including those of the Tuvixeddu necropolis (the largest Punic necropolis still in existence), the Roman amphitheatre, traditionally called \"Is centu scalas\" (\"One hundred steps\"), and of an aqueduct used to provide generally scarce water. Still visible are also some ancient cisterns of vast extent.\nThe Palaeo-Christian Basilica of San Saturnino, dedicated to a martyr killed under Diocletian's reign, Saturninus of Cagliari, patron saint of the city, was built in the 5th century. Of the original building the dome and the central part remain, to which two arms (one with a nave and two aisles) were added later. A Palaeo-Christian crypt is also under the church of \"San Lucifero\" (1660), dedicated to Saint Lucifer, a bishop of the city. The church has a Baroque fa\u00e7ade with ancient columns and sculpted parts, some of which came from the nearby necropolis.\nThe old medieval town (called \"Castello\" in Italian, \"Casteddu de susu\" in Sardinian, \"the upper castle\") lies on top of a hill with a view of the Gulf of Cagliari (also known as Angels' Gulf). Most of its city walls are intact and include two early 14th-century white limestone towers, the Torre di San Pancrazio and the Torre dell'Elefante, typical examples of Pisan military architecture. The local white limestone was also used to build the walls of the city and many other buildings, besides the towers. The exact period of construction of a fortress on this hill is unknown at present, due to the superposition of layers of buildings along the history. Some scholars have suggested a first urbanization of the quarter in the Punic era on the basis of similarity of the planimetry with the contemporary Carthaginian fortress of Monte Sirai. Recently, archaeological excavations have identified Punic and Roman buildings under the ramparts of the fortress. Already the Roman poet Varro called the city \"Vicus munitus\", a fortified city, and sixteenth-century authors describe a Roman acropolis perhaps still visible in their day.\nD. H. Lawrence, in his memoir of a voyage to Sardinia, \"Sea and Sardinia\", that he undertook in January 1921, described the effect of warm Mediterranean sunlight on the white limestone city and compared Cagliari to a \"white Jerusalem\".\nThe exterior of the cathedral was restored in the 1930s, returning the former Baroque fa\u00e7ade into a Pisan Romanesque-style fa\u00e7ade more akin to the original appearance of the church in the 13th century. The bell tower is original. The interior has a nave and two aisles, with a pulpit (1159\u20131162) sculpted for the Cathedral of Pisa but later donated to Cagliari. The crypt houses the remains of martyrs found in the Basilica of San Saturnino. Near the cathedral is the Palazzo Regio or Viceregio and the Old City Hall.\nThe Sanctuary of Our Lady of Bonaria (from which the city of Buenos Aires, Argentina, gets its name) was built by the Catalans in 1324\u20131326 when they were besieging the Pisans in Castello. It has a small Gothic portal in the fa\u00e7ade and the interior houses a wooden statue of the Madonna, which, after having been thrown off a Spanish ship, landed at the foot of Bonaria hill. Bonaria hill is also the location of the Basilica and the Monumental Cemetery of Bonaria.\nThe \"Chiesa della Purissima\" is a Catalan Gothic church built in the 16th century in the Castello distinct.\nThe other early districts of the town (Marina, Stampace and Villanova) retain much of their original character. In Stampace the Torre dello Sperone, another tower built by the Pisans in the late 13th century, is located, as well as two important monumental churches: the \"Collegiata di Sant'Anna\" and the \"Chiesa di San Michele\", both built in the 18th century in a baroque style. Many more churches, both old and modern, can be found throughout the city.\nThe Bastion of Saint Remy was built between 1896 and 1903, designed by architects Giuseppe Costa and Fulgenzio Setti, who followed a previous proposal by Gaetano Cima. The entire building was built of white and yellow limestone in a classical style with Corinthian columns. A staircase with two flights provides access from Constitution Square. In 1943, during World War II, the staircase and the Arch of Triumph were severely damaged by aerial bombardment, but after the conflict they were faithfully reconstructed. In 1948 the covered walk hosted the first Trade Fair of Sardinia. After many years of decay, it was restored and re-evaluated as a cultural space reserved especially for art exhibitions.\nFrom the Terrazza Umberto I the Bastion of Santa Caterina can be accessed via a short flight of steps. Here there was once an old Dominican convent, destroyed by fire in 1800. According to tradition, the conspiracy to kill the Viceroy Camarassa in 1666 was set up in the surroundings of the monastery.\nThe modern districts built in the late 19th and early 20th century contain examples of Art Deco architecture, as well as controversial examples of Fascist architecture, such as the Court of Justice (\"Palazzo di Giustizia\") in Republic Square. The Court of Justice is near the biggest city park, Monte Urpinu, with its pine trees, artificial lakes, and a vast area with a hill. The Orto Botanico dell'Universit\u00e0 di Cagliari, the city's botanical garden, is also of interest.\nCulture.\nThe city has numerous libraries and is also home to the State Archive, containing thousands of handwritten documents from the foundation of the Kingdom of Sardinia (1325 AD) to the present. In addition to numerous local and university department libraries, the most important libraries are the old University Library, with thousands of ancient books, the Provincial Library, the Regional Library, and the Mediateca of the Mediterranean, which contains the municipal archive and library collection.\nIn the first century B.C. a famous singer and musician from Cagliari, Tigellius, lived in Rome and was satirized by Cicero and Horace. The history of Sardinian literature begins in Cagliari in the first century A.D. In the funerary monument of Atilia Pomptilla, carved into the rock of the necropolis of Tuvixeddu, poems are engraved in Greek and Latin dedicated to his dead wife. Some of them, particularly those in the Greek language, have literary merit.\nThe first Sardinian literary author known was Bishop Lucifer of Cagliari, who wrote severe pamphlets against the Arian heresy in the fourth century A.D. Only in the eleventh century A.D. did the first texts of an administrative nature appear in the modern Sardinian language, together with hagiographies of local martyrs written in Latin.\nIn the late 16th century, the local humanist Roderigo Hunno Baeza dedicated to his town a didactic Latin poem, \"Caralis Panegyricus\". At the beginning of the 17th century Juan Francisco Carmona wrote a hymn to Cagliari in Spanish; Jacinto Arnal De Bolea published in 1636, in Spanish, the first novel set in Cagliari, entitled \"El Forastero\". \nLife in Cagliari has been depicted by many writers, David Herbert Lawrence wrote about the city in his \"Sea and Sardinia\". Modern writers connected to Cagliari include Giuseppe Dess\u00ec, Giulio Angioni, Giorgio Todde, Sergio Atzeni (who set many of his novels and short stories, such as \"Bakunin's Son\", in ancient and modern Cagliari), Flavio Soriga.\nCagliari was the birthplace or residence of the composer Ennio Porrino, of the film, theatre and TV director Nanni Loy, and of the actors Gianni Agus, Amedeo Nazzari and Pier Angeli (born Anna Maria Pierangeli).\nExcluding the Roman era amphitheater, the first theater was inaugurated in Cagliari in 1767: the Teatro Zapata, later becoming the Civic Theatre. Devastated by bombing in 1943, it was recently restored, but the roof was not rebuilt, and today it serves as an open-air theatre. The Politeama Regina Margherita, inaugurated in 1859, was destroyed by fire in 1942 and never rebuilt.\nAlthough opera had, and in part still has, a solid tradition the city, it was left without a true theater until 1993 when a new opera house, the Teatro Lirico, was inaugurated. Inside there is a music compound with a music conservatory with its own auditorium, and a music park. Cagliari is and was home to opera singers such as the tenors Giovanni Matteo Mario (Giovanni Matteo De Candia, 1810\u20131883) and Piero Schiavazzi (1875\u20131949), the baritone Angelo Romero (born 1940), the contralto Bernadette Manca di Nissa, born 1954 and the soprano Giusy Devinu (1960\u20132007).\nThe Italian pop singer Marco Carta was also born in Cagliari, in 1985.\nThe old Teatro Massimo was only recently renovated and is now the seat of the Teatro Stabile of Sardinia. The Municipal Auditorium, in the former 17th-century church of Santa Teresa, is the seat of the Scuola di Arte Drammatica (School of Dramatic Art) di Cagliari, while the Teatro delle Saline (\"Saltworks Theatre\"), is home of Akroama, Teatro Stabile di Innovazione (\"Permanent Theater of Innovation\").\nFinally, some comic and satirical theater companies are active in the city, the most well known being the \"Compagnia Teatrale Lapola\", which offers an urban version of the traditional campidanese comic theater.\nFounded by Bepi Vigna, Antonio Serra and Michele Medda, a comic book school, the Centro Internazionale del Fumetto (\"Comic Strip International Centre\") has been active for several decades. Its founders invented and designed the comic characters Nathan Never and Legs Weaver.\nMuseums and galleries.\nThe Polo museale di Cagliari \"Cittadella dei musei\" (Citadel of Museums) is home to:\nFeast of Sant'Efis.\nThe Feast of St. Ephysius (Sant'Efisio in Italian, Sant'Efis in Sardinian) is the most important religious event of Cagliari, taking place every year on 1 May. During this festival, thousands of people from folk groups all over Sardinia wear their traditional costumes. The saint is escorted by the traditional ancient \"Milicia\", the deputy mayor (Alter Nos), numerous confraternities, and a convoy of chariots pulled by oxen in a procession to Nora (near modern Pula), from Cagliari, where, according to tradition, he was beheaded. In addition to being one of the oldest, it is also the longest Italian religious procession, with about of walks over four days, and the largest in the Mediterranean area.\nA plague was spreading throughout Sardinia, starting in 1652, and the epidemic infected Cagliari in particular, killing some ten thousand inhabitants. According to legend, in 1656 St. Ephysius appeared to the Spanish Viceroy, Francisco Fern\u00e1ndez de Castro Andrade, Count of Lemos to request a procession on 1 May, in order to free the city from the plague. The Municipality of Cagliari swore that, if the plague disappeared, a procession would be held every day in the saint's honor, starting from the Stampace district and ending at Nora where the saint was martyred. In September the plague ended, and the procession and festival was therefore regularly held starting the following year on 1 May. The procession was held even during the last war; a statue of the saint was placed on a lorry and, through city ruins of the devastated by the bombs, arrived safely in Nora.\nOther events.\nOther feasts and events in Cagliari include:\nLanguages.\nThe native language of Cagliari, declared official along with Italian, is Sardinian (\"sardu\"), a Romance language, specifically the Campidanese dialect (\"campidanesu\") in its local variant (\"casteddaju\").\nThe variant of Cagliari in its high register has traditionally represented the linguistic model of reference for the entire southern area of the island, and the high social variant used by the middle class in the whole Campidanese domain, as well as the literary model of reference for writers and poets. This language is less spoken by the younger generations in the city, who use Italian instead as that language is compulsory in education and the mass media. Italian has increasingly become predominant in social relations, both formal and informal, relegating Sardinian to a mostly marginal role in everyday life. Young people often have only passive competence in the language, gathered from elderly relatives who still speak it, as their parents often speak only Italian, or they may use a slang (\"italianu porceddinu\") that mixes both Sardinian and Italian.\nSince Cagliari was the metropolis of the ancient Roman province, it absorbed innovations coming from Rome, Carthage, and Constantinople, and its language probably reflected late Latin urban dialects of the 5th-century core cities of the empire.\nGastronomy.\nCagliari has some unique gastronomic traditions: unlike the rest of the island its cuisine is mostly based on the wide variety of locally available seafood. Although it is possible to trace influences from Catalan and Ligurian cuisine, Cagliaritan food has a distinctive and unique character.\nExcellent wines are also part of Cagliaritanians' dinners, like the Cannonau, Nuragus, Nasco, Monica, Moscau, Gir\u00f2 and Malvasia, produced in the nearby vineyards of the Campidano plain.\nMedia.\nThe main newspaper of Sardinia is \"L'Unione Sarda\", it was founded in Cagliari in 1889. It was one of the first European newspapers to have its own website in 1994. It has a circulation of about 85,000 copies.\nThe main regional headquarters of RAI, the Italian state-owned radio and television network, is in Cagliari. There are also two regional television and radio companies as well as numerous information sites on the internet.\nSports.\nCagliari is home to the football team Cagliari Calcio, winner of the Italian league championship in 1970, when the team was led by Gigi Riva. Founded in 1920, the club played at the Stadio Sant'Elia in the city from 1970 until it was closed in the summer of 2017, causing the club to temporarily relocate to the provisional Sardegna Arena (now Unipol Domus). Sant'Elia was the venue for three 1990 FIFA World Cup matches.\nCagliari is an ideal location for water sports such as surfing, kitesurfing, windsurfing and sailing due to strong and reliable favourable winds. Field hockey is also popular, with two teams in the Italian top division, G.S. Amsicora and C.U.S. Cagliari, the first of which won the league title more often than any other Italian team in the men's championship (20) and is also the protagonist in the women's division.\nSport venues in Cagliari include:\nGovernment.\nCagliari is the hub of the administration offices of the Sardinia Autonomous Region and of Cagliari Province. It is also the home of several local offices of the Italian central administration.\nIt is the seat of the Superintendency of Cultural and Environmental Heritage, of the Sardinia Archival Superintendency and of the Archeological Superintendency of the Cultural Heritage Ministry, of the Sardinia and Provincial seat of the Employment and Social Policies Ministry, of the regional offices of the Finance and Economy Ministry, and of some branch offices of the Health Ministry.\nCagliari is home to all criminal, civil, administrative and accounting courts for Sardinia of the Ministry of Justice up to the High Court of Assizes of Appeal. It was home to a prison, Buon Cammino, built in the late 19th century, famous because no one has ever managed to escape. A new modern prison has been built in the nearby town of Uta.\nTraditionally, votes in Cagliari are oriented towards the center-right wing. Since World War II, all the mayors belonged to the Christian Democracy party with the exception of Salvatore Ferrara, from the Socialist Party, allied with the former. After the collapse of the traditional parties in the 1990s, the mayors belonged to the party or the coalition led by Silvio Berlusconi. The current economic and political crisis that affects Italy has prompted the electorate toward a large abstention and to elect a young mayor, Massimo Zedda, who belongs to a centre-left alliance. In the last municipal elections in June 2016, Massimo Zedda was confirmed in the first round with 50.86% of the votes.\nEducation.\nCagliari is home to the University of Cagliari, the largest public university in Sardinia, founded in 1626. It currently includes six faculties: Engineering and Architecture, Medicine and Surgery, Economics, Juridical and Political Sciences, Basic Sciences, Biology and Pharmacy, Humanistic Studies.\nIt is attended by about 35,000 students. All science faculties of the university, as well as the university hospital, have been transferred to a new \"University Citadel\", located in Monserrato. Cagliari's downtown houses the engineering and the humanities divisions and, in the Castle, the seat of the Rector, in an 18th-century palace with a library of thousands of ancient books.\nCagliari is also the seat of the Pontifical Faculty of Theology of Sardinia and of the European Institute of Design.\nHealth care.\nLife expectancy in Cagliari is high: 79.5 years for men and 85.4 for women (provincial level).\nThere has been a public hospital in Cagliari since the 17th century. The first modern structure was built in the middle of the 19th century, designed by the architect Gaetano Cima. This hospital is still operating, although all its departments will eventually be transferred to the new University Hospital in Monserrato.\nAmong the other public hospitals, the Giuseppe Brotzu (San Michele) Hospital was recognized in 1993 as a High Specialization Nationally Relevant Hospital, particularly for liver, heart, pancreas and bone marrow transplants.\nOther public hospitals in the city include: the \"Santissima Trinit\u00e0\" or commonly \"Is Mirrionis\"; the \"Binaghi\", specialised in pulmonology; \"Marino\" specialised in traumatology, hyperbaric medicine and spinal cord injuries; \"Businco\" specialised in oncology; and \"Microcitemico\", specialised in thalassemia, Genetic diseases and rare diseases. There are in addition many private hospitals.\nDespite its dry climate, thanks to the regional system of dams, every inhabitant of Cagliari may have per day of safe drinking water.\nWaste sorting is still at a low level: only 33.4\u00a0percent of waste is separated.\nTransport.\nAirport.\nThe city is served by the Cagliari-Elmas International Airport, located a few kilometres from the centre of Cagliari. It is the 13th busiest aeroport in Italy by passengers traffic with around 4,370,000 passengers in 2018. A railway line connects the city to the airport; walkways join the railway station to the air terminal. The terminal is also connected to the city by highway SS 130 and by a bus service run by the ARST company to the central bus station in Matteotti square, in the centre of the city.\nThere are other airports not too far from the city: Deciomannu Airport, a NATO military airport and three fields for air sports, Serdiana (used in particular for skydiving), Castiadas and Decimoputzu.\nRoads.\nThe following national roads begin in Cagliari:\nPorts.\nThe port of Cagliari is divided in two sector, the old port and the new international container terminal. The port system of Cagliari-Sarroch is the third for freight traffic in Italy with a movement of about 38\u00a0million tons in 2017. \nCagliari has scheduled services by passenger ship to Civitavecchia, Naples and Palermo. \nIn Cagliari there are also two other small touristic ports, \"Su Siccu\" (Lega Navale) and \"Marina Piccola\".\nRailways.\nThe Ferrovie dello Stato railway station in Cagliari has services to Iglesias, Carbonia, Olbia, Golfo Aranci, Sassari and Porto Torres.\nThe nearby commune of Monserrato is the terminal railway station of a narrow gauge line to Arbatax and Sorgono.\nUrban and suburban mobility.\nBus and trolleybus services, managed by CTM (more than 30 lines) and ARST, connect internal destinations in the city and in the metropolitan area; Cagliari is one of the few Italian cities with an extensive trolleybus network, whose fleet was fully renewed with new vehicles in 2012\u20132016. A light rail service, MetroCagliari, operates between Piazza Repubblica and the new university campus near Monserrato (line 1) and from Monserrato San Gottardo and Settimo San Pietro (line 2). A line between Piazza Repubblica and Piazza Matteotti, the city transport hub (with train, urban and extra-urban bus stations), is planned. Trenitalia, the primary train operator in Italy, operates a metro train service between Cagliari Central Station and Decimomannu, which connects the airport with the city center. A public bike-sharing service is operating with pick-up points at Via Sonnino - Palazzo Civico, Piazza Repubblica, Piazza Giovanni 23, and Marina Piccola.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nCagliari is twinned with:\nConsulates.\nIn Cagliari there are at present (2018) the following consulates:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nIn English:\nIn Italian:\nExternal links.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "44952", "revid": "11112747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44952", "title": "McCormick Place", "text": "Convention center in Chicago, Illinois\n Green\n}} at Cermak\u2013McCormick Place&lt;br&gt;\n}} ME\n}} at McCormick Place\nMcCormick Place is a convention center in Chicago. It is the largest convention center in North America. It consists of four interconnected buildings and one indoor arena sited on and near the shore of Lake Michigan, about south of the Chicago Loop. McCormick Place hosts numerous trade shows and meetings. The largest regular events are the Chicago Auto Show each February, the International Home and Housewares Show each March, the National Restaurant Association Annual Show each May, and the International Manufacturing Technology Show in the fall every other year.\nHistory.\nAs early as 1927, Robert R. McCormick, a prominent member of the McCormick family of McCormick Reaper/International Harvester fame, and publisher of the \"Chicago Tribune\", championed a purpose-built lakeside convention center for Chicago. In 1958, ground was broken for a $35 million facility that opened in November 1960, and was named after McCormick, who died in 1955. The lead architect was Alfred Shaw, one of the architects of the Merchandise Mart. This building included the Arie Crown Theater, designed by Edward Durell Stone. It seated nearly 5,000 people and was the second largest theater (by seating capacity) in Chicago.\nThe 1960 exposition hall was destroyed in a fire on January 16, 1967, despite being thought fireproof by virtue of its steel-and-concrete construction. At the time of the fire, the building contained highly combustible exhibits, several hydrants were shut off, and there were no sprinklers on the main floor where the fire started. Thus the fire spread quickly and destructively, taking the life of security guard Kenneth Goodman.\nThe fire was investigated by a team led by Rolf H. Jensen, Professor of Fire Protection Engineering at the Illinois Institute of Technology, who went on to found RJA Group. Many lessons were learned and building, electrical, and fire codes for the city and worldwide were amended.\nAlthough many wanted to rebuild the hall on a different site, Chicago mayor Richard J. Daley chose to rebuild on the foundations of the burned building. The new design of dark steel and glass, by Gene Summers of C. F. Murphy and Associates (and formerly of Mies van der Rohe's office), contrasted with the white look of the structure that had burned. On January 3, 1971, the replacement building, later called the East Building and now called the Lakeside Center, opened with a main exhibition hall. The Arie Crown Theatre sustained only minor damage in the 1967 fire, and so was incorporated into the interior of the new building. The theater, with the largest seating capacity of any active theater in Chicago (the Uptown Theatre has more seating, but is currently closed), underwent major modifications in 1997 to improve its acoustics.\nOn March 27, 2020, the United States Army Corps of Engineers announced that the complex would begin transforming convention space into a 3,000-bed hospital during the COVID-19 crisis. The $15 million project was paid for by FEMA and was scheduled for completion on April 30.\nIn 2021, it was proposed to turn Lakeside Center into a Rivers Casino, as part of the Chicago Casino Proposals.\nThe windows at McCormick Place Lakeside Center, which make up most of the building's exterior, encompass an area of . In 2023, on a single night at the height of the fall bird migration, nearly 1,000 birds crashed into the building's windows and died. The following year, Lakeside Center spent $1.2 million and three months to apply arrays of small white dots, designed to be visible to birds, using adhesive film. An analysis showed that the number of birds colliding with windows at the building during the fall migration season dropped by more than 95%.\nAdditions.\nThe North Building, located west of Lake Shore Drive and completed in 1986, is connected to the East Building by an enclosed pedestrian bridge. In contrast to the dark, flat profile of the East Building, the North Building is white (as the original building was), with twelve concrete pylons on the roof which support the roof using 72 cables. The HVAC system for the building is incorporated into the pylons and give the building the appearance of a rigged sailing ship. The North Building has approximately of main exhibition space.\nThe South Building, dedicated on December 12th, 1996, and designed by tvsdesign, contains more than of exhibition space. It more than doubled the space in the complex and made McCormick Place the largest convention center in the nation. The South Building was built on the former site of the McCormick Inn, a 25-story, 619-room hotel built in 1973 as part of the McCormick City complex and demolished in 1993 when ground was broken for the South Building.\nOn August 2, 2007, McCormick Place officials opened yet another addition to the complex, the West Building, also designed by tvsdesign and costing $882 million and completed eight months ahead of schedule. The publicly financed West Building contains of exhibit space, bringing McCormick Place's total existing exhibition space to . The West Building also has of meeting space, including 61 meeting rooms, as well as a ballroom, the size of a football field and one of the largest ballrooms in the world.\nMcCormick Place continued to expand in October 2017 with the opening of Wintrust Arena, a 10,387-seat arena situated on Cermak Road just north of the West Building. The new facility hosts DePaul Blue Demons men's and women's college basketball, and the WNBA's Chicago Sky. The new arena boasts 22 suites, 479 club seats, and 2 VIP lounges. The arena is also equipped to host concerts, sporting events, meetings, and conventions in conjunction with the rest of the McCormick Place complex. Sporting events such as gymnastics and volleyball are also held in the McCormick Place buildings in addition to the arena.\nArchival materials are held by the Ryerson &amp; Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago. The McCormick Place on the Lake 1971 Collection includes photographs, drawings and project files documenting its construction.\nSouth of the center is McCormick Place Bird Sanctuary, created in 2003. The northern end includes a recreated prairie, covering the roof of the center's underground carpark, and so requiring the use of shallow-rooted plants.\nPublic transit.\nMcCormick Place is served by the Chicago Transit Authority's bus and \"L\" (rapid transit) systems; by Metra, Chicago's commuter rail network; and by the South Shore Line, an interurban passenger rail service that runs between Chicago and South Bend, Indiana.\nMetra Electric trains\u2014which run between the Loop and points south\u2014stop at an eponymous station underneath McCormick Place. South Shore trains also stop here, but only during special events, and will not board northbound nor discharge southbound passengers due to a non-compete agreement with Metra.\nAt the street level, CTA's no. 3 and no. 21 bus routes\u2014which run north-south and east-west through the South and Southwest Sides, respectively\u2014serve McCormick directly. Cermak\u2013McCormick Place, a station on the \"L\"'s Green Line, lies two blocks west of the convention center's westernmost entrance.\nBusway.\nThe McCormick Place Busway runs from Lower Randolph between Michigan and Columbus in downtown Chicago to the center. It uses the lower levels of the multilevel streets near downtown, and surface streets to follow the Metra Electric District right-of-way to outside the South Building of McCormick Place. Opened in 2002 at a cost of $43 million, it is meant to provide an unencumbered expressway for visitors to move between downtown hotels and the convention center, but is also used by buses for Soldier Field events, public safety workers, Metra, convention contractors, and Art Institute deliveries. It is also used by national and international government officials as a secure route. It is also known as the \"Mayor's Road\" (as it runs to Maggie Daley Park, named after mayor Richard M. Daley's wife), the \"Bat Cave\", the \"Magic Road\" and a \"secret road\". Its use is administered by the Chicago OEMC (Office of Emergency Management and Communications), and regular users are granted access cards. The convention center advertises the road as a benefit to potential customers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44953", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44953", "title": "Fiat S.p.A.", "text": "Italian holding company\nFiat S.p.A., commonly known as Fiat Group, was an Italian holding company whose original and core activities were in the automotive industry.\nThe Fiat Group contained many brands such as Fiat, Abarth, Ferrari, Maserati, Lancia and Alfa Romeo.\nFiat was founded in 1899 by a group of investors, including Giovanni Agnelli. During its more than century-long history, Fiat has also manufactured railway engines and carriages, military vehicles, farm tractors, and aircraft. In 2013, Fiat Group, together with Chrysler Group was the second largest European automaker by volumes produced, and the seventh in the world ahead of Honda, PSA Peugeot Citro\u00ebn, Suzuki, Renault, and Daimler.\nOver the years Fiat has acquired numerous other automakers: it acquired Lancia in 1968, became a shareholder of Ferrari in 1969, took control of Alfa Romeo from the Italian government in 1986, purchased Maserati in 1993, and became the full owner of Chrysler Group in 2014. Fiat Group currently produces vehicles under twelve brands: Abarth, Alfa Romeo, Chrysler, Dodge, Ferrari, Fiat, Fiat Professional, Jeep, Lancia, Maserati, Ram Trucks, and SRT.\nIn 1970 Fiat employed more than 100,000 in Italy when its production reached the highest number, 1.4\u00a0million cars, in that country. As of 2002, Fiat built more than 1 million vehicles at six plants in Italy and the country accounted for more than a third of the company's revenue.\nFiat-brand cars are built in several locations around the world. Outside Italy, the largest country of production is Brazil, where the Fiat brand is the market leader. The group also has factories in Argentina, Poland and Mexico (where Fiat-brand vehicles are manufactured at plants owned and operated by Chrysler for export to the U.S., Brazil, Italy and other markets) and a long history of licensing manufacture of its products in other countries \u2013 in the 1960s, Fiat notably set up joint ventures in Eastern Europe with the best known being VAZ (Lada) in the former Soviet Union. It also has numerous alliances and joint ventures around the world, the main ones being located in Serbia, France, Turkey, India and China.\nGianni Agnelli, the grandson of founder Giovanni Agnelli, was Fiat's chairman from 1966 until 1996; he then served as honorary chairman from 1996 until his death on 24 January 2003, during which time Cesare Romiti served as chairman. He was succeeded briefly by Paolo Fresco, who served as chairman, and Paolo Cantarella, as CEO. Umberto Agnelli then took over as chairman from 2003 to 2004. After Umberto Agnelli's death on 28 May 2004, Luca Cordero di Montezemolo was named chairman, with Agnelli heir John Elkann becoming vice chairman (at the age of 28), and other family members also serving on the board. On 1 June 2004, Giuseppe Morchio was replaced by Sergio Marchionne as CEO.\nOn 29 January 2014, it was announced that Fiat Group was to be merged with Chrysler Group into Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), taking place before the end of 2014. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles became the new owner of Fiat Group. On 1 August 2014, Fiat Group. received necessary shareholder approval to proceed with the merger (which followed board approval). The merger became effective 12 October 2014.\nHistory.\nGiovanni Agnelli, with several investors, founded the Fabbrica Italiana Automobili Torino (\"Italian Automobile Factory of Turin\"; FIAT) in 1899. Its acronymous name was changed to upper- and lower-case Fiat in 1906. Agnelli led the company until his death in 1945, while Vittorio Valletta administered the firm's daily activities. Its first car, the 3 \u00bd CV, of which only 24 copies were built, all bodied by Alessio of Turin, strongly resembled contemporary Benz, and had a boxer twin engine. In 1903, Fiat produced its first truck. In 1908, the first Fiat was exported to the US. That same year, the first Fiat aircraft engine was produced. Also around the same time, Fiat taxis became popular in Europe.\nBy 1910 Fiat was the largest automotive company in Italy \u2013 a position it has retained since. That same year, a new plant was built in Poughkeepsie, NY, by the newly founded American FIAT Automobile Company. Owning a Fiat at that time was a sign of distinction. The cost of a Fiat in the US was initially $4,000 and rose up to $6,400 in 1918, compared to $825 for a Ford Model T in 1908, and $525 in 1918, respectively. During World War I, Fiat had to devote all of its factories to supplying the Allies with aircraft, engines, machine guns, trucks, and ambulances. Upon the entry of the US into the war in 1917, the factory was shut down as US regulations became too burdensome. After the war, Fiat introduced its first tractor, the 702. By the early 1920s, Fiat had a market share in Italy of 80%.\nIn 1921 workers seized Fiat's plants and hoisted the red flag of communism over them, to which Agnelli responded by quitting the company. However, the Italian Socialist Party and its ally organization, the Italian General Confederation of Labour, in an effort to effect a compromise with the centrist parties ordered the occupation to end. In 1922, Fiat began to build the famous Lingotto car factory\u2014then the largest in Europe\u2014which opened in 1923. It was the first Fiat factory to use assembly lines; by 1925, Fiat controlled 87% of the Italian car market. In 1928, with the 509, Fiat included insurance in the purchase price.\nFiat made military machinery and vehicles during World War II for the Italian army and \"Regia Aeronautica\", and later for the Germans. Fiat made fighter aircraft like the biplane CR.42 Falco, which was one of the most common Italian aircraft, along with Savoia-Marchettis, as well as light tanks, obsolete compared to their German and Soviet counterparts, and armoured vehicles. The best Fiat aircraft was the G.55 fighter, which arrived too late and in too limited numbers to impact the outcome of the war.\nIn 1945 the National Liberation Committee removed the Agnelli family from leadership roles in Fiat because of its ties to Mussolini's government. These were not returned until 1963, when Giovanni's grandson, Gianni, took over as general manager until 1966 and as chairman until 1996.\nFiat launched a nuclear research program in the 1950s. It was the first private company in Europe to host its own nuclear reactor.\nGianni Agnelli.\nAmong the younger Agnelli's first steps after gaining control of Fiat was a massive reorganization of the company management, which had previously been highly centralized, with little provision for the delegation of authority and decision-making. Such a system was effective in the past, but lacked the responsiveness and flexibility needed by Fiat's steady expansion, and the growth of its international operations in the 1960s. The company was reorganized on a product-line basis, with two main product groups\u2014one for passenger cars, the other for trucks and tractors\u2014and a number of semi-independent division and subsidiaries. Top management, freed from responsibility for day-by-day operations of the company, was able to devote its efforts to more far-reaching goals. In 1967, Fiat made its first acquisition when it purchased Autobianchi; with sales amounting to $1.7\u00a0billion, it outstripped Volkswagen, its main European competitor, and in 1968 produced some 1,750,000 vehicles while its sales volume climbed to $2.1\u00a0billion. According to \"Newsweek\" in 1968, Fiat was \"the most dynamic automaker in Europe...[and] may come closest to challenging the worldwide supremacy of Detroit.\" Then, in 1969, it purchased controlling interests in Ferrari and Lancia. At the time, Fiat was a conglomerate, owning Alitalia, toll highways, a typewriter and office machine manufacturer, electronics and electrical equipment firms, a paint company, a civil engineering firm, and an international construction company. Following up on an agreement Valletta had made with Soviet officials in 1966, Agnelli constructed the AvtoVAZ plant in the new city of Togliattigrad on the Volga. This began operation in 1970, producing a local version of the Fiat 124 as the Lada. On his initiative, Fiat automobile and truck plants were also constructed in industrial centers of Yugoslavia, Poland, Bulgaria, and Romania. In 1973, Fiat established Comau, an industrial automation company out of the various suppliers which had equipped the AvtoVAZ plant in Russia. Comau became an industry pioneer in the use of Robotics for vehicle assembly \u2013 a technology with which Fiat would become synonymous for in the 1970s, with its \"Robogate\" system for bodyshell manufacture, and the later FIRE family of robot-assembled engines in the 1980s.\nDespite offering a relatively competitive range of cars, Fiat was not immune from the financial pressures that the auto industry confronted following the 1973 oil price shock. Towards the end of 1976 it was announced that the Libyan government was to take a 9.6% shareholding in the company in return for a capital injection worth an equivalent of \u00a3250\u00a0million. The size of the Libyan investment is apparent when it is compared to the \u00a3310\u00a0million IMF loan that the Italian government was trying to negotiate at the time. Other aspects of the Libyan agreement included the construction of a truck and bus plant at Tripoli. Chairman Agnelli candidly described the deal as \"a classic petro-money recycling operation which will strengthen the Italian reserves, provide Fiat with fresh capital and give the group greater tranquility in which to carry out its investment programmes\". Equally noteworthy was the fact that despite the dilutive effect of the Libyan investment on existing shareholders, the company's largest shareholder, the Agnelli family, retained a 30% stake in the recapitalised business.\nIn 1979 the company became a holding company when it spun off its various businesses into autonomous companies, one of them being Fiat Auto. Vittorio Ghidella was named CEO. That same year, sales reached an all-time high in the US, corresponding to the Iranian Oil Crisis. However, when gas prices fell again after 1981, Americans began purchasing sport utility vehicles, minivans, and pickup trucks in larger numbers (marking a departure from their past preference for large cars). Also, Japanese automakers had been taking an ever-larger share of the car market, increasing at more than half a percent a year. Consequently, in 1984, Fiat and Lancia withdrew from the United States market. In 1989, it did the same in the Australian market, although it remained in New Zealand.\nIn 1986 Fiat acquired Alfa Romeo from the Italian government. Also, in 1986 15% of Fiat company stock was still owned by Libya, an investment dating back to the mid-seventies. US foreign policy under President Reagan's administration canceled a Pentagon contract to produce earth movers with Fiat and pressured the company into brokering a buyout of the Libyan investment. In 1992, two top corporate officials in the Fiat Group were arrested for political corruption.&lt;ref name=\"query.nytimes.com/gst\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; A year later, Fiat acquired Maserati. In 1995 Alfa Romeo exited the US market. Maserati re-entered the US market under Fiat in 2002. Since then, Maserati sales there have been increasing briskly.\nPaolo Fresco.\nPaolo Fresco became chairman of Fiat in 1998 with the hope that the veteran of General Electric would bring more emphasis on shareholder value to Fiat. By the time he took power, Fiat's market share in Italy had fallen to 41% from around 62% in 1984. However, a Jack Welch-like management style would be much harsher than that used by the Italians (e.g., precarious versus lifetime employment). Instead, Fresco focused on offering more incentives for good performance, including compensation using stock options for top and middle management.\nBut his efforts were frustrated by union objections. Unions insisted that pay raises be set by length of tenure, rather than performance. Another conflict was over his preference for informality (the founder, Giovanni Agnelli, used to be a cavalry officer). He often referred to other managers by their first name, although company tradition obliged one to refer to others using their titles (e.g., \"Chairman Fresco\"). The CEO of the company, Paolo Cantarella, ran the day-to-day affairs of the company, while Fresco determined company strategy and especially acted as a negotiator for the company. In 1999, Fiat formed CNH Global by merging New Holland NV and Case Corporation.\nIn 2003 Fiat shed its insurance sector, which it was operating through Toro Assicurazioni to the DeAgostini Group. In the same year, Fiat sold its aviation business, FiatAvio to Avio Holding. In February 2004, the company sold its interest in Fiat Engineering, as well as its stake in Edison.\nSergio Marchionne.\nSergio Marchionne was appointed CEO of Fiat in 2004 and initially he impressed investors. At the end of the 2005 financial year, the company saw its first profit in 17 quarters of \u20ac196M for the first 9 months of FY2006.\nMarchionne reduced Fiat's managerial bureaucracy refocused the business on markets and profit. While chairman, Luca di Montezemolo, dealt with politicians and unions, Marchionne rebuilt the car business. The success of the Grande Punto model was in large part responsible for the turnaround in Fiat's fortunes, but the award-winning 500 cemented it. Fiat formed a joint venture with India's Tata Motors, which has subsequently ended, and with China's Chery Motors which didn't conclude. In 2005 Fiat courted Ford, and returned to China with a joint venture GAC Fiat created in 2010. Under Marchionne Fiat also re-entered several large markets that it had exited years before, such as Mexico and Australia.\nFiat Group Automobiles (FGA) was created on 1 February 2007 from Fiat Auto.\nSimultaneously Fiat Automobiles, Abarth &amp; C., Alfa Romeo Automobiles, Lancia Automobiles and Fiat Light Commercial Vehicles were created, all controlled 100 percent by Fiat Group Automobiles. The former brand directors became CEOs of the new societies, while the employees and production facilities remained under Fiat Group Automobiles.\nIn December 2008 Marchionne announced Fiat had to become one of the top five automakers to survive in the long run. Under Marchionne's leadership, Fiat returned to Canadian and American markets with the new 500. However, since 2009, Marchionne has presided over a business that has experienced a loss in European market share from 9.3 to 6.2 percent. In December 2013, Marchionne announced that he intended to discontinue the Grande Punto so that the company could focus on \"cool, high margin\" Fiat 500 (2007) variants and the Fiat Panda.\nIn 2010 John Elkann became the Chairman of Fiat and shareholders approved a plan to demerger Fiat's capital goods businesses. Agricultural and construction equipment manufacturer CNH Global, truck maker Iveco, and the industrial and marine division of Fiat Powertrain Technologies were spun off into a new group on 1 January 2011. The parent company, Fiat Industrial, was listed on the Milan stock exchange on 3 January 2011.\nIn 2010 credit rating agency Fitch cut Fiat's debt rating to BB\u2212 after it had accumulated a debt of around . In 2013, Fiats debt rating was cut again, this time by Moody's, to Ba3 over concerns European demand was lower and debt was falling slower than expected. The \"Financial Times\" estimate of Fiat's debt at the time was almost .\nAcquisition of Chrysler.\nOn 20 January 2009 Fiat Group and Chrysler Group announced their intention to form a global alliance. Under the terms of the agreement, Fiat would take a 20% stake in Chrysler and gain access to its North American distribution network in exchange for providing Chrysler with technology and platforms to build smaller, more fuel-efficient vehicles in the US and providing reciprocal access to Fiat's global distribution network.&lt;ref name=\"autonews.com/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"italiaspeed.com/2009\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Agreements were signed on 30 April 2009, with Fiat's future shareholding capped at 49% until all government loans had been repaid.&lt;ref name=\"fiatgroup.com/en-us/mediacentre\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn addition, the proposed agreement would entitle Fiat to receive a further 15% (without cash consideration) through the achievement of specific product and commercial objectives. No cash or financial support was required from Fiat under the agreement. Instead it would obtain its stake mainly in exchange for covering the cost of retooling a Chrysler plant to produce one or more Fiat models for in the US. Fiat would also provide engine and transmission technology to enable Chrysler to introduce smaller, fuel-efficient models in the NAFTA market.\nThe deal was engineered by Fiat chief Sergio Marchionne. The principal objective of the partnership was to provide both groups with significantly enhanced economies of scale and geographical reach at a time when they were struggling to compete with larger and more global rivals such as Toyota, Volkswagen and alliance partners Renault and Nissan.\nFiat would not have to pay any money for its 20% of Chrysler. On 7 June 2009, the Indiana State Police Pension Fund, the Indiana Teacher's Retirement Fund, and the state's Major Moves Construction Fund asked the US Supreme Court to delay the sale of Chrysler to Fiat while they challenge the deal. The funds argued that the sale went against US bankruptcy law because it unlawfully rewarded unsecured creditors ahead of secured creditors. On 9 June 2009, the Supreme Court lifted the temporary hold, clearing the way for Fiat to acquire Chrysler.&lt;ref name=\"online.wsj.com/article\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; See Indiana State Police Pension Trust v. Chrysler for more information. On 10 June, the Supreme Court announced that Fiat was now an owner of the Chrysler Group.\nMarchionne was appointed CEO of Chrysler following its emergence from bankruptcy proceedings. Under his leadership, Chrysler has taken on a structure similar to that of Fiat and has released, in quick succession, a large number of completely redesigned or refreshed vehicles. Fiat launched its 500, which had been available in Europe since 2007, in the United States and Canada in 2011, marking the company's return to the American auto market, which it had been absent from since 1984. Prior to this, Fiat's main presence on the continent was Mexico, where it offers a greater variety of products than in the United States and Canada.\nOn 10 January 2011 Fiat announced that it had increased its share in Chrysler from 20% to 25% following the achievement of the first of three performance objectives. On 11 April 2011, it announced achievement of the second performance objective, increasing its stake a further 5% to 30%. On 24 May 2011, Fiat announced that it had paid Chrysler US$1,268\u00a0million for a further 16% interest, increasing its stake total stake to 46% (fully diluted). The transaction coincided with Chrysler refinancing its debt to the U.S. and Canadian governments. On 25 May autonews.com reported that Fiat could buy government stakes in Chrysler as soon as the end of July 2011, increasing its total stake to 54%.\nIn May 2011 it emerged that Fiat could actually increase its stake in Chrysler Group to more than 70 percent through the exercise of further options.\nIn a regulatory filing dated 22 July 2011, the Michigan-based automaker reported that Fiat held a 53.5% interest (fully diluted). Fiat and Chrysler have both stated that they expect that interest to reach 58.5% by the end of 2011 as result of achievement of the third of the three performance objectives. On 5 January 2012 Fiat released press info that the ownership has increased to 58.5%. The stake was further increased to 68.49% in July 2013. On 1 January 2014, Fiat announced it would be acquiring the remaining shares of Chrysler owned by the VEBA worth $3.65\u00a0billion. The deal was completed by 21 January.\nOn 29 January 2014 it was announced that Fiat Group and Chrysler Group would be merged into a new company, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), incorporated in the Netherlands with tax domicile in the UK. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles will become the owner of Fiat Group. On 1 August 2014, Fiat Group received necessary shareholder approval to proceed with the merger (which followed board approval). FCA will be listed on the New York Stock Exchange with an additional listing on the Mercato Telematico Azionario in Milan to follow. The merger became effective 12 October 2014.\nActivities.\nThe group's activities were initially focused on the industrial production of cars, industrial and agricultural vehicles. Over time it has diversified into many other fields, and the group now has activities in a wide range of sectors in industry and financial services. It is Italy's largest industrial concern. It also has significant worldwide operations, operating in 61 countries with 1,063 companies that employ over 223,000 people, 111,000 of whom are outside Italy.\nFiat's main shareholders include 30.1% by Exor S.p.A. (controlled by the Agnelli family), 24.9% by EU institutional investors, 11.2% by outside EU institutional investors and 2.6% by Baillie Gifford &amp; Co., a Scottish investment management company.\nPrincipal subsidiaries.\nFiat S.p.A.'s principal operating subsidiaries (direct and indirect) include: Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A., Chrysler Group LLC, Fiat Automoveis, S.A.; FGA Capital S.p.A. (a jv held 50% by FGA and 50% by Cr\u00e9dit Agricole CF), Ferrari S.p.A., Maserati S.p.A., Magneti Marelli S.p.A., Teksid S.p.A., Comau S.p.A., Itedi - Italiana Edizioni S.p.A. (see 2010 Annual Report)\nAlliances and joint ventures.\nFiat has undertaken numerous joint ventures and alliances. Commencing in 1978, the Type Four platform was an alliance between Alfa Romeo, Fiat, Lancia and Saab and resulting in a range of cars on sale in the mid-1980s.\nIn 2000 a number of joint ventures were established with General Motors following GM buying 20% of Fiat while Fiat bought 6% of GM. Complications with the relationship saw these JVs being wound back by 2005. Resulting projects included the GM Fiat Small platform and Fiat-GM Powertrain.\nIn 2005 Fiat formed an alliance with Ford to create a new small car, resulting in the Fiat 500 and Ford Ka.\nIn 2012 Fiat formed an alliance with Mazda to develop and build a new rear wheel drive roadster for the Alfa Romeo and Mazda brands.\nAutomotive.\n \nFiat is the largest vehicle manufacturer in Italy, with cars ranging from small Fiat city cars to sports cars made by Ferrari, and vans and trucks such as the Ducato. Besides Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A., Fiat Group automotive companies include Chrysler Group LLC and Maserati S.p.A. The Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A. companies include: Abarth &amp; C. S.p.A., Alfa Romeo Automobiles S.p.A., Fiat Automobiles S.p.A., Fiat Professional S.p.A. and Lancia Automobiles S.p.A.\nFerrari S.p.A. is 90% owned by the Fiat Group. The company also owns Autobianchi S.p.A. but the marque has been dormant since 1995, and Innocenti Milano S.p.A., which ceased production in 1996.\nThe European Car of the Year award, Europe's premier automotive trophy for the past 50 years, has been awarded twelve times to the Fiat Group, more than any other manufacturer, most recently with the Fiat 500 in 2008.&lt;ref name=\"telegraph.co.uk/motoring\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nPrevious Fiat Group models which have won European Car of the Year: Fiat 124 (1967), Fiat 128 (1970), Fiat 127 (1972), Lancia Delta (1980), Fiat Uno (1984), Fiat Tipo (1989), Fiat Punto (1995), Fiat Bravo/Brava (1996), Alfa Romeo 156 (1998), Alfa Romeo 147 (2001) and the Fiat Panda (2004).\nTrucks and buses.\nFiat Industrial Vehicles (\"Fiat Veicoli Industriali\") was Fiat's truck and bus division. It was created in 1903 with the launch of the 24HP model. By 1908 the company produced around 120 trucks, and by the end of 1918 production had grown to 17,000.\nThe operation closed in 1974 when Fiat created Iveco with OM, Lancia, Magirus and Unic.\nIveco was demerged into Fiat Industrial at the beginning of 2011.\nCommercial vehicles.\nOn 17 April 2007 Fiat Automobiles' light commercial vehicle unit Fiat Light Commercial Vehicles (\"Fiat Veicoli Commerciali\") was rebranded as Fiat Professional. Some of Fiat's light commercial vehicle products include the Fiat Ducato, Fiat Scudo and Fiat Dobl\u00f2 Cargo.\nAgricultural and construction equipment.\n\"For Fiat branded Agricultural &amp; Construction equipments from 1917 to 1991, see Fiat Trattori and from 1992 to 2014, see CNH Global\".\nComponents.\nThe major Italian component maker Magneti Marelli is owned by Fiat, and it in turn owns other brands such as AL-Automotive Lighting, Carello, Cromodora, Cofap, Ergom Automotive, Jaeger, Mako Elektrik, Paraflu, Seima, Siem SpA, Solex, Veglia Borletti, Vitaloni and Weber.\nMetallurgical products.\nFiat owns Teksid, the largest iron foundry group in the world with a production capacity of approximately 600,000 tons annually. The company was established in December 1978, and designs and produces cylinder blocks, cylinder heads, exhaust manifolds, drive shafts, camshafts and other components for automobiles and commercial vehicles.\nTeksid, which is specialized in casting and processing iron, has plants in France, Portugal, Poland, Brazil, Mexico and China.\nSince 2007, Teksid runs also Teksid Aluminum a company specialized in casting and producing auto components from aluminium alloys.\nProduction systems.\nProduction systems are made mainly through Comau, which bought the American Pico, Renault Automation and Sciaky and produces industrial automation systems. In the 1970s and 1980s, the company became a pioneer in the use of industrial robotics for the assembly of motor vehicles. Fiat assembly plants are among the best automated and advanced in the world.\nServices.\nAn insurance company, Toro Assicurazioni, allowed Fiat to control a relevant part of this market (also with minor companies like Lloyd Italico) and to interact with some associated banks. Toro Assicurazioni was acquired by the giant insurance company Assicurazioni Generali and is no longer part of the Fiat Group.\nConstruction.\nIngest Facility and Fiat Engineering work in various fields of construction, while IPI is a mediation company that also deals with the management of real estate properties.\nInformation technology.\nFiat Group is present in IT fields and in communications with ICT\u2014Information &amp; Communication Technology, Global Value, TeleClient, London and Atlanet.\nPublishing and communication.\nFiat Group also has interests in several major publishing houses and national and local newspapers, such as \"La Stampa\" (created in 1926), Itedi, and Italiana Edizioni. A specialised advertising space reseller is Publikompass, supported by the Consorzio Fiat Media Center. Fiat is also has one of the largest shareholdings in RCS MediaGroup.\nOther activities.\nFiat Gesco, KeyG Consulting, Sadi Customs Services, Easy Drive, RM Risk Management and Servizio Titoli are minor companies that work for public services, delivering services in economics and financial fields. Other activities include industrial securitisation (Consorzio Sirio), treasury (Fiat Geva), Fiat Information &amp; Communication Services.\nFiat supports the \"Fondazione Giovanni Agnelli\", an important foundation for social and economic research. Palazzo Grassi, a well-known historic building in Venice, now a museum and formerly supported by Fiat, was eventually sold to the French businessman Fran\u00e7ois Pinault in January 2005.\nAviation and motorcycles.\nFiat, as Fiat Aviazione, was an important aircraft manufacturer, focused mainly on military aviation. After World War I, Fiat consolidated several Italian small aircraft manufacturers, like Pomilio and Ansaldo. Most famous were Fiat biplane fighter aircraft of the 1930s, Fiat CR.32 and Fiat CR.42. Other notable designs were fighters CR.20, G.50, G.55 and a bomber, the Fiat BR.20. In the 1950s, the company designed the G.91 light ground attack plane. In 1969, Fiat Aviazione merged with Aerfer to create Aeritalia.\nIn 1959 Piaggio came under the control of the Agnelli family. In 1964, the aeronautical and motorcycle divisions split to become independent companies. The aeronautical division was named IAM Rinaldo Piaggio. Today the aeronautical company Piaggio Aero is controlled by the family of Piero Ferrari, which also holds 10% of the carmaker Ferrari.\nThe motorcycle division Vespa thrived until 1992, when Giovanni Alberto Agnelli became CEO\u2014but Agnelli was already suffering from cancer, and died in 1997. In 1999, Morgan Grenfell Private Equity acquired Piaggio.\nWeapons.\nFiat built artillery tractors for the French and Italian armies in World War I.\n\"Societ\u00e0 Anonima Fabbrica Armi Torino\" (SAFAT) was a wholly owned subsidiary of FIAT in the 1930s, designing and manufacturing weapons for the Italian armed forces. After losing a competition to produce a series of new machine-guns for the Regia Aeronautica, SAFAT was sold to the winning competitor \u2013 Societ\u00e0 Italiana Ernesto Breda, forming Breda-SAFAT.\nRail transport.\nFiat Ferroviaria's history goes back to before World War II, when Fiat provided motive power used for both Diesel and electric locomotives and railcars (\"littorine\") not only in Italy, but other parts of Europe, and in South America. Fiat produced, among the rest, the successful Pendolino tilting trains, the first working prototype four-car set being run in the mid-1970s.\nFiat Ferroviaria was later sold to Alstom in 2000.\nRecreation.\nThe Fiat Group owned the Sestriere skiing facilities; the village in the Alps is a creation of the Agnelli family. The Sestriere skiing facilities were sold by the group in 2006.\nEnterprises outside Italy.\n\"See list of Fiat Group assembly sites\"\nFiat was a key player in developing motor industries for a number of countries from the 1950s, particularly in Eastern Europe, Spain, Egypt, Ethiopia and Turkey. The AutoVAZ state works Lada products in Tolyatti (Togliatti), Russia, were Fiat based, as were SEAT products of Spain. Lada is now controlled by Renault, and SEAT by Volkswagen. A small number of Fiats were built in Bulgaria. Among Fiat's earliest foreign assembly plants was one in Poughkeepsie, New York, between 1910 and 1917.\nUnited States.\nThe American FIAT Automobile Company was founded by American licensees in 1909 as a response to 45 percent tariffs on imported automobiles. The plant was finished in the spring of 1910 and the first car rolled off the production line in September 1910; all Poughkeepsie Fiats were built with parts shipped from Italy although they usually received locally made bodywork by companies like Holbrook, Quinby, or Fleetwood. American FIAT focused on the larger and more luxurious end of the range, with the smaller Types 51 and 52 (\"Tipo\" 1 and 2) only available to order as fully built-up imports.\nThe first model offered was the Type 54, corresponding to the European \"Tipo 4.\" This has a four-cylinder engine (itself called \"Tipo 54A\") and rode on a wheelbase; it was manufactured until 1914 or 1915. This was joined by the large and expensive Type 56 in 1912, a seven-passenger touring car reserved for the American market. This model has a six-cylinder version of the Type 54 engine, displacing and mounted in a chassis with a wheelbase. In 1913 the Type 55 arrived (although some Type 55s appear to have been sold in 1912), slightly shorter than the Type 56 with a wheelbase but with a massive four-cylinder engine. This car was largely identical to the European \"Tipo 5\" and was also manufactured for export. In 1914 the fourth and final American Fiat was introduced, the smaller Type 53 \u2013 the equivalent of the Italian \"Tipo 3 Ter.\" This has a four-cylinder engine and a wheelbase. The Tipo 53 was built until 1916, while the 55 and 56 were manufactured until 1917, although late 55s seem to have been sold as \"1918s\" and they did appear in new-car catalogues that year. Fiat Italy took over the American operation in 1917 and reduced the lineup to the Type 55, now sitting on a wheelbase. NACC tax horsepower figures were 30\u00a0hp for the Type 54, 45 for the Type 56, 42 for the Type 55, and 25\u00a0hp for the Type 53. Actual outputs were higher, ranging from for the Type 53 to for the big Types 55 and 56.\nOutput was never very large, Fiats being very expensive cars at the time, with annual production averaging around 350 cars. Once the United States entered the war, no more car parts were arriving from Italy and production was halted. There were plans for restarting production after the war but they came to naught and the plant was sold to Duesenberg in February 1918. Duesenberg proceeded to transfer the machinery to their plant in Elizabeth, NJ, to build aircraft engines. At the beginning of 1928 the facilities changed hands again, now belonging to truck manufacturers Larrabee Motor Truck Co. who transferred their activities there from Binghamton. The building went on to serve various functions, being part of the Marist College campus for a while, and was torn down in 1997.\nBrazil.\nFiat Autom\u00f3veis S.A., a subsidiary of Fiat S.p.A., began making automobiles in Brazil in 1976 beginning with the production of the Fiat 147, the Brazilian version of the Italian Fiat 127, produced until 1986. More than 10,000,000 units have been produced in Fiat Autom\u00f3veis factory in Betim since 1976, plus 232,807 units in the Fiat Argentina plant of C\u00f3rdoba. The original factory, located in the city of Belo Horizonte, cost $250\u00a0million to build. The state of Minas Gerais had a 10\u201320% stake in the company and also provided special economic benefits to Fiat.\nLaunched in July 1979, the 147 was the first mass-produced car that ran on ethanol as fuel instead of petrol. The performance slightly increased and fuel consumption was 30% higher but the cost of the alcohol was a quarter of the gasoline because, at that time, petrol had become expensive as a consequence of the 1979 oil crisis. This version was nicknamed \"cachacinha\" (little cacha\u00e7a) because it had the scent of that Brazilian drink.\nIn October 1984 Fiat Autom\u00f3veis introduced the Fiat Uno, which continued on sale until the end of 2013 as the renamed Fiat Mille, resulting in total production of 3.6\u00a0million vehicles. Production of the Fiat Palio world car began in 1996.\nAfter the successful 2003 introduction of flexible-fuel vehicles in the Brazilian market, Fiat Autom\u00f3veis launched its first flex model in March 2004, the Fiat Palio, followed by the Siena and Palio Weekend. Fiat sold 665,514 vehicles in Brazil in 2008, allowing the carmaker to continue as the market leader for seven years in a row. Flex fuel automobiles represented almost 100 percent of the car sales in 2008, and 92 percent of all light-duty trucks sold.\nIn 2006 Fiat introduced the Fiat Siena Tetra fuel, a four-fuel car developed under Magneti Marelli of Fiat Brazil. This automobile can run as a flex-fuel on 100% ethanol (E100); or on E20-E25 blend, Brazil's normal ethanol gasoline blend; on pure gasoline (though no longer available in Brazil since 1993, it is still used in neighboring countries); or just on natural gas (CNG). The Siena Tetrafuel was engineered to switch from any gasoline-ethanol blend to CNG automatically, depending on the power required by road conditions.\nArgentina.\nFiat has been present in Argentina since the beginning of the 20th century. There was a Fiat manufacturing plant in C\u00f3rdoba at least as far back as 1954 when Fiat entered into a joint venture with two local companies to manufacture tractors. The company was known as Fiat-Concord until 1980. In 1959 the construction of a car plant in Caseros was approved, and 1960 saw the production there of the first Argentinian produced Fiat passenger car, a Fiat 600, after the Fiat 1100 Export and after in 1963 the Fiat 1500. In 1977 the Fiat 133 appeared; this was a rebadged SEAT 133, built in Argentina. By 1978 a car manufacturing facility was well established in C\u00f3rdoba, producing Fiat 128s as well as two models which from the Italian perspective belonged in earlier decades, the 125 (with some derivates) and the 600R.\nIn 1980 a joint venture with PSA called Sevel Argentina was begun, which lasted until 1995. The current day automobile manufacturing started with a new factory opened in C\u00f3rdoba on 20 December 1996. From April 1997 the Siena and Palio models production started.\nProduction was suspended in the early 2000s as the Argentinean economy went downhill. In 2008 Fiat invested new money and the production of Fiat Siena saloon and the Fiat Palio was started. In October 2009, a Fiat Siena HLX becomes the 2 million unit produced by Fiat in Argentina. The Fiat Auto Argentina S.A. is Fiat S.p.A. owned company.&lt;ref name=\"reuters.com/article\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nSerbia.\nIts first enterprise came in 1955, when it agreed to a deal with Yugoslav carmaker Zastava to assemble Fiats for Eastern Europe. The first cars produced by Zastava were its versions of the Fiat 1300 and Fiat 1400. By 1970, Zastava was producing parts for the newer Fiat 124 and Fiat 125 models, which were assembled in Poland. The Zastava 750, launched in 1962, was Zastava's version of the iconic Fiat 600 minicar. It outlived the car on which it was based, with production lasting until 1981. Zastavas were not popular outside of Eastern Europe before the 1980s, although they were exported to the US and several European countries under the Yugo brand during the 1980s.\nThe most famous product launched by Zastava is the Zastava 101, a front-wheel drive car based on the Fiat 128, also available as a hatchback version never sold in Italy. With the demise of the Zastava 750 in 1981, the minicar gap in the Zastava range was filled by the Zastava Koral, which was best known in Britain and America as the Yugo Tempo or Yugo 45/55. It was based on the 1971 Fiat 127, which was due to be replaced by the Fiat Uno in 1983. Hostility towards Yugoslavia in the wake of the 1992 civil unrest saw a swift ending of imports to both Britain and America. The Zastava factory in Kragujevac was later bombed, but was rebuilt after the war ended, and production continued at another factory in Kragujevac.\nIn 1987 Zastava came up with a new car design. The Zastava Florida \u2014 also known as a Yugo, and in other markets as the Yugo Sana \u2013 was styled by Giorgetto Giugiaro at the ItalDesign studio, later featured a range of more modern Peugeot engines. Sales continued in its homeland, with an update at the end of the 1990s. Zastava did not launch another new car for another 16 years. The 2003 Zastava 10 model was another Fiat design\u2014this time the second generation Punto, and in 2009 was renamed Fiat Punto Classic\nA new memorandum of understanding between Fiat and the Serb ministry of economic and regional development about the acquisition of Zastava's Kragujevac plant in 2008 led to a new company being set up in which the Italians would have a 70 percent stake and the Serb government 30 percent.&lt;ref name=\"forbes.com/feeds\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The factory was renamed from Zastava Automobili Srbija to Fiat Automobili Srbija. In 2010 and 2011, Fiat Automobili Srbija underwent large-scale reconstruction for production of the Fiat 500L in 2012.\nPoland.\nFiat automobiles have been made in Poland since 1920. In 1932, the Polskie Zak\u0142ady In\u017cynieryjne (Polish Engineering Works, PZIn\u017c) started the production of Fiat 508, produced until 1939 also as a military vehicle. In 1936 the licence was extended to include the Fiat 518 model. In 1965, the Polish communist government signed a deal with Fiat to produce selected Fiat models in Poland at the FSO factory in Warsaw that had been built in 1951. Production of the new car\u2014the Polski Fiat 125p\u2014began in 1967. It was visually identical to the Fiat 125, but it made use of older Fiat mechanicals which dated back to 1960. The car sold well in its homeland and was soon exported to Western Europe. 1978 saw the appearance of a new five-door hatchback, the FSO Polonez, that made use of Fiat 125p running gear. After 1982, Fiat withdrew its licence; since then FSO badge was reinstated with the Polski Fiat 125p surviving until 1991, and the Polonez production ending in 2002. FSO was taken over by Daewoo of South Korea in 1995, and become independent again in late 2000, after Daewoo went bankrupt and was taken over by General Motors.\nFabryka Samochod\u00f3w Ma\u0142olitra\u017cowych (FSM) in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a and Tychy was a joint venture between FSO and Fiat, and manufactured the Fiat 126(p) in 1973 and the Cinquecento in 1991. In 1992 Fiat owned 90% of FSM (called Fiat Auto Poland, since 1993) and since then it produced Cinquecento, Uno, Seicento, Siena and Palio Weekend models with the capacity up to 200.000 cars a year. In 2003, FSM become the sole producer of Fiat Panda, and in 2007, the Fiat 500 and the related Ford Ka. Capacity was increased with production reaching over 600,000 in 2009, but dropped below 300,000 in 2013, resulting in the workforce being cut by a third.\nRussia.\nIn 1966 Fiat helped USSR state industries build a new car factory (AvtoVAZ) on the Volga river. A planned city called Tolyatti (named after Palmiro Togliatti, former Italian Communist Party Secretary) was developed around the factory, which started producing a \"people's car\" similar to the Volkswagen Beetle and Citro\u00ebn 2CV of Germany and France. The new Soviet car, called the Lada, was a more spacious offering, in four-door saloon and five-door estate variants. Fiat installed British machine tools supplied by Herbert-BSA of Birmingham for the manufacture of many Lada parts. The 124's design was mechanically upgraded to survive treacherous Russian driving conditions and extremely cold winters. Imports to Western Europe, Canada, and some third world countries sold well owing to their low price. This car was upgraded to become the Lada Riva (marketing name in some markets) in 1980. Lada has gone on to develop some of its own models. The four-wheel drive Lada Niva uses some Fiat based components, e.g. engine and gearbox, but the body and four-wheel drive system are VAZ designs.\nBulgaria.\n1967\u20131971 produced Pirin-Fiat in Lovech, Bulgaria.\nTurkey.\nTOFA\u015e T\u00fcrk Otomobil Fabrikas\u0131 A.\u015e. is joint venture owned by Fiat S.p.A. and Ko\u00e7 Holding A.\u015e. (37.8% Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A., 37.8% Ko\u00e7 Holding A.\u015e. and 24.3% others). The Fiat 124 was produced under licence by TOFA\u015e as the TOFA\u015e Murat. This was replaced by a version of the Fiat 131, known as the TOFA\u015e \u015eahin. Today the Fiat Linea car is among those manufactured by the Fiat-Tofas joint venture in Turkey, and the company has 12.1% of the Turkish car market as of 2007.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, SEAT S.A. was established with Fiat S.p.A. assistance in 1950, producing Fiat models under its own brand name until 1981, when Fiat withdrew its support. In 1982 SEAT signed a cooperation agreement with the German manufacturer Volkswagen AG and by the end of 1986 after a purchase of a majority stake SEAT had become part of the Volkswagen Group. However, production of some Fiat-based models continued, ending with the Fiat-based Marbella in 1998.\nEthiopia.\nThe Fiat 131, known as the Holland Car Plc DOCC.\nEgypt.\nFollowing the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, President Gamal Abdel Nasser ordered the EGID (General Intelligence Agent) to establish a state owned automobile company. El Nasr Automotive Manufacturing Company was founded in 1960 in Helwan, Egypt. It began producing some Fiat based models, but later produced the TOFA\u015e \u015eahin under license by Tofa\u015f. The last Fiat 128 model was built in 2008, while the \u015eahin is still in production in Egypt.\nCurrently the El-Mashreq Company, a part of the Seoudi Group is the main manufacturer of Alfa Romeo and Fiat vehicles for the Egyptian market. Arab American Vehicles (AAV) also manufactured Fiats in Egypt. They assembled the Fiat Ritmo at the behest of Nasr.\nIndia.\nFiat India Automobiles Private Limited is a joint venture between Fiat S.p.A. and Mumbai based Tata Motors Limited, founded in 1997. Fiat builds the Palio Stile, Linea and Punto. The Fiat plant is situated in Ranjangaon near Pune in Maharashtra and also manufactures the Tata Indica.\nAlthough not a subsidiary of Fiat, Premier Automobiles Limited of Mumbai was licensed to manufacture versions of the Fiat 500 for the Indian market. This was followed by the Fiat 1100 in 1954. In 1973, the Fiat label was replaced with the Premier name. Premier built the Fiat 1100 and 124 into the 21st century; after a brief attempt at building the Uno in the early years of the 21st century, the companies severed their ties.\nPakistan.\nRaja Motors are the authorized manufacturers of Fiat motor vehicles in Pakistan since 1948. The manufacturing started with VESPA scooters in 1948. The project was expanded in 2001 to facilitate assembly-cum-manufacturing of the Fiat Uno. The production facility is located in Landhi Industrial Area, Karachi, Pakistan.\nSri Lanka.\nIn 1973 entrepreneur Upali Wijewardene's Upali Motor Company began assembly of the local variant of Fiat 128, known as UMC-Fiat 128. Production ended with the introduction of the open-market economy in 1978.\nNorth Korea.\nThe North Korean car manufacturer and dealer Pyeonghwa Motors assembles two Fiat models under licence since 2002: Hwiparam\u00a0(whistle)\u2014based on the Fiat Siena, Bbeokgugi\u00a0(owl)\u2014based on the Fiat Dobl\u00f2.\nChina.\nFiat entered into a 50:50 joint venture with GAC Group in 2010 to create GAC Fiat Automobiles Co., Ltd., with a factory in Changsha completed in 2012 producing a localised version of the Dodge Dart sold as the Fiat Viaggio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44954", "revid": "1307773915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44954", "title": "210", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 210 (CCX) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Faustinus and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 963 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 210 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44955", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44955", "title": "U\u00c7K", "text": "U\u00c7K may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44956", "revid": "34997143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44956", "title": "Kosovo Liberation Army", "text": "Kosovo paramilitary organization (1990s\u20131999)\nThe Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA; , U\u00c7K) was an ethnic Albanian separatist militia that sought the separation of Kosovo, the vast majority of which is inhabited by Albanians, from the Republic of Serbia and Federal Republic of Yugoslavia during the 1990s. Albanian nationalism was a central tenet of the KLA and many in its ranks supported the creation of a Greater Albania, which would encompass all Albanians in the Balkans, stressing Albanian culture, ethnicity and nation.\nMilitary precursors to the KLA began in the late 1980s with armed resistance to Yugoslav police trying to take Albanian activists in custody. By the early 1990s there were attacks on police forces and secret-service officials who abused Albanian civilians. By mid-1998 the KLA was involved in frontal battle though it was outnumbered and outgunned. Conflict escalated from 1997 onward due to the Yugoslav army retaliating with a crackdown in the region which resulted in population displacements. The bloodshed, ethnic cleansing of thousands of Albanians driving them into neighbouring countries and the potential of it to destabilize the region provoked intervention by international organizations, such as the United Nations, NATO and INGOs. NATO conducted a bombing campaign against Yugoslav forces and provided air support to KLA.\nIn September 1999, with the fighting over and an international force in place within Kosovo, the KLA was officially disbanded and thousands of its members entered the Kosovo Protection Corps, a civilian emergency protection body that replaced the KLA and Kosovo Police Force, as foreseen in United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244. The ending of the Kosovo war resulted in the emergence of offshoot guerrilla groups and political organisations from the KLA continuing violent struggles in southern Serbia (1999\u20132001) and northwestern Macedonia (2001), which resulted in peace talks and greater Albanian rights. Former KLA leaders also entered politics, some of them reaching high-ranking offices.\nThe KLA received large funds from Albanian diaspora organizations. There have been allegations that it used narcoterrorism to finance its operations. Abuses and war crimes were committed by the KLA during and after the conflict, such as massacres of civilians, prison camps and destruction of cultural heritage sites. In April 2014, the Assembly of Kosovo considered and approved the establishment of a special court to try cases involving crimes and other serious abuses allegedly committed in 1999\u20132000 by members of the KLA. In June 2020 the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office filed indictments for crimes against humanity and war crimes against a number of former KLA members, including the former president of Kosovo Hashim Tha\u00e7i.\nBackground.\nA key precursor to the Kosovo Liberation Army was the People's Movement of Kosovo (LPK). This group, who argued Kosovo's freedom could be won only through armed struggle, traces back to 1982, and played a crucial role in the creation of the KLA in 1993. Fund-raising began in the 1980s in Switzerland by Albanian exiles of the violence of 1981 and subsequent \u00e9migr\u00e9s. Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 revoked Kosovan autonomy in 1989, returning the region to its 1945 status, ejecting ethnic Albanians from the Kosovan bureaucracy and violently putting down protests. In response, Kosovar Albanians established the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK). Headed by Ibrahim Rugova, its goal was independence from Serbia, but via peaceful means. To this end, the LDK set up and developed a \"parallel state\" with a particular focus on education and healthcare. \nAlbanian nationalism was a central tenet of the KLA and many in its ranks supported the creation of a Greater Albania, which would encompass all Albanians in the Balkans, stressing Albanian culture, ethnicity and nation. It was considered a terrorist group until the breakup of Yugoslavia. The KLA itself disavowed the creation of a 'Greater Albania'. The KLA made their name known publicly for the first time in 1995, and a first public appearance followed in 1997, at which time its membership was still only around 200. Critical of the progress made by Rugova, the KLA received boosts from the 1995 Dayton Accords\u2014 these granted Kosovo nothing, and so generated a more widespread rejection of the LDK's peaceful methods \u2014 and from looted weaponry that spilled into Kosovo after the Albanian rebellion of 1997. During 1997\u201398, the Kosovo Liberation Army moved ahead of Rugova's LDK, a fact starkly illustrated by the KLA's Hashim Tha\u00e7i leading the Kosovar Albanians at the Rambouillet negotiations of spring 1999, with Rugova as his deputy.\nIn February 1996, the KLA undertook a series of attacks against police stations and Yugoslav government officers, saying that they had killed Albanian civilians as part of an ethnic cleansing campaign. Later that year, the British weekly \"The European\" carried an article by a French expert stating that \"German civil and military intelligence services have been involved in training and equipping the rebels with the aim of cementing German influence in the Balkan area. (...) The birth of the KLA in 1996 coincided with the appointment of Hansjoerg Geiger as the new head of the BND (German secret Service). (...) The BND men were in charge of selecting recruits for the KLA command structure from the 500,000 Kosovars in Albania.\" Matthias K\u00fcntzel tried to prove later on that German secret diplomacy had been instrumental in helping the KLA since its creation.\nSerbian authorities denounced the KLA as a terrorist organisation and increased the number of security forces in the region. This had the effect of boosting the credibility of the embryonic KLA among the Kosovar Albanian population. Not long before NATO's military action commenced, the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants reported that \"Kosovo Liberation Army ... attacks aimed at trying to 'cleanse' Kosovo of its ethnic Serb population.\"\nOne of the goals mentioned by the KLA commanders was the formation of Greater Albania, irredentist concept of lands that are considered to form the national homeland by many Albanians, encompassing Kosovo, Albania, and the ethnic Albanian minority of neighbouring Macedonia and Montenegro.\nKosovo War.\nBetween 5 and 7 March 1998, the Yugoslav Army launched an operation on Prekaz. The operation followed an earlier firefight (28 February) in which four policemen were killed and several more were wounded; Adem Jashari, a KLA leader, escaped. In Prekaz, 28 militants were killed, along with 30 civilians, most belonging to Jashari's family. Amnesty International claimed that it was a military operation focused primarily on the elimination of Jashari and his family.\nOn 23 April 1998, the Yugoslav Army (VJ) ambushed the KLA near the Albanian-Yugoslav border. The KLA had tried to smuggle arms and supplies into Kosovo. The Yugoslav Army, although greatly outnumbered, had no casualties, while 19 militants were killed.\nAccording to Roland Keith, a field office director of the OSCE's Kosovo Verification Mission:\nUpon my arrival the war increasingly evolved into a mid intensity conflict as ambushes, the encroachment of critical lines of communication and the [KLA] kidnapping of security forces resulted in a significant increase in government casualties which in turn led to major Yugoslavian reprisal security operations... By the beginning of March these terror and counter-terror operations led to the inhabitants of numerous villages fleeing, or being dispersed to either other villages, cities or the hills to seek refuge... The situation was clearly that KLA provocations, as personally witnessed in ambushes of security patrols which inflicted fatal and other casualties, were clear violations of the previous October's agreement [and United Nations Security Council Resolution 1199].\nAt one point during the Kosovo War, the KLA changed their tactics from hit and run operations to conventional warfare. In July 1998, the KLA captured the cities of Rahovec and Malisheva and expanded their occupation of territory to 40% of Kosovo. However, without enough manpower and heavy weaponry to defend their gains, both cities quickly fell to Yugoslav forces. Their occupation of Rahovec was marred by acts of atrocities committed against Serbian civilians. On 24 August 1998, the KLA reverted to guerrilla warfare and employed new tactics including the appointment of new commanders, central authorities, expanded training camps and military prisons.\nSome sources say that the KLA never won a battle, while others say it won relatively few battles.\nFunding.\nThe KLA received large funds from the Albanian diaspora in Europe and the United States, but also from Albanian businessmen in Kosovo, notably Ismet Asllani, who dedicated his entire wealth and logistics network to supporting the war effort across regions such as Drenica, Dukagjin, and Llap. It is estimated that those funds amounted from $75 million to $100 million and mainly came from the Albanian diaspora in Switzerland, United States and Germany. The KLA received the majority of its funds through the Homeland Calls Fund, but significant funds were also transferred directly to the war zones. Apart from the financial contributions, the KLA also received contributions in kind, especially from the United States and Switzerland. These included weapons, but also military fatigues, boots and other supporting equipment.\nAccording to the Stockholm International peace research institute: In 1999, the KLA's source of arms were Switzerland, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Albania, and United States with non-state armament through the Albanian diaspora, whereas the Armed Forces of Serbia and Montenegro were funded by Israel. The weaponry received through Albania were often cheap and faulty often so bad that KLA smugglers could buy a Kalashnikov for as little as $5.\nThe KLA received its funding in multiple decentralized ways. Apart from the Homeland Calls Fund, which mostly went to KLA operations in the Drenica region, the KLA also received donations through personal contacts of commanders with Albanians in the diaspora. Members of the diaspora usually stressed the difficulties through which KLA's soldiers were going through to fight an uneven battle. They often used stories of KLA members or civilian survivors of massacres to convince others to donate. After collection, the money was then transferred to its destination in different ways. The secrecy of the Swiss banking system allowed some of the funding to be transferred directly to the locations where military equipment would be purchased. From the United States, most of the money was legally carried by individuals in suitcases, who reported to the FBI and other federal authorities that they were sending money to the KLA. The KLA also received some funding from the Three-Percent Fund, which was set up by the institutions of Republic of Kosova led by Bujar Bukoshi and was also collected from the Albanian diaspora.\nAccording to some sources, the KLA may have received funds from individuals involved in drug trade. However insufficient evidence exists that the KLA itself was involved in such activities. For example, Swiss citizens believe that elements of the Albanian community in Switzerland control narcotics trade in Switzerland. Some of the money earned through these illegal activities may have gone to the KLA through contributions to the Homeland Calls Fund or through the usual funding channels in which individuals and businessmen engaged in legitimate economic activities donated. This however is insufficient evidence to claim that the KLA itself got involved in narcotics trade or other criminal activities.\nIn a hearing before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security, Ralf Mutschke from the Interpol General Secretariat claimed that half of the funding that had reached the KLA, which he estimated to have been 900 million DM in total, may have come from drug trafficking. Mother Jones obtained a congressional briefing paper for the U.S. Congress, which stated: \"We would be remiss to dismiss allegations that between 30 and 50 percent of the KLA's money comes from drugs.\" Furthermore, journalist Peter Klebnikov added that after the NATO bombing, KLA-linked heroin traffickers began using Kosovo again as a major supply route. Citing German Federal Police, he said that in 2000, an estimated 80% of Europe's heroin supply was controlled by Kosovar Albanians. According to scholars Gary Dempsey and Roger Fontaine, by 1999, Western intelligence agencies estimated that over $250m of narcotics money had found its way into KLA coffers. Scholar Henry Perritt, who studied the KLA, argues that \"[a]ll available evidence refutes the proposition aggressively advanced by the Milosevic regime that the KLA was mainly financed by drug and prostitution money.\"\nRecruitment.\nIn Kosovo.\nThe original core of KLA in the early 1990s was a closely knitted group of commanders consisting of commissioned and non commissioned officers belonging to reserve, regular and territorial defense units of the Yugoslav army (JNA). In 1996, the KLA consisted of only a few hundred fighters. Within the context of the armed struggle, in 1996-1997 a report by the CIA noted that the KLA could mobilize tens of thousands of supporters in Kosovo within a two to three year time frame. By the end of 1998, the KLA had 17,000 men. While religion was not an explicit ideology of the KLA, it was practically fully made up of muslim-Albanians. \nForeign volunteers.\nAlbanian recruits from neighbouring Macedonia joined the KLA and their numbers ranged from several dozen into the thousands. Following the war some Albanians from Macedonia have felt that their military participation and assistance to fellow Kosovan Albanians during the conflict has not been properly recognised in Kosovo.\nFormer KLA spokesman Jakup Krasniqi said that volunteers came from \"Sweden, Belgium, the UK, Germany and the U.S.\". The KLA included many foreign volunteers from West Europe, mostly from Germany and Switzerland, and also ethnic Albanians from the U.S.\nAccording to the Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, by September 1998 there were foreign mercenaries from Albania, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina (Muslims) and Chechnya in the KLA ranks. Citing a 2003 report by the Serbian government, academics Lyubov Mincheva and Ted Gurr claim that the Abu Bekir Sidik mujahideen unit of 115 members operated in Drenica in May\u2013June 1998, and dozen of its members were Saudis and Egyptians, reportedly funded by Islamist organizations. They further claim that the group was later disbanded, and no permanent Jihadist presence was established. The failure of Islamists groups to gain a foothold with the ranks of the separatist movement is related to the secular foundation of Albanian nationalism and the heavily secular attitudes of Kosovo Albanians which did not leave room for the development of Islamist ideologies.\nDuring the Kosovo conflict Milo\u0161evi\u0107 and his supporters portrayed the KLA as a terrorist organisation of militant Islam. The CIA advised the KLA to avoid involvement with Muslim extremists. The KLA rejected offers of assistance from Muslim fundamentalists. There was an understanding within the ranks of the KLA that foreign assistance from Muslim fundamentalists would limit support toward the cause of Kosovo Albanians in the West.\nAftermath (post\u20131999).\nAfter the war, the KLA was transformed into the Kosovo Protection Corps, which worked alongside NATO forces patrolling the province. In 2000 there was unrest in Mitrovica, with a Yugoslav police officer and physician killed, and three officers and a physician wounded, in February. In March, the FRY complained about the escalation of violence in the region, claiming this showed that the KLA was still active. Between April and September the FRY issued several documents to the UN Security Council about violence against Serbs and other non-Albanians.\nSome people from non-Albanian communities such as the Serbs and Romani fled Kosovo, some fearing revenge attacks by armed people and returning refugees and others were pressured by the KLA and armed gangs to leave. The Yugoslav Red Cross had estimated a total of 30,000 refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) from Kosovo, most of whom were Serb. The UNHCR estimated the figure at 55,000 refugees who had fled to Montenegro and Central Serbia, most of whom were Kosovo Serbs: \"Over 90 mixed villages in Kosovo have now been emptied of Serb inhabitants and other Serbs continue leaving, either to be displaced in other parts of Kosovo or fleeing into central Serbia.\"\nIn post war Kosovo, KLA fighters have been venerated by Kosovar Albanian society with the publishing of literature such as biographies, the erection of monuments and commemorative events. The exploits of Adem Jashari have been celebrated and turned into legend by former KLA members and by Kosovar Albanian society. Several songs, literature works, monuments, memorials have been dedicated to him, and some streets and buildings bear his name across Kosovo.\nInsurgency in south Serbia and Macedonia.\nAfter the end of the Kosovo War in 1999 with the signing of the Kumanovo agreement, a 5-kilometre-wide Ground Safety Zone (GSZ) was created. It served as a buffer zone between the Yugoslav Army and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). In June 1999, a new Albanian militant insurgent group was formed under the Liberation Army of Pre\u0161evo, Medve\u0111a and Bujanovac (U\u00c7PMB), which started training in the GSZ. The group began attacking Serbian civilians and police, which escalated into an insurgency.\nWith the signing of the Kon\u010dulj Agreement in May 2001, the former KLA and U\u00c7PMB fighters next moved to western Macedonia where the National Liberation Army (NLA) was established, which fought against the Macedonian government in 2001. Ali Ahmeti organized the NLA from former KLA and U\u00c7PMB fighters from Kosovo, Albanian insurgents from the Liberation Army of Pre\u0161evo, Medve\u0111a and Bujanovac in Serbia, young Albanian radicals, nationalists from Macedonia, and foreign mercenaries. The acronym was the same as the KLA's in Albanian.\nKLA veterans in politics.\nA number of KLA figures now play a major role in Kosovar politics.\nIndictments.\nHajredin Bala, an ex-KLA prison guard, was sentenced on 30 November 2005 to 13 years' imprisonment for the mistreatment of three prisoners at the Llapushnik prison camp, his personal role in the \"maintenance and enforcement of the inhumane conditions\" of the camp, aiding the torture of one prisoner, and of participating in the murder of nine prisoners from the camp who were marched to the Berisha Mountains on 25 or 26 July 1998 and killed. Bala appealed the sentence and the appeal is still pending.\nForeign support.\nThe United States (and NATO) directly supported the KLA. The CIA funded, trained and supplied the KLA (as they had earlier the Bosnian Army). As disclosed to \"The Sunday Times\" by CIA sources, \"American intelligence agents have admitted they helped to train the Kosovo Liberation Army before NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia\".\nJames Bissett, Canadian Ambassador to Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, wrote in 2001 on the \"Toronto Star\" that media reports indicate that \"as early as 1998, the Central Intelligence Agency assisted by the British Special Air Service were arming and training Kosovo Liberation Army members in Albania to foment armed rebellion in Kosovo. (...) The hope was that with Kosovo in flames NATO could intervene ...\". According to Tim Judah, KLA representatives had already met with American, British, and Swiss intelligence agencies in 1996, and possibly \"several years earlier\".\nAmerican Republican Congressman Dana Rohrabacher, while opposed to American ground troops in Kosovo, advocated for America providing support to the KLA to help them gain their freedom. He was honored by the Albanian American Civic League at a New Jersey located fundraising event on 23 July 2001. President of the League, Joseph J. DioGuardi, praised Rohrabacher for his support to the KLA, saying \"He was the first member of Congress to insist that the United States arm the Kosovo Liberation Army, and one of the few members who to this day publicly supports the independence of Kosovo.\" Rohrabacher gave a speech in support of American equipping the KLA with weaponry, comparing it to French support of America in the Revolutionary War.\nWar crimes.\nThere have been reports of war crimes committed by the KLA both during and after the conflict. These have been directed against Serbs, other ethnic minorities (primarily the Roma) and against ethnic Albanians accused of collaborating with Serb authorities. According to a 2001 report by Human Rights Watch (HRW):\nThe KLA was responsible for serious abuses... including abductions and murders of Serbs and ethnic Albanians considered collaborators with the state.\nElements of the KLA are also responsible for post-conflict attacks on Serbs, Roma, and other non-Albanians, as well as ethnic Albanian political rivals... widespread and systematic burning and looting of homes belonging to Serbs, Roma, and other minorities and the destruction of Orthodox churches and monasteries... combined with harassment and intimidation designed to force people from their homes and communities... elements of the KLA are clearly responsible for many of these crimes.\nThe KLA engaged in tit-for-tat attacks against Serbs in Kosovo, reprisals against ethnic Albanians who \"collaborated\" with the Serbian government, and bombed police stations and cafes known to be frequented by Serb officials, killing innocent civilians in the process. Most of its activities were funded by drug running, though its ties to community groups and Albanian exiles gave it local popularity.\nThe Panda Bar incident, a massacre of Serb teenagers in a caf\u00e9, led to an immediate crackdown on the Albanian-populated southern quarters of Pe\u0107 during which Serbian police killed two Albanians. Aleksandar Vu\u010di\u0107 has stated that there is no evidence that the murder was committed by Albanians, as previously believed. The Serbian Organised Crime Prosecutor's Office launched a new investigation in 2016 and reached the conclusion that the massacre was not perpetrated by Albanians. Many years after the incident, the Serbian government has officially acknowledged that it was perpetrated by agents of the Serbian Secret Service.\nThe exact number of victims of the KLA is not known. According to a Serbian government report, the KLA had killed and kidnapped 3,276 people of various ethnic descriptions including some Albanians. From 1 January 1998 to 10 June 1999 the KLA killed 988 people and kidnapped 287; in the period from 10 June 1999 to 11 November 2001, when NATO took control in Kosovo, 847 were reported to have been killed and 1,154 kidnapped. This comprised both civilians and security force personnel. Of those killed in the first period, 335 were civilians, 351 soldiers, 230 police and 72 were unidentified. By nationality, 87 of the killed civilians were Serbs, 230 Albanians, and 18 of other nationalities. Following the withdrawal of Serbian and Yugoslav security forces from Kosovo in June 1999, all casualties were civilians, the vast majority being Serbs. According to Human Rights Watch, as \"many as one thousand Serbs and Roma have been murdered or have gone missing since 12 June 1999... elements of the KLA are clearly responsible for many of these crimes\".\nA Serbian court sentenced 9 former KLA members for murdering 32 non-Albanian civilians. In the same case, another 35 civilians are missing while 153 were tortured and released.\nUse of child soldiers.\nThe Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the UN General Assembly on 20 November 1989, entered into force on 2 September 1990 and was valid throughout the conflict. Article 38 of this Convention state the age of 15 as the minimum for recruitment or participation in armed conflict. Article 38 requires state parties to prevent anyone under the age of 15 from taking direct part in hostilities and to refrain from recruiting anyone under the age of 15 years.\nThe participation of persons under the age of 18 in the KLA was confirmed in October 2000 when details of the registration of 16,024 KLA soldiers by the International Organization for Migration in Kosovo became known. Ten percent of this number were under the age of 18. The majority of them were 16 and 17 years old. Around 2% were below the age of 16. These were mainly girls recruited to cook for the soldiers rather than to actually fight.\nOrgan theft allegations.\nCarla Del Ponte, a long-time ICTY chief prosecutor, claimed in her book \"\" (2008) that there were instances of organ trafficking in 1999 after the end of the Kosovo War. The allegations have been rejected by Kosovar authorities as fabrications while the ICTY has said \"no reliable evidence had been obtained to substantiate the allegations\". In early 2011 the European Parliament's Committee on Foreign Affairs viewed a report by Dick Marty on the alleged criminal activities and alleged organ harvesting controversy; however, the Members of Parliament criticised the report, citing lack of evidence, and Marty responded that a witness protection program was needed in Kosovo before he could provide more details on witnesses because their lives were in danger.\nIn 2011, France 24 obtained a classified document which dated back to 2003 and revealed that the UN knew about the organ trafficking before it was mentioned by Carla del Ponte in 2008.\nIn July 2014, American attorney Clint Williamson, the former United States Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues, announced that he and his team had found \"compelling indications\" that approximately 10 prisoners had been killed so their organs could be harvested. \"The fact that it occurred on a limited scale does not diminish the savagery of such a crime,\" Williamson said, but added that the level of evidence was insufficient to file charges against any particular individual.\nMurders.\nOn 24 June 2020, Hashim Tha\u00e7i, then President of Kosovo, Kadri Veseli and eight other former leaders of the KLA, were indicted by the Specialist Prosecutor's Office (SPO) at the International Court of Justice in Hague. The indictment charges the suspects with approximately 100 murders of Kosovo Albanians, Kosovo Serbs, Kosovo Roma, and political opponents. According to the Specialist Prosecutor it was necessary to make the issue public due to repeated efforts by Tha\u00e7i and Veseli to obstruct and undermine the work of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers.\nMassacres.\nIn 2003, the daily Serbian newspaper \"Ve\u010dernje novosti\" published wartime photographs of three KLA soldiers with the heads of decapitated Serbs. The newspaper identified two of the three KLA members as Sadik Chuflaj and his son Valon Chuflaj, who according to the newspaper then worked for the Kosovo Protection Corps. Bojan Cvetkovic, a volunteer soldier who had been only on duty for weeks was identified as one of the victims while the Serbian Radical Party later confirmed that soldier Aleksandar Njegovic who was a SRP member, was the second victim out of three other soldiers that went missing at the same time.\nDestroyed medieval churches and monuments.\nCultural historian Andr\u00e1s Riedlmayer stated that no Serbian Orthodox churches or monasteries were damaged or destroyed by the KLA during the war. Riedlmayer and Andrew Herscher conducted a survey of Kosovo cultural heritage for the ICTY and UNMIK following the war and their results found that most of the damage to the churches occurred during revenge attacks following the conflict and the return of Kosovo Albanian refugees. In 1999 KLA fighters were accused of vandalizing Devi\u010d monastery and terrorizing the staff. The KFOR troops said KLA rebels vandalized centuries-old murals and paintings in the chapel and stole two cars and all the monastery's food.\nKarima Bennoune, United Nations special rapporteur in the field of cultural rights, referred to the many reports of widespread attacks against churches committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army. In 2014, John Clint Williamson announced EU Special Investigative Task Force's investigative findings and he indicated that a certain element of the KLA following the conclusion of the war (June 1999) intentionally targeted minority populations in organized ethnic cleansing campaign with acts of persecution that also included desecration and destruction of churches and other religious sites. Fabio Maniscalco, an Italian archaeologist, specialist about the protection of cultural property, described that KLA members seized icons and liturgical ornaments as they ransacked and that they proceeded to destroy Christian Orthodox churches and monasteries with mortar bombs after the arrival of KFOR.\nPrison camps.\nSeveral survivors of KLA run prison camps in Albania have come forward to tell their stories of being kidnapped and transported to these camps where they witnessed the torture and killing of other prisoners. In 2009, eyewitness testimonies from former inmates and KLA fighters described the detention of Albanian, Roma and Serb civilians from the area of Prizren in KLA run prison camps in the Albanian town of Kuk\u00ebs. Despite the prison camp initially being set up, with assistance from the Albanian army, to detain unruly KLA fighters, acts of torture and extrajudicial killings were committed by the KLA against Albanian, Roma, and Serb civilians. According to one former KLA fighter:\nIt didn't seem strange at the time...but now, looking back, I know that some of the things that were done to innocent civilians were wrong. But the people who did those things act as if nothing happened, and continue to hurt their own people, Albanians.\nSexual violence.\nSince the entry of the NATO-led Kosovo Force, rapes of Serb and Romani, as well as Albanian women perceived as collaborators, by ethnic Albanians and sometimes by KLA members have been documented.\nStatus as a terrorist group.\nThe Yugoslav authorities, under Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107, regarded the KLA as terrorist group. In February 1998, U.S. President Bill Clinton's special envoy to the Balkans, Robert Gelbard, condemned both the actions of the Serb government and of the KLA, and described the KLA as \"without any questions, a terrorist group\". UN resolution 1160 took a similar stance.\nAllegedly the 1997 U.S. State Department's official list of \"Foreign Terrorist Organizations\" did not include the KLA but the U.S. State Department might have listed it as a terrorist organization in 1998 presumably by the fact that it was financing its operations with money from the international heroin trade and loans from Islamic countries. In March 1998, just one month later Gerbald had to modify his statements to say that KLA had not been classified legally by the U.S. government as a terrorist group, and the U.S. government approached the KLA leaders to make them interlocutors with the Serbs. \"The Wall Street Journal\" claimed later that the U.S. government had in February 1998 removed the KLA from the list of terrorist organisations, a removal that has never been confirmed. France delisted the KLA in late 1998, after strong U.S. and UK lobbying. KLA is still present in the MIPT Terrorism Knowledge Base list of terrorist groups, and is listed as an inactive terrorist organisation by the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism. \nDuring the war, the KLA troops collaborated with the NATO troops, and one of its members was called by NATO the embodiment of the Kosovo \"freedom fighters\". In late 1999 the KLA was disbanded and its members entered the Kosovo Protection Corps. Most states which faced international activity by the KLA on their territory never officially designated it as a terrorist organization.\nInvestigations for war crimes.\nIn 2005, the KLA commander Haradin Bala was convicted of war crimes and crimes against humanity against Serbs and Albanians by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. KLA commanders and later Kosovo politicians, Ramush Haradinaj and Fatmir Limaj were acquitted, but the court noted that there were difficulties because many witnesses were fearful of giving testimonies, while others changed their testimonies and some died in mysterious circumstances. In addition, there were convictions for witness-tampering regarding these two cases.\nIn 2010, a report by the Council of Europe accused KLA guerrillas of killing civilian Serbs and ethnic Albanian political opponents. Based on the Council of Europe report, the Special Investigative Task Force (SITF) was created in 2011 to investigate the allegations. The SITF chief prosecutor presented his general findings in 2014 resulting in the creation of the specialist chambers in The Hague to adjudicate the cases.\nIn April 2014, the Assembly of Kosovo considered and approved the establishment of a special court of Kosovo to try alleged war crimes and other serious abuses committed during and after the 1998\u201399 Kosovo war. The court will adjudicate cases against individuals based on a 2010 Council of Europe report by the Swiss senator Dick Marty. The proceedings will be EU-funded and held in The Hague, though it would still be a Kosovo national court. Defendants will likely include members of the Kosovo Liberation Army who are alleged to have committed crimes against ethnic minorities and political opponents, meaning the court is likely to meet with some unpopularity at home, where the KLA are still widely considered heroes.\nIn 2017, ten members of the KLA, including Sylejman Selimi who was ex-head of the Kosovo Security Force and later ambassador to Albania, were convicted for war crimes against civilians.\nOn June 24, 2020, the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office filed a ten-count Indictment, charging Kosovo President Hashim Tha\u00e7i, Kadri Veseli and others for crimes against humanity and war crimes. The prosecutors said that Hashim Thaci and Kadri Veseli repeatedly tried to obstruct and undermine the work of the KSC (Special Court of Kosovo), \"in an attempt to ensure that they do not face justice\". In July 2020, Tha\u00e7i was questioned by war crimes prosecutors at The Hague.\nIn September 2020, Agim \u00c7eku was summoned by the prosecutors as a war crimes suspect. The same month, the former KLA commander Salih Mustafa was arrested and transferred to the detention facilities in The Hague, based on a \"warrant, transfer order and confirmed indictment issued by a pre-trial judge\". Mustafa was charged with the war crimes of arbitrary detention, cruel treatment, torture and murder. The same month, Hysni Gucati (Chairman of the Kosovo Liberation Army War Veterans Association) and Nasim Haradinaj (Deputy Chairman of the Kosovo Liberation Army War Veterans Association) were also arrested and transferred to the Kosovo Specialist Chambers's Detention Unit. They were charged for obstructing Special Court of Kosovo officials in performing their duties, intimidation during criminal proceedings, retaliation and violating secrecy of proceedings.\nIn November 2020, Thaci, a deputy in the Kosovo parliament Rexhep Selimi, the president of Thaci's Kosovo Democratic Party Kadri Veseli and veteran Kosovo politician Jakup Krasniqi were arrested and transferred to the detention center of the Kosovo Tribunal in The Hague on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.\nIn December 2020, the Parliament of Albania decided to create a committee in order to investigate the accusations against KLA of human rights violations in both Kosovo and north Albania where it had bases. Prime Minister Edi Rama accused the opposition chief Lulzim Basha of helping the UN to investigate the KLA and called him a traitor. Basha denied the accusations.\nIn 2020, Serbian authorities arrested Nezir Mehmetaj at the Merdare. He is accused of participating in war crimes against civilians including murders and burning and looting of private properties in the village of Rudice at Klina during the war. He denied the accusations.\nIn February 2021, the president of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, Ekaterina Trendafilova, informed the European diplomats that there were increasing efforts from Kosovo to undermine the court's work and warned about the safety of the witnesses. She mentioned that there were attempts to challenge the law and to pardon those convicted of crimes. In addition she said that Kosovo is trying hard to move the court from Hague to Pristina (capital of Kosovo) and such a move would \"risk the lives, safety and security of the people who have or will be willing to cooperate with the court\".\nIn March 2021, Belgian authorities arrested Pjeter Shala, a former KLA commander on war crimes charges.\nThe United States Country Reports on Human Rights Practices of 2021 reported that \"leading politicians, civil society leaders and veterans organisations\" in Kosovo were trying to undermine the Hague court.\nIn May 2022, more charges were added for war crimes allegedly committed in 1998 and 1999 by KLA members at the dormitories in Budakove and Semetishte. According to the final indictment, most of the crimes committed at detention centres in Kosovo and Albania.\nIn December 2022 Salih Mustafa, who had been arrested in September 2020, was convicted in The Hague of the war crimes of arbitrary detention, torture, and murder, but not convicted of cruel treatment for legal reasons. He was sentenced to 26 years in prison. The Trial Panel also mentioned that the victims and witnesses had shown tremendous courage cooperating with the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor, because they were subjected to threats and intimidation in Kosovo for their cooperation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Below is the decision of the judges for Salih Mustafa in details:\nMr Mustafa, given that you have been found guilty of more than one crime, the Panel\nhas determined an individual sentence for each crime for which a conviction has been\nentered, pursuant to Rule 163(4) of the Rules. I will thus first set out these individual\nsentences, thereafter I will, pronounce a single sentence for the totality of your\ncriminal conduct.\nThe Panel has determined:\nThe Panel sentences you to a single sentence of twenty-six (26) years of imprisonment,\nwith credit for the time served.\nKosovo provides help to former KLA members but does not support the victims of war crimes, despite the Chambers' requests.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44957", "revid": "42002101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44957", "title": "KLA", "text": "KLA may refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44958", "revid": "49222050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44958", "title": "Water tower", "text": "Elevated structure supporting a tank\nA water tower is an elevated structure supporting a water tank constructed at a height sufficient to pressurize a distribution system for potable water, and to provide emergency storage for fire protection. Water towers often operate in conjunction with underground or surface service reservoirs, which store treated water close to where it will be used. Other types of water towers may only store raw (non-potable) water for fire protection or industrial purposes, and may not necessarily be connected to a public water supply.\nWater towers are able to supply water even during power outages, because they rely on hydrostatic pressure produced by elevation of water (due to gravity) to push the water into domestic and industrial water distribution systems; however, they cannot supply the water for a long time without power, because a pump is typically required to refill the tower. A water tower also serves as a reservoir to help with water needs during peak usage times. The water level in the tower typically falls during the peak usage hours of the day, and then a pump fills it back up during the night. This process also keeps the water from freezing in cold weather, since the tower is constantly being drained and refilled.\nHistory.\nAlthough the use of elevated water storage tanks has existed since ancient times in various forms, the modern use of water towers for pressurized public water systems developed during the mid-19th century, as steam-pumping became more common, and better pipes that could handle higher pressures were developed. In the United Kingdom, standpipes consisted of tall, exposed, N-shaped pipes, used for pressure relief and to provide a fixed elevation for steam-driven pumping engines which tended to produce a pulsing flow, while the pressurized water distribution system required constant pressure. Standpipes also provided a convenient fixed location to measure flow rates. Designers typically enclosed the riser pipes in decorative masonry or wooden structures. By the late 19th century, standpipes grew to include storage tanks to meet the ever-increasing demands of growing cities.\nMany early water towers are now considered historically significant and have been included in various heritage listings around the world. Some are converted to apartments or exclusive penthouses. In certain areas, such as New York City in the United States, smaller water towers are constructed for individual buildings. In California and some other states, domestic water towers enclosed by siding (tankhouses) were once built (1850s\u20131930s) to supply individual homes; windmills pumped water from hand-dug wells up into the tank in New York.\nWater towers were used to supply water stops for steam locomotives on railroad lines. Early steam locomotives required water stops every .\nDesign and construction.\nA variety of materials can be used to construct a typical water tower; steel and reinforced or prestressed concrete are most often used (with wood, fiberglass, or brick also in use), incorporating an interior coating to protect the water from any effects from the lining material. The reservoir in the tower may be spherical, cylindrical, or an ellipsoid, with a minimum height of approximately and a minimum of in diameter. A standard water tower typically has a height of approximately . \nPressurization occurs through the hydrostatic pressure of the elevation of water; for every of elevation, it produces of pressure. of elevation produces roughly , which is enough pressure to operate and provide for most domestic water pressure and distribution system requirements.\nThe height of the tower provides the pressure for the water supply system, and it may be supplemented with a pump. The volume of the reservoir and diameter of the piping provide and sustain flow rate. However, relying on a pump to provide pressure is expensive; to keep up with varying demand, the pump would have to be sized to meet peak demands. During periods of low demand, jockey pumps are used to meet these lower water flow requirements. The water tower reduces the need for electrical consumption of cycling pumps and thus the need for an expensive pump control system, as this system would have to be sized sufficiently to give the same pressure at high flow rates.\nVery high volumes and flow rates are needed when fighting fires. With a water tower present, pumps can be sized for average demand, not peak demand; the water tower can provide water pressure during the day and pumps will refill the water tower when demands are lower.\nUsing wireless sensor networks to monitor water levels inside the tower allows municipalities to automatically monitor and control pumps without installing and maintaining expensive data cables.\nArchitecture.\nThe adjacent image shows three architectural approaches to incorporating these tanks in the design of a building, one on East 57th Street in New York City. From left to right, a fully enclosed and ornately decorated brick structure, a simple unadorned roofless brick structure hiding most of the tank but revealing the top of the tank, and a simple utilitarian structure that makes no effort to hide the tanks or otherwise incorporate them into the design of the building.\nThe technology dates to at least the 19th century, and for a long time New York City required that all buildings higher than six stories be equipped with a rooftop water tower. Two companies in New York build water towers, both of which are family businesses in operation since the 19th century.\nThe original water tower builders were barrel makers who expanded their craft to meet a modern need as buildings in the city grew taller in height. Even today, no sealant is used to hold the water in. The wooden walls of the water tower are held together with steel cables or straps, but water leaks through the gaps when first filled. As the water saturates the wood, it swells, the gaps close and become impermeable. The rooftop water towers store of water until it is needed in the building below. The upper portion of water is skimmed off the top for everyday use while the water in the bottom of the tower is held in reserve to fight fire. When the water drops below a certain level, a pressure switch, level switch or float valve will activate a pump or open a public water line to refill the water tower.\nArchitects and builders have taken varied approaches to incorporating water towers into the design of their buildings. On many large commercial buildings, water towers are completely hidden behind an extension of the facade of the building. For cosmetic reasons, apartment buildings often enclose their tanks in rooftop structures, either simple unadorned rooftop boxes, or ornately decorated structures intended to enhance the visual appeal of the building. Many buildings, however, leave their water towers in plain view atop utilitarian framework structures.\nWater towers are common in India, where the electricity supply is erratic in most places.\nIf the pumps fail (such as during a power outage), then water pressure will be lost, causing potential public health concerns. Many U.S. states require a \"boil-water advisory\" to be issued if water pressure drops below . This advisory presumes that the lower pressure might allow pathogens to enter the system.\nSome have been converted to serve modern purposes, as for example, the Wie\u017ca Ci\u015bnie\u0144 (Wroc\u0142aw water tower) in Wroc\u0142aw, Poland which is today a restaurant complex. Others have been converted to residential use.\nHistorically, railroads that used steam locomotives required a means of replenishing the locomotive's tenders. Water towers were common along the railroad. The tenders were usually replenished by water cranes, which were fed by a water tower.\nSome water towers are also used as observation towers, and some restaurants, such as the Goldbergturm in Sindelfingen, Germany, or the second of the three Kuwait Towers, in the State of Kuwait. It is also common to use water towers as the location of transmission mechanisms in the UHF range with small power, for instance for closed rural broadcasting service, amateur radio, or cellular telephone service.\nIn hilly regions, local topography can be substituted for structures to elevate the tanks. These tanks are often nothing more than concrete cisterns terraced into the sides of local hills or mountains, but function identically to the traditional water tower. The tops of these tanks can be landscaped or used as park space, if desired.\nSpheres and spheroids.\nThe Chicago Bridge and Iron Company has built many of the water spheres and spheroids found in the United States. The website \"World's Tallest Water Sphere\" describes the distinction between a water sphere and water spheroid thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A water sphere is a type of water tower that has a large sphere at the top of its post. The sphere looks like a golf ball sitting on a tee or a round lollipop. A cross section of a sphere in any direction (east-west, north-south, or top-bottom) is a perfect circle. A water spheroid looks like a water sphere, but the top is wider than it is tall. A spheroid looks like a round pillow that is somewhat flattened. A cross section of a spheroid in two directions (east-west or north-south) is an ellipse, but in only one direction (top-bottom) is it a perfect circle. Both spheres and spheroids are special-case ellipsoids: spheres have symmetry in 3 directions, spheroids have symmetry in 2 directions. Scalene ellipsoids have 3 unequal length axes and three unequal cross sections.\nThe Union Watersphere is a water tower topped with a sphere-shaped water tank in Union, New Jersey, and characterized as the \"World's Tallest Water Sphere\".\nA \"Star Ledger\" article suggested a water tower in Erwin, North Carolina completed in early 2012, tall and holding , had become the World's Tallest Water Sphere. However, photographs of the Erwin water tower revealed the new tower to be a water spheroid.\nThe water tower in Braman, Oklahoma, built by the Kaw Nation and completed in 2010, is tall and can hold . Slightly taller than the Union Watersphere, it is also a spheroid.\nAnother tower in Oklahoma, built in 1986 and billed as the \"largest water tower in the country\", is tall, can hold , and is located in Edmond.\nThe \"Earthoid\", a perfectly spherical tank located in Germantown, Maryland, U.S., is tall and holds of water. The name is taken from it being painted to resemble a globe of the world.\nThe golf ball-shaped tank of the water tower at Gonzales, California is supported by three tubular legs and reaches about high.\nThe Watertoren (or Water Towers) in Eindhoven, Netherlands contain three spherical tanks, each in diameter and capable of holding of water, on three spires were completed in 1970.\nDecoration and Traditions.\nWater towers can be surrounded by ornate coverings including fancy brickwork, a large ivy-covered trellis or they can be simply painted. Some city water towers have the name of the city painted in large letters on the roof, as a navigational aid to aviators and motorists. Sometimes the decoration can be humorous. An example of this are water towers built side by side, labeled \"HOT\" and \"COLD\". Cities in the United States possessing side-by-side water towers labeled HOT and COLD include Granger, Iowa; Canton, Kansas; Pratt, Kansas, and St. Clair, Missouri. Eveleth, Minnesota at one time had two such towers, but no longer does.\n&lt;br&gt;\nMany small towns in the United States use their water towers to advertise local tourism, their local high school sports teams, or other locally notable facts. A \"mushroom\" water tower was built in \u00d6rebro, Sweden and holds almost two million gallons of water.\nAlternatives.\nAlternatives to water towers are simple pumps mounted on top of the water pipes to increase the water pressure. This new approach is more straightforward, but also more subject to potential public health risks; if the pumps fail, then loss of water pressure may result in entry of contaminants into the water system. Most large water utilities do not use this approach, given the potential risks.\nExamples.\nKuwait.\nKuwait Towers, which include two water reservoirs, and Kuwait Water Towers (Mushroom towers in Kuwait City.\nStandpipe.\nA standpipe is a water tower which is cylindrical (or nearly cylindrical) throughout its whole height, rather than an elevated tank on supports with a narrower pipe leading to and from the ground. \nThere were originally over 400 standpipe water towers in the United States, but very few remain today, including:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44959", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44959", "title": "Telluride", "text": "Telluride may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44960", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44960", "title": "Drake Hotel", "text": "Drake Hotel may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44961", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44961", "title": "U.S. National Ice Center", "text": "Echelon V command of the U.S. Navy\nThe U.S. National Ice Center (USNIC) is a tri-agency operational center and echelon V command of the Naval Oceanographic Office (NAVOCEANO), whose mission is to provide worldwide navigational ice analyses for the armed forces of the United States, allied nations, and U.S. government agencies.\nIt is represented by the United States Navy (Department of Defense); the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Department of Commerce); and the United States Coast Guard (Department of Homeland Security). The U.S. National Ice Center is a subordinate command of the Naval Oceanographic Office (NAVOCEANO). Originally known as the Navy/NOAA Joint Ice Center, which was established on December 15, 1976 in a memorandum of agreement between the U.S. Navy and NOAA, the National Ice Center was formed in 1995 when the U.S. Coast Guard became a partner. The U.S. National Ice Center produces global sea ice charts and various cryospheric GIS products. They also name and track Antarctic icebergs if greater than on its longest axis.\nIcebergs must be a minimum of 19\u00a0kilometers in length to be tracked by the USNIC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44962", "revid": "8771858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44962", "title": "Iceberg B-22", "text": ""}
{"id": "44963", "revid": "8156500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44963", "title": "Stefano Benni", "text": "Italian writer and journalist (1947\u20132025)\nStefano Benni (12 August 1947 \u2013 9 September 2025) was an Italian satirical writer, poet and journalist. His books have been translated into around 20 foreign languages and scored notable commercial success. 2.5 million copies of his books have been sold in Italy.\nLife and career.\nBenni wrote many successful novels and anthologies, among which are \"Bar Sport, Elianto, Terra!, La compagnia dei celestini, Baol, Comici spaventati guerrieri, Saltatempo, Margherita Dolcevita\" and \"Il bar sotto il mare\".\nHe also worked with the weekly magazines \"L'espresso\" and \"Panorama\", and with the satirical \"Cuore\" and \"Tango\", the monthly magazines \"Linus\" and \"Il Mago\" (where he began and published in installments part of \"Bar Sport\"), and the newspapers \"La Repubblica\" and \"il manifesto\".\nHe also wrote television sketches for Beppe Grillo at the beginning of Grillo's career, and one of these sketches \u2013 called \"Pietro Longo=P2\" \u2013 caused the Psdi to ask the RAI commission to remove Grillo from RAI TV; their request was denied.\nIn 1989, with Umberto Angelucci, Benni directed the film \"Musica per vecchi animali\", adapted from his book \"Comici spaventati guerrieri\", with the actors Dario Fo, Paolo Rossi, and Viola Simoncioni. Two years before that he was also the screenwriter of another film, \"Topo Galileo\" by Francesco Laudadio, starring his friend Beppe Grillo and with music by Fabrizio De Andr\u00e9 and Mauro Pagani.\nWith the jazz musician Umberto Petrin, he wrote \"Misterioso. Viaggio nel silenzio di Thelonius Monk\".\nHis novels contain, within imaginary worlds and situations, a strong satire of Italian society over the last few decades. His writing style includes many puns, neologisms and parodies of other literary styles.\nIn January and February 2010, he presented the event \"Bennac\", a meeting between himself and the French writer Daniel Pennac.\nBenni died in Bologna on 9 September 2025 after a long illness, at the age of 78.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44964", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44964", "title": "Thwaites Ice Tongue", "text": ""}
{"id": "44965", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44965", "title": "Colorado Mineral Belt", "text": "Area of ore deposits in Colorado, United States\nThe Colorado Mineral Belt (CMB) is an area of ore deposits from the La Plata Mountains in Southwestern Colorado to near the middle of the state at Boulder, Colorado, and from which over 25 million troy ounces (778 t) of gold were extracted beginning in 1858. The belt is a \"northeast-striking zone defined by: a Proterozoic shear zone system (McCoy, 2001); a suite of Laramide-aged plutons and related ore deposits (Tweto and Sims, 1963); a major gravity low (Isaacson and Smithson, 1976); low-crustal velocities; and high heat flow (Decker et al., 1988).\" Mining districts include:https://\nThe belt lies within a zone that has been geologically active at intervals beginning from near the time of crustal accretion in central Colorado at least 1.6 billion years ago until the present. Parts of the CMB follow shear zones of Precambrian age and the Paleozoic and Mesozoic. Igneous rocks intruded about 60 to 70 million years ago during the Laramide orogeny are associated with the belt and once were thought to be responsible for most of the ore deposits. Now many of the important ore deposits are thought to be genetically related to younger magmatism, some at least as young as about 25 million years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44967", "revid": "33", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44967", "title": "Egadi Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "44968", "revid": "46519493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44968", "title": "Likelihood function", "text": "Function related to statistics and probability theory\nA likelihood function (often simply called the likelihood) measures how well a statistical model explains observed data by calculating the probability of seeing that data under different parameter values of the model. It is constructed from the joint probability distribution of the random variable that (presumably) generated the observations. When evaluated on the actual data points, it becomes a function solely of the model parameters.\nIn maximum likelihood estimation, the model parameter(s) or argument that maximizes the likelihood function serves as a point estimate for the unknown parameter, while the Fisher information (often approximated by the likelihood's Hessian matrix at the maximum) gives an indication of the estimate's precision.\nIn contrast, in Bayesian statistics, the estimate of interest is the converse of the likelihood, the so-called posterior probability of the parameter given the observed data, which is calculated via Bayes' rule.\nDefinition.\nThe likelihood function, parameterized by a (possibly multivariate) parameter formula_1, is usually defined differently for discrete and continuous probability distributions (a more general definition is discussed below). Given a probability density or mass function\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is a realization of the random variable formula_4, the likelihood function is\nformula_5\noften written\nformula_6\nIn other words, when formula_7 is viewed as a function of formula_3 with formula_1 fixed, it is a probability density function, and when viewed as a function of formula_1 with formula_3 fixed, it is a likelihood function. In the frequentist paradigm, the notation formula_7 is often avoided and instead formula_13 or formula_14 are used to indicate that formula_1 is regarded as a fixed unknown quantity rather than as a random variable being conditioned on. \nThe likelihood function does \"not\" specify the probability that formula_1 is the truth, given the observed sample formula_17. Such an interpretation is a common error, with potentially disastrous consequences (see prosecutor's fallacy).\nDiscrete probability distribution.\nLet formula_4 be a discrete random variable with probability mass function formula_19 depending on a parameter formula_1. Then the function\nformula_21\nconsidered as a function of formula_1, is the \"likelihood function\", given the outcome formula_3 of the random variable formula_4. Sometimes the probability of \"the value formula_3 of formula_4 for the parameter value formula_1\" is written as \"P\"(\"X\" \n \"x\" | \"\u03b8\") or \"P\"(\"X\" \n \"x\"; \"\u03b8\"). The likelihood is the probability that a particular outcome formula_3 is observed when the true value of the parameter is formula_1, equivalent to the probability mass on formula_3; it is \"not\" a probability density over the parameter formula_1. The likelihood, formula_32, should not be confused with formula_33, which is the posterior probability of formula_1 given the data formula_3.\nExample.\nConsider a simple statistical model of a coin flip: a single parameter formula_36 that expresses the \"fairness\" of the coin. The parameter is the probability that a coin lands heads up (\"H\") when tossed. formula_36 can take on any value within the range 0.0 to 1.0. For a perfectly fair coin, formula_38.\nImagine flipping a fair coin twice, and observing two heads in two tosses (\"HH\"). Assuming that each successive coin flip is i.i.d., then the probability of observing HH is\nformula_39\nEquivalently, the likelihood of observing \"HH\" assuming formula_38 is\nformula_41\nThis is not the same as saying that formula_42, a conclusion which could only be reached via Bayes' theorem given knowledge about the marginal probabilities formula_43 and formula_44.\nNow suppose that the coin is not a fair coin, but instead that formula_45. Then the probability of two heads on two flips is\nformula_46\nHence\nformula_47\nMore generally, for each value of formula_36, we can calculate the corresponding likelihood. The result of such calculations is displayed in Figure\u00a01. The integral of formula_49 over [0,\u00a01] is 1/3; likelihoods need not integrate or sum to one over the parameter space.\nContinuous probability distribution.\nLet formula_4 be a random variable following an absolutely continuous probability distribution with density function formula_51 (a function of formula_3) which depends on a parameter formula_1. Then the function\nformula_54\nconsidered as a function of formula_1, is the \"likelihood function\" (of formula_1, given the outcome formula_57). Again, formula_49 is not a probability density or mass function over formula_1, despite being a function of formula_1 given the observation formula_17.\nRelationship between the likelihood and probability density functions.\nThe use of the probability density in specifying the likelihood function above is justified as follows. Given an observation formula_62, the likelihood for the interval formula_63, where formula_64 is a constant, is given by formula_65. Observe that\nformula_66\nsince formula_67 is positive and constant. Because\nformula_68\nwhere formula_69 is the probability density function, it follows that\nformula_70\nThe first fundamental theorem of calculus provides that\nformula_71\nThen\nformula_72\nTherefore,\nformula_73\nand so maximizing the probability density at formula_74 amounts to maximizing the likelihood of the specific observation formula_74.\nIn general.\nIn measure-theoretic probability theory, the density function is defined as the Radon\u2013Nikodym derivative of the probability distribution relative to a common dominating measure. The likelihood function is this density interpreted as a function of the parameter, rather than the random variable. Thus, we can construct a likelihood function for any distribution, whether discrete, continuous, a mixture, or otherwise. (Likelihoods are comparable, e.g. for parameter estimation, only if they are Radon\u2013Nikodym derivatives with respect to the same dominating measure.)\nThe above discussion of the likelihood for discrete random variables uses the counting measure, under which the probability density at any outcome equals the probability of that outcome.\nLikelihoods for mixed continuous\u2013discrete distributions.\nThe above can be extended in a simple way to allow consideration of distributions which contain both discrete and continuous components. Suppose that the distribution consists of a number of discrete probability masses formula_76 and a density formula_7, where the sum of all the formula_19's added to the integral of formula_51 is always one. Assuming that it is possible to distinguish an observation corresponding to one of the discrete probability masses from one which corresponds to the density component, the likelihood function for an observation from the continuous component can be dealt with in the manner shown above. For an observation from the discrete component, the likelihood function for an observation from the discrete component is simply\nformula_80\nwhere formula_81 is the index of the discrete probability mass corresponding to observation formula_3, because maximizing the probability mass (or probability) at formula_3 amounts to maximizing the likelihood of the specific observation.\nThe fact that the likelihood function can be defined in a way that includes contributions that are not commensurate (the density and the probability mass) arises from the way in which the likelihood function is defined up to a constant of proportionality, where this \"constant\" can change with the observation formula_3, but not with the parameter formula_1.\nRegularity conditions.\nIn the context of parameter estimation, the likelihood function is usually assumed to obey certain conditions, known as regularity conditions. These conditions are assumed in various proofs involving likelihood functions, and need to be verified in each particular application. For maximum likelihood estimation, the existence of a global maximum of the likelihood function is of the utmost importance. By the extreme value theorem, it suffices that the likelihood function is continuous on a compact parameter space for the maximum likelihood estimator to exist. While the continuity assumption is usually met, the compactness assumption about the parameter space is often not, as the bounds of the true parameter values might be unknown. In that case, concavity of the likelihood function plays a key role.\nMore specifically, if the likelihood function is twice continuously differentiable on the k-dimensional parameter space formula_86 assumed to be an open connected subset of formula_87 there exists a unique maximum formula_88 if the matrix of second partials\nformula_89 is negative definite for every formula_90 at which the gradient formula_91 vanishes,\nand if the likelihood function approaches a constant on the boundary of the parameter space, formula_92 i.e.,\nformula_93\nwhich may include the points at infinity if formula_86 is unbounded. M\u00e4kel\u00e4inen and co-authors prove this result using Morse theory while informally appealing to a mountain pass property. Mascarenhas restates their proof using the mountain pass theorem.\nIn the proofs of consistency and asymptotic normality of the maximum likelihood estimator, additional assumptions are made about the probability densities that form the basis of a particular likelihood function. These conditions were first established by Chanda. In particular, for almost all formula_3, and for all formula_96\nformula_97\nexist for all formula_98 in order to ensure the existence of a Taylor expansion. Second, for almost all formula_3 and for every formula_100 it must be that\nformula_101\nwhere formula_102 is such that formula_103 This boundedness of the derivatives is needed to allow for differentiation under the integral sign. And lastly, it is assumed that the information matrix,\nformula_104\nis positive definite and formula_105 is finite. This ensures that the score has a finite variance.\nThe above conditions are sufficient, but not necessary. That is, a model that does not meet these regularity conditions may or may not have a maximum likelihood estimator of the properties mentioned above. Further, in case of non-independently or non-identically distributed observations additional properties may need to be assumed.\nIn Bayesian statistics, almost identical regularity conditions are imposed on the likelihood function in order to proof asymptotic normality of the posterior probability, and therefore to justify a Laplace approximation of the posterior in large samples.\nLikelihood ratio and relative likelihood.\nLikelihood ratio.\nA \"likelihood ratio\" is the ratio of any two specified likelihoods, frequently written as:\nformula_106\nThe likelihood ratio is central to likelihoodist statistics: the \"law of likelihood\" states that the degree to which data (considered as evidence) supports one parameter value versus another is measured by the likelihood ratio.\nIn frequentist inference, the likelihood ratio is the basis for a test statistic, the so-called likelihood-ratio test. By the Neyman\u2013Pearson lemma, this is the most powerful test for comparing two simple hypotheses at a given significance level. Numerous other tests can be viewed as likelihood-ratio tests or approximations thereof. The asymptotic distribution of the log-likelihood ratio, considered as a test statistic, is given by Wilks' theorem.\nThe likelihood ratio is also of central importance in Bayesian inference, where it is known as the Bayes factor, and is used in Bayes' rule. Stated in terms of odds, Bayes' rule states that the \"posterior\" odds of two alternatives, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, given an event &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is the \"prior\" odds, times the likelihood ratio. As an equation:\nformula_107\nThe likelihood ratio is not directly used in AIC-based statistics. Instead, what is used is the relative likelihood of models (see below).\nIn evidence-based medicine, likelihood ratios are used in diagnostic testing to assess the value of performing a diagnostic test.\nRelative likelihood function.\nSince the actual value of the likelihood function depends on the sample, it is often convenient to work with a standardized measure. Suppose that the maximum likelihood estimate for the parameter \u03b8 is formula_108. Relative plausibilities of other \u03b8 values may be found by comparing the likelihoods of those other values with the likelihood of formula_108. The \"relative likelihood\" of \u03b8 is defined to be \nformula_110\nThus, the relative likelihood is the likelihood ratio (discussed above) with the fixed denominator formula_111. This corresponds to standardizing the likelihood to have a maximum of 1.\nLikelihood region.\nA \"likelihood region\" is the set of all values of \u03b8 whose relative likelihood is greater than or equal to a given threshold. In terms of percentages, a \"p% likelihood region\" for \u03b8 is defined to be\nformula_112\nIf \u03b8 is a single real parameter, a p% likelihood region will usually comprise an interval of real values. If the region does comprise an interval, then it is called a \"likelihood interval\".\nLikelihood intervals, and more generally likelihood regions, are used for interval estimation within likelihoodist statistics: they are similar to confidence intervals in frequentist statistics and credible intervals in Bayesian statistics. Likelihood intervals are interpreted directly in terms of relative likelihood, not in terms of coverage probability (frequentism) or posterior probability (Bayesianism).\nGiven a model, likelihood intervals can be compared to confidence intervals. If \u03b8 is a single real parameter, then under certain conditions, a 14.65% likelihood interval (about 1:7 likelihood) for \u03b8 will be the same as a 95% confidence interval (19/20 coverage probability). In a slightly different formulation suited to the use of log-likelihoods (see ), the test statistic is twice the difference in log-likelihoods and the probability distribution of the test statistic is approximately a chi-squared distribution with degrees-of-freedom (df) equal to the difference in df's between the two models (therefore, the e\u22122 likelihood interval is the same as the 0.954 confidence interval; assuming difference in df's to be 1).\nLikelihoods that eliminate nuisance parameters.\nIn many cases, the likelihood is a function of more than one parameter but interest focuses on the estimation of only one, or at most a few of them, with the others being considered as nuisance parameters. Several alternative approaches have been developed to eliminate such nuisance parameters, so that a likelihood can be written as a function of only the parameter (or parameters) of interest: the main approaches are profile, conditional, and marginal likelihoods. These approaches are also useful when a high-dimensional likelihood surface needs to be reduced to one or two parameters of interest in order to allow a graph.\nProfile likelihood.\nIt is possible to reduce the dimensions by concentrating the likelihood function for a subset of parameters by expressing the nuisance parameters as functions of the parameters of interest and replacing them in the likelihood function. In general, for a likelihood function depending on the parameter vector formula_113 that can be partitioned into formula_114, and where a correspondence formula_115 can be determined explicitly, concentration reduces computational burden of the original maximization problem.\nFor instance, in a linear regression with normally distributed errors, formula_116, the coefficient vector could be partitioned into formula_117 (and consequently the design matrix formula_118). Maximizing with respect to formula_119 yields an optimal value function formula_120. Using this result, the maximum likelihood estimator for formula_121 can then be derived as\nformula_122\nwhere formula_123 is the projection matrix of formula_124. This result is known as the Frisch\u2013Waugh\u2013Lovell theorem.\nSince graphically the procedure of concentration is equivalent to slicing the likelihood surface along the ridge of values of the nuisance parameter formula_119 that maximizes the likelihood function, creating an isometric profile of the likelihood function for a given formula_121, the result of this procedure is also known as \"profile likelihood\". In addition to being graphed, the profile likelihood can also be used to compute confidence intervals that often have better small-sample properties than those based on asymptotic standard errors calculated from the full likelihood.\nConditional likelihood.\nSometimes it is possible to find a sufficient statistic for the nuisance parameters, and conditioning on this statistic results in a likelihood which does not depend on the nuisance parameters.\nOne example occurs in 2\u00d72 tables, where conditioning on all four marginal totals leads to a conditional likelihood based on the non-central hypergeometric distribution. This form of conditioning is also the basis for Fisher's exact test.\nMarginal likelihood.\nSometimes we can remove the nuisance parameters by considering a likelihood based on only part of the information in the data, for example by using the set of ranks rather than the numerical values. Another example occurs in linear mixed models, where considering a likelihood for the residuals only after fitting the fixed effects leads to residual maximum likelihood estimation of the variance components.\nPartial likelihood.\nA partial likelihood is an adaption of the full likelihood such that only a part of the parameters (the parameters of interest) occur in it. It is a key component of the proportional hazards model: using a restriction on the hazard function, the likelihood does not contain the shape of the hazard over time.\nProducts of likelihoods.\nThe likelihood, given two or more independent events, is the product of the likelihoods of each of the individual events:\nformula_127\nThis follows from the definition of independence in probability: the probabilities of two independent events happening, given a model, is the product of the probabilities.\nThis is particularly important when the events are from independent and identically distributed random variables, such as independent observations or sampling with replacement. In such a situation, the likelihood function factors into a product of individual likelihood functions.\nThe empty product has value 1, which corresponds to the likelihood, given no event, being 1: before any data, the likelihood is always 1. This is similar to a uniform prior in Bayesian statistics, but in likelihoodist statistics this is not an improper prior because likelihoods are not integrated.\nLog-likelihood.\n\"Log-likelihood function\" is the logarithm of the likelihood function, often denoted by a lowercase \"l\" or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, to contrast with the uppercase \"L\" or formula_49 for the likelihood. Because logarithms are strictly increasing functions, maximizing the likelihood is equivalent to maximizing the log-likelihood. But for practical purposes it is more convenient to work with the log-likelihood function in maximum likelihood estimation, in particular since most common probability distributions\u2014notably the exponential family\u2014are only logarithmically concave, and concavity of the objective function plays a key role in the maximization.\nGiven the independence of each event, the overall log-likelihood of intersection equals the sum of the log-likelihoods of the individual events. This is analogous to the fact that the overall log-probability is the sum of the log-probability of the individual events. In addition to the mathematical convenience from this, the adding process of log-likelihood has an intuitive interpretation, as often expressed as \"support\" from the data. When the parameters are estimated using the log-likelihood for the maximum likelihood estimation, each data point is used by being added to the total log-likelihood. As the data can be viewed as an evidence that support the estimated parameters, this process can be interpreted as \"support from independent evidence \"adds\",\" and the log-likelihood is the \"weight of evidence\". Interpreting negative log-probability as information content or surprisal, the support (log-likelihood) of a model, given an event, is the negative of the surprisal of the event, given the model: a model is supported by an event to the extent that the event is unsurprising, given the model.\nA logarithm of a likelihood ratio is equal to the difference of the log-likelihoods:\nformula_129\nJust as the likelihood, given no event, being 1, the log-likelihood, given no event, is 0, which corresponds to the value of the empty sum: without any data, there is no support for any models.\nGraph.\nThe graph of the log-likelihood is called the support curve (in the univariate case).\nIn the multivariate case, the concept generalizes into a support surface over the parameter space.\nIt has a relation to, but is distinct from, the support of a distribution.\nThe term was coined by A. W. F. Edwards in the context of statistical hypothesis testing, i.e. whether or not the data \"support\" one hypothesis (or parameter value) being tested more than any other.\nThe log-likelihood function being plotted is used in the computation of the score (the gradient of the log-likelihood) and Fisher information (the curvature of the log-likelihood). Thus, the graph has a direct interpretation in the context of maximum likelihood estimation and likelihood-ratio tests.\nLikelihood equations.\nIf the log-likelihood function is smooth, its gradient with respect to the parameter, known as the score and written formula_130, exists and allows for the application of differential calculus. The basic way to maximize a differentiable function is to find the stationary points (the points where the derivative is zero); since the derivative of a sum is just the sum of the derivatives, but the derivative of a product requires the product rule, it is easier to compute the stationary points of the log-likelihood of independent events than for the likelihood of independent events.\nThe equations defined by the stationary point of the score function serve as estimating equations for the maximum likelihood estimator.\nformula_131\nIn that sense, the maximum likelihood estimator is implicitly defined by the value at formula_132 of the inverse function formula_133, where formula_134 is the d-dimensional Euclidean space, and formula_135 is the parameter space. Using the inverse function theorem, it can be shown that formula_136 is well-defined in an open neighborhood about formula_132 with probability going to one, and formula_138 is a consistent estimate of formula_1. As a consequence there exists a sequence formula_140 such that formula_141 asymptotically almost surely, and formula_142. A similar result can be established using Rolle's theorem.\nThe second derivative evaluated at formula_108, known as Fisher information, determines the curvature of the likelihood surface, and thus indicates the precision of the estimate.\nExponential families.\nThe log-likelihood is also particularly useful for exponential families of distributions, which include many of the common parametric probability distributions. The probability distribution function (and thus likelihood function) for exponential families contain products of factors involving exponentiation. The logarithm of such a function is a sum of products, again easier to differentiate than the original function.\nAn exponential family is one whose probability density function is of the form (for some functions, writing formula_144 for the inner product):\nformula_145\nEach of these terms has an interpretation, but simply switching from probability to likelihood and taking logarithms yields the sum:\nformula_146\nThe formula_147 and formula_148 each correspond to a change of coordinates, so in these coordinates, the log-likelihood of an exponential family is given by the simple formula:\nformula_149\nIn words, the log-likelihood of an exponential family is inner product of the natural parameter &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the sufficient statistic &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, minus the normalization factor (log-partition function) &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Thus for example the maximum likelihood estimate can be computed by taking derivatives of the sufficient statistic \"T\" and the log-partition function \"A\".\nExample: the gamma distribution.\nThe gamma distribution is an exponential family with two parameters, formula_150 and formula_151. The likelihood function is\nformula_152\nFinding the maximum likelihood estimate of formula_151 for a single observed value formula_3 looks rather daunting. Its logarithm is much simpler to work with:\nformula_155\nTo maximize the log-likelihood, we first take the partial derivative with respect to formula_151:\nformula_157\nIf there are a number of independent observations formula_158, then the joint log-likelihood will be the sum of individual log-likelihoods, and the derivative of this sum will be a sum of derivatives of each individual log-likelihood:\nformula_159\nTo complete the maximization procedure for the joint log-likelihood, the equation is set to zero and solved for formula_151:\nformula_161\nHere formula_162 denotes the maximum-likelihood estimate, and formula_163 is the sample mean of the observations.\nBackground and interpretation.\nHistorical remarks.\nThe term \"likelihood\" has been in use in English since at least late Middle English. Its formal use to refer to a specific function in mathematical statistics was proposed by Ronald Fisher, in two research papers published in 1921 and 1922. The 1921 paper introduced what is today called a \"likelihood interval\"; the 1922 paper introduced the term \"method of maximum likelihood\". Quoting Fisher:\nThe concept of likelihood should not be confused with probability as mentioned by Sir Ronald Fisher\nFisher's invention of statistical likelihood was in reaction against an earlier form of reasoning called inverse probability. His use of the term \"likelihood\" fixed the meaning of the term within mathematical statistics.\nA. W. F. Edwards (1972) established the axiomatic basis for use of the log-likelihood ratio as a measure of relative support for one hypothesis against another. The \"support function\" is then the natural logarithm of the likelihood function. Both terms are used in phylogenetics, but were not adopted in a general treatment of the topic of statistical evidence.\nInterpretations under different foundations.\nAmong statisticians, there is no consensus about what the foundation of statistics should be. There are four main paradigms that have been proposed for the foundation: frequentism, Bayesianism, likelihoodism, and AIC-based. For each of the proposed foundations, the interpretation of likelihood is different. The four interpretations are described in the subsections below.\nBayesian interpretation.\nIn Bayesian inference, although one can speak about the likelihood of any proposition or random variable given another random variable: for example the likelihood of a parameter value or of a statistical model (see marginal likelihood), given specified data or other evidence, the likelihood function remains the same entity, with the additional interpretations of (i) a conditional density of the data given the parameter (since the parameter is then a random variable) and (ii) a measure or amount of information brought by the data about the parameter value or even the model. Due to the introduction of a probability structure on the parameter space or on the collection of models, it is possible that a parameter value or a statistical model have a large likelihood value for given data, and yet have a low \"probability\", or vice versa. This is often the case in medical contexts. Following Bayes' Rule, the likelihood when seen as a conditional density can be multiplied by the prior probability density of the parameter and then normalized, to give a posterior probability density. More generally, the likelihood of an unknown quantity formula_4 given another unknown quantity formula_165 is proportional to the \"probability of formula_165 given formula_4\".\nLikelihoodist interpretation.\nIn frequentist statistics, the likelihood function is itself a statistic that summarizes a single sample from a population, whose calculated value depends on a choice of several parameters \"\u03b8\"1 ... \"\u03b8\"p, where \"p\" is the count of parameters in some already-selected statistical model. The value of the likelihood serves as a figure of merit for the choice used for the parameters, and the parameter set with maximum likelihood is the best choice, given the data available.\nThe specific calculation of the likelihood is the probability that the observed sample would be assigned, assuming that the model chosen and the values of the several parameters \u03b8 give an accurate approximation of the frequency distribution of the population that the observed sample was drawn from. Heuristically, it makes sense that a good choice of parameters is those which render the sample actually observed the maximum possible \"post-hoc\" probability of having happened. Wilks' theorem quantifies the heuristic rule by showing that the difference in the logarithm of the likelihood generated by the estimate's parameter values and the logarithm of the likelihood generated by population's \"true\" (but unknown) parameter values is asymptotically \u03c72 distributed.\nEach independent sample's maximum likelihood estimate is a separate estimate of the \"true\" parameter set describing the population sampled. Successive estimates from many independent samples will cluster together with the population's \"true\" set of parameter values hidden somewhere in their midst. The difference in the logarithms of the maximum likelihood and adjacent parameter sets' likelihoods may be used to draw a confidence region on a plot whose co-ordinates are the parameters \"\u03b8\"1 ... \"\u03b8\"p. The region surrounds the maximum-likelihood estimate, and all points (parameter sets) within that region differ at most in log-likelihood by some fixed value. The \u03c72 distribution given by Wilks' theorem converts the region's log-likelihood differences into the \"confidence\" that the population's \"true\" parameter set lies inside. The art of choosing the fixed log-likelihood difference is to make the confidence acceptably high while keeping the region acceptably small (narrow range of estimates).\nAs more data are observed, instead of being used to make independent estimates, they can be combined with the previous samples to make a single combined sample, and that large sample may be used for a new maximum likelihood estimate. As the size of the combined sample increases, the size of the likelihood region with the same confidence shrinks. Eventually, either the size of the confidence region is very nearly a single point, or the entire population has been sampled; in both cases, the estimated parameter set is essentially the same as the population parameter set.\nAIC-based interpretation.\nUnder the AIC paradigm, likelihood is interpreted within the context of information theory.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44970", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44970", "title": "Frederick T. Frelinghuysen", "text": "American lawyer and politician (1817\u20131885)\nFrederick Theodore Frelinghuysen (August 4, 1817\u00a0\u2013 May 20, 1885) was an American lawyer and politician from New Jersey who served as a U.S. Senator and later as United States Secretary of State under President Chester A. Arthur.\nFrelinghuysen was born in Millstone, New Jersey, and was adopted by his uncle Theodore Frelinghuysen after his father's death. He graduated from Rutgers College and studied law under his uncle. Frelinghuysen was involved in various political roles, including serving as a delegate to the 1860 Republican National Convention and as Attorney General of New Jersey. He was also appointed to fill a vacancy in the United States Senate.\nIn 1870, Frelinghuysen was nominated as U.S. ambassador to the United Kingdom but declined the position. He served again as a U.S. Senator from 1871 to 1877, and in 1881, was appointed U.S. Secretary of State by President Chester A. Arthur, serving until 1885. During his tenure, he withdrew the U.S. from the War of the Pacific and negotiated a treaty change with Hawaii, allowing for a naval base at Pearl Harbor.\nAfter his term as Secretary of State, Frelinghuysen returned to Newark, New Jersey, where he died less than three months later. He married Matilda Elizabeth Griswold in 1842, with whom he had six children. Frelinghuysen University in Washington, D.C. was named in his honor in 1917.\nEarly life and education.\nFrelinghuysen was born in Millstone, New Jersey, to Frederick Frelinghuysen (1788\u20131820) and Mary Dumont. His father died when he was just three years old, and he was adopted by his uncle, Theodore Frelinghuysen (1787\u20131862).\nHis grandfather, Frederick Frelinghuysen (1753\u20131804), was an eminent lawyer, one of the framers of the first New Jersey Constitution, a soldier in the American Revolutionary War, a member (1778\u20131779 and 1782\u20131783) of the Continental Congress from New Jersey, and from 1793 to 1796 a member of the United States Senate.\nHis uncle, Theodore Frelinghuysen, was Attorney General of New Jersey from 1817 to 1829, was a U.S. Senator from New Jersey from 1829 to 1835, was the Whig candidate for Vice President of the United States on the Henry Clay ticket in the 1844 Presidential election, and was Chancellor of New York University from 1839 until 1850 and president of Rutgers College from 1850 to 1862.\nFrelinghuysen graduated from Rutgers College in 1836, and studied law in Newark with his uncle, to whose practice he succeeded in 1839, after he was admitted to the bar.\nCareer.\nFollowing his admission to the bar, he became attorney for the Central Railroad of New Jersey, the Morris Canal and Banking Company and other corporations.\nPolitical career.\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", Frelinghuysen was a member of the Whig Party until joining the Republican Party upon its inception. He was also crucial in establishing the Republican Party in New Jersey.\nDuring the American Civil War, Frelinghuysen was active in public office rather than joining the Union Army. He was a delegate in 1861 to the Peace Congress, and appointed Attorney General of New Jersey by Governor Charles S. Olden that year to serve in the post until 1867. Frelinghuysen was encouraged by some to run for governor in 1862, though he declined.\nFrelinghuysen was a delegate to the 1860 Republican National Convention from New Jersey and from 1861 to 1867 was Attorney General of New Jersey. He was a delegate to the Peace conference of 1861 in Washington, and in 1866 was appointed by the Governor of New Jersey, as a Republican, to fill a vacancy in the United States Senate. In the winter of 1867, he was elected to fill the unexpired term, but a Democratic majority in the New Jersey Legislature prevented his re-election in 1869.\nIn 1870, he was nominated by President Ulysses S. Grant, and confirmed by the Senate, as United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom to succeed John Lothrop Motley, but declined the mission. From 1871 to 1877 he was again a member of the United States Senate, in which he was prominent in debate and in committee work, and was chairman of the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs during the Alabama Claims negotiations.\nHe was a strong opponent of the Reconstruction measures of President Andrew Johnson, for whose conviction he voted for in Johnson's impeachment trial. Frelinghuysen supported the Radical Republicans' program for Reconstruction that emphasized a harsh treatment of former Confederates. He later allied with the GOP Stalwart faction whose members tended to utilize corruption/patronage effectively, though was considered to have a clean record.\nHe was a member of the joint committee which drew up and reported (1877) the Electoral Commission Bill, and subsequently served as a member of the Electoral Commission that decided the 1876 Presidential election. As a Republican, he voted with the eight-member majority on all counts.\nU.S. Secretary of State.\nOn December 12, 1881, he was appointed United States Secretary of State by President Chester A. Arthur to succeed James G. Blaine, and served until the inauguration of President Grover Cleveland in 1885.\nUpon taking the post, Frelinghuysen was tasked with resolving a number of consequences resulted by the actions of his predecessor Blaine. Taking a pacifistic and patient approach, he shared the vision held by William H. Seward of the United States dominating the global market in setting an example for other nations to follow, he withdrew the U.S. from the War of the Pacific between Chile and Peru in which his predecessor unsuccessfully backed the Peruvians.\nFrelinghuysen's other actions included canceling a scheduled Pan-American conference against President Arthur's wishes that Blaine had originally planned. In addition, he negotiated a treaty change with Hawaii that allowed for a naval base for the U.S. in Pearl Harbor, which was later known for being bombed by Japan in World War II.\nIn contrast to his predecessors in the position of U.S. Secretary of State, Frelinghuysen proved unable to urge Great Britain to modify the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty terms in a re-negotiation attempt, and instead pushed through a treaty with Nicaragua that would permit the construction of a canal in the country under joint ownership. However, it was withdrawn later during the presidency of Grover Cleveland by the U.S. Senate, which did not ratify it. Other efforts rejected by Congress included proposals to negotiate reciprocity Spain, Mexico, and Santo Dominigo, in addition to opening an international consortium between the Congo, U.S. and other countries.\nFrelinghuysen served in the post until the end of President Arthur's term, effectively resigning in early March 1885.\nAfter his term as Secretary of State Frelinghuysen returned to his home in Newark where he died less than three months after retiring.\nLegacy.\nIn 1917, Frelinghuysen University in Washington D.C. was named in honor of his service to African American causes.\nMarriage and children.\nOn January 25, 1842, Frelinghuysen married Matilda Elizabeth Griswold (1817\u20131889). She was the daughter of George Griswold, a merchant in New York City who \"made an immense fortune in the time of the clipper trade with China.\" Together, they were the parents of three daughters and three sons, including:\nFrelinghuysen died at Newark on May 20, 1885, aged 67. He was buried at Mount Pleasant Cemetery, Newark. His widow died a few years later in February 1889.\nDescendants.\nThrough his eldest son Frederick, he was the grandfather of George Griswold Frelinghuysen II, who married Anne de Smolianinof; Estelle C. \"Suzy\" Frelinghuysen, who married fellow painter George Lovett Kingsland Morris; Frederick Frelinghuysen; Thomas Frelinghuysen; and Theodore Frelinghuysen.\nThrough his daughter Sarah and granddaughter Mathilda Elizabeth Frelinghuysen (n\u00e9e Davis) Lodge (1876\u20131960), who married George Cabot Lodge, he was the great-grandfather of Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. (1902\u20131985), the diplomat and United States Senator from Massachusetts, and John Davis Lodge (1903\u20131985), also a diplomat, U.S. Representative, and Governor of Connecticut.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "44972", "revid": "1309472445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44972", "title": "Kannada script", "text": "Abugida writing system of the Brahmic family\nThe Kannada script (IAST: \"Kanna\u1e0da lipi\"; obsolete: Kanarese or Canarese script in English) is an abugida of the Brahmic family, used to write Kannada, one of the Dravidian languages of South India especially in the state of Karnataka. It is one of the official scripts of the Indian Republic. Kannada script is also widely used for writing Sanskrit texts in Karnataka. Several minor languages, such as Tulu, Konkani, Kodava, Beary and Sanketi also use alphabets based on the Kannada script. The Kannada and Telugu scripts share very high mutual intellegibility with each other, and are often considered to be regional variants of single script. Other scripts similar to Kannada script are Sinhala script (which included some elements from the Kadamba script), and Old Peguan script\n(used in Burma).\nThe Kannada script ( \"ak\u1e63aram\u0101le\" or \"var\u1e47am\u0101le\") is a phonemic abugida of forty-nine letters. The character set is almost identical to that of other Brahmic scripts or often known as Brahmi Lipi. Consonantal letters imply an inherent vowel. Letters representing consonants are combined to form digraphs \"(\" \"ottak\u1e63ara)\" when there is no intervening vowel. Otherwise, each letter corresponds to a syllable.\nThe letters are classified into three categories: \"svara\" (vowels), \"vya\u00f1jana\" (consonants), and \"y\u014dgav\u0101haka\" (semiconsonants).\nThe Kannada words for a letter of the script are \"akshara\", \"akkara\", and \"var\u1e47a\". Each letter has its own form ( \"\u0101k\u0101ra\") and sound ( \"\u015babda\"), providing the visible and audible representations, respectively. Kannada is written from left to right.\nHistory.\nKannada script or the early Kadamba script evolved from the Ashokan Brahmi script, which later evolved into Kannada-Telugu script, during the period of Chalukyas and later Chalukyas of Vengi. The Kannada and Telugu scripts then separated by around 1300 C.E.\nThe 11th-century Persian scholar and polymath Al-Biruni calls the Kannada script as \"Karnata\" alphabets used in \"Karnatadesa\".\nOver the centuries some changes have been made to the Kannada script. These changes consist of:\nVowels.\nThere are thirteen vowel letters ( \"svara\") in modern Kannada.\nThe Kannada script is an abugida, where when a vowel follows a consonant, it is written with a diacritic rather than as a separate letter. There are also three obsolete vowels, corresponding to vowels in Sanskrit.\nWritten Kannada is composed of akshara or \"kagunita\", corresponding to syllables. The letters for consonants combine with diacritics for vowels. The consonant letter without any diacritic, such as , has the inherent vowel . A consonant without a vowel is marked with a 'killer' stroke, such as . This silencing diacritic and process is known as , whereas the resulting letter is called an (lit.\u2009'half letter').\nKannada has a phonemic vowel length distinction, so like many other Brahmic scripts, the writing system has two sets of diacritics, one for short vowels and one for long vowels. Short vowels are referred to as , while long vowels are referred to as .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nY\u014dgav\u0101ha.\nThere are two \"y\u014dgav\u0101ha\" (part-vowel, part consonant) letters, known as \"ardhavisarga\", used in modern Kannada and two others used in Sanskrit transcription.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConsonant letters.\nTwo categories of consonant letters ( \"vyan\u0304jana\") are defined in Kannada: the structured consonants and the unstructured consonants.\nStructured consonants.\nThe structured consonants are classified according to their place of articulation, that is, where the tongue touches the palate.\nUnstructured consonants.\nThe unstructured consonants are consonants that do not fall into any of the above structures:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nObsolete Kannada letters.\nKannada literary works employed the letters (transliterated \" or 'rh') and (transliterated \", 'lh' or 'zh'), whose manner of articulation most plausibly could be akin to those in present-day Malayalam and Tamil. The letters dropped out of use in the 12th and 18th centuries, respectively. Later Kannada works replaced 'rh' and 'lh' with (ra) and (la) respectively.\nIt is still used to write the Badaga language and a vowel + virama + \u1e3b is used to transcribe its retroflex vowels.\nAnother letter (or unclassified \"vyanjana\" (consonant)) that has become extinct is 'nh' or 'inn'. Likewise, this has its equivalent in Telugu, where it is called \"Nakaara pollu\". The usage of this consonant was observed until the 1980s in Kannada works from the mostly coastal areas of Karnataka (especially the Dakshina Kannada district). Now, hardly any mainstream works use this consonant. This letter has been replaced by (consonant n).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConsonant conjuncts.\nThe Kannada script is rich in conjunct consonant clusters, with most consonants having a standard subjoined form and few true ligature clusters. A table of consonant conjuncts follows although the forms of individual conjuncts may differ according to the font.\nOf special note is the sequence concerning the letter (ra). Unlike other letters, the conjunct form is written second even if it is pronounced first in the sequence.\nFor example, the /rna\u02d0/ in the word \"Karn\u0101\u1e6daka\" (\u0c95\u0cb0\u0ccd\u0ca8\u0cbe\u0c9f\u0c95) is written \u0cb0\u0ccd\u0ca8\u0cbe rather than \u0cb0\u200d\u0ccd\u0ca8\u0cbe.\nThe nasal consonants (\u1e45a), (\u00f1a), (\u1e47a), (na), and (ma) are usually written as an anusvara when preceding another consonant rather than a consonant conjunct.\nFor example, the /\u014bg/ in the word \"Be\u1e45ga\u1e37\u016bru\" (\u0cac\u0cc6\u0c82\u0c97\u0cb3\u0cc2\u0cb0\u0cc1) is usually written rather than (\u0cac\u0cc6\u0c99\u0ccd\u0c97\u0cb3\u0cc2\u0cb0\u0cc1).\nFull list of consonant + vowel combinations.\nThe formations shown boldface above are seldom used.\nNumerals.\nThe decimal numerals in the script are:\nTransliteration.\nSeveral transliteration schemes/tools are used to type Kannada characters using a standard keyboard. These include Baraha (based on ITRANS), Pada Software and several internet tools like Google transliteration, Quillpad (predictive transliterator). Nudi, the Government of Karnataka's standard for Kannada Input, is a phonetic layout loosely based on transliteration.\nIn popular culture.\nDue to its resemblance to an eye and an eyebrow, the Kannada letter \"\u1e6dha\" is used in the \"look of disapproval\" (displayed as \"\u0ca0_\u0ca0\"), a popular emoticon used to convey disapproval or contempt. Similarly, the akshara \"rr\u0325a\" has been used in emoticons to represent a monocle, while \"tha\" has been used to represent a tearing eye.\nUnicode.\nKannada script was added to the Unicode Standard in October 1991 with the release of version 1.0.\nThe Unicode block for Kannada is U+0C80\u2013U+0CFF:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44975", "revid": "49194911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44975", "title": "Phrase", "text": "Group of one or more words\nIn grammar, a phrase\u2014called an expression in some contexts\u2014is a group of one or more words acting as a grammatical unit. For instance, the English expression \"the very happy squirrel\" is a noun phrase which contains the adjective phrase \"very happy\". Phrases can consist of a single word or a complete sentence. In theoretical linguistics, phrases are often analyzed as units of syntactic structure such as a constituent. There is a difference between the common use of the term \"phrase\" and its technical use in linguistics. In common usage, a phrase is usually a group of words with some special idiomatic meaning or other significance, such as \"all rights reserved\", \"economical with the truth\", or \"kick the bucket\". It may be a euphemism, a saying or proverb, a fixed expression, a figure of speech, etc. In linguistics, these are known as phrasemes.\nIn theories of syntax, a phrase is any group of words, or sometimes a single word, which plays a particular role within the syntactic structure of a sentence. It does not have to have any special meaning or significance, or even exist anywhere outside of the sentence being analyzed, but it must function there as a complete grammatical unit. For example, in the sentence \"Yesterday I saw an orange bird with a white neck\", the words \"an orange bird with a white neck\" form a noun phrase, or a determiner phrase in some theories, which functions as the object of the sentence.\nPhrase trees.\nMany theories of syntax and grammar illustrate sentence structure using phrase 'trees', which provide schematics of how the words in a sentence are grouped and relate to each other. A tree shows the words, phrases, and clauses that make up a sentence. Any word combination that corresponds to a complete subtree can be seen as a phrase.\nThere are two competing principles for constructing trees; they produce 'constituency' and 'dependency' trees and both are illustrated here using an example sentence. The constituency-based tree is on the left and the dependency-based tree is on the right (where adjective (A), determiner (D), noun (N), sentence (S), verb (V), noun phrase (NP), prepositional phrase (PP), verb phrase (VP)):\nThe tree on the left is of the constituency-based, phrase structure grammar, and the tree on the right is of the dependency grammar. The node labels in the two trees mark the syntactic category of the different constituents, or word elements, of the sentence.\nIn the constituency tree each phrase is marked by a phrasal node (NP, PP, VP); and there are eight phrases identified by phrase structure analysis in the example sentence. On the other hand, the dependency tree identifies a phrase by any node that exerts dependency upon, or dominates, another node. And, using dependency analysis, there are six phrases in the sentence.\nThe trees and phrase-counts demonstrate that different theories of syntax differ in the word combinations they qualify as a phrase. Here the constituency tree identifies three phrases that the dependency trees does not, namely: \"house at the end of the street\", \"end of the street\", and \"the end\". More analysis, including about the plausibilities of both grammars, can be made empirically by applying constituency tests.\nHeads and dependents.\nIn grammatical analysis, most phrases contain a head, which identifies the type and linguistic features of the phrase. The syntactic category of the head is used to name the category of the phrase; for example, a phrase whose head is a noun is called a noun phrase. The remaining words in a phrase are called the dependents of the head.\nIn the following phrases the head-word, or head, is bolded:\ntoo slowly \u2014 \nvery happy \u2014 \nthe massive dinosaur \u2014 \nat lunch \u2014 \nwatch TV \u2014 \nThe above five examples are the most common of phrase types; but, by the logic of heads and dependents, others can be routinely produced. For instance, the subordinator phrase:\nbefore that happened \u2014 \nBy linguistic analysis this is a group of words that qualifies as a phrase, and the head-word gives its syntactic name, \"subordinator\", to the grammatical category of the entire phrase. But this phrase, \"before that happened\", is more commonly classified in other grammars, including traditional English grammars, as a subordinate clause (or dependent clause); and it is then labelled \"not\" as a phrase, but as a clause.\nMost theories of syntax view most phrases as having a head, but some non-headed phrases are acknowledged. A phrase lacking a head is known as exocentric, and phrases with heads are endocentric.\nFunctional categories.\nSome modern theories of syntax introduce functional categories in which the head of a phrase is a functional lexical item. Some functional heads in some languages are not pronounced, but are rather covert. For example, in order to explain certain syntactic patterns which correlate with the speech act a sentence performs, some researchers have posited \"force phrases\" (ForceP), whose heads are not pronounced in many languages including English. Similarly, many frameworks assume that covert determiners are present in bare noun phrases such as proper names.\nAnother type is the inflectional phrase, where (for example) a finite verb phrase is taken to be the complement of a functional, possibly covert head (denoted INFL) which is supposed to encode the requirements for the verb to inflect \u2013 for agreement with its subject (which is the specifier of INFL), for tense and aspect, etc. If these factors are treated separately, then more specific categories may be considered: \"tense phrase\" (TP), where the verb phrase is the complement of an abstract \"tense\" element; \"aspect phrase\"; \"agreement phrase\" and so on.\nFurther examples of such proposed categories include \"topic phrase\" and \"focus phrase\", which are argued to be headed by elements that encode the need for a constituent of the sentence to be marked as the topic or focus.\nVariation among theories of syntax.\nTheories of syntax differ in what they regard as a phrase. For instance, while most if not all theories of syntax acknowledge the existence of verb phrases (VPs), Phrase structure grammars acknowledge both finite verb phrases and non-finite verb phrases while dependency grammars only acknowledge non-finite verb phrases. The split between these views persists due to conflicting results from the standard empirical diagnostics of phrasehood such as constituency tests.\nThe distinction is illustrated with the following examples:\nThe Republicans may nominate Newt. \nThe Republicans may nominate Newt. \nThe syntax trees of this sentence are next:\nThe constituency tree on the left shows the finite verb string \"may nominate Newt\" as a constituent; it corresponds to VP1. In contrast, this same string is not shown as a phrase in the dependency tree on the right. However, both trees, take the non-finite VP string \"nominate Newt\" to be a constituent.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "44976", "revid": "213797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44976", "title": "Olive tree", "text": ""}
{"id": "44980", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44980", "title": "\u00c9mile Zola", "text": "French writer (1840\u20131902)\n\u00c9mile \u00c9douard Charles Antoine Zola (, ; ; 2 April 1840\u00a0\u2013 29 September 1902) was a French novelist, journalist, playwright, the best-known practitioner of the literary school of naturalism, and an important contributor to the development of theatrical naturalism. He was a major figure in the political liberalization of France and in the exoneration of the falsely accused and convicted army officer Alfred Dreyfus, which is encapsulated in his renowned newspaper opinion headlined \"J'Accuse...!\"\u200a Zola was nominated for the first and second Nobel Prizes in Literature in 1901 and 1902.\nEarly life.\nZola was born in Paris in 1840 to Fran\u00e7ois Zola (originally Francesco Zolla) and \u00c9milie Aubert. His father was an Italian engineer with some Greek ancestry, who was born in Venice in 1795, and engineered the Zola Dam in Aix-en-Provence; his mother was French. The family moved to Aix-en-Provence in the southeast when \u00c9mile was three years old. In 1845, five-year-old Zola was sexually molested by an older boy. Two years later, in 1847, his father died, leaving his mother on a meager pension. In 1852, Zola entered the Coll\u00e8ge Bourbon as a boarding student. He would later complain about poor nutrition and bullying in school.\nIn 1858, the Zolas moved to Paris, where \u00c9mile's childhood friend Paul C\u00e9zanne soon joined him. Zola started to write in the Romantic style. His widowed mother had planned a law career for \u00c9mile, but he failed his baccalaur\u00e9at examination twice.\nBefore his breakthrough as a writer, Zola worked for minimal pay as a clerk in a shipping firm and then in the sales department for the publisher Hachette. He also wrote literary and art reviews for newspapers. As a political journalist, Zola did not hide his dislike of Napoleon III, who had successfully run for the office of president under the constitution of the French Second Republic, only to use this position as a springboard for the coup d'\u00e9tat that made him emperor.\nLater life.\nIn 1862 Zola was naturalized as a French citizen. In 1865, he met \u00c9l\u00e9onore-Alexandrine Meley, who called herself Gabrielle, a seamstress. They married on 31 May 1870. Together they cared for Zola's mother. She stayed with him all his life and was instrumental in promoting his work. The marriage remained childless. Alexandrine Zola had had a child before she met Zola that she had given up, because she had been unable to take care of it. When she confessed this to Zola after their marriage, they went looking for the girl, but she had died a short time after birth.\nIn 1888, he was given a camera, but he only began to use it in 1895 and attained a near professional level of expertise. Also in 1888, Alexandrine hired Jeanne Rozerot, a 21-year-old seamstress who was to live with them in their home in M\u00e9dan. The 48-year-old Zola fell in love with Jeanne and fathered two children with her: Denise in 1889 and Jacques in 1891. After Jeanne left M\u00e9dan for Paris, Zola continued to support and visit her and their children. In November 1891 Alexandrine discovered the affair, but their marriage lasted until Zola's death. The discord was partially healed, which allowed Zola to take an increasingly active role in the lives of the children. After Zola's death, the children were given his name as their lawful surname.\nCareer.\nDuring his early years, Zola wrote numerous short stories and essays, four plays, and three novels. Among his early books was \"Contes \u00e0 Ninon\" (\"Stories for Ninon\"), published in 1864. With the publication of his sordid autobiographical novel \"La Confession de Claude\" (1865) attracting police attention, Hachette fired Zola. His novel \"Les Myst\u00e8res de Marseille\" appeared as a serial in 1867. He was also an aggressive critic, his articles on literature and art appearing in Villemessant's journal \"L'\u00c9v\u00e9nement\". After his first major novel, \"Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Raquin\" (1867), Zola started the series called .\nIn Paris, Zola maintained his friendship with C\u00e9zanne, who painted a portrait of him with another friend from Aix-en-Provence, writer Paul Alexis, entitled \"Paul Alexis Reading to Zola\".\nLiterary output.\nMore than half of Zola's novels were part of the twenty-volume cycle, which details the history of a single family under the reign of Napol\u00e9on III. Unlike Balzac, who in the midst of his literary career resynthesized his work into \"La Com\u00e9die Humaine\", Zola from the start, at the age of 28, had thought of the complete layout of the series. Set in France's Second Empire, in the context of Baron Haussmann's changing Paris, the series traces the environmental and hereditary influences of violence, alcohol, and prostitution which became more prevalent during the second wave of the Industrial Revolution. The series examines two branches of the family\u2014the respectable (that is, legitimate) Rougons and the disreputable (illegitimate) Macquarts\u2014over five generations.\nIn the preface to the first novel of the series, Zola states, \"I want to explain how a family, a small group of regular people, behaves in society, while expanding through the birth of ten, twenty individuals, who seem at first glance profoundly dissimilar, but who are shown through analysis to be intimately linked to one another. Heredity has its own laws, just like gravity. I will attempt to find and to follow, by resolving the double question of temperaments and environments, the thread that leads mathematically from one man to another.\"\nAlthough Zola and C\u00e9zanne were friends from childhood, they experienced a falling out later in life over Zola's fictionalised depiction of C\u00e9zanne and the Bohemian life of painters in Zola's novel (\"The Masterpiece\", 1886).\nFrom 1877, with the publication of \"L'Assommoir\", \u00c9mile Zola became wealthy; he was better paid than Victor Hugo, for example. Because \"L'Assommoir\" was such a success, Zola was able to renegotiate his contract with his publisher Georges Charpentier to receive more than 14% royalties and the exclusive rights to serial publication in the press. Subsequently, sales of \"L'Assommoir\" were even exceeded by those of \"Nana\" (1880) and \"La D\u00e9b\u00e2cle\" (1892). He became a figurehead among the literary bourgeoisie and organised cultural dinners with Guy de Maupassant, Joris-Karl Huysmans, and other writers at his luxurious villa (worth 300,000 francs) in M\u00e9dan, near Paris, after 1880. Despite being nominated several times, Zola was never elected to the .\nZola's output also included novels on population (\"F\u00e9condit\u00e9\") and work (\"Travail\"), a number of plays, and several volumes of criticism. He wrote every day for around 30 years, and took as his motto (\"not a day without a line\").\nThe self-proclaimed leader of French naturalism, Zola's works inspired operas such as those of Gustave Charpentier, notably \"Louise\" in the 1890s. His works were inspired by the concept of heredity and milieu (Claude Bernard and Hippolyte Taine) and by the realism of Balzac and Flaubert. He also provided the libretto for several operas by Alfred Bruneau, including \"Messidor\" (1897) and \"L'Ouragan\" (1901); several of Bruneau's other operas are adapted from Zola's writing. These provided a French alternative to Italian verismo.\nHe is considered to be a significant influence on those writers that are credited with the creation of the so-called new journalism: Wolfe, Capote, Thompson, Mailer, Didion, Talese and others.\nTom Wolfe wrote that his goal in writing fiction was to document contemporary society in the tradition of John Steinbeck, Charles Dickens, and \u00c9mile Zola.\nDreyfus affair.\nCaptain Alfred Dreyfus was a French-Jewish artillery officer in the French army. In September 1894, French intelligence discovered someone had been passing military secrets to the German Embassy. Senior officers began to suspect Dreyfus, though there was no direct evidence of any wrongdoing. Dreyfus was court-martialed, convicted of treason, and sent to Devil's Island in French Guiana.\nLt. Col. Georges Picquart came across evidence that implicated another officer, Ferdinand Walsin Esterhazy, and informed his superiors. Rather than move to clear Dreyfus, the decision was made to protect Esterhazy and ensure the original verdict was not overturned. Major Hubert-Joseph Henry forged documents that made it seem as if Dreyfus were guilty, while Picquart was reassigned to duty in Africa. However, Picquart's findings were communicated by his lawyer to the Senator Auguste Scheurer-Kestner, who took up the case, at first discreetly and then increasingly publicly. Meanwhile, further evidence was brought forward by Dreyfus's family and Esterhazy's estranged family and creditors. Under pressure, the general staff arranged for a closed court-martial to be held on 10\u201311 January 1898, at which Esterhazy was tried \"in camera\" and acquitted. Picquart was detained on charges of violation of professional secrecy.\nIn response Zola risked his career and more, and on 13 January 1898 published \"J'Accuse...!\" on the front page of the Paris daily \"L'Aurore\". The newspaper was run by Ernest Vaughan and Georges Clemenceau, who decided that the controversial story would be in the form of an open letter to the president, F\u00e9lix Faure. Zola's \"J'Accuse...!\" accused the highest levels of the French Army of obstruction of justice and antisemitism by having wrongfully convicted Alfred Dreyfus to life imprisonment on Devil's Island in French Guiana. Zola's intention was that he be prosecuted for libel so that the new evidence in support of Dreyfus would be made public.\nThe case, known as the Dreyfus affair, deeply divided France between the reactionary army and Catholic Church on one hand, and the more liberal commercial society on the other. The ramifications continued for many years; on the 100th anniversary of Zola's article, France's Catholic daily paper, \"La Croix\", apologised for its antisemitic editorials during the Dreyfus affair. As Zola was a leading French thinker and public figure, his letter formed a major turning point in the affair.\nZola was brought to trial for criminal libel on 7 February 1898, and was convicted on 23 February and removed from the Legion of Honour. The first judgment was overturned in April on a technicality, but a new suit was pressed against Zola, which opened on 18 July. At his lawyer's advice, Zola fled to England rather than wait for the end of the trial (at which he was again convicted). Without even having had the time to pack a few clothes, he arrived at Victoria Station on 19 July, the start of a brief and unhappy residence in the UK. Zola wrote a book about his exile in England: \"Pages d'exil\" (\"Notes from Exile\").\nZola visited historic locations including a Church of England service at Westminster Abbey. After initially staying at the Grosvenor Hotel, Victoria, Zola went to the Oatlands Park Hotel in Weybridge and shortly afterwards rented a house locally called Penn where he was joined by his family for the summer. At the end of August, they moved to another house in Addlestone called Summerfield. In early October the family moved to London and then his wife and children went back to France so the children could resume their schooling. Thereafter Zola lived alone in the Queen's Hotel, Norwood. He stayed in Upper Norwood from October 1898 to June 1899.\nIn France, the furious divisions over the Dreyfus affair continued. The fact of Major Henry's forgery was discovered and admitted to in August 1898, and the Government referred Dreyfus's original court-martial to the Supreme Court for review the following month, over the objections of the General Staff. Eight months later, on 3 June 1899, the Supreme Court annulled the original verdict and ordered a new military court-martial. The same month Zola returned from his exile in England. Still the anti-Dreyfusards would not give up, and on 9 September 1899 Dreyfus was again convicted.\nDreyfus applied for a retrial, but the government countered by offering Dreyfus a pardon (rather than exoneration), which would allow him to go free, provided that he admit to being guilty. Although he was clearly not guilty, he chose to accept the pardon. Later the same month, despite Zola's condemnation, an amnesty bill was passed, covering \"all criminal acts or misdemeanours related to the Dreyfus affair or that have been included in a prosecution for one of these acts\", indemnifying Zola and Picquart, but also all those who had concocted evidence against Dreyfus. Dreyfus was finally completely exonerated by the Supreme Court in 1906.\nZola said of the affair, \"The truth is on the march, and nothing shall stop it.\" Zola's 1898 article is widely viewed in France as the most prominent manifestation of the new power of the intellectuals (writers, artists, academicians) in shaping public opinion, the media and the state.\nThe Manifesto of the Five.\nOn August 18, 1887, the French daily newspaper \"Le Figaro\" published \"The Manifesto of the Five\" shortly after \"La Terre\" was released. The signatories included Paul Bonnetain, J. H. Rosny, Lucien Descaves, Paul Margueritte and Gustave Guiches, who strongly disapproved of the lack of balance of both morals and aesthetics throughout the book's depiction of the revolution. The manifesto accused Zola of having \"lowered the standard of Naturalism, of catering to large sales by deliberate obscenities, of being a morbid and impotent hypochondriac, incapable of taking a sane and healthy view of mankind. They freely referred to Zola's physiological weaknesses and expressed the utmost horror at the crudeness of La Terre.\"\nDeath.\nZola died on 29 September 1902 of carbon monoxide poisoning caused by an improperly ventilated chimney. His funeral on 5 October was attended by thousands. Alfred Dreyfus initially had promised not to attend the funeral, but was given permission by Zola's widow and attended. At the time of his death Zola had just completed a novel, , about the Dreyfus trial. A sequel, , had been planned, but was not completed.\nHis enemies were blamed for his death because of previous attempts on his life, but nothing could be proven at the time. Expressions of sympathy arrived from everywhere in France; for a week the vestibule of his house was crowded with notable writers, scientists, artists, and politicians who came to inscribe their names in the registers. On the other hand, Zola's enemies used the opportunity to celebrate in malicious glee. Writing in \"L'Intransigeant\", Henri Rochefort claimed Zola had committed suicide, having discovered Dreyfus to be guilty.\nZola was initially buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Montmartre in Paris, but on 4 June 1908, just five years and nine months after his death, his remains were relocated to the Panth\u00e9on, where he shares a crypt with Victor Hugo and Alexandre Dumas. The ceremony was disrupted by an assassination attempt on Alfred Dreyfus by Louis Gr\u00e9gori, a disgruntled journalist and admirer of \u00c9douard Drumont, in which Dreyfus was wounded in the arm by the gunshot. Gr\u00e9gori was acquitted by the Parisian court which accepted his defense that he had not meant to kill Dreyfus, meaning merely to graze him.\nA 1953 investigation by journalist Jean Bedel published in the newspaper \"Lib\u00e9ration\" under the headline \"Was Zola assassinated?\" raised the idea that Zola's death might have been a murder rather than an accident. It is based on the revelation by Norman pharmacist Pierre Hacquin, who was told by chimney-sweep Henri Buronfosse that he intentionally blocked the chimney of Zola's apartment in Paris.\nLiterary historian Alain Pag\u00e8s believes that is likely true and Zola's great-granddaughters, Brigitte \u00c9mile-Zola and Martine Le Blond-Zola, corroborate this explanation of Zola's poisoning by carbon monoxide. As reported in \"L'Orient-Le Jour\", Brigitte \u00c9mile-Zola recounts that her grandfather Jacques \u00c9mile-Zola, son of \u00c9mile Zola, told her at the age of eight that, in 1952, a man came to his house to give him information about his father's death. The man had been with a dying friend, who had confessed to taking money to plug Emile Zola's chimney.\nScope of the Rougon-Macquart series.\nZola's Rougon-Macquart novels are a panoramic account of the Second French Empire. They tell the story of a family approximately between the years 1851 and 1871. These twenty novels contain over 300 characters, who descend from the two family lines of the Rougons and Macquarts. In Zola's words, which are the subtitle of the Rougon-Macquart series, they are \"\"L'Histoire naturelle et sociale d'une famille sous le Second Empire\" (\"The natural and social history of a family under the Second Empire\").\"\nMost of the Rougon-Macquart novels were written during the French Third Republic. To an extent, attitudes and value judgments may have been superimposed on that picture with the wisdom of hindsight. Some critics classify Zola's work, and naturalism more broadly, as a particular strain of decadent literature, which emphasized the fallen, corrupted state of modern civilization. Nowhere is the doom-laden image of the Second Empire so clearly seen as in \"Nana\", which culminates in echoes of the Franco-Prussian War (and hence by implication of the French defeat). Even in novels dealing with earlier periods of Napoleon III's reign the picture of the Second Empire is sometimes overlaid with the imagery of catastrophe.\nIn the Rougon-Macquart novels, provincial life can seem to be overshadowed by Zola's preoccupation with the capital. However, the following novels (see the individual titles in the Livre de poche series) scarcely touch on life in Paris: \"La Terre\" (peasant life in Beauce), \"Le R\u00eave\" (an unnamed cathedral city), \"Germinal\" (collieries in the northeast of France), \"La Joie de vivre\" (the Atlantic coast), and the four novels set in and around Plassans (modelled on his childhood home, Aix-en-Provence), (, \"La Conqu\u00eate de Plassans\", \"La Faute de l'Abb\u00e9 Mouret\" and \"Le Docteur Pascal\"). \"La D\u00e9b\u00e2cle\", the military novel, is set for the most part in country districts of eastern France; its d\u00e9nouement takes place in the capital during the civil war leading to the suppression of the Paris Commune. Though Paris has its role in the most striking incidents (notably the train crash) take place elsewhere. Even the Paris-centred novels tend to set some scenes outside, if not very far from, the capital. In the political novel \"Son Excellence Eug\u00e8ne Rougon\", the eponymous minister's interventions on behalf of his so-called friends, have their consequences elsewhere, and the reader is witness to some of them. Even Nana, one of Zola's characters most strongly associated with Paris, makes a brief and typically disastrous trip to the country.\nQuasi-scientific purpose.\nIn \"Le Roman exp\u00e9rimental\" and \"Les Romanciers naturalistes\", Zola expounded the purposes of the \"naturalist\" novel. The experimental novel was to serve as a vehicle for scientific experiment, analogous to the experiments conducted by Claude Bernard and expounded by him in \"Introduction \u00e0 la m\u00e9decine exp\u00e9rimentale\". Claude Bernard's experiments were in the field of clinical physiology, those of the Naturalist writers (Zola being their leader) would be in the realm of psychology influenced by the natural environment. Balzac, Zola claimed, had already investigated the psychology of lechery in an experimental manner, in the figure of Hector Hulot in \"La Cousine Bette\". Essential to Zola's concept of the experimental novel was dispassionate observation of the world, with all that it involved by way of meticulous documentation. To him, each novel should be based upon a dossier. With this aim, he visited the colliery of Anzin in northern France, in February 1884 when a strike was on; he visited La Beauce (for \"La Terre\"), Sedan, Ardennes (for \"La D\u00e9b\u00e2cle\") and travelled on the railway line between Paris and Le Havre (when researching \"La B\u00eate humaine\").\nCharacterisation.\nZola strongly claimed that Naturalist literature is an experimental analysis of human psychology. Considering this claim, many critics, such as Gy\u00f6rgy Luk\u00e1cs, find Zola strangely poor at creating lifelike and memorable characters in the manner of Honor\u00e9 de Balzac or Charles Dickens, despite his ability to evoke powerful crowd scenes. It was important to Zola that no character should appear \"larger than\" life; but the criticism that his characters are \"cardboard\" is substantially more damaging. Zola, by refusing to make any of his characters larger than life (if that is what he has indeed done), did not inhibit himself from also achieving verisimilitude.\nAlthough Zola found it scientifically and artistically unjustifiable to create larger-than-life characters, his work presents some larger-than-life symbols which, like the mine Le Voreux in \"Germinal\", take on the nature of a surrogate human life. The mine, the still in \"L'Assommoir\" and the locomotive La Lison in \"La B\u00eate humaine\" impress the reader with the vivid reality of human beings. The great natural processes of seedtime and harvest, death and renewal in \"La Terre\" are instinct with a vitality which is not human but is the elemental energy of life. Human life is raised to the level of the mythical as the hammerblows of Titans are seemingly heard underground at Le Voreux, or as in \"La Faute de l'Abb\u00e9 Mouret\", the walled park of Le Paradou encloses a re-enactment\u2014and restatement\u2014of the Book of Genesis.\nZola's optimism.\nIn Zola there is the theorist and the writer, the poet, the scientist and the optimist \u2013 features that are basically joined in his own confession of positivism; later in his life, when he saw his own position turning into an anachronism, he would still style himself with irony and sadness over the lost cause as \"an old and rugged Positivist\".\nThe poet is the artist in words whose writing, as in the racecourse scene in \"Nana\" or in the descriptions of the laundry in \"L'Assommoir\" or in many passages of \"La Faute de l'Abb\u00e9 Mouret\", \"Le Ventre de Paris\" and \"La Cur\u00e9e\", vies with the colourful impressionistic techniques of Claude Monet and Pierre-Auguste Renoir. The scientist is a believer in some measure of scientific determinism \u2013 not that this, despite his own words \"devoid of free will\" (\"\"d\u00e9pourvus de libre arbitre\"), need always amount to a philosophical denial of free will. The creator of \"la litt\u00e9rature putride\", a term of abuse invented by an early critic of \"Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Raquin\" (a novel which predates series), emphasizes the squalid aspects of the human environment and upon the seamy side of human nature.\nThe optimist is that other face of the scientific experimenter, the man with an unshakable belief in human progress. Zola bases his optimism on \"inn\u00e9it\u00e9\" and on the supposed capacity of the human race to make progress in a moral sense. \"Inn\u00e9it\u00e9\" is defined by Zola as that process in which \"se confondent les caract\u00e8res physiques et moraux des parents, sans que rien d'eux semble s'y retrouver\"\"; it is the term used in biology to describe the process whereby the moral and temperamental dispositions of some individuals are unaffected by the hereditary transmission of genetic characteristics. Jean Macquart and Pascal Rougon are two instances of individuals liberated from the blemishes of their ancestors by the operation of the process of \"inn\u00e9it\u00e9\".\nBibliography.\nFrench language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWorks translated into English.\nThe Three Cities\nThe Four Gospels\nStandalones\nModern translations.\nThe Rougon-Macquart (1993\u20132021)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44981", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44981", "title": "Franz Peter Schubert", "text": ""}
{"id": "44983", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44983", "title": "Schubert", "text": ""}
{"id": "44984", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44984", "title": "Kapellmeister", "text": "Person in charge of music-making\n ( , , ), from ('chapel') and ('master'), literally 'master of the chapel choir', is a word of German origin that designates the leader of an ensemble of musicians. Originally used to refer to somebody in charge of music in a chapel, the term has evolved considerably in its meaning and is today used for denoting the leader of a musical ensemble, often smaller ones used for TV, radio, and theatre.\nTerminology.\nVariant spellings \"capellmeister\" and \"capelle\", to refer to the orchestra or choir, are sometimes encountered in English language works about composers who held the title.\nThe word specified that the Kapellmeister worked at a nobleman's court (); a held a somewhat less senior position.\nPositions equivalent to Kapellmeister existed in other European countries and were referred to with equivalent names, as follows:\nUsage.\nHistorical usage.\nIn German-speaking countries during the approximate period 1500\u20131800, the word often designated the director of music for a monarch or nobleman. For English speakers, it is this sense of the term that is most often encountered, since it appears frequently in biographical writing about composers who worked in German-speaking countries. During that period, in Italy, the position () largely referred to directors of music assigned to cathedrals and sacred institutions rather than those under royal or aristocratic patronage.\nA Kapellmeister position was a senior one and involved supervision of other musicians. Johann Sebastian Bach worked from 1717 to 1723 as Kapellmeister for Prince Leopold of Anhalt-C\u00f6then. Joseph Haydn worked for many years as Kapellmeister for the Esterh\u00e1zy family, a high-ranking noble family of the Habsburg monarchy. George Frideric Handel served as Kapellmeister for George, Elector of Hanover (who eventually became King George I of Great Britain).\nA Kapellmeister might also be the director of music for a church. Thus, Georg Reutter was the Kapellmeister at St. Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna, where his young choristers included both Joseph and Michael Haydn.\nBecoming a Kapellmeister was a mark of success for professional musicians. For instance, Joseph Haydn once remarked that he was glad his father (a wheelwright) had lived long enough to see his son become a Kapellmeister. The term also implied the possession of considerable musical skill. When the 18th-century actor and musician Joachim Daniel Preisler heard the famous soprano Aloysia Weber (Mozart's sister-in-law) perform in her home, he paid her the following compliment in his diary:\nThe well-known \"Mozardt\" is her brother-in-law and has taught her so well that she accompanies from a score and plays interludes like a Kapellmeister.\nBy the end of the 18th century, many of the nobility had declined in their economic power relative to the newly prosperous middle class. Eventually, the maintenance of a became too expensive for most nobles, which led to a decline in the number of Kapellmeister positions. A well-known instance occurred in 1790, when Prince Anton Esterh\u00e1zy succeeded his father Nikolaus and dismissed almost all of the latter's extensive musical establishment. But Prince Anton was hardly alone in doing this; during this same period, \"the steady decline in the number of orchestras supported by aristocratic families represented a ... change that affected all composers and their works.\" This was a difficult time for musicians, who needed to find new ways to support themselves. For instance, Ludwig van Beethoven (1770\u20131827) never worked as a Kapellmeister but was supported by a somewhat unreliable combination of noble patronage, publication, and concert income.\nThe case of Mozart.\nMozart never was a Kapellmeister in the sense given above. In 1787, he was given a paid position in the court of the Austrian Emperor Joseph II as (chamber composer), but authority in matters musical at the court was exercised primarily by Antonio Salieri. In reviews, diaries, and advertising, Mozart was commonly referred to as . It seems that Mozart's prestige, along with the fact that he frequently appeared in public directing other musicians, led to the use of \"Kapellmeister\" as a term of respect.\nIn April 1791, Mozart applied to become the Kapellmeister at St. Stephen's Cathedral and was designated by the City Council to take over this job following the death of the then-ailing incumbent, Leopold Hofmann. This never took place, since Mozart died (December 1791) before Hofmann did (1793).\nContemporary usage.\nIn contemporary German, the term has become less common than (conductor). When used today it designates the director or chief conductor of an orchestra or choir. It suggests involvement in orchestra or choir policy (for example, selecting repertoire, concert schedules, and guest conductors) as well as conducting. In military settings it refers to a bandmaster. The music director of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra traditionally holds the old-fashioned title . In other German opera houses, the term generally refers to a deputy conductor reporting to the (general music director, usually also the chief conductor). An opera company may have several Kapellmeister, ranked as (First...), (Second...), etc.\nThe conductor Christian Thielemann has offered a nuanced account of the \"Dirigent\"/\"Kapellmeister\" distinction in contemporary usage. He suggests that \"Kapellmeister\" has unfairly acquired a sense of routine or failure to project glamour: \"a Kapellmeister now describes a pale, meek figure beating time. A policeman on duty at the podium directing the musical traffic, no more.\" In fact, Thielemann, who is fully aware of the historical usage of the term, would himself prefer to be called a \"Kapellmeister\": \"it implies such virtues as knowledge of a work, great ability, and dedication to the cause of music\".\nThe term \"Kapellmeister Tradition\" is commonly used to describe these qualities, as exemplified by such historically important conductors as Otto Klemperer, Clemens Krauss, and Erich Kleiber, in the sense that they have \"paid their dues\" on their way to international fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44985", "revid": "6675779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44985", "title": "Sampler", "text": "Sampler may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44986", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44986", "title": "Sampling", "text": "Sampling may refer to:\nSpecific types of sampling include:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44987", "revid": "49655340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44987", "title": "Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma", "text": "Theorem in probability\nIn probability theory, the Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma is a theorem about sequences of events. In general, it is a result in measure theory. It is named after \u00c9mile Borel and Francesco Paolo Cantelli, who gave statement to the lemma in the first decades of the 20th century. A related result, sometimes called the second Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma, is a partial converse of the first Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma. The lemma states that, under certain conditions, an event will have probability of either zero or one. Accordingly, it is the best-known of a class of similar theorems, known as zero-one laws. Other examples include Kolmogorov's zero\u2013one law and the Hewitt\u2013Savage zero\u2013one law.\nStatement of lemma for probability spaces.\nLet \"E\"1, \"E\"2, ... be a sequence of events in some probability space.\nThe Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBorel\u2013Cantelli lemma\u2014If the sum of the probabilities of the events {\"E\"\"n\"} is finite\nformula_1\nthen the probability that infinitely many of them occur is 0, that is,\nformula_2\nHere, \"lim\u00a0sup\" denotes limit supremum of the sequence of events. That is, lim\u00a0sup\u00a0\"E\"\"n\" is the outcome that infinitely many of the infinite sequence of events (\"E\"\"n\") actually occur. Explicitly,\nformula_3The set lim\u00a0sup\u00a0\"E\"\"n\" is sometimes denoted {\"E\"\"n\" i.o.}, where \"i.o.\" stands for \"infinitely often\". The theorem therefore asserts that if the sum of the probabilities of the events \"E\"\"n\" is finite, then the set of all outcomes that contain infinitely many events must have probability zero. Note that no assumption of independence is required.\nExample.\nSuppose (\"X\"\"n\") is a sequence of random variables with Pr(\"X\"\"n\" = 0) = 1/\"n\"2 for each \"n\". The probability that \"X\"\"n\" = 0 occurs for infinitely many \"n\" is equivalent to the probability of the intersection of infinitely many [\"X\"\"n\" = 0] events. The intersection of infinitely many such events is a set of outcomes common to all of them. However, the sum \u03a3Pr(\"X\"\"n\" = 0) converges to and so the Borel\u2013Cantelli Lemma states that the set of outcomes that are common to infinitely many such events occurs with probability zero. Hence, the probability of \"X\"\"n\" = 0 occurring for infinitely many \"n\" is\u00a00. Almost surely (i.e., with probability 1), \"X\"\"n\" is nonzero for all but finitely many\u00a0\"n\".\nProof.\nLet (\"E\"\"n\") be a sequence of events in some probability space.\nThe sequence of events formula_4 is non-increasing:\nformula_5By continuity from above,\nformula_6By subadditivity,\nformula_7By original assumption, formula_8 As the series formula_9 converges,\nformula_10\nas required.\nGeneral measure spaces.\nFor general measure spaces, the Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma takes the following form:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBorel\u2013Cantelli Lemma for measure spaces\u2014Let \"\u03bc\" be a (positive) measure on a set \"X\", with \u03c3-algebra \"F\", and let (\"A\"\"n\") be a sequence in \"F\". If\nformula_11\nthen\nformula_12\nConverse result.\nA related result, sometimes called the second Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma, is a partial converse of the first Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma. The lemma states: If the events \"E\"\"n\" are independent and the sum of the probabilities of the \"E\"\"n\" diverges to infinity, then the probability that infinitely many of them occur is 1. That is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecond Borel\u2013Cantelli Lemma\u2014If formula_13 and the events formula_14 are independent, then formula_15\nThe assumption of independence can be weakened to pairwise independence, but in that case the proof is more difficult.\nThe infinite monkey theorem follows from this second lemma.\nExample.\nThe lemma can be applied to give a covering theorem in R\"n\". Specifically , if \"E\"\"j\" is a collection of Lebesgue measurable subsets of a compact set in R\"n\" such that\nformula_16\nthen there is a sequence \"F\"\"j\" of translates\nformula_17\nsuch that\nformula_18\napart from a set of measure zero.\nProof.\nSuppose that formula_19 and the events formula_20 are independent. It is sufficient to show the event that the \"E\"\"n\"'s did not occur for infinitely many values of \"n\" has probability 0. This is just to say that it is sufficient to show that\nformula_21\nNoting that:\nformula_22 it is enough to show: formula_23. Since the formula_14 are independent:\nformula_25\nThe convergence test for infinite products guarantees that the product above is 0, if formula_26 diverges. This completes the proof.\nCounterpart.\nAnother related result is the so-called counterpart of the Borel\u2013Cantelli lemma. It is a counterpart of the\nLemma in the sense that it gives a necessary and sufficient condition for the limsup to be 1 by replacing the independence assumption by the completely different assumption that formula_27 is monotone increasing for sufficiently large indices. This Lemma says:\nLet formula_27 be such that formula_29,\nand let formula_30 denote the complement of formula_31. Then the probability of infinitely many formula_32 occur (that is, at least one formula_32 occurs) is one if and only if there exists a strictly increasing sequence of positive integers formula_34 such that\nformula_35This simple result can be useful in problems such as for instance those involving hitting probabilities for stochastic process with the choice of the sequence formula_36 usually being the essence.\nKochen\u2013Stone.\nLet formula_27 be a sequence of events with formula_38 and\nformula_39 Then there is a positive probability that formula_40 occur infinitely often.\nProof.\nLet formula_41. Then, note that \nformula_42\nand \nformula_43\nHence, we know that\nformula_44\nWe have that \nformula_45\nNow, notice that by the Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality, for any random variable formula_46:\nformula_47\ntherefore, \nformula_48\nWe then have\nformula_49\nGiven formula_50, since formula_51, we can find formula_52 large enough so that \nformula_53\nfor any given formula_54. Therefore, \nformula_55\nBut the left side is precisely the probability that the formula_56 occur infinitely often since \nformula_57\nWe're done now, since we've shown that formula_58\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44988", "revid": "1141954500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44988", "title": "Chip carving", "text": "Style of carving\nChip carving or chip-carving, \"kerbschnitt\" in German, is a style of carving in which knives or chisels are used to remove small chips of the material from a flat surface in a single piece. The style became important in Migration Period metalwork, mainly animal style jewellery, where the faceted surfaces created caught the light to give a glinting appearance. This was very probably a transfer to metalworking of a technique already used in woodcarving, but no wooden examples have survived. Famous Anglo-Saxon examples include the jewellery from Sutton Hoo and the Tassilo Chalice, although the style originated in mainland Europe. In later British and Irish metalwork, the same style was imitated using casting, which is often called imitation chip-carving, or sometimes just chip carving (authors are not always careful to distinguish the two), a term also sometimes applied to pottery decorated in a similar way.\nWoodwork.\nIn modern wood carving, the style is also called spoon carving. The style is traditional in the folk art of many countries. Patterns can be free form style or based on geometric figures. In America it is mostly used with basswood, butternut, pine, or mahogany. Chip carving knives can also be used for whittling, cabinet making, and general workbench purposes."}
{"id": "44989", "revid": "74100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44989", "title": "Wood burning", "text": ""}
{"id": "44990", "revid": "39606237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44990", "title": "Ryan White", "text": "AIDS spokesperson and poster boy (1971\u20131990)\nRyan Wayne White (December 6, 1971\u00a0\u2013 April 8, 1990) was an American teenager from Kokomo, Indiana, who became a national poster child for HIV/AIDS in the United States after his school barred him from attending classes following a diagnosis of AIDS.\nAs a hemophiliac, White became infected with HIV from a contaminated factor VIII blood treatment and, when diagnosed in December 1984, was given six months to live. Doctors said he posed no risk to other students, as AIDS is not an airborne disease and spreads solely through bodily fluids, but AIDS was poorly understood by the general public at the time. When White tried to return to school, irate parents and teachers in Howard County rallied against his attendance due to unwarranted concerns of the disease spreading to other students and staff. A lengthy administrative appeal process ensued, and news of the conflict turned White into a popular celebrity and advocate for AIDS research and public education. Surprising his doctors, White lived five years longer than predicted. He died on April 8, 1990, one month before his high school graduation.\nDuring the 1980s, AIDS was largely stigmatized as an illness impacting the gay community. In the U.S., that perception shifted with the media focus placed on White and other prominent heterosexual HIV-infected people such as Magic Johnson, Arthur Ashe and the Ray brothers, although these cases were often framed as \"innocent\"\u2014a contrast to gay men who were seen as \"guilty\" subjects. The U.S. Congress passed a major piece of AIDS legislation, the Ryan White CARE Act, shortly after White's death, which was signed into law by President George H. W. Bush in August 1990 and reauthorized twice. Through the \"Ryan White programs\" which it funds, the Act has become the largest provider of services for people living with HIV/AIDS in the United States.\nEarly life and illness.\nRyan White was born at St. Joseph Memorial Hospital in Kokomo, Indiana, to Hubert Wayne and Jeanne Elaine (Hale) White. When he was circumcised, the bleeding would not stop; when he was three days old, doctors diagnosed him with severe hemophilia A, a hereditary blood coagulation disorder associated with the X chromosome, which causes even minor injuries to result in severe bleeding. For treatment, he received weekly infusions of factor VIII, a blood product created from pooled plasma of non-hemophiliacs, an increasingly common treatment for hemophiliacs at the time.\nHealthy for most of his childhood, White became extremely ill with pneumonia in December 1984. On December 17, 1984, during a lung biopsy, White was diagnosed with AIDS. By this time, the scientific community had studied the epidemic in great detail. Earlier that year, HTLV-III was identified and isolated by American research scientists, confirming the work done by French research scientists who called it LAV. A lengthy public battle to determine who should be recognized as the discoverer of the human retrovirus delayed development of a test for what would later be called HIV. White had apparently received a contaminated treatment of factor\u00a0VIII that was infected with HIV, as did thousands of other Americans with hemophilia and hemophiliacs around the world. At that time, because the virus had only recently been identified and there was no screening of blood products, much of the pooled factor VIII concentrate was tainted. Blood banks and pharmaceutical companies dismissed calls by the CDC to use a hepatitis B test as a surrogate until an HIV test could be developed. Later plasma products were screened and heat-treated to deactivate both HIV and hepatitis. Among hemophiliacs treated with blood-clotting factors between 1979 and 1984, nearly 90% became infected with HIV and/or hepatitis C. At the time of his diagnosis, White's T-cell count had dropped to 25 per cubic millimeter (a healthy individual without HIV will have around 500\u20131,200; below 200 is AIDS-defining in the U.S.). Doctors predicted Ryan White had only six months to live.\nAfter the diagnosis, White was too ill to return to school, but, by early 1985, he began to feel better. His mother asked if he could return to school but was told by school officials that he could not. On June 30, 1985, a formal request to permit re-admittance to school was denied by Western School Corporation superintendent James O. Smith, sparking an administrative appeal process that lasted for over nine months.\nBattle with schools.\nWestern Middle School in Russiaville faced enormous pressure from many parents and faculty to prevent White from returning to the campus after his diagnosis became widely known. In the school of 360 total students, 117 parents and 50 teachers signed a petition encouraging school leaders to ban White from school. Due to the widespread fear and ignorance of AIDS, the principal and later the school board succumbed to this pressure and prohibited re-admittance. The White family filed a lawsuit seeking to overturn the decision. The Whites initially filed suit in the U.S. District Court in Indianapolis. The court, however, declined to hear the case until administrative appeals had been resolved. On November 25, an Indiana Department of Education officer ruled that the school must follow the Indiana Board of Health guidelines and that White must be allowed to attend school.\nThe means of transmission of HIV had not yet been fully understood by the mid- to late 1980s. Scientists knew it spread via blood and was not transmittable by any sort of casual contact (such as shaking hands or being in the same room), but as recently as 1983, the American Medical Association had thought that \"Evidence Suggests Household Contact May Transmit AIDS\", and the belief that the disease could easily spread persisted. Children with AIDS were still rare; at the time of White's rejection from school, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention knew of only 148 cases of pediatric AIDS in the United States. Many families in Kokomo believed his presence posed an unacceptable risk. When White was permitted to return to school for one day in February 1986, 151 of 360 students stayed home. He also worked as a paperboy, and many of the people on his route canceled their subscriptions, believing that HIV could be transmitted through newsprint.\nThe Indiana state health commissioner, Dr. Woodrow Myers, who had extensive experience treating AIDS patients in San Francisco, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention both notified the board that White posed no risk to other students, but the school board and many parents ignored their statements. In February 1986, \"The New England Journal of Medicine\" published a study of 101 people who had spent three months living in close but non-sexual contact with people with AIDS. The study concluded that the risk of infection was \"minimal to nonexistent,\" even when contact included sharing toothbrushes, razors, clothing, combs, and drinking glasses; sleeping in the same bed; and hugging and kissing.\nWhen White was finally readmitted in April, a group of families withdrew their children and started an alternative school. Threats of violence and lawsuits persisted. According to White's mother, people on the street would often yell, \"we know you're queer\" at White. The editors and publishers of the \"Kokomo Tribune\", which supported White both editorially and financially, were also ridiculed by members of the community and threatened with death for their actions.\nWhite attended Western Middle School for eighth grade during the 1985\u20131986 school year. He was deeply unhappy and had few friends. The school required him to eat with disposable utensils, use separate bathrooms, and waived his requirement to enroll in a gym class. Threats continued. When a bullet was fired through the Whites' living room window (no one was home at the time), the family decided to leave Kokomo. After finishing the school year, his family moved to Cicero, Indiana, where he began ninth grade at Hamilton Heights High School, in Arcadia, Indiana. On August 31, 1986, a \"very nervous\" White was greeted by school principal Tony Cook, school system superintendent Bob G. Carnal, and a handful of students who had been educated about AIDS and were unafraid to shake White's hand.\nNational spokesman.\nThe publicity of White's story catapulted him into the national spotlight, amidst a growing wave of AIDS coverage in the news media. Between 1985 and 1987, the number of news stories about AIDS in the American media doubled. While isolated in middle school, White appeared frequently on national television and in newspapers to discuss his tribulations with the disease. Eventually, he became known as a poster child for the AIDS crisis, appearing in fundraising and educational campaigns for the syndrome. White participated in numerous public benefits for children with AIDS. Many celebrities appeared with him, starting during his trial and continuing for the rest of his life, to help publicly destigmatize socializing with people with AIDS. Singers John Mellencamp, Elton John and Michael Jackson, actor Matt Frewer, diver Greg Louganis, President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan, Surgeon General Dr. C. Everett Koop, Indiana University basketball coach Bob Knight and basketball player Kareem Abdul-Jabbar all befriended White. He also was a friend to many children with AIDS or other potentially debilitating conditions.\nFor the rest of his life, White appeared frequently on Phil Donahue's talk show. His celebrity crush, Alyssa Milano of the then-popular TV show \"Who's the Boss?\", met White and gave him a friendship bracelet and a kiss. Elton John loaned Jeanne White $16,500 to put toward a down payment on the Cicero home, and, rather than accept repayment, placed the repaid money into a college fund for White's sister. In high school, White drove a red 1988 Ford Mustang LX 5.0, a gift from Michael Jackson. Despite the fame and donations, White stated that he disliked the public spotlight, loathed remarks that seemingly blamed his parents or his upbringing for his illness, and emphasized that he would be willing at any moment to trade his fame for freedom from the disease.\nIn 1988, White spoke before the President's Commission on the HIV Epidemic. White told the commission of the discrimination he had faced when he first tried to return to school, but how education about the disease had made him welcome in the town of Cicero. White emphasized his differing experiences in Kokomo and Cicero as an example of the power and importance of AIDS education.\nIn 1989, ABC aired the television movie \"The Ryan White Story\", starring Lukas Haas as White, Judith Light as Jeanne and Nikki Cox as his sister Andrea. White had a small cameo appearance as \"Chad\" in the film, playing a boy who also has HIV and later befriends Haas. Others in the film included Sarah Jessica Parker as a sympathetic nurse, George Dzundza as his doctor, and George C. Scott as White's attorney, who legally argued against school board authorities. Nielsen estimated that the movie was seen by 15 million viewers. Some residents of Kokomo felt that the movie was condemning of them for their actions against White. After the film aired, the office of Kokomo mayor Robert F. Sargent was flooded with complaints from across the country, although Sargent had not been mayor during the time of the controversy.\nBy early 1990, White's health was deteriorating rapidly. In his final public appearance, he hosted an after-Oscars party with former president Ronald Reagan and his wife Nancy in California. Despite his declining health, White spoke to the Reagans about his date to the prom and his hopes of attending college.\nDeath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We owe it to Ryan to make sure that the fear and ignorance that chased him from his home and his school will be eliminated. We owe it to Ryan to open our hearts and our minds to those with AIDS. We owe it to Ryan to be compassionate, caring, and tolerant toward those with AIDS, their families, and friends. It's the disease that's frightening, not the people who have it.\"\nOn March 29, 1990, White entered Riley Hospital for Children in Indianapolis with a respiratory tract infection. As his condition deteriorated, he was sedated and placed on a ventilator. Elton John paid him a visit and the hospital was deluged with calls from well-wishers. White died on April 8, 1990.\nOver 1,500 people attended White's funeral on April 11, a standing-room only event held at the Second Presbyterian Church on Meridian Street in Indianapolis. White's pallbearers included Elton John, football star Howie Long and Phil Donahue. Elton John performed \"Skyline Pigeon\" at the funeral. The funeral was also attended by singer Michael Jackson, and then-First Lady Barbara Bush. On the day of the funeral, Ronald Reagan wrote a tribute to White that appeared in \"The Washington Post\". Reagan's statement about AIDS and White's funeral were seen as indicators of how greatly White had helped change perceptions of AIDS.\nWhite is buried in Cicero, close to the former home of his mother. In the year following his death, his grave was vandalized on four occasions. As time passed, White's grave became a shrine for his admirers.\nLegacy.\nWhite was one of a handful of highly visible people with AIDS in the 1980s and early 1990s who helped change the public perception of the disease. White, along with actor Rock Hudson, was one of the earliest public faces of AIDS. Other public figures who were infected with HIV included Keith Haring, Holly Johnson, Freddie Mercury, the Ray brothers, Magic Johnson, Greg Louganis, Arthur Ashe, Liberace, Eazy-E, Tim Richmond, Anthony Perkins, Randy Shilts, Ricky Wilson, Ofra Haza, Robert Reed, and Jerry Smith. White helped to increase public awareness that HIV/AIDS was a significant epidemic.\nNumerous charities formed around White's death. The Indiana University Dance Marathon, started in 1991, raises money for the Riley Hospital for Children. Between 1991 and 2022, this event helped raise over $50 million for children at Riley. The money raised has also helped fund the Ryan White Infectious Disease Clinic at the hospital to take care of the nation's sickest children. White's personal physician, with whom he was close friends, Dr. Martin Kleiman, became the Ryan White Professor of Pediatrics at Indiana University School of Medicine in Indianapolis. In a 1993 interview, prominent gay rights and AIDS activist Larry Kramer said, \"I think little Ryan White probably did more to change the face of this illness and to move people than anyone. And he continues to be a presence through his mom, Jeanne White. She has an incredibly moving presence as she speaks around the world.\"\nIn 1992, White's mother founded the national nonprofit Ryan White Foundation. The foundation worked to increase awareness of HIV/AIDS-related issues, with a focus on hemophiliacs like White, and on families caring for relatives with the disease. The foundation was active throughout the 1990s, with donations reaching $300,000 a year in 1997. Between 1997 and 2000, however, AIDS donations declined nationwide by 21%, and the Ryan White Foundation saw its donation level drop to $100,000 a year. In 2000, White's mother closed the foundation, and merged its remaining assets with AIDS Action, a larger charity. She became a spokeswoman for AIDS activism and continued to arrange speaking events through the site devoted to her son, ryanwhite.com (no longer online as of October 2020). White's high school, Hamilton Heights, has had a student\u2013government-sponsored annual AIDS Walk, with proceeds going to a Ryan White Scholarship Fund.\nElton John has cited White's death as the major impetus behind his decision to fight his long-standing alcohol and cocaine addiction; he went into rehab shortly afterwards and later created the Elton John AIDS Foundation. White also became the inspiration for a handful of popular songs. Elton John donated proceeds from \"The Last Song,\" which appears on his album \"The One\", to a Ryan White fund at Riley Hospital. Michael Jackson dedicated the song \"Gone Too Soon\" from his \"Dangerous\" album to White, as did 1980s pop star Tiffany with the song \"Here in My Heart\" on her \"New Inside\" album. In November 2007, The Children's Museum of Indianapolis opened an exhibit called \",\" which features White's bedroom and belongings alongside similar tributes to Anne Frank and Ruby Bridges. After White died, Greg Louganis gave his Olympic gold medal to White's mother, and it is now part of the display about White at the Children's Museum. In April 2015, Louganis visited The Power of Children exhibit with Jeanne to see his medal in White's recreated room. He said then, \"The thing I\u2019ll always remember about Ryan is his courage, strength, and sense of humor...The way Ryan lived his life continues to give me the strength and courage to do things I might not otherwise feel comfortable doing.\"\nRyan White and public perception of AIDS.\nIn the early 1980s, AIDS was known as gay-related immune deficiency, because the disease had first been identified among primarily homosexual communities in Los Angeles, New York City, and San Francisco. At the start of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the United States, the disease was thought to be a \"homosexual problem\" and was largely ignored by policymakers. White's diagnosis demonstrated to many that AIDS was not exclusive to homosexual men. Lesser criticisms had been made that the disease was a punishment for drug abuse and heterosexual promiscuity, citing \"an expensive price to pay for drugs and casual sex\". In his advocacy for AIDS research, White, not gay himself, always rejected any criticism of homosexuality.\nWhite was seen by some as an \"innocent victim\" of the AIDS epidemic. White and his family strongly rejected the language of \"innocent victim\" because the phrase was often used to imply that gays with AIDS were \"guilty\". His mother told \"The New York Times\", &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ryan always said, \"I'm just like everyone else with AIDS, no matter how I got it.\" And he would never have lived as long as he did without the gay community. The people we knew in New York made sure we knew about the latest treatments way before we would have known in Indiana. I hear mothers today say they're not gonna work with no gay community on anything. Well, if it comes to your son's life, you better start changing your heart and your attitude around.\nRyan White CARE Act.\nIn August 1990, four months after White's death, Congress enacted The Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency (CARE) Act (often known simply as the Ryan White CARE Act), in his honor. The act is the United States' largest federally funded program for people living with HIV/AIDS. The Ryan White CARE Act funds several different programs to improve availability of care for low-income, uninsured and underinsured victims of AIDS and their families.\nRyan White programs are \"payers of last resort,\" which subsidize treatment when no other resources are available. The Act provided some level of care for around 500,000 people a year and, in 2004, provided funds to 2,567 organizations. Ryan White programs also provide funding and technical assistance to local and state primary medical care providers, support services, healthcare providers and training programs.\nThe act was reauthorized in 1996, 2000, 2006, and 2009. Since the Affordable Care Act of 2010 prohibited discrimination on the basis of health status and expanded access to insurance coverage, some experts debated the need for programs like the Ryan White Act. The Ryan White CARE Act expired in 2013, but individual programs continue to receive congressional funding.\nIn 2024, over half of the people diagnosed with HIV in the United States (more than 550,000) were provided care and treatment from the funded programs, and 57,000 health care professionals treating people with HIV received education and training.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44991", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44991", "title": "Lim sup", "text": ""}
{"id": "44992", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44992", "title": "Lim inf", "text": ""}
{"id": "44993", "revid": "47854361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44993", "title": "Pope Nicholas V", "text": "Head of Catholic Church from 1447 to 1455\nPope Nicholas V (; ; 15 November 1397 \u2013 24 March 1455), born Tommaso Parentucelli, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 6 March 1447 until his death in March 1455. Pope Eugene IV made him a cardinal in 1446 after successful trips to Italy and Germany, and when Eugene died the next year, Parentucelli was elected in his place. He took his name Nicholas in memory of his obligations to Niccol\u00f2 Albergati. He remains the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"Nicholas\".\nThe pontificate of Nicholas saw the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks and the end of the Hundred Years' War. He responded by calling a crusade against the Ottomans, which never materialized. By the Concordat of Vienna he secured the recognition of papal rights over bishoprics and benefices. He also brought about the submission of the last of the antipopes, Felix V, and the dissolution of the Synod of Basel. A key figure in the Roman Renaissance, Nicholas sought to make Rome the home of literature and art. He strengthened fortifications, restored aqueducts, and rebuilt many churches. He ordered design plans for what would eventually be the Basilica of St. Peter.\nEarly life.\nTommaso Parentucelli was born in Sarzana, an important town in Lunigiana, to the physician Bartolomeo Parentucelli and wife Andreola Bosi of Fivizzano. The Lunigiana region had long been fought over by competing Tuscan, Ligurian and Milanese forces. Three years before Parentucelli's birth, the town was captured from the Florentines by the Genoese Republic. His father died while he was young. Parentucelli later became a tutor, in Florence, to the families of the Strozzi and Albizzi, where he met the leading humanist scholars.\nParentucelli studied at Bologna and Florence, gaining a degree in theology in 1422. Bishop Niccol\u00f2 Albergati was so awestruck with his capabilities that he took him into his service and gave him the chance to pursue his studies further by sending him on a tour through Germany, France and England. He was able to collect books, for which he had an intellectual's passion, wherever he went. Some of them survive with his marginal annotations.\nParentucelli attended the Council of Florence and in 1444, when his patron died, he was appointed Bishop of Bologna in his place. Civic disorders at Bologna were prolonged, so Pope Eugene IV soon named him as one of the legates sent to Frankfurt. He was to assist in negotiating an understanding between the Papal States and the Holy Roman Empire, regarding undercutting or at least containing the reforming decrees of the Council of Basel (1431\u20131439).\nPapacy.\nParentucelli's successful diplomacy gained him the reward, on his return to Rome, of the title Cardinal-Priest of Santa Susanna in December 1446. At the papal conclave of 1447 he was elected pope in succession to Eugene IV on 6 March. He took the name Nicholas in honour of his early benefactor, Niccol\u00f2 Albergati.\nIn only eight years, his pontificate delivered important achievements in the political, scientific, and literary history of the world. Politically, he needed to repair relationships which had broken down in the pontificate of Eugene IV. He called the congress which produced the Treaty of Lodi, secured peace with Charles VII of France, and concluded the Concordat of Vienna or \"Aschaffenburg\" (17 February 1448) with the German King, Frederick III, by which the decrees of the Council of Basel against papal annates and reservations were abrogated so far as Germany was concerned. In the following year he secured a still greater tactical triumph with the resignation of the Antipope Felix V on 7 April and his own recognition by the rump of the Council of Basel that assembled at Lausanne.\nIn 1450, Nicholas held a Jubilee at Rome, and the offerings of the numerous pilgrims who thronged to Rome gave him the means of furthering the cause of culture in Italy, which he had so much at heart. In March 1452 he crowned Frederick III as Holy Roman Emperor in St. Peter's, in what was the last imperial coronation held in Rome.\nWithin the city of Rome, Nicholas introduced the fresh spirit of the Renaissance both intellectually and architecturally. His plans were of embellishing the city with new monuments worthy of the capital of the Christian world. It was in recognition of this commitment to building that Leon Battista Alberti dedicated to Nicholas V his treatise \"De re aedificatoria\".\nHe is the last pope to date to take the pontifical name \"Nicholas\".\nRebuilding Rome.\nHis first care was practical, to reinforce the city's fortifications, cleaning and even paving some main streets and restoring the water supply. The end of ancient Rome is sometimes dated from the destruction of its magnificent array of aqueducts by 6th-century invaders. In the Middle Ages Romans depended on wells and cisterns for water, and the poor dipped their water from the yellow Tiber. The Aqua Virgo aqueduct, originally constructed by Agrippa, was restored by Nicholas and emptied into a simple basin that Alberti designed, the predecessor of the Trevi Fountain.\nHe continued restoration of the major Roman basilicas, but also of many other Roman churches including Sant' Apostoli, Sant' Eusebio, San Lorenzo fuori le Mura, Santa Maria in Trastevere, Santa Prassede, San Salvatore, Santo Stefano Rotondo, San Teodoro, and especially San Celso. He rebuilt the Ponte Sant' Angelo which had collapsed in 1450, and supported the redevelopment of the surrounding area as a prestigious business and residential district.\nArts patron.\nNicholas V's major focus was on establishing the Vatican as the official residence of the Papacy, replacing the Lateran Palace. He added a substantial new wing including a private chapel to the Vatican, and\u00a0\u2013 according to Giannozzo Manetti, biographer of Nicholas\u00a0\u2013 planned substantial changes to the Borgo district. He also laid up 2,522 cartloads of marble from the dilapidated Colosseum for use in the later constructions.\nThe Pope's contemporaries criticised his lavish expenditure on building: Manetti drew parallels with the wealth and expenditure of Solomon, suggesting that Papal wealth was acceptable so long as it was expended to the glory of God and the good of the Church. The decoration of the Niccoline Chapel by Fra Angelico demonstrated this message through its depictions of St Lawrence (martyred for refusing to hand to the Roman state the wealth of the Church) and St Stephen.\nUnder the generous patronage of Nicholas, humanism made rapid strides as well. The new humanist learning had been hitherto looked on with suspicion in Rome, a possible source of schism and heresy from an unhealthy interest in paganism. For Nicholas, humanism became a tool for the cultural aggrandizement of the Christian capital, and he sent emissaries to the East to attract Greek scholars after the fall of Constantinople. The pope also employed Lorenzo Valla to translate Greek histories, pagan as well as Christian, into Latin. This industry, coming just before the dawn of printing, contributed enormously to the sudden expansion of the intellectual horizon.\nNicholas, with assistance from Enoch of Ascoli and Giovanni Tortelli, founded a library of five thousand volumes, including manuscripts rescued from the Turks after the fall of Constantinople. The Pope himself was a man of vast erudition, and his friend Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini, later Pope Pius II, said of him that \"what he does not know is outside the range of human knowledge\". A lifelong bibliophile, he treasured books: while the Vatican library was still being designed and planned, he kept the rarest books near to him in his bedroom, with the others in a room nearby. Often thinking fondly of his former work as a librarian, he once remarked, \"I had more happiness in a day than now in a whole year.\"\nHe was compelled, however, to add that the lustre of his pontificate would be forever dulled by the fall of Constantinople, which the Turks took in 1453. Unsuccessful in a campaign to unite Christian powers to come to the aid of Constantinople, just before that great citadel was conquered, Nicholas had ordered 10 papal ships to sail with ships from Genoa, Venice and Naples to defend the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire. However, the ancient capital fell before the ships could offer any aid. The Pope bitterly felt this catastrophe as a double blow to Christendom and to Greek letters. \"It is a second death\", wrote Aeneas Silvius, \"to Homer and Plato.\"\nNicholas preached a crusade and endeavoured to reconcile the mutual animosities of the Italian states, but without much success.\nIn undertaking these works, Nicholas was moved \"to strengthen the weak faith of the populace by the greatness of that which it sees\". The Roman populace, however, appreciated neither his motives nor their results, and in 1452 a formidable conspiracy for the overthrow of the papal government under the leadership of Stefano Porcari was discovered and crushed. This revelation of disaffection, together with the fall of Constantinople in 1453, darkened the last years of Pope Nicholas. \"As Thomas of Sarzana\", he said, \"I had more happiness in a day than now in a whole year\".\nSlavery.\nIn late spring of 1452 Byzantine Emperor Constantine XI wrote to Pope Nicholas for help against the impending siege by Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II. Nicholas issued the bull \"Dum Diversas\" (18 June 1452) authorizing King Afonso V of Portugal to \"attack, conquer, and subjugate Saracens, pagans and other enemies of Christ wherever they may be found\". Issued less than a year before the fall of Constantinople, the bull may have been intended to begin another crusade against the Ottoman Empire.\nOwnership of the Canary Islands continued to be a source of dispute between Spain and Portugal and Nicholas was asked to settle the matter, ultimately in favor of the Portuguese. The geographical area of the concession given in the bull is not explicit, but historian Richard Raiswell finds that it clearly refers to the recently discovered lands along the coast of West Africa. Portuguese ventures were intended to compete with the Muslim trans-Sahara caravans, which played a key role in the highly profitable Muslim slave trade and also held a monopoly on West African gold and ivory.\nThe Portuguese claimed territorial rights along the African coast by virtue of having invested time and treasure in discovering it; the Castilian claim was based on their being the heirs of the Visigoths. In 1454 a fleet of caravels from Seville and C\u00e1diz traded along the African coast and upon their return, were intercepted by a Portuguese squadron. Enrique IV of Castile threatened war. Afonso V appealed to the Pope for moral support of Portugal's right to a monopoly of trade in lands she discovered.\nThe papal bull \"Romanus Pontifex\", issued on 8 January 1455, endorsed Portuguese possession of Cuerta (which they already held), and the exclusive right to trade, navigation, and fishing in the discovered lands, and reaffirmed the previous \"Dum Diversas\". It granted permission to Afonso and his heirs to \"... make purchases and sales of any things and goods, and victuals whatsoever, as it may seem fit, with any Saracens and infidels in said regions; ... provided they be not iron instruments, wood used for construction, cordage, ships, and any kinds of armor.\"\nThe bull conferred exclusive trading rights to the Portuguese between Morocco and the Indies with the rights to conquer and convert the inhabitants. A significant concession given by Nicholas in a brief issued to King Alfonso in 1454 extended the rights granted to existing territories to all those that might be taken in the future. Consistent with these broad aims, it allowed the Portuguese \"to invade, search out, capture, vanquish, and subdue all Saracens and pagans whatsoever, and other enemies of Christ wheresoever placed, and the kingdoms, dukedoms, principalities, dominions, possessions, and all movable and immovable goods whatsoever held and possessed by them and to reduce their persons to perpetual slavery\". However, together with a second reference to some who have already been enslaved, this has been used to suggest that Nicholas sanctioned the purchase of black slaves from \"the infidel\": \"... many Guineamen and other negroes, taken by force, and some by barter of unprohibited articles, or by other lawful contract of purchase, have been ... converted to the Catholic faith, and it is hoped, by the help of divine mercy, that if such progress be continued with them, either those peoples will be converted to the faith or at least the souls of many of them will be gained for Christ.\"\nIt is on this basis that it has been argued that collectively the two bulls issued by Nicholas gave the Portuguese the rights to acquire slaves along the African coast by force or trade. By dealing with local African chieftains and Muslim slave traders, the Portuguese sought to become key European players in the lucrative slave trade. The concessions given were confirmed by bulls issued by Pope Callixtus III ( \"Inter Caetera quae\" in 1456), which recognized Portugal's trade rights in territories it had discovered along the West African coast. This confirmation of \"Romanus Pontifex\" also gave the Portuguese the military Order of Christ under Henry the Navigator. Other papal bulls would go on later to confirm territorial possessions and acquisitions of Spanish and Portugal such as Sixtus IV (\"Aeterni Regis\" in 1481), Pope Alexander VI: \"Eximiae devotionis\" (3 May 1493), \"Inter Caetera\" (4 May 1493) and \"Dudum Siquidem\" (23 September 1493).\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44995", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44995", "title": "Antipope Nicholas V", "text": "13/14th-century Italian preacher; claimant to the papacy from 1328 to 1330\nNicholas V, born Pietro Rainalducci (c. 1258\u00a0\u2013 16 October 1333) was an antipope in Italy from 12 May 1328 to 25 July 1330 during the pontificate of Pope John XXII (1316\u20131334) at Avignon. He was the last antipope set up by a Holy Roman Emperor.\nRainalducci was born at Corvaro, an ancient stronghold near Rieti in Lazio. He joined the Franciscan order after separating from his wife in 1310, and became famous as a preacher.\nHe was elected through the influence of the excommunicated Holy Roman Emperor, Louis the Bavarian, by an assembly of priests and laymen, and consecrated at Old St. Peter's Basilica, Rome, on 12 May 1328 by the bishop of Venice.\nAfter spending four months in Rome, he withdrew with Louis IV to Viterbo, but in December 1328 the papal legate Cardinal Orsini began a campaign against Viterbo and Corneto. Nicholas moved on to Grosseto and then to Pisa, where he was guarded by the imperial vicar. On 19 February 1329, Nicholas V presided at a ceremony in the Duomo of Pisa, at which a straw puppet representing Pope John XXII and dressed in pontifical robes was formally condemned, degraded, and handed over to the secular arm (to be \"executed\").\nNicholas V was excommunicated by Pope John XXII in April 1329, and sought refuge with Count Boniface of Donoratico near Piombino. Having obtained assurance of pardon, he presented a confession of his sins first to the archbishop of Pisa, and then at Avignon on 25 August 1330, to John XXII, who absolved him.\nHe remained in honourable imprisonment in the papal palace, Avignon until his death in October 1333. Despite this reconciliation, memories of him were highly negative in the later 1330s. In a monumental fresco by Buonamico Buffalmacco in the Camposanto Monumentale di Pisa, Nicholas V is depicted in Hell being dismembered and eaten by demons. The inscription describes him as a \"friend of Muhammad\", who is shown being tortured at his feet.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44999", "revid": "413489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44999", "title": "Audio sampling", "text": ""}
{"id": "45001", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45001", "title": "Axioms of probability", "text": ""}
{"id": "45002", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45002", "title": "Systems analysis", "text": "Problem-solving technique that breaks down a system into its component pieces\nSystems analysis is \"the process of studying a procedure or business to identify its goal and purposes and create systems and procedures that will efficiently achieve them\". Another view sees systems analysis as a problem-solving technique that breaks a system down into its component pieces and analyses how well those parts work and interact to accomplish their purpose.\nThe field of system analysis relates closely to requirements analysis or to operations research. It is also \"an explicit formal inquiry carried out to help a decision maker identify a better course of action and make a better decision than they might otherwise have made.\"\nThe terms and stem from Greek, meaning \"to take apart\" and \"to put together\", respectively. These terms are used in many scientific disciplines, from mathematics and logic to economics and psychology, to denote similar investigative procedures. The analysis is defined as \"the procedure by which we break down an intellectual or substantial whole into parts,\" while synthesis means \"the procedure by which we combine separate elements or components to form a coherent whole.\" System analysis researchers apply methodology to the systems involved, forming an overall picture.\nSystem analysis is used in every field where something is developed. Analysis can also be a series of components that perform organic functions together, such as systems engineering. Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary field of engineering that focuses on how complex engineering projects should be designed and managed.\nInformation technology.\nThe development of a computer-based information system includes a system analysis phase. This helps produce the data model, a precursor to creating or enhancing a database. There are several different approaches to system analysis. When a computer-based information system is developed, system analysis (according to the Waterfall model) would constitute the following steps:\nAnother view outlines a phased approach to the process. This approach breaks system analysis into 5 phases:\nUse cases are widely used system analysis modeling tools for identifying and expressing the functional requirements of a system. Each use case is a business scenario or event for which the system must provide a defined response. Use cases evolved from the object-oriented analysis.\nPolicy analysis.\nThe discipline of what is today known as policy analysis originated from the application of system analysis when it was first instituted by United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.\nPractitioners.\nPractitioners of system analysis are often called up to dissect systems that have grown haphazardly to determine the current components of the system. This was shown during the year 2000 re-engineering effort as business and manufacturing processes were examined as part of the Y2K automation upgrades. Employment utilizing system analysis include system analyst, business analyst, manufacturing engineer, systems architect, enterprise architect, software architect, etc.\nWhile practitioners of system analysis can be called upon to create new systems, they often modify, expand, or document existing systems (processes, procedures, and methods). Researchers and practitioners rely on system analysis. Activity system analysis has been already applied to various research and practice studies, including business management, educational reform, educational technology, etc.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45007", "revid": "20248368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45007", "title": "Amman", "text": "Capital city of Jordan\nAmman is the capital and the largest city of Jordan, and the country's economic, political, and cultural center. With a population of five million as of 2024, Amman is Jordan's primate city and is the largest city in the Levant region, the fifth-largest city in the Arab world, and the sixth-largest metropolitan area in the Middle East.\nAmman is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. The earliest evidence of settlement in Amman dates to the 8th millennium BC in 'Ain Ghazal, home to the world's oldest statues of the human form. During the Iron Age, the city was known as \"Rabat Aman\", the capital of the Ammonite Kingdom. In the 3rd century BC, the city was renamed \"Philadelphia\" and became one of the ten Greco-Roman cities of the Decapolis. Later, in the 7th century AD, the Rashidun Caliphate renamed the city Amman. Throughout most of the Islamic era, the city alternated between periods of devastation and periods of relative prosperity. Amman was largely abandoned during the Ottoman period from the 15th century until 1878, when it was resettled by Circassians. The city grew after it was connected to the Hejaz Railway in 1904, leading to the formation of its first municipal council in 1909.\nAmman witnessed rapid growth after its designation as Transjordan's capital in 1921, receiving migrations from different Jordanian and Levantine cities, and later several successive waves of refugees: Palestinians in 1948 and 1967; Iraqis in 1990 and 2003; and Syrians since 2011. It was initially built on seven hills, but now spans over 19 hills combining 22 areas, which are administered by the Greater Amman Municipality. Areas of Amman have gained their names from either the hills (\"jabal\") or the valleys (\"wadi\") they occupy, such as Jabal al-Luweibdeh and Wadi Abdoun. East Amman is predominantly filled with historic sites that frequently host cultural activities, while West Amman is more modern and serves as the economic center of the city.\nApproximately one million visitors arrived in Amman in 2018, which made it the 89th most-visited city in the world and the 12th most-visited Arab city. Amman has a relatively fast growing economy and it is ranked as a Beta\u2212 global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Moreover, it was named one of the Middle East and North Africa's best cities according to economic, labor, environmental, and socio-cultural factors. The city is among the most popular locations in the Arab world for multinational corporations to set up their regional offices, alongside Doha and only behind Dubai. Amman has a bus network, including a Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system that serves the city and connects it to neighboring Zarqa.\nEtymology.\nAmman derives its name from the ancient people of the Ammonites, whose capital the city had been since the 13th century BC. The Ammonites named it \"Rabat \u02bfAmm\u0101n\" (\ud802\udd13\ud802\udd01\ud802\udd15 \ud802\udd0f\ud802\udd0c\ud802\udd0d), with the term \"Rabat\" meaning the \"Capital\" or the \"King's Quarters\". In the Hebrew Bible, the town is referred to as () or simply (), and it appears in English translations as \"Rabbah of the Ammonites,\" \"Rabbah of the sons of Ammon, or \"Rabbath Ammon.\" Ptolemy II Philadelphus, the Macedonian ruler of the Ptolemaic Kingdom who reigned from 283 to 246 BC, renamed the city Philadelphia (; literally: \"brotherly love\"), after himself, after occupying it. By the Islamic era, the Rashidun Caliphate restored its ancient Semitic name and called it Amman in the 7th century AD.\nHistory.\nNeolithic period.\nThe Neolithic site of \u02bfAin Ghazal today lies in the outskirts of Amman. At its height, around 7000 BC (9000 years ago), it had an area of and was inhabited by ca. 3000 people (four to five times the population of contemporary Jericho). At that time, the site was a typical aceramic Neolithic village. Its houses were rectangular mud-bricked buildings that included a main square living room, whose walls were made up of lime plaster. The site was discovered in 1974 as construction workers were working on a road crossing the area. By 1982, when the excavations started, around of road ran through the site. Despite the damage brought by urban expansion, the remains of \u02bfAin Ghazal provided a wealth of information.\n\u02bfAin Ghazal is well known for a set of small human statues found in 1983, when local archeologists stumbled upon the edge of a large pit containing them. These statues are human figures made with white plaster, with painted eyes. Thirty-two figures were found in two caches, fifteen of them full figures, fifteen busts, and two fragmentary heads. Three of the busts depicted two-headed characters, the significance of which is not clear.\nIron Age: the Ammonites.\nIn the 13th century BC, Amman was the capital of the Ammonite Kingdom, and became known as \"Rabat Amman\". Rabat Amman provided several natural resources to the region, including sandstone and limestone, along with a productive agricultural sector that made it a vital location along the King's Highway, the ancient trade route connecting Egypt with Mesopotamia, Syria and Anatolia. As with the Edomites and Moabites, trade along this route gave the Ammonites considerable revenue. Milcom is named in the Hebrew Bible as the national god of Rabat Amman. Another ancient deity, Moloch, usually associated with the use of children as offerings, is also mentioned in the Bible as a god of the Ammonites, but this is probably a mistake for Milcom. However, excavations by archeologists near Amman Civil Airport uncovered a temple, which included an altar containing many human bone fragments. The bones showed evidence of burning, which led to the assumption that the altar functioned as a pyre and used for human sacrifice.\nAmman is mentioned several times in the Hebrew Bible. According to the biblical narrative, the Ammonite king Hanun allied with Hadadezer, king of Aram-Zobah, against the United Kingdom of Israel. During the war, Joab, the captain of King David's army, laid siege to Rabbah, Hanun's royal capital, and destroyed it (, ). David took a great quantity of plunder from the city, including the king's crown, and brought it to his capital, Jerusalem (). Hanun's brother, Shobi, was made king in his place, and became a loyal vassal of David (). Hundreds of years later, the prophet Jeremiah foresaw the coming destruction and final desolation of the city ().\nSeveral Ammonite ruins across Amman exist, such as Rujm Al-Malfouf and some parts of the Amman Citadel. The ruins of Rujm Al-Malfouf consist of a stone watchtower used to ensure the protection of their capital and several store rooms to the east. The city was later conquered by the Assyrians, followed by the Babylonians and the Achaemenid Persians.\nHellenistic period.\nConquest of the Near East by Alexander the Great firmly consolidated the influence of Hellenistic culture, marking the start of the Hellenistic period. Little is known about Greek/Macedonian control over the Levantine coast and Transjordan until 301 BCE, 22 years after Alexander's death, when the Ptolemies took control over this area. The Greeks founded new cities in the area of modern-day Jordan, including Gadara (Umm Qays), Gerasa (Jerash), Pella (Tabaqat Fahl) and Philadelphia (Amman). Ptolemy II nicknamed Philadelphus, the Macedonian ruler of Egypt, established in or before 259/58 BCE at the site of Amman what was initially probably a military colony, which then developed into a full-blown Greek-type \"polis\", possibly by settling there Hellenised Tyrean colonists. Ptolemy II named it Philadelphia (), evoking \"brotherly love\" in Greek, in adulation to his own nickname.\nWritten sources speak of members of the Jewish Tobiad family based in Jerusalem, who worked for the Ptolemies as tax collectors in charge of the entire region. The last known Tobiad, Hyrcanus, built the unique Hellenistic palace of Tyros (today's Qasr al-Abd, 'Castle of the Slave') southwest of Philadelpheia, before killing himself in c.\u2009170-168 BC as the Seleucid king Antiochus IV seemed poised to attack him. This was one of several episodes in the Syrian Wars between the Seleucids and the Ptolemies, ending with the 200 BCE victory of the Seleucids at the Battle of Panium. In 218/17 BCE for instance, Seleucid king Antiochus\u202fIII destroyed the Ptolemaic garrisons in the centre of Transjordan, capturing Philadelpheia in the process. Even after 200 BCE, Philadelpheia seems to have broken free at times from Seleucid rule and probably also escaped capture by Hasmonean king Alexander Jannaios (r. c.\u2009103 \u2013 c.\u200976 BCE), who was more successful elsewhere in the region. Other Hasmonean and Nabataean rulers acted as regional power brokers, contributing to the instability of the political situation during the 2nd century BCE and until the advent of the Roman period in the following century, which led to the Hellenisation of the region only truly setting in under the Romans.\nRoman period.\nThe Romans conquered much of the Levant in 63 BC, inaugurating a period of imperial rule conducted from Rome that lasted for four centuries. In the northern parts of modern-day Jordan, the Greek cities of Philadelphia (Amman), Gerasa, Gedara, Pella and Arbila joined with other cities in Palestine and southern parts of today's Syria to form the Decapolis League, a confederation based on common economic and cultural interests (see also Scythopolis, Hippos, Capitolias, Canatha and Damascus). Philadelphia became a point along a road stretching from Ailah to Damascus that was built by Emperor Trajan in AD 106. This provided an economic boost for the city in a short period of time.\nThere are traces of Roman construction all across Jordan. In Amman the most conspicuous structures include the Great Temple (inaccurately known as the \"Temple of Hercules\") at the Amman Citadel, the Roman Theatre, the Odeon, and the Nymphaeum. The two theaters and the nymphaeum fountain were built during the reign of Emperor Antoninus Pius around AD 161. The theatre was the larger venue of the two and had a capacity for 6,000 attendees. It was oriented north and built into the hillside, to protect the audience from the sun. To the northeast of the theatre was a small odeon. Built at roughly the same time as the theatre, the Odeon had 500 seats and is still in use today for music concerts. Archaeologists speculate that the structure was originally covered with a wooden roof to shield the audience from the weather. The Nymphaeum is situated southwest of the Odeon and served as Philadelphia's chief fountain. The Nymphaeum is believed to have contained a pool which was deep and was continuously refilled with water.\nByzantine period.\nDuring the late Byzantine period in the seventh century, several bishops were based in the city; a number of church sites from the Byzantine period have been discovered there - see List of Byzantine churches in Amman.\nEarly Muslim period (7th\u201311th century).\nIn the 630s, the Rashidun Caliphate conquered the region from the Byzantines, beginning the Islamic era in the Levant. Philadelphia was renamed \"Amman\" by the Muslims and became part of the district of Jund Dimashq. A large part of the population already spoke Arabic, which facilitated integration into the caliphate, as well as several conversions to Islam. Under the Umayyad caliphs who began their rule in 661 AD, numerous desert castles were established as a means to govern the desert area of modern-day Jordan, several of which are still well-preserved. Amman had already been functioning as an administrative centre. The Umayyads built a large palace on the Amman Citadel hill, known today as the Umayyad Palace. Amman was later destroyed by several earthquakes and natural disasters, including a particularly severe earthquake in 749. The Umayyads were overthrown by the Abbasids three years later.\nAmman's importance declined by the mid-8th century after damage caused by several earthquakes rendered it uninhabitable. Excavations among the collapsed layer of the Umayyad Palace have revealed remains of kilns from the time of the Abbasids (750\u2013969) and the Fatimids (969\u20131099). In the late 9th century, Amman was noted as the \"capital\" of the Balqa by geographer al-Yaqubi. Likewise, in 985, the Jerusalemite historian al-Muqaddasi described Amman as the capital of Balqa, that it was a town in the desert fringe of Syria surrounded by villages and cornfields and a regional source of lambs, grain and honey. Its inhabitants he reports, at the time, were Shia Muslims. Furthermore, al-Muqaddasi describes Amman as a \"harbor of the desert\" where Arab Bedouin would take refuge, and that its citadel, which overlooked the town, contained a small mosque.\nCrusaders and Ayyubids (12th\u201313th century).\nThe occupation of the Citadel Hill by the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem is so far based only on interpretations of Crusader sources. William of Tyre writes in his \"Historia\" that in 1161 Philip of Milly received the castle of Ahamant, which is seen to refer to Amman, as part of the lordship of Oultrejordain. In 1166 Philip joined the military order of the Knights Templar, passing on to them a significant part of his fief including the castle of Ahamant or \"Haman\", as it is named in the deed of confirmation issued by King Amalric. By 1170, Amman was in Ayyubid hands. The remains of a watch tower on Citadel Hill, first attributed to the Crusaders, now are preferentially dated to the Ayyubid period, leaving it to further research to find the location of the Crusader castle. During the Ayyubid period, the Damascene geographer al-Dimashqi wrote that Amman was part of the province of al-Karak, although \"only ruins\" remained of the town.\nMamluk period (13th\u2013early 16th century).\nDuring the Mamluk era (late 13th\u2013early 16th century), the region of Amman was a part of Wilayat Balqa, the southernmost district of Mamlakat Dimashq (Damascus Province). The capital of the district in the first half of the 14th century was the minor administrative post of Hisban, which had a considerably smaller garrison than the other administrative centers in Transjordan, namely Ajlun and al-Karak. In 1321, the geographer Abu'l Fida, recorded that Amman was \"a very ancient town\" with fertile soil and surrounded by agricultural fields. For unclear, though likely financial reasons, in 1356, the capital of Balqa was transferred from Hisban to Amman, which was considered a \"madina\" (city). In 1357, Emir Sirghitmish bought Amman in its entirety, most likely to use revenues from the city to help fund the Madrasa of Sirghitmish, which he built in Cairo that same year. After his purchase of the city, Sirghitmish transferred the courts, administrative bureaucracy, markets and most of the inhabitants of Hisban to Amman. Moreover, he financed new building works in the city.\nOwnership of Amman following Sirghitmish's death in 1358 passed to successive generations of his descendants until 1395, when his descendants sold it to Emir Baydamur al-Khwarazmi, the \"na'ib as-saltana\" (viceroy) of Damascus. Afterward, part of Amman's cultivable lands were sold to Emir Sudun al-Shaykhuni (died 1396), the \"na'ib as-saltana\" of Egypt. The increasingly frequent division and sale of the city and lands of Amman to different owners signalled declining revenues coming from Amman, while at the same time, Hisban was restored as the major city of the Balqa in the 15th century. From then until 1878, Amman was an abandoned site periodically used to shelter seasonal farmers who cultivated arable lands in its vicinity and by Bedouin tribes who used its pastures and water. The Ottoman Empire annexed the region of Amman in 1516, but for much of the Ottoman period, al-Salt functioned as the virtual political center of Transjordan.\nModern era (1878\u2013present).\nLate Ottoman period (1878\u20131917).\nAmman began to be resettled in 1878, when several hundred Muslim Circassians arrived following their expulsion from the North Caucasus by the Russian Empire during the events of the Russo-Circassian War. Between 1878 and 1910, tens of thousands of Circassians became refugees in the Ottoman Empire, which had moved large numbers of them into its province of Syria. The Ottoman authorities directed the Circassians, who were mainly of peasant stock, to settle in Amman, and distributed arable land among them. Their settlement was a partial manifestation of the Ottoman statesman Kamil Pasha's project, which did not materialize, to establish the Amman Province (vilayet) which, along with other sites in its vicinity, would become Circassian-populated townships guaranteeing the security of the Damascus\u2013Medina highway. The first Circassian settlers, who belonged to the Shapsug tribe, lived near Amman's Roman theater and incorporated its stones into the houses they built. The English traveller Laurence Oliphant noted in his 1879 visit that most of the original Circassian settlers had left Amman by then, with about 150 remaining. They were joined by Circassians from the Kabardian and Abzakh tribes in 1880\u20131892.\nUntil 1900 settlement was concentrated in the valley and slopes of the Amman stream and settlers built mud-brick houses with wooden roofs. The French Dominican priest Marie-Joseph Lagrange commented in 1890 about Amman: \"A mosque, the ancient bridges, all that jumbled with the houses of the Circassians gives Amman a remarkable physiognomy\". The new village became a \"nahiye\" (subdistrict) center of the \"kaza\" of al-Salt in the Karak Sanjak established in 1894. By 1908 Amman contained 800 houses divided between three main quarters, Shapsug, Kabartai and Abzakh, each called after the Circassian groupings which respectively settled there, a number of mosques, open-air markets, shops, bakeries, mills, a textile factory, a post and telegraph office and a government compound (saraya). Kurdish settlers formed their own quarter called \"al-Akrad\" after them, while a number of townspeople from nearby al-Salt and al-Fuheis, seeking to avoid high taxes and conscription or attracted by financial incentives, and traders from Najd and Morocco, had also moved to the town.\nThe city's demographics changed dramatically after the Ottoman government's decision to construct the Hejaz Railway, which linked Damascus and Medina, and facilitated the annual Hajj pilgrimage and trade. Operational in central Transjordan since 1903, the Hejaz Railway helped to transform Amman from a small village into a major commercial hub in the region. Circassian entrepreneurship, facilitated by the railway, helped to attract investment from merchants from Damascus, Nablus, and Jerusalem, many of whom moved to Amman in the 1900s and 1910s. Some of the Arab families who arrived from surrounding regions during this period include Hudhud, Malas, Idlibi, Bdeir, Haddad, and Kawar. Although they settled after the local Circassian population and Bedouins of Jordan, they earned the nickname 'Founding Families of Amman' for establishing key institutions such as pharmacies and construction firms, and for bringing goods and expertise from their more developed cities of origion. Amman's first municipal council was established in 1909, and Circassian Ismael Babouk was elected as its mayor.\nThe First and Second Battle of Amman were part of the Middle Eastern theatre of World War I and the Arab Revolt, taking place in 1918. Amman had a strategic location along the Hejaz Railway; its capture by British forces and the Hashemite Arab army facilitated the British advance towards Damascus. The second battle was won by the British, resulting in the establishment of the British Mandate.\nBritish Mandate; Emirate of Transjordan (1921\u20131946).\nIn 1921, the Hashemite emir and later king Abdullah I designated Amman instead of al-Salt to be the capital of the newly created state, the Emirate of Transjordan, which became the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in 1950. Its function as the capital of the country attracted immigrants from different Levantine areas, particularly from al-Salt, a nearby city that had been the largest urban settlement east of the Jordan River at the time. The early settlers who came from Palestine were overwhelmingly from Nablus, from which many of al-Salt's inhabitants had originated. They were joined by other immigrants from Damascus. Amman later attracted people from the southern part of the country, particularly al-Karak and Madaba. The city's population was around 10,000 in the 1930s.\nThe British report from 1933 shows around 1,700 Circassians living in Amman. Yet the community was far from insulated. Local urban and nomadic communities formed alliances with the Circassians, some of which are still present today. This cemented the status of Circassians in the re-established city.\nPost-independence (1946\u2013present).\nJordan gained its independence in 1946 and Amman was designated the country's capital. Amman received many refugees during wartime events in nearby countries, beginning with the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. A second wave arrived after the Six-Day War in 1967. In 1970, Amman was a battlefield during the conflict between the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Jordanian Army known as Black September. The Jordanian Army defeated the PLO in 1971, and the latter were expelled to Lebanon. The first wave of Iraqi refugees settled in the city after the 1991 Gulf War, with a second wave occurring in the aftermath of the 2003 invasion of Iraq.\nOn 9 November 2005, Al-Qaeda under Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's leadership launched coordinated explosions in three hotel lobbies in Amman, resulting in 60 deaths and 115 injured. The bombings, which targeted civilians, caused widespread outrage among Jordanians. Jordan's security as a whole was dramatically improved after the attack, and no major terrorist attacks have been reported since then. Most recently a wave of Syrian refugees have arrived in the city during the ongoing Syrian Civil War which began in 2011. Amman was a principal destination for refugees for the security and prosperity it offered.\nDuring the 2010s, the city has experienced an economic, cultural and urban boom. The large growth in population has significantly increased the need for new accommodation, and new districts of the city were established at a quick pace. This strained Jordan's scarce water supply and exposed Amman to the dangers of quick expansion without careful municipal planning.\nGeography.\nAmman is situated on the East Bank Plateau, an upland characterized by three major wadis which run through it. Originally, the city had been built on seven hills. Amman's terrain is typified by its mountains. The most important areas in the city are named after the hills or mountains they lie on. The area's elevation ranges from . Al-Salt and al-Zarqa are located to the northwest and northeast, respectively, Madaba is located to the west, and al-Karak and Ma'an are to Amman's southwest and southeast, respectively. One of the only remaining springs in Amman now supplies the Zarqa River with water. Trees found in Amman include Aleppo pine, Mediterranean cypress and Phoenician juniper.\nClimate.\nAmman features a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: Csa) in its western and northern neighborhoods, while its eastern and southern neighborhoods experience a semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: BSh/BSk).\nThe summer season in Amman is moderately long, characterized by mild heat and refreshing breezes. However, occasional heatwaves may occur during this period. Spring is brief yet warm, with temperatures reaching highs of 28\u00a0\u00b0C (82\u00a0\u00b0F). This season typically commences between April and May, lasting for about a month. Winter usually sets in around the end of November, extending through early to mid-March. During winter, temperatures typically hover around or below 17\u00a0\u00b0C (63\u00a0\u00b0F), with sporadic snowfall occurring once or twice a year.\nThe average annual rainfall in Amman is around 385\u00a0mm (15\u00a0in), with great variations between different parts of the city. The western areas receive more than 500\u00a0mm (20\u00a0in) of rainfall, whereas the eastern areas receive less than 250\u00a0mm (10\u00a0in). Rainfall primarily occurs between November and April, and periodic droughts are not uncommon.\nAmman experiences heavy fog on about 120 days each year. The city's diverse weather conditions are heavily influenced by differences in elevation. While snow might accumulate in the higher-altitude western and northern regions of Amman (with an average altitude of 1,000 m or 3,300\u00a0ft above sea level), the city center (at an elevation of 700 m or 2,300\u00a0ft) might experience rainfall simultaneously. This variation in elevation leads to extreme microclimates within Amman, with each district having its own distinct weather patterns.\nLocal government.\nAmman is governed by a 41-member city council elected directly for terms of four years. All Jordanian citizens above 18 years old are eligible to vote in the municipal elections. However, the mayor is appointed by the king and not through elections. In 1909 a city council was established in Amman by Circassian Ismael Babouk who became the first-ever mayor of the capital, and in 1914 Amman's first city district center was founded.\nThe Greater Amman Municipality (GAM) has been investing in making the city a better place, through a number of initiatives. Green Amman 2020 was initiated in 2014, aiming to turn the city to a green metropolis by 2020. According to official statistics, only 2.5% of Amman is green space. In 2015 GAM and Zain Jordan started operating free-of-charge Wi-Fi services at 15 locations, including Wakalat Street, Rainbow Street, The Hashemite Plaza, Ashrafieh Cultural Complex, Zaha Cultural Center, Al Hussein Cultural Center, Al Hussein Public Parks and others.\nAdministrative divisions.\nJordan is divided into twelve administrative divisions, each called a governorate. Amman Governorate divides into nine districts, five of which are divided into sub-districts. The Greater Amman Municipality has 22 areas which are further divided into neighborhoods.\nThe city is administered as the Greater Amman Municipality and covers 22 areas which include:\nEconomy.\nBanking sector.\nThe banking sector is one of the principal foundations of Jordan's economy. Despite the unrest and economic difficulties in the Arab world resulting from the Arab Spring uprisings, Jordan's banking sector maintained its growth in 2014. The sector consists of 25 banks, 15 of which are listed on the Amman Stock Exchange. Amman is the base city for the international Arab Bank, one of the largest financial institutions in the Middle East, serving clients in more than 600 branches in 30 countries on five continents. Arab Bank represents 28% of the Amman Stock Exchange and is the highest-ranked institution by market capitalization on the exchange.\nTourism.\nAmman is the fourth most-visited Arab city and the ninth highest recipient of international visitor spending. Roughly 1.8\u00a0million tourists visited Amman in 2011 and spent over $1.3\u00a0billion in the city. The expansion of Queen Alia International Airport is an example of the Greater Amman Municipality's heavy investment in the city's infrastructure. The recent construction of a public transportation system and a national railway, and the expansion of roads, are intended to ease the traffic generated by the millions of annual visitors to the city.\nAmman, and Jordan in general, is the Middle East's hub for medical tourism. Jordan receives the most medical tourists in the region and the fifth highest in the world. Amman receives 250,000 foreign patients a year and over $1\u00a0billion annually.\nBusiness.\nAmman is introducing itself as a business hub. The city's skyline is being continuously transformed through the emergence of new projects. A significant portion of business flowed into Amman following the 2003 Iraq War. Jordan's main airport, Queen Alia International Airport, is located south of Amman and is the hub for the country's national carrier Royal Jordanian, a major airline in the region. The airline is headquartered in Zahran district. Rubicon Group Holding and Maktoob, two major regional information technology companies, are based in Amman, along with major international corporations such as Hikma Pharmaceuticals, one of the Middle East's largest pharmaceutical companies, and Aramex, the Middle East's largest logistics and transportation company.\nIn a report by Dunia Frontier Consultants, Amman, along with Doha, Qatar and Dubai, United Arab Emirates, are the favored hubs for multinational corporations operating in the Middle East and North Africa region. In \"FDI\" magazine, Amman was chosen as the Middle Eastern city with the most potential to be a leader in foreign direct investment in the region. Furthermore, several of the world's largest investment banks have offices in Amman including Standard Chartered, Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale, and Citibank.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Amman reached 4,007,526 in 2015; the city contains about 42% of Jordan's entire population. It has a land area of which yields a population density of about . The population of Amman has risen exponentially with the successive waves of immigrants and refugees arriving throughout the 20th century. From a population of roughly 1,000 in 1890, Amman grew to around 1,000,000 inhabitants in 1990, primarily as a result of immigration, but also due to the high birthrate in the city. Amman had been abandoned for centuries until hundreds of Circassians settled it in the 19th century. Today, about 40,000 Circassians live in Amman and its vicinity. After Amman became a major hub along the Hejaz Railway in 1914, many Muslim and Christian merchant families from al-Salt immigrated to the city. A large proportion of Amman's inhabitants have Palestinian roots (urban or rural origin), and the two main demographic groups in the city today are Arabs of Palestinian or Jordanian descent. Other ethnic groups comprise about 2% of the population. There are no official statistics about the proportion of people of Palestinian or Jordanian descent.\nNew arrivals consisting of Jordanians from the north and south of the country and immigrants from Palestine had increased the city's population from 30,000 in 1930 to 60,000 in 1947. About 10,000 Palestinians, mostly from Safed, Haifa and Acre, migrated to the city for economic opportunities before the 1948 war. Many of the immigrants from al-Salt from that time were originally from Nablus. The 1948 war caused an exodus of urban Muslim and Christian Palestinian refugees, mostly from Jaffa, Ramla and Lydda, to Amman, whose population swelled to 110,000. With Jordan's capture of the West Bank during the war, many Palestinians from that area steadily migrated to Amman between 1950 and 1966, before another mass wave of Palestinian refugees from the West Bank moved to the city during the 1967 War. By 1970, the population had swelled to an estimated 550,000. A further 200,000 Palestinians arrived after their expulsion from Kuwait during the 1991 Gulf War. Several large Palestinian refugee camps exist around the center of Amman.\nBecause Amman lacks a deep-rooted native population, the city does not have a distinct Arabic dialect, although recently such a dialect utilizing the various Jordanian and Palestinian dialects, has been forming. The children of immigrants in the city are also increasingly referring to themselves as \"Ammani\", unlike much of the first-generation inhabitants who identify more with their respective places of origin.\nReligion.\nAmman has a mostly Sunni Muslim population, and the city contains numerous mosques. Among the main mosques is the large King Abdullah I Mosque, built between 1982 and 1989. It is capped by a blue mosaic dome beneath which 3,000 Muslims may offer prayer. The Abu Darweesh Mosque, noted for its checkered black-and-white pattern, has an architectural style that is unique to Jordan. The mosque is situated on Jabal Ashrafieh, the highest point in the city. The mosque's interior is marked by light-colored walls and Persian carpets. During the 2004 Amman Message conference, edicts from various clergy-members afforded the following schools of thought as garnering collective recognition: Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki, Shafi'i, Ja'fari, Zahiri, Zaydi, Ibadi, tassawuf-related Sufism, Muwahhidism and Salafism. Amman also has a small Druze community.\nLarge numbers of Christians from throughout Jordan, particularly from al-Salt, have moved to Amman. Nearby Fuheis is a predominantly Christian town located to the northwest of the city. A small Armenian Catholic community of around 70 families is present in the city. Ecclesiastical courts for matters of personal status are also located in Amman. A total of 16 historic churches are located in Umm ar-Rasas ruins in Al-Jeezah district; the site is believed to have initially served as Roman fortified military camps which gradually became a town around the 5th century AD. It has not been completely excavated. It was influenced by several civilizations including the Romans, Byzantines and Muslims. The site contains some well-preserved mosaic floors, particularly the mosaic floor of the Church of Saint Stephen.\nCityscape.\nDowntown Amman, the city center area (known in Arabic as \"Al-Balad\"), has been dwarfed by the sprawling urban area that surrounds it. Despite the changes, much remains of its old character. Jabal Amman is a tourist attraction in old Amman, where the city's largest souks, museums, ancient constructions, monuments, and cultural sites are found. Jabal Amman also contains the famous Rainbow Street and the cultural Souk Jara market.\nArchitecture.\nResidential buildings are limited to four stories above street level and if possible another four stories below, according to the Greater Amman Municipality regulations. The buildings are covered with thick white or beige limestone or sandstone. The buildings usually have balconies on each floor, with the exception of the ground floor, which has a front and back yard. Some buildings make use of Mangalore tiles on the roofs or on the roof of covered porches. Hotels, towers and commercial buildings are either covered by stone, plastic or glass.\nHigh-rise construction and towers.\nZahran district in west Amman is the location of the Jordan Gate, which is a high class commercial and residential project currently under construction in the Wadi Al-Seer district of Amman, Jordan, it consists of two high-rise buildings connected by a multi-storey podium.\nNew Abdali district hosts a mall, a boulevard along with several hotels, commercial and residential towers. Valued at more than US$5 billion with two main phases, the district created a new visible center for Amman and act as the major business district for the city.\nThe first phase, estimated at more than JD2.4 billion, and receiving about 20 million visitors annually, contains seven Itowers extending over an area of 1.03 million square metres. It attracts about 500 companies operating in 27 sectors, and provided a total of 15,000 job opportunities by 2023.\nA second phase was announced in May 2024, which will cover an area of 1.2 million square meters and is anticipated to create over 3,000 job opportunities each year, were outlined in the statement. This phase involves the construction of a multi-use conference center with a capacity for 25,000 people, as well as two towers that will include hotels, residential apartments, commercial centers, and advanced medical facilities.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nThe largest museum in Jordan is The Jordan Museum. It contains much of the valuable archeological findings in the country, including some of the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Neolithic limestone statues of 'Ain Ghazal, and a copy of the Mesha Stele. Other museums include the Duke's Diwan, Jordan National Gallery of Fine Arts, Jordan Archaeological Museum, The Children's Museum Jordan, The Martyrs' Memorial and Museum, the Royal Automobile Museum, the Prophet Mohammad Museum, the Museum of Parliamentary Life, the Jordan Folklore Museum, and museums at the University of Jordan.\nLifestyle.\nAmman is considered one of the most liberal cities in the Arab world. The city has become one of the most popular destinations for expatriates and college students who seek to live, study, or work in the Middle East or the Arab world in general. The city's culinary scene has changed from its shawarma stands and falafel joints to embrace many popular international restaurants and fast-food outlets such as Asian fusion restaurants, French bistros and Italian trattorias. The city has become famous for its fine dining scene among Western expatriates and Persian Gulf tourists.\nLarge shopping malls were built during the 2000s in Amman, including the Mecca Mall, Abdoun Mall, City Mall, Al-Baraka Mall, TAJ Lifestyle Center, Zara Shopping Center, Avenue Mall, and Abdali Mall in Al Abdali. Wakalat Street (\"Agencies Street\") is Amman's first pedestrian-only street and carries a lot of name-label clothes. The Sweifieh area is considered to be the main shopping district of Amman.\nNightclubs, music bars and shisha lounges are present across Amman, changing the city's old image as the conservative capital of the kingdom. This burgeoning new nightlife scene is shaped by Jordan's young population. In addition to the wide range of drinking and dancing venues on the social circuit of the city's affluent crowd, Amman hosts cultural entertainment events, including the annual Amman Summer Festival. Souk Jara is a Jordanian weekly flea market event that occurs every Friday throughout the summer. Sweifieh is considered to be the unofficial red-light district of Amman as it holds most of the city's nightclubs, bars. Jabal Amman and Jabal al-Luweibdeh are home to many pubs and bars as well, making the area popular among bar hoppers.\nAlcohol is widely available in restaurants, bars, nightclubs, and supermarkets. There are numerous nightclubs and bars across the city, especially in West Amman. As of 2011[ [update]], there were 77 registered nightclubs in Jordan (excluding bars and pubs), overwhelmingly located in the capital city. In 2009, there were 222 registered liquor stores in Amman.\nCuisine.\nDanielle Pergament of \"The New York Times\" described Ammani cuisine as a product of several cuisines in the region, writing that it combines \"the bright vegetables from Lebanon, crunchy falafels from Syria, juicy kebabs from Egypt and, most recently, spicy meat dishes from Jordan's neighbor, Iraq. It's known as the food of the Levant\u00a0\u2013 an ancient word for the area bounded by the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian peninsula. But the food here isn't just the sum of its calories. In this politically, religiously and ethnically fraught corner of the world, it is a symbol of bloodlines and identity.\" However, the city's street food scene makes the Ammani cuisine distinctive.\nSports.\nAmman-based football clubs Al-Wehdat and Al-Faisaly, both former league champions, share one of the most popular rivalries in the local football scene. Amman hosted the 2016 FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup along with Irbid and Zarqa.\nThe 2007 Asian Athletics Championships and more than one edition of the IAAF World Cross Country Championships were held in the city. Amman also hosts the Jordan Rally, which form part of the FIA World Rally Championship, becoming one of the largest sporting events ever held in Jordan.\nAmman is home to a growing number of foreign sports such as skateboarding and rugby; the latter has two teams based in the city: Amman Citadel Rugby Club and Nomads Rugby Club. In 2014, German non-profit organization Make Life Skate Life completed construction of the 7Hills Skatepark, a 650 square meter concrete skatepark located at Samir Rifai park in Downtown Amman.\nMedia and music.\nThe majority of Jordan's radio stations are based in Amman. The first radio station to originate in the city was \"Hunna Amman\" in 1959; it mainly broadcast traditional Bedouin music. In 2000, Amman Net became the first de facto private radio station to be established in the country, despite private ownership of radio stations being illegal at the time. After private ownership was legalized in 2002, several more radio stations were created.\nMost Jordanian newspapers and news stations are situated in Amman. Daily newspapers published in Amman include \"Alghad\", \"Ad-Dustour\", \"The Jordan Times\", and \"Al Ra'i\", the most circulated newspaper in the country. In 2011, \"Al Ra'i\" was ranked the 5th most popular newspaper in the Arab world by Forbes Middle-East report. \"Al-Arab Al-Yawm\" is the only daily pan-Arab newspaper in Jordan. The two most popular Jordanian TV channels, Ro'ya TV and JRTV, are based in Amman.\nAside from mainstream Arabic pop, there is a growing independent music scene in the city which includes many bands that have sizable audiences across the Arab world. Local Ammani bands along with other bands in the Middle East gather in the Roman Theater during the Al-Balad Music Festival held annually in August. Music genres of the local bands are diverse, ranging from heavy metal to Arabic Rock, jazz and rap. Performers include JadaL, Torabyeh, Bilocate, Akher Zapheer, Autostrad and El Morabba3.\nEvents.\nMany events take place in Amman, including Red Bull-sponsored events Soundclash and Soapbox race, the second part of Jerash Festival, Al-Balad Music Festival, Amman Marathon, Made in Jordan Festival, Amman Book Festival and New Think Festival. Venues for such cultural events often include the Roman and Odeon Theaters downtown, the Ras al Ain Hanger, King Hussein Business Park, Rainbow Theater and Shams Theater, the Royal Film Commission, Shoman libraries and Darat al Funun, and the Royal Cultural Center at Sports City. In addition to large-scale events and institutional planning, scholars point to tactical urbanism as a key element of the city's cultural fabric.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nThe main airport serving Amman is Queen Alia International Airport, situated about south of Amman. Much smaller is Amman Civil Airport, a one-terminal airport that serves primarily domestic and nearby international routes and the army. Queen Alia International Airport is the major international airport in Jordan and the hub for Royal Jordanian, the flag carrier. Its expansion was recently done and modified, including the decommissioning of the old terminals and the commissioning of new terminals costing $700M, to handle over 16\u00a0million passengers annually. It is now considered a state-of-the-art airport and was named 'the best airport in the Middle East' for 2014 and 2015 and 'the best improvement in the Middle East' for 2014 by Airport Service Quality Survey, the world's leading airport passenger satisfaction benchmark program.\nRoads.\nAmman has an extensive road network. Eight roundabout \"circles\", which formerly marked neighborhoods, are used as landmarks. The road network includes many bridges and tunnels due to the mountainous nature of the terrain. A leading example is the Abdoun Bridge, which spans Wadi Abdoun and connects the 4th Circle to Abdoun Circle. It is considered one of Amman's many landmarks and is the first curved suspended bridge to be built in the country.\nSuccessive waves of refugees to the city has led to the rapid construction of new neighborhoods, but Amman's capacity for new or widened roads remains limited despite the influx. This has resulted in increasing traffic jams, particularly during summer when there are large numbers of tourists and Jordanian expatriates visiting. In 2015, a ring road encompassing the city was constructed, which aims to connect the northern and southern parts of the city in order for traffic to be diverted outside Amman and to improve the environmental conditions in the city.\nBus and taxi.\nThe city has frequent bus connections to other cities in Jordan, as well as to major cities in neighboring countries; the latter are also served by service taxis. Internal transport is served by a number of bus routes and taxis. Service taxis, which most often operate on fixed routes, are readily available and inexpensive. The two main bus and taxi stations are Abdali (near the King Abdullah Mosque, the Parliament and Palace of Justice) and the Raghadan Central Bus Station near the Roman theater in the city center. Popular Jordanian bus company services include JETT and Al-Mahatta. Taxis are the most common way to get around in Amman due their high availability and inexpensiveness.\nThe Amman Bus and the Amman Bus Rapid Transit public transportation systems currently serve the city. Construction work on the BRT system started in 2010, but was halted soon after amid feasibility concerns. Resuming in 2015, the first route of the BRT system was inaugurated in 2021, and the second in 2022. Another BRT route connecting Amman with Zarqa started operations in May 2024.\nThe BRT system in Amman runs on 2 routes: the first from Sweileh in northwest Amman to the Ras Al-Ain area next to downtown Amman, and the second from Sweileh to Mahatta terminal in eastern Amman. Both routes meet at the Sports City intersection. The first route is currently served by three lines: 98, 99 and 100. Ticket price for all lines of Amman Bus and Amman BRT are bought either online via the Amman Bus mobile application or as a rechargeable card in major terminals. Passengers scan their cards or QR codes on phone when boarding the bus, where the price ticket is subtracted from the available balance. The buses are air-conditioned, accessible, monitored with security cameras and have free internet service.\nEducation.\nAmman is a major regional center of education. The Amman region hosts Jordan's highest concentration of education centers. There are 20 universities in Amman. The University of Jordan is the largest public university in the city. There are 448 private schools in the city attended by 90,000 students, including Jubilee School, Amman Baccalaureate School, Amman Academy, Amman National School, Modern American School, American Community School in Amman, and National Orthodox School.\nUniversities include:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAmman is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45008", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45008", "title": "Petra", "text": "Ancient rock-cut historical city in Jordan\nPetra (; ), originally known to its inhabitants as Raqmu ( or ), is an ancient city and archaeological site in southern Jordan. Famous for its rock-cut architecture and water conduit systems, Petra is also called the \"Rose City\" because of the colour of the sandstone from which it is carved. The city is one of the New 7 Wonders of the World and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe area around Petra has been inhabited from as early as 7000\u00a0BC, and was settled by the Nabataeans, a nomadic Arab people, in the 4th century BC. Petra would later become the capital city of the Nabataean Kingdom in the second century BC. The Nabataeans invested in Petra's proximity to the incense trade routes by establishing it as a major regional trading hub, which gained them considerable revenue. Unlike their enemies, the Nabataeans were accustomed to living in the barren deserts and thus were able to defend their kingdom. They were particularly skillful in agriculture, stone carving, and rainwater harvesting.\nPetra flourished in the 1st century AD, when its Al-Khazneh structure, possibly the mausoleum of Nabataean king Aretas IV, was constructed, and its population peaked at an estimated 20,000 inhabitants. Nabataea fell to the Romans in 106\u00a0AD, who annexed and renamed it Arabia Petraea. Petra's importance declined as sea trade routes emerged, and after an earthquake in 363 destroyed many structures. In the Byzantine era, several Christian churches were built, but the city continued to decline and, by the early Islamic era, it was abandoned except for a handful of nomads. It remained unknown to the western world until 1812, when Swiss traveller Johann Ludwig Burckhardt rediscovered it.\nUNESCO has described Petra as \"one of the most precious cultural properties of man's cultural heritage\". Petra is a symbol of Jordan, as well as Jordan's most-visited tourist attraction. Visitor numbers reach close to a million tourists every year.\nHistory.\nNeolithic.\nBy 7000 BC, some of the earliest recorded farmers had settled in Beidha, a Pre-Pottery Neolithic settlement just north of Petra.\nBronze Age.\nPetra is listed in Egyptian campaign accounts and the Amarna letters as \"Pel\", \"Sela\", or \"Seir\".\nIron Age Edom.\nThe Iron Age lasted between 1200 and 600 BC; in that time, the Petra area was occupied by the Edomites. The configuration of mountains in Petra allowed for a reservoir of water for the Edomites. This made Petra a stopping point for merchants, making it an outstanding area for trade. Some wares that were traded included wines, olive oil, and wood.\nInitially, the Edomites were accompanied by Nomads who eventually left, but the Edomites stayed and made their mark on Petra before the emergence of the Nabataens. It is said that 10,000 men were thrown off of the mountain Umm el-Biyara, but this story has been debated by scholars.\nThe Edomite site excavated at the top of the Umm el-Biyara mountain at Petra was established no earlier than the seventh century BC (Iron II).\nEmergence of Petra.\nThe Nabataeans were one among several nomadic Bedouin tribes that roamed the Arabian Desert and moved with their herds to wherever they could find pasture and water. Although the Nabataeans were initially embedded in Aramaic culture, theories about them having Aramean roots are rejected by many modern scholars. Instead, archaeological, religious and linguistic evidence confirm that they are a northern Arabian tribe. Current evidence suggests that the Nabataean name for Petra was Raq\u0113m\u014d, variously spelled in inscriptions as \"rqmw\" or \"rqm\".\nThe Jewish historian Josephus (ca. 37\u2013100 AD) writes that the region was inhabited by the Midianites during the time of Moses, and that they were ruled by five kings, one of whom was Rekem. Josephus mentions that the city, called Petra by the Greeks, \"ranks highest in the land of the Arabs\" and was still called \"Rekeme\" by all the Arabs of his time, after its royal founder (Antiquities iv. 7, 1; 4, 7). The Onomasticon of Eusebius also identified Rekem as Petra. Arabic \"raqama\" means \"to mark, to decorate\", so \"Rekeme\" could be a Nabataean word referring to the famous carved rock fa\u00e7ades. In 1964, workmen clearing rubble away from the cliff at the entrance to the gorge found several funerary inscriptions in Nabatean script. One of them was to a certain Petraios who was born in Raqmu (Rekem) and buried in Garshu (Jerash).\nAn old theory held that Petra might be identified with a place called \"sela\" in the Hebrew Bible. \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" (1911) states that the Semitic name of the city, if not Sela, would remain unknown. It nevertheless cautioned that \"sela\" simply means \"rock\" in Hebrew, and thence might not be identified with a city where it occurs in the biblical text in the book of Obadiah. It is possible that the city was part of the nation of Edom.\nThe passage in Diodorus Siculus (xix. 94\u201397) described the Nabataeans at the time as a nomadic group of people who believed that those who owned possessions could be easily compelled by those who held power, this would drastically change as the centuries went on.\nThis text further describes the expeditions which Antigonus sent against the Nabataeans in 312 BC, was understood by some researchers to throw some light upon the history of Petra, but the \"petra\" (Greek for rock) referred to as a natural fortress and place of refuge cannot be a proper name, and the description implies that there was no town in existence there at the time. \nRoman period.\nIn 106, when Aulus Cornelius Palma Frontonianus was governor of Roman Syria, the part of the Arabian Peninsula under the rule of Petra was absorbed into the Roman Empire as part of Arabia Petraea, and Petra became its capital. The native dynasty came to an end but the city continued to flourish under Roman rule. It was around this time that the Petra Roman Road was built. A century later, in the time of Severus Alexander, when the city was at the height of its splendor, the issue of coinage came to an end. There was no more building of sumptuous tombs, owing apparently to some sudden catastrophe, such as an invasion by the Sasanian Empire.\nMeanwhile, as Palmyra (fl. 130\u2013270) grew in importance and attracted the pre-Islamic Arab trade away from Petra, the latter declined. It appears, however, to have lingered on as a religious center. Another Roman road was constructed at the site. Epiphanius of Salamis (c.315\u2013403) writes that in his time a feast was held there on December 25 in honor of the virgin Khaabou and her offspring Dushara. Dushara and al-Uzza were two of the principal deities of the city, which otherwise included many idols from other Nabataean deities such as Allat and Manat.\nBetween 111 and 114, Trajan built the Via Traiana Nova, running from the Syrian border to the Red Sea through Petra. This road followed the old routes of Nabataean caravans. In the shadow of the \"Pax Romana\", this route revived trade between Arabia, Syria, and Mediterranean harbors. In 125 AD, one of Emperor Hadrian's administrators left marks in Petra, pointed out by documents found at the Dead Sea. In 130, Hadrian visited the former Nabataean capital, giving it the name of \"Hadri\u0101n\u012b Petra Metropolis\", imprinted on his coins. His visit, however, did not lead to any boom in development and new buildings as it did in Jerash. The province's governor, Sextius Florentinus, erected a monumental mausoleum for his son near the end of the al-Hubta (King's Wall) tombs, which had been generally reserved during the Nabataean period for the royal family.\nRoman emperors' interest in the city in the 3rd century suggests that Petra and its environs remained highly esteemed for a long time. An inscription to Liber Pater, a god revered by Emperor Septimius Severus, was found in the \"temenos\" of the temple known as Qasr al-Bint, and Nabataean tombs contained silver coins with the emperor's portrait as well as pottery from his reign. Emperor Elagabalus declared Petra to be a Roman colony, when he reorganized the Roman Empire towards the end of the 3rd century. The area from Petra to Wadi Mujib, the Negev, and the Sinai Peninsula were annexed into the province of Palaestina Salutaris. The Madaba Map from the reign of Emperor Justinian I is missing the section that would include Petra.\nByzantine period.\nPetra declined rapidly under Roman rule, in large part from the revision of sea-based trade routes. In 363, an earthquake destroyed many buildings and crippled the vital water management system. The old city of Petra was the capital of the Byzantine province of Palaestina III and many churches from the Byzantine period were excavated in and around Petra. In one of them, the Byzantine Church, 140 papyri were discovered, which contained mainly contracts dated from 530s to 590s, establishing that the city was still flourishing in the 6th century. The Byzantine Church is a prime example of monumental architecture in Byzantine Petra.\nThe last reference to Byzantine Petra comes from the \"Spiritual Meadow\" of John Moschus, written in the first decades of the 7th century. He gives an anecdote about its bishop, Athenogenes. It ceased to be a metropolitan bishopric sometime before 687 when that function had been transferred to Areopolis. Petra is not mentioned in the narratives of the Muslim conquest of the Levant, nor does it appear in any early Islamic records.\nCrusaders and Mamluks.\nIn the 12th century, the Crusaders built fortresses such as the Alwaeira Castle, but were forced to abandon Petra after a while. As a result, the location of Petra was lost until the 19th century\nTwo further Crusader-period castles are known in and around Petra: the first is al-Wu'ayra, situated just north of Wadi Musa. It can be viewed from the road to Little Petra. It is the castle that was seized by a band of Turks with the help of local Muslims and only recovered by the Crusaders after they began to destroy the olive trees of Wadi Musa. The potential loss of livelihood led the locals to negotiate a surrender. The second is on the summit of el-Habis, in the heart of Petra, and can be accessed from the West side of the Qasr al-Bint.\nThe ruins of Petra were an object of curiosity during the Middle Ages and were visited by Baibars, one of the first Mamluk sultans of Egypt, towards the end of the 13th century.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nThe first European to describe them was the Swiss traveler Johann Ludwig Burckhardt during his travels in 1812. At that time, the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem operated a diocese in al-Karak named Battra (, ) and it was the opinion among the clergy of Jerusalem that Kerak was the ancient city of Petra.\nBurckhardt already spoke Arabic fluently, and was on his way to explore the Niger River when he heard stories of a dead city that held the tomb of the Prophet Aaron, and became fascinated with finding the city. He then dressed himself up as a local, and only spoke in Arabic, bringing a goat with him with the intent of sacrificing it in honor of Aaron's Tomb. After one day of exploring, he was convinced that he had found the lost city of Petra.\nL\u00e9on de Laborde and Louis-Maurice-Adolphe Linant de Bellefonds made the first accurate drawings of Petra in 1828. The Scottish painter David Roberts visited Petra in 1839 and returned to Britain with sketches and stories of the encounter with local tribes, published in \"The Holy Land, Syria, Idumea, Arabia, Egypt, and Nubia\". Frederic Edwin Church, the leading American landscape painter of the 19th century, visited Petra in 1868, and the resulting painting \"El Khasn\u00e9, Petra\" is among his most important and well-documented. Missionary Archibald Forder published photographs of Petra in the December 1909 issue of National Geographic.\nBecause the structures weakened with age, many of the tombs became vulnerable to thieves, and many treasures were stolen. In 1929, a four-person team consisting of British archaeologists Agnes Conway and George Horsfield, Palestinian physician and folklore expert Tawfiq Canaan and Ditlef Nielsen, a Danish scholar, excavated and surveyed Petra.\nThe archaeologist Philip Hammond from the University of Utah visited Petra for nearly 40 years. He explained that the local folklore says it was created by the wand of Moses, when he struck the rock to bring forth water for the Israelites. Hammond believed the carved channels deep within the walls and ground were made from ceramic pipes that once fed water for the city, from rock-cut systems on the canyon rim.\nIn the 1980s, the Bedul Bedouin, once inhabitants of Petra, were relocated by the Jordanian government to the nearby settlement of Umm Sayhoun, a process spanning two decades. This move was part of broader initiatives aimed at settling Bedouin communities and promoting tourism in Petra. With a name meaning \"the changing ones\" and oral traditions recounting a conversion narrative, the Bedul Bedouins are believed to have adopted Islam later in their history, possibly with Jewish or Nabatean origins. Today, alongside their traditional activities, they engage in local tourism, alongside the more prominent Liyathnah tribe.\nNumerous scrolls in Greek and dating to the Byzantine period were discovered in an excavated church near the Temple of the Winged Lions in Petra in December 1993.\n21st century.\nIn December 2022, Petra was hit by heavy flooding.\nLayout.\nPetra is adjacent to the mountain of Jabal Al-Madbah, in a basin surrounded by mountains forming the eastern flank of the Arabah valley running from the Dead Sea to the Gulf of Aqaba.\nExcavations have demonstrated that it was the ability of the Nabataeans to control the water supply that led to the rise of the desert city, creating an artificial oasis. The area is visited by flash floods, but archaeological evidence shows that the Nabataeans controlled these floods by the use of dams, cisterns, and water conduits. These innovations stored water for prolonged periods of drought and enabled the city to prosper from its sale.\nIn ancient times, Petra might have been approached from the south on a track leading across the plain of Petra, around Jabal Haroun (\"Aaron's Mountain\"), the location of the Tomb of Aaron, said to be the burial place of Aaron, brother of Moses. Another approach was possibly from the high plateau to the north. Today, most modern visitors approach the site from the east. The impressive eastern entrance leads steeply down through a dark, narrow gorge, in places only wide, called the Siq (\"shaft\"), a natural geological feature formed from a deep split in the sandstone rocks and serving as a waterway flowing into Wadi Musa.\nHellenistic architecture.\nPetra is known primarily for its Hellenistic architecture. The facades of the tombs in Petra are commonly rendered in Hellenistic style, reflecting the number of diverse cultures with which the Nabataeans traded, all of which were in turn influenced by Greek culture. Most of these tombs contain small burials niches carved into the stone.\nPerhaps the best example of the Hellenistic style is seen in the Treasury, which is wide and tall and refers to the architecture of Alexandria. The facade of the Treasury features a broken pediment with a central tholos inside, and two obelisks appear to form into the rock at the top. Near the bottom of the Treasury are the twin Greek gods Castor and Pollux, who protect travellers on their journeys. Near the top of the Treasury, two victories are seen standing on each side of a female figure on the tholos. This female figure is believed to be the Isis-Tyche, Isis and Tyche being the Egyptian and Greek goddesses, respectively, of good fortune.\nAnother prime example of Hellenistic architecture featured in Petra is its Monastery, which stands at tall and wide; this is Petra's largest monument and is similarly carved into the rock face. The facade of this again features a broken pediment, similar to the Treasury, as well as another central tholos. The Monastery displays more of a Nabataen touch while at the same time incorporating elements from Greek architecture. Its only source of light is its entrance standing at high. There is a large space outside of the Monastery, which is purposefully flattened for worship purposes. Formerly, in the Byzantine period, this was a place for Christian worship, but is now a holy site for pilgrims to visit.\nCity centre.\nAt the end of the narrow gorge, the Siq, stands Petra's most elaborate ruin, popularly known as Al-Khazneh (\"the Treasury\"), hewn into the sandstone cliff. While remaining in remarkably preserved condition, the face of the structure is marked by hundreds of bullet holes made by the local Bedouin tribes that hoped to dislodge riches that were once rumoured to be hidden within it.\nA little farther from the Treasury, at the foot of the mountain called \"en-Nejr\", is a massive theatre, positioned so as to bring the greatest number of tombs within view. At the point where the valley opens out into the plain, the site of the city is revealed with striking effect. The theatre was cut into the hillside and into several of the tombs during its construction. Rectangular gaps in the seating are still visible. Almost enclosing it on three sides are rose-coloured mountain walls, divided into groups by deep fissures and lined with knobs cut from the rock in the form of towers. The theatre was said to hold around 8,500 people. The performances that audiences were able to attend here were poetry readings and dramas. Gladiator fights were also said to be held here and attracted the most audience, although no gladiator was able to gain any momentum or fame due to the heavy mortality rate that came with it. The theatre was one of many structures in Petra that took significant damage due to the 363 Galilee earthquake.\nThe Petra Pool and Garden Complex is a series of structures within the city center. Originally said to be a market area, excavations at the site have allowed scholars to identify it as an elaborate Nabataean garden, which included a large swimming pool, an island-pavilion, and an intricate hydraulic system.\nAhead of the Petra Pool and Garden Complex lies Colonnaded street, which is among few artifacts of Petra that was constructed rather than natural. This street used to hold a semi-circle nymphaeum, which is now in ruins due to flash flooding, and used to hold Petra's only tree. This was intended to be a symbol for the peaceful atmosphere that the Nabataens were able to construct in Petra. Once the Romans took control of the city, Colonnaded street was narrowed to make room for a side walk, and 72 columns were added to each side.\nHigh Place of Sacrifice.\nThe High Place of Sacrifice is perched atop Jebel Madbah Mountain. The beginning of the hike is near Petra's theatre. From there, the site of The High Place of Sacrifice is around an 800-step hike. One commonly believed sacrifice that took place there was libation. Another common form of sacrifice that took place there was animal sacrifice; this is due to the belief that the tomb of the Prophet Aaron is located in Petra, which is a sacred site for Muslims. In honor of this, a goat was sacrificed annually. Other rituals also took place there, including the burning of frankincense.\nRoyal Tombs.\nThe Royal Tombs of Petra are in the Nabatean version of Hellenistic architecture, but their facades have worn due to natural decay. One of these tombs, the Palace Tomb, is speculated to be the tomb for the kings of Petra. The Corinthian Tomb, which is right next to the Palace Tomb, has the same Hellenistic architecture featured on the Treasury. The two other Royal Tombs are the Silk Tomb and the Urn Tomb; the Silk Tomb does not stand out as much as the Urn Tomb. The Urn Tomb features a large yard in its front, and was turned into a church in 446 AD after the expansion of Christianity.\nExterior platform.\nIn 2016, archaeologists using satellite imagery and drones discovered a very large, previously unknown monumental structure whose beginnings were tentatively dated to about 150 BC, the time when the Nabataeans initiated their public building programme. It is located outside the main area of the city, at the foot of Jabal an-Nmayr and about south of the city centre, but is facing east, not towards the city, and has no visible relationship to it. The structure consists of a huge, platform, with a monumental staircase along its eastern side. The large platform enclosed a slightly smaller one, topped with a comparatively small building, , which was facing east toward the staircase. The structure, second in size only to the Monastery complex, probably had a ceremonial function of which not even a speculative explanation has yet been offered by the researchers.\nGeostrategic importance.\nPliny the Elder and other writers identify Petra as the capital of the Nabataean Kingdom and the centre of their caravan trade. Enclosed by towering rocks and watered by a perennial stream, Petra not only possessed the advantages of a fortress, but controlled the main commercial routes which passed through it to Gaza in the west, to Bosra and Damascus in the north, to Aqaba and Leuce Come on the Red Sea, and across the desert to the Persian Gulf.\nReligious importance.\nNabataean religion.\nThe Nabataeans worshipped Arab gods and goddesses during the pre-Islamic era as well as a few of their deified kings. One, Obodas I, was deified after his death in 85 BC. Dushara was the primary male god accompanied by his three female deities: Al-\u2018Uzz\u0101, Allat and Man\u0101t. Many statues carved in the rock depict these gods and goddesses. New evidence indicates that broader Edomite, and Nabataean theology had strong links to Earth-Sun relationships, often manifested in the orientation of prominent Petra structures to equinox and solstice sunrises and sunsets.\nThe Monastery, Petra's largest monument, dates from the 1st century BC. It was dedicated to Obodas I and is believed to be the symposium of Obodas the god. This information is inscribed on the ruins of the Monastery (the name is the translation of the Arabic Ad Deir).\nThe Temple of the Winged Lions is a large temple complex dated to the reign of King Aretas IV (9 BC\u201340 AD). The temple is located in Petra's so-called Sacred Quarter, an area situated at the end of Petra's main Colonnaded Street consisting of two majestic temples, the Qasr al-Bint and, opposite, the Temple of the Winged Lions on the northern bank of Wadi Musa.\nLate Roman and Byzantine-period Christianity.\nChristianity found its way to Petra during the 4th century AD, nearly 500 years after the establishment of Petra as a trade centre, and the city was gradually converted over the course of the 4th century and possibly into the early 5th century AD. The start of Christianity in Petra started primarily in 330 AD when the first Christian emperor of Rome took over, Constantine I, otherwise known as Constantine the Great. Together with Licinius, he issued a decree of tolerance which stopped the persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire. Athanasius mentions a bishop of Petra (Antioch. 10) named Asterius. At least one of the tombs (now known as the \"Urn Tomb\") was used as a church. An inscription in red paint records its consecration \"in the time of the most holy bishop Jason\" (447).\nEarly Muslim and Crusader periods.\nAfter the Muslim conquest of 629\u2013632, Christianity in Petra, as of most of Arabia, gave way to Islam.\nIn the wake of the First Crusade, part of Transjordan including Petra was conquered by King Baldwin I of Jerusalem and formed the second fief of the barony of Krak (in the lordship of Oultrejordain) with the title \"Ch\u00e2teau de la Val\u00e9e de Moyse\" or \"Sela\". It remained in the hands of the Franks until 1189. It is still a titular see of the Catholic Church - see Archbishop of Petra and List of Catholic titular sees: Petra in Palaestina.\nTraditional connection to Moses, Aaron and Miriam.\nAccording to a tradition, Petra is the spot where Moses (Musa in Arabic) struck a rock with his staff and water came forth, and where Moses' brother, Aaron (Harun in Arabic), is buried, at Mount Hor, known in Arabic as Jabal Haroun, 'Mount Aaron'. Placing the death of Aaron on a mountain peak near Petra dates back to at least the time of Josephus (see \"Antiquities\" IV. 4, 7). A memorial church built in the saddle under the peak in the 5th century became the nucleus of a monastery frequented by pilgrims, named in a document from among the Petra papyri and dated to 573 as \"the House of ... High Priest Aaron.\" Wadi Musa or the \"Wadi of Moses\" is the Arabic name for the narrow valley at the head of which Petra is sited.\nA mountaintop shrine of Moses' sister Miriam was still shown to pilgrims at the time of Jerome in the 4th century, but its location has not been identified since.\nClimate.\nIn Petra, there is a semi-arid climate. Most rain falls in the winter. The K\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification is BSk. The average annual temperature in Petra is . About of precipitation falls annually.\nConservation.\nThe Bedul (Petra Bedouin) were forcibly resettled from their cave dwellings in Petra to Umm Sayhoun/Um Seihun by the Jordanian government in 1985, prior to the UNESCO designation process. They were provided with block-built housing with some infrastructure including in particular a sewage and drainage system. Among the six communities in the Petra Region, Umm Sayhoun is one of the smaller communities. The village of Wadi Musa is the largest in the area, inhabited largely by the Layathnah Bedouin, and is now the closest settlement to the visitor centre, the main entrance via the Siq and the archaeological site generally. Umm Sayhoun gives access to the 'back route' into the site, the Wadi Turkmaniyeh pedestrian route.\nOn December 6, 1985, Petra was designated a World Heritage Site. In a popular poll in 2007, it was also named one of the New 7 Wonders of the World. The Petra Archaeological Park (PAP) became an autonomous legal entity over the management of this site in August 2007.\nThe Bedoul belong to one of the Bedouin tribes whose cultural heritage and traditional skills were proclaimed by UNESCO on the Intangible Cultural Heritage List in 2005 and inscribed in 2008.\nIn 2011, following an 11-month project planning phase, the Petra Development and Tourism Region Authority in association with DesignWorkshop and JCP s.r.l published a Strategic Master Plan that guides planned development of the Petra Region. This is intended to guide planned development of the Petra Region in an efficient, balanced and sustainable way over the next 20 years for the benefit of the local population and of Jordan in general. As part of this, a Strategic Plan was developed for Umm Sayhoun and surrounding areas.\nThe process of developing the Strategic Plan considered the area's needs from five points of view:\nThe site suffers from a host of threats, including collapse of ancient structures, erosion due to flooding and improper rainwater drainage, weathering from salt upwelling, improper restoration of ancient structures, and unsustainable tourism. The last has increased substantially, especially since the site received widespread media coverage in 2007 during the New 7 Wonders of the World Internet and cellphone campaign. Tourism has steadily grown, with Petra receiving 1.2 million total visitors in 2019.\nIn an attempt to reduce the problems, the Petra National Trust (PNT) was established in 1989. It has worked with numerous local and international organisations on projects that promote the protection, conservation, and preservation of the Petra site. Moreover, UNESCO and ICOMOS recently collaborated to publish their first book on human and natural threats to the sensitive World Heritage sites. They chose Petra as its first and the most important example of threatened landscapes. The presentation \"Tourism and Archaeological Heritage Management at Petra: Driver to Development or Destruction?\" (2012) was the first in a series to address the very nature of these deteriorating buildings, cities, sites, and regions.\nPeople for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) released a video in 2018 highlighting the abuse of working animals in Petra. PETA claimed that animals are forced to carry tourists or pull carriages every day. The video showed handlers beating and whipping working animals, with beatings intensifying when animals faltered. PETA also showed some wounded animals, including camels with fly-infested, open wounds. The Jordanian authority running the site responded by proposing a veterinary clinic, and by undertaking to spread awareness among animal handlers. In 2020, more video released by PETA indicated that conditions for the animals had not improved and, in 2021, the organization was running what appeared to be the only veterinary clinic in the area.\nPetra is a site at the intersection of natural and cultural heritage forming a unique cultural landscape. Ever since Johann Ludwig Burckhardt aka Sheikh Ibrahim had re-discovered the ruin city in Petra, Jordan, in 1812, the cultural heritage site has attracted different people who shared an interest in the ancient history and culture of the Nabataeans such as travellers, pilgrims, painters and savants. However, it was not until the late 19th century that the ruins were systematically approached by archaeological researchers. Since then regular archaeological excavations and ongoing research on the Nabataean culture have been part of today's UNESCO world cultural heritage site Petra. Through the excavations in the Petra Archaeological Park an increasing number of Nabataean cultural heritage is being exposed to environmental impact. A central issue is the management of water impacting the built heritage and the rock hewn facades. The large number of discoveries and the exposure of structures and findings demand conservation measures respecting the interlinkage between the natural landscape and cultural heritage, as especially this connection is a central challenge at the UNECSO World Heritage Site.\nIn recent years different conservation campaigns and projects were established at the cultural heritage site of Petra. The main works first focussed on the entrance situation of the Siq to protect tourists and to facilitate access. Also, different projects for conservation and conservation research were conducted. Following is a list of projects, to be continued.\nPopular culture.\n\"Rite of passage\" of the Israeli youth.\nA part of the Zionist Youth movement was hikes across the Land of Israel. These often involved cross-border incursions into Syria and Jordan, reportedly pioneered by Meir Har-Zion. Petra was a popular, often deadly, destination. In 1958 Haim Hefer wrote the lyrics for a ballad called HaSela haAdom (\"The Red Rock\") about one such trip ended in death.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45010", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45010", "title": "Oil shale", "text": "Organic-rich fine-grained sedimentary rock containing kerogen\nOil shale is an organic-rich fine-grained sedimentary rock containing kerogen (a solid mixture of organic chemical compounds) from which liquid hydrocarbons can be produced. In addition to kerogen, general composition of oil shales constitutes inorganic substance and bitumens. Based on their deposition environment, oil shales are classified as marine, lacustrine and terrestrial oil shales. Oil shales differ from oil-\"bearing\" shales, shale deposits that contain petroleum (tight oil) that is sometimes produced from drilled wells. Examples of oil-\"bearing\" shales are the Bakken Formation, Pierre Shale, Niobrara Formation, and Eagle Ford Formation. Accordingly, shale oil produced from oil shale should not be confused with tight oil, which is also frequently called shale oil.\nA 2016 estimate of global deposits set the total world resources of oil shale equivalent of of oil in place. Oil shale has gained attention as a potential abundant source of oil. However, the various attempts to develop oil shale deposits have had limited success. Only Estonia and China have well-established oil shale industries, and Brazil, Germany, and Russia utilize oil shale to some extent.\nOil shale can be burned directly in furnaces as a low-grade fuel for power generation and district heating or used as a raw material in chemical and construction-materials processing. Heating oil shale to a sufficiently high temperature causes the chemical process of pyrolysis to yield a vapor. Upon cooling the vapor, the liquid unconventional oil, called shale oil, is separated from combustible oil-shale gas. Shale oil is a substitute for conventional crude oil; however, extracting shale oil is costlier than the production of conventional crude oil both financially and in terms of its environmental impact. Oil-shale mining and processing raise a number of environmental concerns, such as land use, waste disposal, water use, waste-water management, greenhouse-gas emissions and air pollution.\nGeology.\nOil shale, an organic-rich sedimentary rock, belongs to the group of sapropel fuels. It does not have a definite geological definition nor a specific chemical formula, and its seams do not always have discrete boundaries. Oil shales vary considerably in their mineral content, chemical composition, age, type of kerogen, and depositional history, and not all oil shales would necessarily be classified as shales in the strict sense. According to the petrologist Adrian C. Hutton of the University of Wollongong, oil shales are not \"geological nor geochemically distinctive rock but rather 'economic' term\". Their common defining feature is low solubility in low-boiling organic solvents and generation of liquid organic products on thermal decomposition. Geologists can classify oil shales on the basis of their composition as carbonate-rich shales, siliceous shales, or cannel shales.\nOil shale differs from bitumen-impregnated rocks (other so-called unconventional resources such as oil sands and petroleum reservoir rocks), humic coals and carbonaceous shale. While oil sands do originate from the biodegradation of oil, heat and pressure have not (yet) transformed the kerogen in oil shale into petroleum, which means its maturation does not exceed early mesocatagenetic. Oil shales differ also from oil-bearing shales, shale deposits that contain tight oil that is sometimes produced from drilled wells. Examples of oil-bearing shales are the Bakken Formation, Pierre Shale, Niobrara Formation, and Eagle Ford Formation. Accordingly, shale oil produced from oil shale should not be confused with tight oil, which is called also frequently shale oil.\nGeneral composition of oil shales constitutes inorganic matrix, bitumens, and kerogen. While the bitumen portion of oil shales is soluble in carbon disulfide, the kerogen portion is insoluble in carbon disulfide and may contain iron, vanadium, nickel, molybdenum, and uranium. Oil shale contains a lower percentage of organic matter than coal. In commercial grades of oil shale the ratio of organic matter to mineral matter lies approximately between 0.75:5 and 1.5:5. At the same time, the organic matter in oil shale has an atomic ratio of hydrogen to carbon (H/C) approximately 1.2 to 1.8\u00a0times lower than for crude oil and about 1.5 to 3\u00a0times higher than for coals. The organic components of oil shale derive from a variety of organisms, such as the remains of algae, spores, pollen, plant cuticles and corky fragments of herbaceous and woody plants, and cellular debris from other aquatic and land plants. Some deposits contain significant fossils; Germany's Messel Pit has the status of a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The mineral matter in oil shale includes various fine-grained silicates and carbonates. Inorganic matrix can contain quartz, feldspar, clay (mainly illite and chlorite), carbonate (calcite and dolomite), pyrite and some other minerals.\nAnother classification, known as the van Krevelen diagram, assigns kerogen types, depending on the hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen content of oil shales' original organic matter. The most commonly used classification of oil shales, developed between 1987 and 1991 by Adrian C. Hutton, adapts petrographic terms from coal terminology. This classification designates oil shales as terrestrial, lacustrine (lake-bottom-deposited), or marine (ocean bottom-deposited), based on the environment of the initial biomass deposit. Known oil shales are predominantly of aquatic (marine, lacustrine) origin. Hutton's classification scheme has proven useful in estimating the yield and composition of the extracted oil.\nResource.\nAs source rocks for most conventional oil reservoirs, oil shale deposits are found in all world oil provinces, although most of them are too deep to be exploited economically. As with all oil and gas resources, analysts distinguish between oil shale resources and oil shale reserves. \"Resources\" refer to all oil shale deposits, while \"reserves\" represent those deposits from which producers can extract oil shale economically using existing technology. Since extraction technologies develop continuously, planners can only estimate the amount of recoverable kerogen. Although resources of oil shale occur in many countries, only 33\u00a0countries possess known deposits of potential economic value. Well-explored deposits, potentially classifiable as reserves, include the Green River deposits in the western United States, the Tertiary deposits in Queensland, Australia, deposits in Sweden and Estonia, the El-Lajjun deposit in Jordan, and deposits in France, Germany, Brazil, China, southern Mongolia and Russia. These deposits have given rise to expectations of yielding at least 40\u00a0liters of shale oil per tonne of oil shale, using the Fischer Assay.\nA 2016 estimate set the total world resources of oil shale equivalent to yield of of shale oil, with the largest resource deposits in the United States accounting more than 80% of the world total resource. For comparison, at the same time the world's proven oil reserves are estimated to be . The largest deposits in the world occur in the United States in the Green River Formation, which covers portions of Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming; about 70% of this resource lies on land owned or managed by the United States federal government. Deposits in the United States constitute more than 80% of world resources; other significant resource holders being China, Russia, and Brazil. The amount of economically recoverable oil shale is unknown.\nHistory.\nHumans have used oil shale as a fuel since prehistoric times, since it generally burns without any processing. Around 3000 BC, \"rock oil\" was used in Mesopotamia for road construction and making architectural adhesives. Britons of the Iron Age used tractable oil shales to fashion cists for burial, or just polish it to create ornaments.\nIn the 10th century, the Arab physician Masawaih al-Mardini (Mesue the Younger) described a method of extraction of oil from \"some kind of bituminous shale\". The first patent for extracting oil from oil shale was British Crown Patent 330 granted in 1694 to Martin Eele, Thomas Hancock and William Portlock, who had \"found a way to extract and make great quantities of pitch, tarr, and oyle out of a sort of stone\".\nModern industrial mining of oil shale began in 1837 in Autun, France, followed by exploitation in Scotland, Germany, and several other countries. Operations during the 19th century focused on the production of kerosene, lamp oil, and paraffin; these products helped supply the growing demand for lighting that arose during the Industrial Revolution, supplied from Scottish oil shales. Fuel oil, lubricating oil and grease, and ammonium sulfate were also produced. Scottish production peaked in around 1913, operating 120 oil shale works, producing 3,332,000 tonnes of oil shale, generating around 2% of the global production of petroleum. The Scottish oil-shale industry expanded immediately before World War I partly because of limited access to conventional petroleum resources and the mass production of automobiles and trucks, which accompanied an increase in gasoline consumption; but mostly because the British Admiralty required a reliable fuel source for their fleet as war in Europe loomed.\nAlthough the Estonian and Chinese oil-shale industries continued to grow after World War II, most other countries abandoned their projects because of high processing costs and the availability of cheaper petroleum. Following the 1973 oil crisis, world production of oil shale reached a peak of 46\u00a0million tonnes in 1980 before falling to about 16\u00a0million tonnes in 2000, because of competition from cheap conventional petroleum in the 1980s.\nOn 2 May 1982, known in some circles as \"Black Sunday\", Exxon canceled its US$5\u00a0billion Colony Shale Oil Project near Parachute, Colorado, because of low oil prices and increased expenses, laying off more than 2,000\u00a0workers and leaving a trail of home foreclosures and small business bankruptcies. In 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed into law the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, which among other things abolished the United States' Synthetic Liquid Fuels Program.\nThe global oil-shale industry began to revive at the beginning of the 21st century. In 2003, an oil-shale development program restarted in the United States. Authorities introduced a commercial leasing program permitting the extraction of oil shale and oil sands on federal lands in 2005, in accordance with the Energy Policy Act of 2005.\nIndustry.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], oil shale is utilized primarily in Brazil, China, Estonia and to some extent in Germany, and Russia. Several additional countries started assessing their reserves or had built experimental production plants, while others had phased out their oil shale industry. Oil shale serves for oil production in Estonia, Brazil, and China; for power generation in Estonia, China, and Germany; for cement production in Estonia, Germany, and China; and for use in chemical industries in China, Estonia, and Russia.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], 80% of oil shale used globally is extracted in Estonia, mainly because Estonia uses several oil-shale-fired power plants, which has an installed capacity of 2,967\u00a0megawatts (MW). By comparison, China's oil shale power plants have an installed capacity of 12\u00a0MW, and Germany's have 9.9\u00a0MW. A 470\u00a0MW oil shale power plant in Jordan is under construction as of 2020. Israel, Romania and Russia have in the past run power plants fired by oil shale but have shut them down or switched to other fuel sources such as natural gas. Other countries, such as Egypt, have had plans to construct power plants fired by oil shale, while Canada and Turkey had plans to burn oil shale along with coal for power generation. Oil shale serves as the main fuel for power generation only in Estonia, where 90.3% of country's electrical generation in 2016 was produced from oil shale.\nAccording to the World Energy Council, in 2008 the total production of shale oil from oil shale was 930,000\u00a0tonnes, equal to , of which China produced 375,000\u00a0tonnes, Estonia 355,000\u00a0tonnes, and Brazil 200,000\u00a0tonnes. In comparison, production of the conventional oil and natural gas liquids in 2008 amounted 3.95\u00a0billion tonnes or .\nExtraction and processing.\nMost exploitation of oil shale involves mining followed by shipping elsewhere, after which the shale is burned directly to generate electricity or undertakes further processing. The most common methods of mining involve open-pit mining and strip mining. These procedures remove most of the overlying material to expose the deposits of oil shale and become practical when the deposits occur near the surface. Underground mining of oil shale, which removes less of the overlying material, employs the room-and-pillar method.\nThe extraction of the useful components of oil shale usually takes place above ground (\"ex-situ\" processing), although several newer technologies perform this underground (on-site or \"in-situ\" processing). In either case, the chemical process of pyrolysis converts the kerogen in the oil shale to shale oil (synthetic crude oil) and oil shale gas. Most conversion technologies involve heating shale in the absence of oxygen to a temperature at which kerogen decomposes (pyrolyses) into gas, condensable oil, and a solid residue. This usually takes place between and . The process of decomposition begins at relatively low temperatures () but proceeds more rapidly and more completely at higher temperatures.\n\"In-situ\" processing involves heating the oil shale underground. Such technologies can potentially extract more oil from a given area of land than \"ex-situ\" processes, since they can access the material at greater depths than surface mines can. Several companies have patented methods for \"in-situ\" retorting. However, most of these methods remain in the experimental phase. Two \"in-situ\" processes could be used: true \"in-situ\" processing does not involve mining the oil shale, while modified \"in-situ\" processing involves removing part of the oil shale and bringing it to the surface for modified \"in-situ\" retorting in order to create permeability for gas flow in a rubble chimney. Explosives rubblize the oil-shale deposit.\nHundreds of patents for oil shale retorting technologies exist; however, only a few dozen have undergone testing. By 2006, only four technologies remained in commercial use: Kiviter, Galoter, Fushun, and Petrosix.\nApplications and products.\nOil shale is utilized as a fuel for thermal power-plants, burning it (like coal) to drive steam turbines; some of these plants employ the resulting heat for district heating of homes and businesses. In addition to its use as a fuel, oil shale may also serve in the production of specialty carbon fibers, adsorbent carbons, carbon black, phenols, resins, glues, tanning agents, mastic, road bitumen, cement, bricks, construction and decorative blocks, soil-additives, fertilizers, rock-wool insulation, glass, and pharmaceutical products. However, oil shale use for production of these items remains small or only in experimental development. Some oil shales yield sulfur, ammonia, alumina, soda ash, uranium, and nahcolite as shale-oil extraction byproducts. Between 1946 and 1952, a marine type of \"Dictyonema\" shale served for uranium production in Sillam\u00e4e, Estonia, and between 1950 and 1989 Sweden used alum shale for the same purposes. Oil shale gas has served as a substitute for natural gas, but as of 2009[ [update]], producing oil shale gas as a natural-gas substitute remained economically infeasible.\nThe shale oil derived from oil shale does not directly substitute for crude oil in all applications. It may contain higher concentrations of olefins, oxygen, and nitrogen than conventional crude oil. Some shale oils may have higher sulfur or arsenic content. By comparison with West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark standard for crude oil in the futures-contract market, the Green River shale oil sulfur content ranges from near 0% to 4.9% (in average 0.76%), where West Texas Intermediate's sulfur content has a maximum of 0.42%. The sulfur content in shale oil from Jordan's oil shales may be as high as 9.5%. The arsenic content, for example, becomes an issue for Green River formation oil shale. The higher concentrations of these materials means that the oil must undergo considerable upgrading (hydrotreating) before serving as oil-refinery feedstock. Above-ground retorting processes tended to yield a lower API gravity shale oil than the \"in situ\" processes. Shale oil serves best for producing middle-distillates such as kerosene, jet fuel, and diesel fuel. Worldwide demand for these middle distillates, particularly for diesel fuels, increased rapidly in the 1990s and 2000s. However, appropriate refining processes equivalent to hydrocracking can transform shale oil into a lighter-range hydrocarbon (gasoline).\nEconomics.\nThe various attempts to develop oil shale deposits have succeeded only when the cost of shale-oil production in a given region comes in below the price of crude oil or its other substitutes (break-even price). According to a 2005 survey, conducted by the RAND Corporation, the cost of producing a barrel of oil at a surface retorting complex in the United States (comprising a mine, retorting plant, upgrading plant, supporting utilities, and spent shale reclamation), would range between US$70\u201395 ($440\u2013600/m3, adjusted to 2005 values). This estimate considers varying levels of kerogen quality and extraction efficiency. In order to run a profitable operation, the price of crude oil would need to remain above these levels. The analysis also discussed the expectation that processing costs would drop after the establishment of the complex. The hypothetical unit would see a cost reduction of 35\u201370% after producing its first . Assuming an increase in output of during each year after the start of commercial production, RAND predicted the costs would decline to $35\u201348 per barrel ($220\u2013300/m3) within 12 years. After achieving the milestone of , its costs would decline further to $30\u201340 per barrel ($190\u2013250/m3). In 2010, the International Energy Agency estimated, based on the various pilot projects, that investment and operating costs would be similar to those of Canadian oil sands, that means would be economic at prices above $60 per barrel at current costs. This figure does not account carbon pricing, which will add additional cost. According to the New Policies Scenario introduced in its World Energy Outlook 2010, a price of $50 per tonne of emitted CO2 adds additional $7.50 cost per barrel of shale oil. As of November 2021, the price of tonne of CO2 exceeded $60.\nA 1972 publication in the journal \"P\u00e9trole Informations\" () compared shale-based oil production unfavorably with coal liquefaction. The article portrayed coal liquefaction as less expensive, generating more oil, and creating fewer environmental impacts than extraction from oil shale. It cited a conversion ratio of of oil per one ton of coal, as against of shale oil per one ton of oil shale.\nA critical measure of the viability of oil shale as an energy source lies in the ratio of the energy produced by the shale to the energy used in its mining and processing, a ratio known as \"energy return on investment\" (EROI). A 1984 study estimated the EROI of the various known oil-shale deposits as varying between 0.7\u201313.3, although known oil-shale extraction development projects assert an EROI between 3 and 10. According to the World Energy Outlook 2010, the EROI of \"ex-situ\" processing is typically 4 to 5 while of \"in-situ\" processing it may be even as low as 2. However, according to the IEA most of used energy can be provided by burning the spent shale or oil-shale gas. To increase efficiency when retorting oil shale, researchers have proposed and tested several co-pyrolysis processes.\nEnvironmental considerations.\nMining oil shale involves numerous environmental impacts, more pronounced in surface mining than in underground mining. These include acid drainage induced by the sudden rapid exposure and subsequent oxidation of formerly buried materials; the introduction of metals including mercury into surface-water and groundwater; increased erosion, sulfur-gas emissions; and air pollution caused by the production of particulates during processing, transport, and support activities.\nOil-shale extraction can damage the biological and recreational value of land and the ecosystem in the mining area. Combustion and thermal processing generate waste material. In addition, the atmospheric emissions from oil shale processing and combustion include carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas. Environmentalists oppose production and usage of oil shale, as it creates even more greenhouse gases than conventional fossil fuels. Experimental \"in situ\" conversion processes and carbon capture and storage technologies may reduce some of these concerns in the future, but at the same time they may cause other problems, including groundwater pollution. Among the water contaminants commonly associated with oil shale processing are oxygen and nitrogen heterocyclic hydrocarbons. Commonly detected examples include quinoline derivatives, pyridine, and various alkyl homologues of pyridine, such as picoline and lutidine.\nWater concerns are sensitive issues in arid regions, such as the western U.S. and Israel's Negev Desert, where plans exist to expand oil-shale extraction despite a water shortage. Depending on technology, above-ground retorting uses between one and five barrels of water per barrel of produced shale-oil. A 2008 programmatic environmental impact statement issued by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management stated that surface mining and retort operations produce of waste water per of processed oil shale. \"In situ\" processing, according to one estimate, uses about one-tenth as much water.\nEnvironmental activists, including members of Greenpeace, have organized strong protests against the oil shale industry. In one result, Queensland Energy Resources put the proposed Stuart Oil Shale Project in Australia on hold in 2004.\nExtraterrestrial oil shale.\nSome comets contain massive amounts of an organic material almost identical to high grade oil shale, the equivalent of cubic kilometers of such mixed with other material; for instance, corresponding hydrocarbons were detected in a probe fly-by through the tail of Halley's Comet in 1986.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "45011", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45011", "title": "UNIX-like", "text": ""}
{"id": "45013", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45013", "title": "North Cascades National Park", "text": "National Park in Washington, United States\nNorth Cascades National Park is a national park of the United States in Washington. At more than , it is the largest of the three National Park Service units that comprise the North Cascades National Park Complex. North Cascades National Park consists of a northern and southern section, bisected by the Skagit River that flows through the reservoirs of Ross Lake National Recreation Area. Lake Chelan National Recreation Area lies on the southern border of the south unit of the park. In addition to the two national recreation areas, other protected lands including several national forests and wilderness areas, as well as Canadian provincial parks in British Columbia, nearly surround the park. North Cascades National Park features the rugged mountain peaks of the North Cascades Range, the most expansive glacial system in the contiguous United States, the headwaters of numerous waterways, and vast forests with the highest degree of flora biodiversity of any American national park.\nThe region was first settled by Paleo-Indian Native Americans; by the time European American explorers arrived, it was inhabited by Skagit tribes. By the early 19th century, the region was visited by fur trappers and several British and American companies vied for control over the fur trade. After the Canada\u2013United States border was set at the 49th parallel in 1846, explorers came to chart potential routes through the mountains for roads and railroads. Limited mining and logging occurred from the late 19th century to the early 20th century. The first significant human impact in the region occurred in the 1920s when several dams were built in the Skagit River valley to generate hydroelectric power. Environmentalists then campaigned to preserve the remaining wilderness, culminating on October 2, 1968, with the designation of North Cascades National Park.\nHeavy snows and a high risk of avalanches due to the steep terrain, especially on the western slopes, severely limit visitation in the winter. Most access to the park is from State Route 20, which follows the Skagit River, though even this road is closed for months at a time in the winter. Most of the plant and animal species native to the park region are still found there, though climate change and pollutants from industrialized regions to the west pose risks to the environment. The park has one of the earliest and longest lasting research programs dedicated to studying climate change, primarily through examining the effects of glacial retreat.\nNorth Cascades National Park is almost entirely protected as wilderness, and so the park has few structures, roads or other improvements. Visitors wishing to drive to a campground must do so in the adjacent national forests or national recreation areas. Camping inside the park requires hiking in by trail, horseback or boat, and camping is regulated by a permit system to ensure the wilderness is not over-exploited. Mountaineering is popular in the park and only unobtrusive clean climbing is allowed.\nHuman history.\nPaleoindians and Native Americans.\nHuman history in North Cascades National Park and the surrounding region begins 8\u201310,000\u00a0years ago, after the end of the last glacial period. Paleo-Indians slowly advanced from Puget Sound into the interior mountain region as the glacial ice retreated. Archaeological evidence from other sites hundreds of miles away from the park indicate that Hozomeen chert, a type of rock well-suited to the fabrication of implements, was mined from near Hozomeen Mountain, just east of the park border, for the last 8,400\u00a0years. Tools such as microblades made from Hozomeen chert are part of the archaeological record throughout the Skagit River Valley, west of the park and in regions to the east. Prehistoric micro blades 9,600\u00a0years old have been discovered at Cascade Pass, a mountain pass that connects the western lowlands to the interior regions of the park and the Stehekin River Valley. The microblades are part of an archaeological assemblage that includes five distinct cultural periods, indicating that people were traveling into the mountains nearly 10,000\u00a0years ago. As well as the archaeological excavation at Cascade Pass, there are another 260 prehistoric sites that have been identified in the park.\nWhen white explorers first entered the area in the late 18th century, an estimated thousand Native American Skagits lived in what is now North Cascades National Park as well as the surrounding area. Residing mainly to the west of the park near Puget Sound, the Skagits lived in settlements, culling their needs from the waterways and traveling by canoe. Skagits formed a loose confederation of tribes that united if threatened by outside tribes such as the Haidas, who lived to the north. They erected large houses or lodges that could house multiple families, each with their own partitioned area and entrance. The lodges were in length and in width, and the roofs were shed-styles, with a single pitch; structures built by other Puget Sound tribes usually had gable roofs with more than one pitch. The Skagits were generally lowlanders, who only ventured into the North Cascades during the summer months, and structures in the mountains were more modest, consisting mostly of temporary buildings erected with poles and covered with branches. The Skagits erected totem poles and participated in potlatch ceremonies, similar to the Haidas, but with less complexity and extravagance. By 1910, only about 56 Skagits remained in the region, but their numbers have since rebounded to several hundred.\nInland and residing to the north and east of the Skagit tribe, the Nlaka'pamux (also known as the \"Thompson Indians\", named after explorer David Thompson), Chelan, Okanogan and Wenatchi (Wenatchee) tribes lived partly or year-round in the eastern sections of the North Cascades. The Skagits and Nlaka'pamux often had disputes, and raided one another's camps in search of slaves or to exact retribution. Like the coastal-based Skagits, inland tribes also constructed long lodges which were occupied by numerous families, though the style of construction was slightly different as the lodges did not have partitions separating one family from another, and were frame constructed and covered with reed mats rather than from cedar planking. One Wenatchee tribal lodge was described by Thompson as being long. Inland tribes were more likely to travel on foot or horseback than by canoe since the inland regions were less densely forested. Inland tribes also had less bountiful fisheries and greater weather extremes due to being further away from the moderating influence of the Pacific Ocean. Inland tribes rarely erected totem poles or participated in potlatch ceremonies. By the beginning of the 20th century, inland tribes, like their coastal neighbors, had experienced population decline from their first contact with white explorers a hundred years earlier, mostly due to smallpox and other diseases.\nAnglo-European exploration.\nThe first white explorer to enter the North Cascades was most likely a Scotsman named Alexander Ross, who was in the employ of the American-owned Pacific Fur Company. To the southeast of the modern park boundary, Ross and other members of the company constructed Fort Okanogan in 1811, as a base from which to operate during the early period of the Pacific Northwest fur trade. Fort Okanogan was the first American settlement in present-day Washington State, well north of the route followed by members of the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1804\u20131806, and also north of Fort Vancouver, on the Columbia River. Fort Okanogan was later owned by the North West Company, and then the Hudson's Bay Company, both of which were British-owned.\nBoth Native American and white trappers conducted fur transactions at the trading post, which was staffed by representatives of the fur trading company. During one season, Ross traded 1,500 beaver pelts. In 1814, Ross became the first known white explorer to explore the valleys and high passes of the North Cascades, but he was less interested in exploration than discovering a route that would easily connect the fur trading posts of interior Washington with Puget Sound to the west. Ross was accompanied by three Indians, one of whom was a guide who led the party to a high pass in the North Cascades. Ross and the guide may have traveled as far west as the Skagit River, but failed to get to Puget Sound. Fur trading slowed considerably as demand for furs decreased in the 1840s, but a few residents continued to augment their income by trapping for furs in the area until 1968, when the park was established, rendering the activity illegal.\nAside from isolated trappers, the North Cascades saw no further explorations until the 1850s. In 1853, US Army Captain George B. McClellan led a party that explored the area for potential locations for the construction of a railroad through the region. McClellan determined the mountains were too numerous and precipitous, and that any railway would have to be constructed well to the south.\nAmerican and British disputes in the region centered on the fur trade, and the Treaty of 1818 allowed for joint administration of Oregon Country, as it was referred to in the United States\u00a0\u2013 the British Empire referred to the region as the Columbia District. The treaty set the international border at the 49th parallel, but this was disputed west of the Rocky Mountains, since the rival fur trading outfits had their own ideas about where the border should be. The Oregon boundary dispute between Britain and the United States eventually led to the Oregon Treaty of 1846, and the 49th parallel forms both the current international border as well as the northern limit of the current park. During the late 1850s, members of the US North West Boundary Commission explored the border region, attempting to identify which mountains, rivers and lakes belonged to which country. One party of the commission was led by explorer Henry Custer, and they explored the northern district of the park, publishing their report in the 1860s. Custer's party crossed Whatcom Pass in 1858, and were the first whites to see Challenger Glacier and Hozomeen Mountain. Impressed with the scenic grandeur of the region, Custer stated, \"must be seen, it cannot be described\".\nIn 1882, US Army Lieutenant Henry Hubbard Pierce led a government-sponsored exploration that traversed the western boundary of the southern section of the current park, in search of transportation routes and natural resources. As with the party led by McClellan in the 1850s, Pierce failed to find a suitable route for a railway, and only marginally suitable routes for roads. However, the expedition discovered gold in a quartz vein on the slopes of Eldorado Peak. Further expeditions by the military in 1883 and 1887 also determined that the mountains were virtually impenetrable. Explorers continued to seek out routes for wagon roads and railways and by the end of the 19th century, much of the park had been explored, but it was not until 1972 that the North Cascades Highway bisected the mountains.\nMining, logging and dam construction.\nMineral prospectors entered the North Cascades region, and by the 1850s were doing placer mining along the banks of the Skagit River in search of gold. In the 1870s, placer mining also commenced along Ruby Creek, and hundreds of miners came to the region even though it was difficult to access. Most mining activity along Ruby Creek had ended by the 1880s, but was soon replaced by hard rock mining for silver and other minerals. This second period of mining lasted from the 1890s to the 1940s, but was only marginally more lucrative. Miners were hampered by short working seasons, difficult terrain, low quantities of ore and a lack of financial investment. Miners built some of the first trails and roads into portions of the backcountry, some of which involved intricate engineering, including bridges over the numerous streams and dynamiting rock ledges above steep gorges during trail construction. One mining company built a series of flumes, the longest of which was over , to transport lumber and to supply water for use in their hydraulic mining operation.\nDuring the late 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, larger operations mined silver and lead in addition to gold, mostly with little or no profitability. The demand for metals was not constant, and so prices tended to fluctuate too greatly for mining to be viable. Once the region became a national park, some privately owned mining inholdings remained. One such inholding, the Thunder Creek mine, was still privately owned as of 1997.\nUnlike in many other regions of the Pacific Northwest, logging had little impact on the future park. The ruggedness of the terrain and the existence of more economically viable timber resources that were closer to transportation routes largely dissuaded the timber industry from logging in the area. In 1897 the Washington Forest Reserve was set aside, preserving the forestland that would later become the park. By 1905, the management of the reserve was transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Agriculture. The Forest Service was subsequently created to administer these forest reserves nationwide, which were redesignated as National Forests. Though the Department of Agriculture allowed commercial enterprises to log the forest with a permit, most of the timber taken from the region was used only locally for the construction of cabins and similar small-scale enterprises. Logging expanded when the Skagit River Hydroelectric Project was commenced by the public utility Seattle City Light in the 1920s. Almost of timber would have been left underwater by the completion of the Ross Dam. A contract to extract the timber was awarded in 1945 and the project was completed in 1958. None of the dams or areas that were extensively logged are within the current boundaries of the national park, but they are in the adjoining Ross Lake National Recreation Area.\nEstablishing the National Park.\nThe establishment of Yellowstone National Park in 1872, and Yosemite National Park in 1890, led preservationists to argue for similar protections for other areas. Even before the North Cascade region was designated as a Forest Reserve in 1897, activists argued the region should be afforded the greater protection accorded from a National Park designation. Washingtonians submitted a petition in 1892 to establish a national park to the north of Lake Chelan, as many who had visited the region believed it to have scenery \"greater than Switzerland's\". Further efforts took place in 1906, and again between 1916 and 1921, when artist Julian Itter and the Mazamas Alpine Club lobbied for a bill to designate \"Mount Baker National Park\". The proposals failed to gain approval from the US Congress and were shelved for decades.\nNot all locals supported the idea of a national park, as they felt that such a designation would damage the economics of the region. The Forest Service was also not in favor of park designation, as they would have to relinquish control over the land to the Park Service, which was not uncommon, since many parks being established were originally managed by the Forest Service. In an effort to appease their detractors, the Forest Service designated Primitive Areas which would provide increased protection to some of the most pristine regions they managed.\nBy the mid-1930s, forester Bob Marshall argued that the region should be set aside as wilderness. Rival interests continued to argue over whether the lands should remain under the management of the Forest Service or the National Park Service, but by the 1960s the environmentalist argument advocating for a national park prevailed. President John F. Kennedy directed the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior to fund a joint study into a possible national park in the North Cascades region, which was completed in January 1966 and submitted to Congress. The size of the national park was subject to debate locally and in Congress, as well as its effect on the local logging industry. The North Cascades National Park Act designated the region as a national park on October 2, 1968, and the National Park Service commenced direct management on January 1, 1969. The North Cascades National Park Act also designated Ross Lake and Lake Chelan National Recreation Areas. Redwood National Park in California was also signed into existence on the same day as the North Cascades. By 1988, much of Bob Marshall's original plan to set aside the future park as wilderness was achieved when almost all of North Cascades National Park was designated as the Stephen Mather Wilderness.\nPark management.\nNorth Cascades National Park is managed by the National Park Service, and the park headquarters is in Sedro-Woolley, Washington. The park consists of a northern and a southern district or unit. These are separated by Ross Lake National Recreation Area. The southeast boundary of the southern district abuts Lake Chelan National Recreation Area; the park and two recreation areas are managed as the North Cascades National Park Complex. Most of the park complex was designated as the Stephen Mather Wilderness, preventing further human-induced alterations to 93\u00a0percent of the park. The mandate of the National Park Service is to \"preserve and protect natural and cultural resources\". In keeping with this mandate, hunting is illegal in the park, as is mining, logging, oil and gas extraction, and removal of natural or cultural resources.\nIn 2024, North Cascades National Park recorded 16,485 visitors, while adjoining Ross Lake National Recreation Area reported 971,173 visitors and Lake Chelan National Recreation Area had 30,815 visitors. Peak visitation is between June and September. Ross Lake NRA is easily accessible on State Route 20 (also called the North Cascades Highway), the only road which traverses the park complex; the highway lies entirely within the Ross Lake NRA. Only two primitive roadways enter the actual national park. The North Cascades National Park Complex had an operating base budget of $7,700,000 for fiscal year 2010, augmented by another $3,700,000 of non-base funding (which can fluctuate significantly on an annual basis), and additional funding from revenue generated from concessionaire contracts and user fees. Much of the budget is for staffing, with 83\u00a0percent covering the cost of 81 permanent employees, not all of whom are employed year-round, and the nearly 250 seasonal and term employees who work primarily in the summer months. In 2017, the fiscal year budget was approximately 7.5\u00a0million dollars, and budgets have been stagnant overall for all National Park Service sites for many years.\nAccess.\nAlthough there are some gravel roads open to the public that enter the park, such as the Cascade River Road beginning at Marblemount, and the Thornton Lakes Road near Newhalem, most automobile traffic travels on State Route 20, which passes through the Ross Lake National Recreation Area. The visitor center at Newhalem on the North Cascades Highway is open in the summer. Some of the best views of Mount Shuksan are from the Heather Meadows Visitor Center in Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest well outside of the park. All backcountry access requires a permit, and most are obtained at the Wilderness Information Center near Marblemount. Full accessibility for all is not available in the park, but the adjacent National Recreation Areas have a few trails, and all visitor centers, campgrounds and restrooms are fully accessible.\nThe nearest large town on the west side of the park is Sedro-Woolley, and Winthrop lies to the east. Chelan is located at the southeastern end of Lake Chelan where access to the park from Stehekin serves eastern Washington communities. The closest international airport is Seattle-Tacoma International Airport (Sea-Tac), which is from North Cascades Visitor Center and from Chelan. In Chelan, the \"Lady of the Lake\" is a passenger-only ferry that transports visitors to Stehekin, and the trailheads hikers can use to access the southern end of the park.\nGeography.\nNorth Cascades National Park is located in portions of Whatcom, Skagit, and Chelan counties in the U.S. state of Washington. Bisected by Ross Lake National Recreation Area (NRA), the park consists of two districts; the northern and southern. The northern boundary of the north district is also the international border between the United States and Canada; the latter manages adjoining Chilliwack Lake and Skagit Valley Provincial Park. The entire eastern and southern boundary of the north district is bordered by Ross Lake NRA. The western side of the north district is bordered by Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest, within which lies the Mount Baker and Noisy-Diobsud Wildernesses, both of which border the park. Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest also borders a portion of the southern district of the park, to the southwest. Along the southwest border is Wenatchee National Forest, within which lies the Glacier Peak Wilderness. The southern boundary of the park is shared with Lake Chelan NRA, and a small section of the eastern boundary is shared with the Okanogan\u2013Wenatchee National Forest. The Lake Chelan-Sawtooth Wilderness lies in the Okanogan\u2013Wenatchee National Forest along the southeastern park boundary.\nNorth Cascades National Park has nearly of vertical relief, with the park's highest point atop Goode Mountain, and the western valleys situated at only around above mean sea level, the park has a highly varied ecosystem, including eight life zones. Erosion from water and glacial ice have created some of the steepest mountain ranges in the contiguous US, rising between above their bases. The park is home to over 300 glaciers as well as 300 lakes, and contains the headwaters for some streams that flow into the Skagit River, as well as the Stehekin and Nooksack Rivers. The ruggedness of the terrain was an obstacle to human encroachment and consequently, the park is almost entirely wilderness.\nGeology.\nNorth Cascades National Park was named after the North Cascades mountains, which are a subsection of the Cascade Range that extends from northern California into British Columbia. The North Cascades are the northernmost section of the range and unlike their southern counterparts that consist of Tertiary to Holocene volcanic rocks, the North Cascades are composed primarily of Mesozoic crystalline and metamorphic rocks. Though most rocks in the park are from the more recent Mesozoic, the oldest rocks are 400\u00a0million years old, dating from the Devonian. A complex assemblage of various rock formations have repeatedly been eroded, reburied, subjected to fracturing and heat, creating a geological puzzle that is one of the most complicated and least understood geological records in North America. These forces are ongoing and the region continues to see uplift and faulting.\nEvidence from the fossils and magnetism found in the rocks indicates that the terranes composing the North Cascades drifted thousands of miles north until they impacted the North American Plate 90\u00a0million years ago. The collision between the rocks caused fracturing and folding as well as uplift and the terranes were further fractured into north or south trending faults. The uplifted rocks mostly eroded away; 40\u00a0million years ago the heavier basaltic rocks of the ocean floor started to push the lighter granitic rocks that are the core of the mountains upward, a process that continues. Subjected to intense heat, rocks deep underground near the collision zone became recrystallized into granitic rocks, which comprise the backbone of the highest peaks. Continued uplift and erosion and finally the action of glacial ice on the landscape during the Holocene exposed the rocks visible today.\nMuch harder and more durable than the younger volcanic rocks of the southern Cascades, the North Cascades are consequently more rugged, with steep terrain being the norm due to heavy erosion from water and ice. Continued rising in conjunction with erosion from water and ice has created deep valleys and significant vertical relief that is comparable to much taller mountain ranges.\nMountains.\nThe tallest mountain in North Cascades National Park is Goode Mountain at . It lies in a remote backcountry region of the southern section of the park. Nearby are several other peaks that exceed , including Buckner Mountain () and Mount Logan (). At about , about northeast of Goode Mountain, is Black Peak (). Other prominent peaks in the southern section of the park include Boston Peak (), Eldorado Peak () and Forbidden Peak ().\nThe northern region of the park contains the Picket Range, a subrange of the Skagit Range, which is in turn a subrange of the North Cascades. The Picket Range has numerous spires with ominous names such as Mount Fury, Mount Challenger, Poltergeist Pinnacle, Mount Terror, Ghost Peak and Phantom Peak, all of which exceed . The Picket Range is only long yet contains 21 peaks over . North of the Picket Range and near the border with Canada lie Mount Redoubt (), Mount Spickard () and the spires of the Mox Peaks (). Isolated and dominating the northwestern reaches of the park lies the oft photographed Mount Shuksan (), which towers more than above Baker Lake only to the south.\nWater features.\nMore than 500 lakes and ponds are located within North Cascades National Park. Many of these are devoid of fish, not uncommon in steep terrain where fish may not be able to access high altitude waterways. Around 240 of these lakes exist in the higher elevations and stocking of some of these lakes with fish has been ongoing since the late 19th century. Fishing in these lakes, which, without fish stocking, do not have native fish, is part of the area's economy and tourism. In 2008 an Environmental Impact Statement was produced that examined whether these lakes should continue to be stocked, and if so, what the impact would be on native species such as salamanders and other aquatic life. The North Cascades National Park Service Complex Fish Stocking Act, signed in 2014, directs the NPS to allow stocking of non-reproducing fish in no more than 42 lakes, making it the only national park to continue to stock non-native fish in park lakes. The prior decision not to continue to stock the lakes with fish was part of a larger debate about what \"natural\" means in reference to national parks.\nHundreds of creeks and streams and several rivers originate within the park. The streams at higher elevation are often directly supplied by meltwater from glaciers, and they carry finely ground rock particles commonly referred to as glacial flour. Turning the water a turquoise hue at times, this finely ground powder remains suspended in lakes the creeks flow into, also causing some of them to appear turquoise. Thunder Creek is particularly well known for this attribute, as it is supplied melt water from dozens of glaciers and transports the suspended particles into Diablo Lake.\nThe Skagit River divides the park into the north and south districts; it lies within the Ross Lake NRA and outside of the national park boundaries, but some of the creeks and streams that supply it originate within the national park; the Baker River is the largest of these tributaries. The Skagit River is the largest river that flows into Puget Sound to the west, and the dams located in Ross Lake National Recreation Area and impounding other lakes adjacent to the park supply nearly 90\u00a0percent of the electricity used in Seattle. Other important rivers that originate in the park include the Chilliwack, Nooksack and the Stehekin rivers.\nGlaciers.\nWith approximately 312 glaciers, North Cascades National Park has the most glaciers of any US park outside Alaska, and a third of all the glaciers in the lower 48 states. Counting a few glaciers in the adjoining National Recreation Areas, the North Cascades National Park Complex glaciers covered an expanse totaling as of 2009. Boston Glacier, on the north slope of Boston Peak, is the largest glacier in the park, measured in 1971 to have an area of . Other glaciers that were measured in 1971 to be larger than include East Nooksack and Sulphide Glaciers on Mount Shuksan, McAllister and Inspiration Glaciers on Eldorado Peak, Redoubt Glacier on Mount Redoubt, Neve Glacier on Snowfield Peak, and Challenger Glacier on Mount Challenger.\nThe dense concentration and relative ease of access to the North Cascade glaciers brought about some of the earliest series of scientific studies regarding glaciology in the United States. Beginning in 1955, the University of Washington sponsored Richard C. Hubley to undertake annual aerial photography expeditions designed to capture images of the glaciers and to show any alterations that might be occurring. In 1960, Austin Post expanded the aerial coverage to include other regions and he also used ground-based imagery to augment the research. In 1971, based on the photographs and other data collected since 1955, Post and others wrote a report that documented the number and scale of glaciers in the North Cascades. At the time of Austin Post's inventory, their study concluded that some North Cascades glaciers had experienced a period of minor growth or equilibrium in the mid-20th century, after undergoing decades of retreat. The study concluded that annual glacial melt due to seasonal variations has a significant influence on river levels, accounting for about 30\u00a0percent of the late summer water flow, which directly impacted the supported ecosystems such as salmon fisheries.\nThe National Park Service, United States Geological Survey (USGS) and glaciologists such as Mauri S. Pelto, who has led the North Cascades Glacier Climate Project since 1984, have continued research on North Cascade glaciers. Since 1993, the National Park Service has conducted rigorous studies on four park glaciers: Noisy Creek, Silver, North Klawatti and Sandalee Glaciers. The National Park Service research indicated that these four glaciers experienced rapid decrease in volumes between 1993 and 2011. In 1998, a National Park Service and Portland State University aerial photographic inventory showed a 13\u00a0percent loss in park-wide glacial volume since Austin Post's inventory in 1971. The NPS stated that in the last 150\u00a0years since the end of the Little Ice Age, a period of several centuries in which the earth experienced a cooling phase, glacial ice volumes in the North Cascades have been reduced by 40\u00a0percent. This loss of glacial ice has contributed to decreased melt in the summer. In a paper published in 2016, it was reported that since 1959 the Skagit River watershed has seen a 25\u00a0percent reduction in the summertime streamflow.\nMap.\nGeographical features in the area can be found in this clickable map:\nEcology.\nEight distinctive life zones support thousands of different plant and animal species in the North Cascades National Park ecosystem. With an elevation gain of nearly , the park has one of the largest ranges of biodiversity found in any US national park.\nFlora.\nThe flora in North Cascades National Park is influenced by the great vertical relief, the amount of moisture an area receives, the slope and soil types as well as the fire ecology. This wide array of ecological niches has allowed a great biodiversity to evolve. Few other North American national parks have recorded as many vascular plant species as have been documented in North Cascades National Park. With 1,630 species documented, experts estimate adding non-vascular plants and fungi could more than double the number of known plant species. \nThe park contains an estimated of old-growth forests. As little of the park was previously logged, significant stands of old growth forest can be found in the valleys and lower slopes up to the timberline at . From the lowest valley floors to about , virgin stands of western hemlock, red cedar and Douglas fir are common. These species are heavily dependent on deep soils, and red cedars 1,000 years old and over tall can be found on Big Beaver Creek. These lowest elevation forests can be accessed by trails, such as the Happy Creek Forest Walk off State Route 20, the Shadows of the Sentinels at Baker Lake, Thunder Creek Trail at Diablo Lake and the Horseshoe Bend Trail from State Route 542. In openings in the forest canopy, red alder and bigleaf maple can be found but throughout this dense forest, ferns, shrubs and mosses abound.\nBetween the forest is dominated by the pacific silver fir tree near State Route 20 at Rainy Pass. Also at this elevation, the western hemlock is replaced by the mountain hemlock as a dominant species. At elevations between in the subalpine zone, the forest gives way to meadows dominated by grasses and flowering plants and shrubs. Above lies the alpine zone where few plant species survive aside from some sparse grasses, the occasional shrub and lichens. A warming climate has led to an altitude adjustment for many flora species, with the timberline reaching further up the mountain slopes since the 1960s.\nThe biodiversity of the area is threatened by climate change and invasive exotic plant species. These plants have spread across the park through the inadvertent redistribution from human activities, attaching themselves to cars and hikers. Invasive plants include the diffuse knapweed and reed canary grass. True grass species number nearly 150 in the park; half of those are considered exotic and nonnative to the ecosystem.\nWhitebark pine is native to the park and grows at elevations over in the drier eastern region of the park. Whitebark pine is a stabilizing species for other species of high altitude flora and provides a food source for birds such as the Clark's nutcracker and mammals including red and Douglas squirrels. Scientists believe that increasing temperatures will have a negative impact on the habitat necessary to support whitebark pine, and therefore impact a wide array of other species. White pine blister rust and mountain pine beetles have devastated whitebark pine populations in many regions; as of 2018, \"28\u00a0percent of whitebark pine trees are dead, 30\u00a0percent are infected with blister rust, and 1\u00a0percent have died from mountain pine beetles.\"\nFauna.\nThis park has a diversity of animal species including 75 mammal species. A total of 18 species of carnivores including coyote, bobcat, lynx, cougar, mink, river otter and black bear have been reported within this park. Several species of deer such as the elk and moose, several more species of bovids including the mountain goat and bighorn sheep, and more than two dozen species of rodents like the beaver, hoary marmot and pika are also present. Ten species of bats have been documented. The grey wolf is listed as an endangered species, while the grizzly bear is listed as threatened. North Cascade National Park has management plans in place to return grizzly bears to the park but not wolves, as the latter is seen as likely to reestablish themselves naturally over time.\nThe park is a prime habitat for grizzly bear, but the species was extirpated from the region by 1860. Only two grizzly bear sightings occurred in the decade before 2015, and these were outside the park boundary in Canada. In 1991, a decision was reached by the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee, a US Government land management agency committee, to make efforts to restore self-sustaining populations of grizzlies in the North Cascades region, which included the national park and surrounding national forests. In 1997, the North Cascades region was added to the National Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan; by 2017, the environmental impact statement for grizzly bear restoration was still in the public comment stage. Various action plans had been proposed to reestablish a self-sustaining population of 200 grizzlies in the region.\nWolverines are one of the rarest and most elusive mammals in North America. They are seldom sighted in the park, both due to the limited numbers of the species and the habitats they prefer, which are snowy high-altitude regions far removed from human encroachment. Approximately nine wolverines were captured in the national forest east of the park and fitted with transmitters that were tracked by Argos satellite telemetry. Four of the wolverines frequented the southern sections of North Cascades National Park, and of those, two spent the majority of their time there; researchers were unable to determine if these study animals had reproduced in the park. A warming climate may impact any wolverine recovery efforts implemented due to the loss of snow cover this species needs to reproduce. Research indicates that wolverines den in deep snow at least deep that lasts well into May, and as climate warms, these regions are becoming less common, especially in the lower 48 states.\nMore than 200 species of birds that pass through or use the park as a breeding ground have been recorded. These bird species include both golden and bald eagle as well as northern spotted owl, harlequin duck, Clark's nutcracker, trumpeter swan and seasonal appearances of western tanager, Cassin's vireo, pine grosbeak, woodpeckers such as the pileated woodpecker and primarily ground-dwelling birds such as the sooty grouse. The peregrine falcon is the only species found in the park that is federally designated as an endangered species, while the marbled murrelet and northern spotted owl are listed as threatened.\nThere are at least 28 species of fish documented, including all five species of Pacific salmon: pink, chinook (king), sockeye, coho and chum. Various trout species including rainbow, lake and brook trout can be found as can the largemouth bass and longnose dace.\nSeven species of reptiles and about a dozen species of amphibians have been documented. Reptiles such as the northern alligator lizard and the common garter snake and amphibians such as the western toad, Pacific giant salamander and rough-skinned newt reside in the park.\nMore than 500 species of insects have been recorded, including at least two dozen species of butterflies. Around 250 species of aquatic invertebrates can be found in the parks waterways.\nFire.\nIn North Cascades National Park, fire was used by Native Americans in the region near present-day Ross Lake to clear out brush, to ease foot travel, and possibly to flush animals out of the foliage. Evidence found in the patterns of tree growth as well as from tree ring analysis indicates human-caused fires were created for many hundreds of years. Similar evidence is found in the Stehekin Valley, where both smaller low intensity fires and larger fires are suggested by the growth patterns and burn scars in tree ring evidence. The low-intensity fires that were likely human induced were only found in the easternmost regions of the park. In the subalpine regions such as the Thunder Creek area, the studies concluded fire occurs at frequencies ranging from 30\u00a0years to 400\u00a0years.\nAcross the entire North Cascades National Park Service Complex, between 1973 and 2003, there were 113 human-caused fires that burned , and 264 lightning-caused fires that burned . During this period, the largest fire consumed , mostly in Ross Lake National Recreation Area. North Cascades National Park Complex has three different zones with varying ratings for fire potential and severity. The park is managed as the Skagit Fire Management Unit (FMU) and has a low frequency of large natural fires that occur on average only every 50 to 400\u00a0years.\nNorth Cascades National Park has a condition type that shows \"...natural (historical) range of variability of vegetation characteristics; fuel composition; fire frequency, severity and pattern; and other associated disturbances.\" This condition type, in keeping with the wilderness designation applied to most of the park, equates to a natural \"let it burn\" policy overall, so long as people and historical property are not threatened and the fire was lightning-caused. As part of the management plan, the few historic structures in the FMU are prioritized for fire protection including backcountry shelters like Beaver Pass Shelter, and fire lookouts such as Sourdough, Desolation and Copper lookout, all of which are on the National Register of Historic Places.\nClimate.\nThe Cascade Range is tall enough to cause a significant rain shadow on the eastern slopes. Annually, the western portions of the park receive more precipitation than the eastern sections. The higher precipitation in the west also correlates to increased snowfall with more measured in the west than the east annually. On the western slopes, snowfall depths range from in lower altitudes annually, increasing to at elevations between above sea level. Snow depths peak in early March and range from depending on altitude.\nSnow covers the ground more than six months out of the year, even at lower elevations, and State Route 20, the only highway through the park, is generally closed from late November until late April. Numerous avalanche chutes, as many as traverse any state or federal highway, and including some over long, cross the highway and make snow removal during that period infeasible. Heavy snow and frequent avalanches are common, especially on the western slopes, from autumn to spring. The high elevation trails are generally open by mid-summer and the majority of tourism is between mid-June and late September. The east side of the park is generally warmer and drier, especially in the summer with highs reaching . Since the 1950s, there has been a five-degree Fahrenheit (2.77\u00b0C) mean winter minimum temperature increase at elevations above . This has led to a reduced winter snowpack as the mean winter freezing level is now higher.\nOverall the relative proximity of the Pacific Ocean moderates temperatures in the park, and it is warmer than other regions at a similar latitude farther inland.\nAir and water quality.\nWhile North Cascades National Park is in a remote region for the most part, the prevailing westerly winds bring various pollutants into the park from the industrialized region around Puget Sound and the Fraser River Valley of British Columbia. These pollutants deposit onto plants and glaciers and are then carried by rainfall or ice melt and dispersed into rivers and lakes. The industrialized regions around Puget Sound and the Fraser River Valley have had a more noticeable negative impact on water and air quality than at Mount Rainier National Park well to the south due to the prevailing winds. Lakes at higher elevations show a higher level of acidity due to this phenomenon; the current and long-term impact on the ecosystem of the park has not yet been fully assessed.\nMercury and toxins from pesticides have been detected in the park, as has ozone; these have not been demonstrated to be at sufficient concentrations to greatly impact the ecosystem. Sulfur, nitrogen dioxide and ozone from factories and automobile emissions as well as increased dust and fine particulates from sources such as farming and construction are dispersed into the atmosphere, reducing long-range visibility. Visibilities of up to have been reduced to less than on the worst days due to the increased haze.\nClimate change will impact the temperatures of high altitude lakes and streams, which in turn will have an effect on the fish that can thrive in these waters. Retreating glaciers reduce the amount of glacial ice melt available in warmer months that kept streams and lakes cold, even in late summer.\nAttractions.\nNorth Cascades National Park is approximately northeast of Seattle. Nearly all of the national park is protected as the Stephen Mather Wilderness and it is \"one of the premier wilderness parks\" in the lower-48 states\". Unlike some national parks, there is no entrance fee at North Cascades, and hiking trailheads accessed by vehicle do not require a parking pass; trailheads on some national forest properties adjacent to the park may require a pass. Mount Shuksan, in the northwest corner of the park, is often photographed, and at is the second highest peak in the park.\nCamping, hiking and bicycling.\nHikers and backpackers often visit Cascade Pass in the southwestern section of the southern unit of the park, which was used as a travel route by Native Americans. The pass can be reached by a hiking trail accessed from a parking lot at the end of a gravel road that starts at Marblemount. There are nearly of hiking trails in the park. Hikers can also access two National Scenic Trails including of the Pacific Crest Trail in the southern unit of the park and of the Pacific Northwest Trail that passes through the northern unit. The north and south Picket Ranges, Mount Triumph, Eldorado Peak and Boston Peak regions are popular backcountry camping zones.\nUnlike most US national parks, there are no places within North Cascades National Park where one can drive to a campground. There are many vehicular access camp grounds in Ross Lake National Recreation Area and in surrounding national forests. All overnight camping is considered backcountry camping and camping areas are protected to prevent overcrowding. Backcountry camping spots can be reserved in early spring only; walk-up permits can be obtained at the Wilderness Information Center near Marblemount. Since the vast majority of the park is designated wilderness, the goal is to ensure all hikers and backcountry travelers enjoy the opportunities for solitude. Group sizes are limited to parties of less than a dozen on what are known as trail and camping corridors, and in more remote areas off trails, groups larger than six are not permitted.\nBicycles are allowed in the park but only on the same roads that vehicles are allowed on. No mountain bike access is allowed on hiking trails. Hiker/biker camping is available at Newhalem Campground, Colonial Creek, and near Stehekin.\nMountaineering.\nHigh quality climbing routes on the numerous cliffs, ice and other challenges make the park a favorite destination for many mountaineering enthusiasts. While some peaks and cliffs can be accessed fairly easily, the most remote ones entail a multi-day excursion, challenging for even experienced mountaineers. The park has banned the installation of any new fixed anchors such as pitons, and only removable anchors such as chocks and cams are permitted. This clean climbing has been implemented to help protect the resource, since fixed point anchors deface the rock and are considered intrusive.\nWith much of the rock climbing and mountaineering done above the tree line, the effort to protect alpine ecosystems is of paramount importance. Leave No Trace policies are strictly enforced and encouraged, such as camping only on bare rock, using only a camp stove, storing food safely where animals cannot get to it, and carrying out or properly burying human waste as necessary. Mountaineering in the North Cascades was first popularized by Fred Beckey; at age 15 he was the first to reach the summit of Sinister Peak in 1938, in 1939 he was the first atop Mount Despair, and the following year he was the first to climb Forbidden Peak. Beckey was the first to summit at least two dozen peaks in the North Cascades, and his exhaustive three-volume Cascade Alpine Guide books, first published in the early 1970s, have been called the \"Beckey Bible\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45016", "revid": "12396222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45016", "title": "World Esperanto Youth Organization", "text": "The World Esperanto Youth Organization (, TEJO) is an organization dedicated to supporting young Esperanto speakers around the world and promote the use of Esperanto. TEJO was founded in 1938 as the \"Tutmonda Junular-Organizo\" (World Youth Organization) and took its current name in 1952. In 1956, TEJO became the youth section of the Universal Esperanto Association (UEA). In 1971, the finances and administration of TEJO were fully integrated into those of UEA.\nActivities.\nTEJO is an organization for young Esperanto speakers. TEJO has individual members as well as member organizations. There are 42 member organizations, as well as 13 national organizations that TEJO has contact with but that are not members.\nTEJO organizes an International Youth Congress (\"Internacia Junulara Kongreso\") each year in a different location around the world. During the IJK there are concerts, presentations, excursions, and recreation, usually one week long and attended by a few hundred young people from several countries.\nTEJO also publishes the Pasporta Servo, which is an international hospitality network of Esperanto speakers that accept Esperanto-speaking guests.\nTEJO publishes \"Kontakto\", a magazine aimed at beginners and youth.\nTEJO organizes several youth seminars each year. These seminars bring together an international group of young people to discuss a current issue. Past seminars have focused on human rights, globalization, language problems on minority languages, intercomprehension and the Internet. The seminars last for one week."}
{"id": "45018", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45018", "title": "1250s BC", "text": "The 1250s BC is a decade that lasted from 1259 BC to 1250 BC.\nDecade\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45022", "revid": "36518604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45022", "title": "Natural transformation", "text": "Central object of study in category theoryIn category theory, a branch of mathematics, a natural transformation provides a way of transforming one functor into another while respecting the internal structure (i.e., the composition of morphisms) of the categories involved. Hence, a natural transformation can be considered to be a \"morphism of functors\". Informally, the notion of a natural transformation states that a particular map between functors can be done consistently over an entire category.\nIndeed, this intuition can be formalized to define so-called functor categories. Natural transformations are, after categories and functors, one of the most fundamental notions of category theory and consequently appear in the majority of its applications.\nDefinition.\nIf formula_1 and formula_2 are functors between the categories formula_3 and formula_4 (both from formula_3 to formula_6), then a natural transformation formula_7 from formula_1 to formula_2 is a family of morphisms formula_10, where formula_11. The morphism formula_12 is called \"the component of formula_7 at formula_14\" or \"the formula_14 component of formula_16.\" The components of formula_7 are such that for every morphism formula_18 in formula_3 we have formula_20\nThis equation can be conveniently expressed by the following commutative diagram:\nIf both formula_1 and formula_2 are contravariant, the vertical arrows in the right diagram are reversed. If formula_7 is a natural transformation from formula_1 to formula_25, we also write formula_26 or formula_27. This is also expressed by saying the family of morphisms formula_28 is natural in formula_14.\nIf, for every object formula_30 in formula_31, the morphism formula_12 is an isomorphism in formula_4, then formula_7 is said to be a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;natural isomorphism (or sometimes natural equivalence or isomorphism of functors). Two functors formula_35 and formula_2 are called \"naturally isomorphic\" or simply \"isomorphic\" if there exists a natural isomorphism from formula_1 to formula_2 in their category.\nAn infranatural transformation formula_27 is simply the family of components for all formula_30 in formula_3. Thus, a natural transformation is a special case of an infranatural transformation for which formula_42 for every morphism formula_43 in formula_3. The naturalizer of formula_45, formula_46, is the largest subcategory formula_47 (S for subcategory), we will denote as formula_48 (L for largest), containing all the objects of formula_3, on which formula_7 restricts to a natural transformation. Alternatively put, formula_46 is the largest formula_47, dubbed formula_48, such that formula_54 or formula_55 for every object formula_56 in formula_57.\nExamples.\nOpposite group.\nStatements such as\n\"Every group is naturally isomorphic to its opposite group\"\nabound in modern mathematics. We will now give the precise meaning of this statement as well as its proof. Consider the category \nformula_58 of all groups with group homomorphisms as morphisms. If formula_59 is a group, we define \nits opposite group formula_60 as follows: formula_61 is the same set as formula_62, and the operation formula_63 is defined \nby formula_64. All multiplications in formula_65 are thus \"turned around\". Forming the opposite group becomes \na (covariant) functor from formula_58 to formula_58 if we define formula_68 for any group homomorphism formula_69. Note that \nformula_70 is indeed a group homomorphism from formula_61 to formula_72:\nformula_73\nThe content of the above statement is:\n\"The identity functor formula_74 is naturally isomorphic to the opposite functor formula_75\"\nTo prove this, we need to provide isomorphisms formula_76 for every group formula_62, such that the above diagram commutes. \nSet formula_78.\nThe formulas formula_79 and formula_80\nshow that formula_81 is a group homomorphism with inverse formula_82. To prove the naturality, we start with a group homomorphism \nformula_83 and show formula_84, i.e. \nformula_85 for all formula_86 in formula_62. This is true since \nformula_68 and every group homomorphism has the property formula_89.\nModules.\nLet formula_90 be an formula_91-module homomorphism of right modules. For every left module formula_92 there is a natural map formula_93, form a natural transformation formula_94. For every right module formula_92 there is a natural map formula_96 defined by formula_97, form a natural transformation formula_98.\nAbelianization.\nGiven a group formula_62, we can define its abelianization formula_100 formula_101, where formula_101 denotes the commutator subgroup of formula_62. Let formula_104 denote the projection map onto the cosets of formula_101. This homomorphism is \"natural in \nformula_62\", i.e., it defines a natural transformation, which we now check. Let formula_107 be a group. For any homomorphism formula_83, we have that \nformula_101 is contained in the kernel of formula_110, because any homomorphism into an abelian group kills the commutator subgroup. Then \nformula_110 factors through formula_112 as formula_113 for the unique homomorphism \nformula_114. This makes formula_115 a functor and \nformula_116 a natural transformation, but not a natural isomorphism, from the identity functor to formula_117.\nHurewicz homomorphism.\nFunctors and natural transformations abound in algebraic topology, with the Hurewicz homomorphisms serving as examples. For any pointed topological space formula_118 and positive integer formula_119 there exists a group homomorphism\n formula_120\nfrom the formula_119-th homotopy group of formula_118 to the formula_119-th homology group of formula_56. Both formula_125 and formula_126 are functors from the category Top* of pointed topological spaces to the category Grp of groups, and formula_127 is a natural transformation from formula_125 to formula_126.\nDeterminant.\nGiven commutative rings formula_130 and formula_131 with a ring homomorphism formula_132, the respective groups of invertible formula_133 matrices formula_134 and formula_135 inherit a homomorphism which we denote by formula_136, obtained by applying formula_137 \nto each matrix entry. Similarly, formula_137 restricts to a group homomorphism formula_139, where formula_140 denotes the group of units of formula_130. In fact, formula_142 and formula_143 are functors from the category of commutative rings formula_144 to formula_58. \nThe determinant on the group formula_134, denoted by formula_147, is a group homomorphism \n formula_148\nwhich is natural in formula_130: because the determinant is defined by the same formula for every ring, formula_150 holds. This makes the determinant a natural transformation from formula_142 to formula_143.\nDouble dual of a vector space.\nFor example, if formula_153 is a field, then for every vector space formula_154 over formula_153 we have a \"natural\" injective linear map formula_156 from the vector space into its double dual. These maps are \"natural\" in the following sense: the double dual operation is a functor, and the maps are the components of a natural transformation from the identity functor to the double dual functor.\nFinite calculus.\nFor every abelian group formula_62, the set formula_158 of functions from the integers to the underlying set of formula_62 \nforms an abelian group formula_160 under pointwise addition. (Here formula_161 is the standard forgetful functor formula_162.) \nGiven an formula_163 morphism formula_164, the map formula_165 given by left composing formula_166 with the elements of the former is itself a homomorphism of abelian groups; in this way we \nobtain a functor formula_167. The finite difference operator formula_168 taking each function \nformula_169 to formula_170 is a map from formula_160 to itself, and the collection formula_172 of such maps gives a natural transformation formula_173.\nTensor-hom adjunction.\nConsider the category formula_163 of abelian groups and group homomorphisms. For all abelian groups formula_56, formula_176 and formula_177 we have a group isomorphism\n formula_178.\nThese isomorphisms are \"natural\" in the sense that they define a natural transformation between the two involved functors formula_179.\nThis is formally the tensor-hom adjunction, and is an archetypal example of a pair of adjoint functors. Natural transformations arise frequently in conjunction with adjoint functors, and indeed, adjoint functors are defined by a certain natural isomorphism. Additionally, every pair of adjoint functors comes equipped with two natural transformations (generally not isomorphisms) called the \"unit\" and \"counit\".\nUnnatural isomorphism.\nThe notion of a natural transformation is categorical, and states (informally) that a particular map between functors can be done consistently over an entire category. Informally, a particular map (esp. an isomorphism) between individual objects (not entire categories) is referred to as a \"natural isomorphism\", meaning implicitly that it is actually defined on the entire category, and defines a natural transformation of functors; formalizing this intuition was a motivating factor in the development of category theory. \nConversely, a particular map between particular objects may be called an unnatural isomorphism (or \"an isomorphism that is not natural\") if the map cannot be extended to a natural transformation on the entire category. Given an object formula_182 a functor formula_62 (taking for simplicity the first functor to be the identity) and an isomorphism formula_184 proof of unnaturality is most easily shown by giving an automorphism formula_185 that does not commute with this isomorphism (so formula_186). More strongly, if one wishes to prove that formula_56 and formula_188 are not naturally isomorphic, without reference to a particular isomorphism, this requires showing that for \"any\" isomorphism formula_16, there is some formula_190 with which it does not commute; in some cases a single automorphism formula_190 works for all candidate isomorphisms formula_16 while in other cases one must show how to construct a different formula_193 for each isomorphism. The maps of the category play a crucial role \u2013 any infranatural transform is natural if the only maps are the identity map, for instance.\nThis is similar (but more categorical) to concepts in group theory or module theory, where a given decomposition of an object into a direct sum is \"not natural\", or rather \"not unique\", as automorphisms exist that do not preserve the direct sum decomposition \u2013 see for example.\nSome authors distinguish notationally, using formula_194 for a natural isomorphism and formula_195 for an unnatural isomorphism, reserving formula_196 for equality (usually equality of maps).\nExample: fundamental group of torus.\nAs an example of the distinction between the functorial statement and individual objects, consider homotopy groups of a product space, specifically the fundamental group of the torus.\nThe homotopy groups of a product space are naturally the product of the homotopy groups of the components, formula_197 with the isomorphism given by projection onto the two factors, fundamentally because maps into a product space are exactly products of maps into the components \u2013 this is a functorial statement.\nHowever, the torus (which is abstractly a product of two circles) has fundamental group isomorphic to formula_198, but the splitting formula_199 is not natural. Note the use of formula_195, formula_194, and formula_202:\nformula_203\nThis abstract isomorphism with a product is not natural, as some isomorphisms of formula_204 do not preserve the product: the self-homeomorphism of formula_204 (thought of as the quotient space formula_206) given by formula_207 (geometrically a Dehn twist about one of the generating curves) acts as this matrix on formula_208 (it's in the general linear group formula_209 of invertible integer matrices), which does not preserve the decomposition as a product because it is not diagonal. However, if one is given the torus as a product formula_210 \u2013 equivalently, given a decomposition of the space \u2013 then the splitting of the group follows from the general statement earlier. In categorical terms, the relevant category (preserving the structure of a product space) is \"maps of product spaces, namely a pair of maps between the respective components\".\nNaturality is a categorical notion, and requires being very precise about exactly what data is given \u2013 the torus as a space that happens to be a product (in the category of spaces and continuous maps) is different from the torus presented as a product (in the category of products of two spaces and continuous maps between the respective components).\nExample: dual of a finite-dimensional vector space.\nEvery finite-dimensional vector space is isomorphic to its dual space, but there may be many different isomorphisms between the two spaces. There is in general no natural isomorphism between a finite-dimensional vector space and its dual space. However, related categories (with additional structure and restrictions on the maps) do have a natural isomorphism, as described below.\nThe dual space of a finite-dimensional vector space is again a finite-dimensional vector space of the same dimension, and these are thus isomorphic, since dimension is the only invariant of finite-dimensional vector spaces over a given field. However, in the absence of additional constraints (such as a requirement that maps preserve the chosen basis), the map from a space to its dual is not unique, and thus such an isomorphism requires a choice, and is \"not natural\". On the category of finite-dimensional vector spaces and linear maps, one can define an infranatural isomorphism from vector spaces to their dual by choosing an isomorphism for each space (say, by choosing a basis for every vector space and taking the corresponding isomorphism), but this will not define a natural transformation. Intuitively this is because it required a choice, rigorously because \"any\" such choice of isomorphisms will not commute with, say, the zero map; see for detailed discussion.\nStarting from finite-dimensional vector spaces (as objects) and the identity and dual functors, one can define a natural isomorphism, but this requires first adding additional structure, then restricting the maps from \"all linear maps\" to \"linear maps that respect this structure\". Explicitly, for each vector space, require that it comes with the data of an isomorphism to its dual, formula_211. In other words, take as objects vector spaces with a nondegenerate bilinear form formula_212. This defines an infranatural isomorphism (isomorphism for each object). One then restricts the maps to only those maps formula_213 that commute with the isomorphisms: formula_214 or in other words, preserve the bilinear form: formula_215. (These maps define the \"naturalizer\" of the isomorphisms.) The resulting category, with objects finite-dimensional vector spaces with a nondegenerate bilinear form, and maps linear transforms that respect the bilinear form, by construction has a natural isomorphism from the identity to the dual (each space has an isomorphism to its dual, and the maps in the category are required to commute). Viewed in this light, this construction (add transforms for each object, restrict maps to commute with these) is completely general, and does not depend on any particular properties of vector spaces.\nIn this category (finite-dimensional vector spaces with a nondegenerate bilinear form, maps linear transforms that respect the bilinear form), the dual of a map between vector spaces can be identified as a transpose. Often for reasons of geometric interest this is specialized to a subcategory, by requiring that the nondegenerate bilinear forms have additional properties, such as being symmetric (orthogonal matrices), symmetric and positive definite (inner product space), symmetric sesquilinear (Hermitian spaces), skew-symmetric and totally isotropic (symplectic vector space), etc. \u2013 in all these categories a vector space is naturally identified with its dual, by the nondegenerate bilinear form.\nOperations with natural transformations.\nVertical composition.\nIf formula_216 and formula_217 are natural transformations between functors formula_218, then we can compose them to get a natural transformation formula_219. \nThis is done component-wise:\nformula_220. \nThis vertical composition of natural transformations is associative and has an identity, and allows one to consider the collection of all functors formula_221 itself as a category (see below under Functor categories).\nThe identity natural transformation formula_222 on functor formula_223 has components formula_224.\nFor formula_216, formula_226.\nHorizontal composition.\nIf formula_227 is a natural transformation between functors formula_228 and formula_229 is a natural transformation between functors formula_230, then the composition of functors allows a composition of natural transformations formula_231 with components\nformula_232.\nBy using whiskering (see below), we can write\nformula_233,\nhence\nformula_234.\nThis horizontal composition of natural transformations is also associative with identity.\nThis identity is the identity natural transformation on the identity functor, i.e., the natural transformation that associate to each object its identity morphism: for object formula_56 in category formula_236, formula_237.\nFor formula_227 with formula_228, formula_240.\nAs identity functors formula_241 and formula_242 are functors, the identity for horizontal composition is also the identity for vertical composition, but not vice versa.\nWhiskering.\nWhiskering is an external binary operation between a functor and a natural transformation.\nIf formula_227 is a natural transformation between functors formula_228, and formula_245 is another functor, then we can form the natural transformation formula_246 by defining\nformula_247.\nIf on the other hand formula_248 is a functor, the natural transformation formula_249 is defined by\nformula_250.\nIt's also a horizontal composition where one of the natural transformations is the identity natural transformation:\nformula_251 and formula_252.\nNote that formula_253 (resp. formula_254) is generally not the left (resp. right) identity of horizontal composition formula_143 (formula_256 and formula_257 in general), except if formula_107 (resp. formula_153) is the identity functor of the category formula_260 (resp. formula_236).\nInterchange law.\nThe two operations are related by an identity which exchanges vertical composition with horizontal composition: if we have four natural transformations formula_262 as shown on the image to the right, then the following identity holds:\nformula_263.\nVertical and horizontal compositions are also linked through identity natural transformations:\nfor formula_264 and formula_265, formula_266.\nAs whiskering is horizontal composition with an identity, the interchange law gives immediately the compact formulas of horizontal composition of formula_227 and formula_229 without having to analyze components and the commutative diagram:\nformula_269.\nFunctor categories.\nIf formula_236 is any category and formula_271 is a small category, we can form the functor category formula_272 having as objects all functors from formula_271 to formula_236 and as morphisms the natural transformations between those functors. This forms a category since for any functor formula_223 there is an identity natural transformation formula_276 (which assigns to every object formula_56 the identity morphism on formula_278) and the composition of two natural transformations (the \"vertical composition\" above) is again a natural transformation.\nThe isomorphisms in formula_272 are precisely the natural isomorphisms. That is, a natural transformation formula_280 is a natural isomorphism if and only if there exists a natural transformation formula_281 such that formula_282 and formula_283.\nThe functor category formula_272 is especially useful if formula_271 arises from a directed graph. For instance, if formula_271 is the category of the directed graph \u2022 \u2192 \u2022, then formula_272 has as objects the morphisms of formula_236, and a morphism between formula_289 and formula_290 in formula_272 is a pair of morphisms formula_292 and formula_293 in formula_236 such that the \"square commutes\", i.e. formula_295.\nMore generally, one can build the 2-category formula_296 whose\nThe horizontal and vertical compositions are the compositions between natural transformations described previously. A functor category formula_272 is then simply a hom-category in this category (smallness issues aside).\nMore examples.\nEvery limit and colimit provides an example for a simple natural transformation, as a cone amounts to a natural transformation with the diagonal functor as domain. Indeed, if limits and colimits are defined directly in terms of their universal property, they are universal morphisms in a functor category.\nYoneda lemma.\nIf formula_56 is an object of a locally small category formula_236, then the assignment formula_308 defines a covariant functor formula_309. This functor is called \"representable\" (more generally, a representable functor is any functor naturally isomorphic to this functor for an appropriate choice of formula_56). The natural transformations from a representable functor to an arbitrary functor formula_311 are completely known and easy to describe; this is the content of the Yoneda lemma.\nHistorical notes.\nSaunders Mac Lane, one of the founders of category theory, is said to have remarked, \"I didn't invent categories to study functors; I invented them to study natural transformations.\" Just as the study of groups is not complete without a study of homomorphisms, so the study of categories is not complete without the study of functors. The reason for Mac Lane's comment is that the study of functors is itself not complete without the study of natural transformations.\nThe context of Mac Lane's remark was the axiomatic theory of homology. Different ways of constructing homology could be shown to coincide: for example in the case of a simplicial complex the groups defined directly would be isomorphic to those of the singular theory. What cannot easily be expressed without the language of natural transformations is how homology groups are compatible with morphisms between objects, and how two equivalent homology theories not only have the same homology groups, but also the same morphisms between those groups.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45024", "revid": "93887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45024", "title": "Un*x", "text": ""}
{"id": "45028", "revid": "43519741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45028", "title": "Mongol invasion of Kievan Rus'", "text": "13th-century Mongol military campaign in Europe\nThe Mongol Empire invaded and conquered much of the Kievan Rus' in the mid-13th century, sacking numerous cities such as Ryazan, Yaroslavl, Pereyaslavl and Vladimir, including the largest: Kiev (50,000 inhabitants) and Chernigov (30,000 inhabitants). The siege of Kiev in 1240 by the Mongols is generally held to mark the end of the state of Kievan Rus', which had already been undergoing fragmentation. Many other principalities and urban centres in the northwest and southwest escaped complete destruction or suffered little to no damage from the Mongol invasion, including Galicia\u2013Volhynia, Pskov, Smolensk, Polotsk, Vitebsk, and probably Rostov and Uglich.\nThe Mongol campaign was heralded by the Battle of the Kalka River on 31 May 1223, which resulted in a Mongol victory over the forces of several principalities as well as the remnants of the Cumans under K\u00f6ten. The Mongols retreated, having gathered their intelligence, which was the purpose of the reconnaissance-in-force. A full-scale invasion by Batu Khan followed, with most of Kievan Rus' overrun in 1236\u20131238. The Mongols captured Kiev in 1240 and moved west into Hungary and Poland. The heavy losses suffered by the Mongols during the invasion period significantly weakened subsequent campaigns, preventing the ruin of the Holy Roman Empire and more western countries.\nThe invasion was ended by the Mongol succession process upon the death of \u00d6gedei Khan. Even those principalities who avoided physical conquest were eventually forced to accept Mongol supremacy in the form of tribute \u2013 as in the case of Galicia\u2013Volhynia, Polotsk and Novgorod \u2013 if not outright vassalage, of the Golden Horde, until well into the 14th century. Although a Russian army defeated the Mongols at the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380, the Mongolian demands of tribute from Russian princes continued until about 1480. \nBackground.\nThe Mongols had plans to conquer Eastern Europe long before Batu's campaign in 1237. In 1207, Genghis Khan sent his eldest son Jochi to conquer the tribes north of the Selenga River and in the Irtysh valley, which included the lands of Eastern Europe in the Jochi Ulus. However, these plans were not implemented during the lifetime of Genghis Khan. In 1222\u20131224, Subutai and Jebe conducted a campaign with a 30,000-strong army in Transcaucasia and Southeastern Europe, which is traditionally considered as a reconnaissance. However, the \"Secret History of the Mongols\" and Rashid ad-Din state that the purpose of this campaign was to be supported by the forces of Jochi and included Cumania, Alania, Hungary, and Rus', including Kiev. The kurultai of 1235, after which the invasion of Europe took place, repeated these goals. The campaign of Subutai and his 30,000 troops to the Caspian steppes was a new step in the conquest of Eastern Europe, and it began in the late 1220s. In 1235, a kurultai was convened to outline a general Mongol campaign, in which the troops of other uluses (clans or tribes) were to take part. \u00d6gedei sent Batu, B\u00fcri, M\u00f6ngke, and other princes on a campaign to help Subutai, and each Chingizid led with him one or more tumens of the army. The Mongols prepared for an offensive in 1235 and early 1236 and subjugated the Bashkir tribes, who were forced to allocate several detachments to the Mongol army. The Mongols concentrated in the Caspian steppes in the autumn of 1236 under the general leadership of Jochi's son Batu. The first blow of the united Chingizid army targeted Volga Bulgaria.\nThe princes of Galicia\u2013Volhynia and Chernigov initially defeated the Mongols at Battle of Oleshia in May 1223. The Mongols (called \"Tartars\" in contemporary accounts) then defeated a united Rus' army led by Mstislav the Bold and Mstislav Romanovich the Old on 31 May 1223 at the Battle of the Kalka River. In 1237, they besieged and took Ryazan, and Vladimir fell in early February 1238. \"For our sins\", wrote a chronicler, \"unknown nations arrived. No one knew their origin or whence they came, or what religion they practiced. That is known only to God, and perhaps to wise men learned in books\". Although this defeat left the principalities at the mercy of invaders, the Mongol or Tartar forces retreated and did not reappear for another 13 years, during which time the princes of Rus' went on quarreling and fighting as before, until they were startled by a new and much more formidable invading force. In \"The Secret History of the Mongols\", the only reference to this early battle is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then he (Genghis Khan) sent Dorbei the Fierce off against the city of Merv, and on to conquer the people between Iraq and the Indus. He sent Subetei the Brave off to war in the North where he defeated eleven kingdoms and tribes, crossing the Volga and Ural Rivers, finally going to war with Kiev.\nThe \"Secret History of the Mongols\" reports that \u00d6gedei sent Batu, B\u00fcri, M\u00f6ngke, and many other princes on a campaign to help Subutai, who was facing strong resistance from various peoples and cities under Genghis Khan's command. The list of Genghisides who participated in the campaign is present in works such as \"The Secret Legend\", \"Yuan Shi\", and \"Jami' al-tawarikh.\" In addition to Batu, other Chingizids who participated in the campaign included the sons of Jochi, Orda, Shiban, Tangkut and Berke; the son of Chagatai, Baidar, and the grandson of Chagatai, B\u00fcri; the sons of \u00d6gedei, G\u00fcy\u00fck and Kadan; the sons of Tolui, M\u00f6ngke and Ariq B\u00f6ke; the son of Genghis Khan, K\u00fclkhan, and the grandson of Genghis Khan's brother, Argasun. In 1235 and early 1236, the assembled army prepared for an offensive, and then subjugated the Bashkir tribes, who were forced to allocate several detachments to the Mongol army. In the autumn of 1236, the Mongols concentrated on the Caspian steppes under the general leadership of Jochi's son Batu.\nThe first blow of the united Chingizid army struck Volga Bulgaria. Until the mid-1220s, Volga Bulgaria was in constant conflict with the Vladimir-Suzdal and Murom-Ryazan principalities. The parties undertook campaigns, there were constant skirmishes, the victories in which were mainly won by Rus' troops. However, with the appearance of the Mongols at their borders, the Bulgars began to seek peace, which was met with understanding and support from the Rus' princes. Over the course of several years, the Rus' and the Bulgars normalized relations, which allowed the Volga Bulgaria to devote all its forces to preparing to repel the alleged Mongol invasion. Ramparts were created in the forests that covered the main cities, the cities themselves were fortified, and the garrisons increased. However, all these measures were in vain \u2013 the Volga Bulgaria was defeated with lightning speed and completely conquered by the spring of 1237.\nThe next stage of the campaign was an attack on the Cumans and Alans. From the Lower Volga region, the Mongols moved on a broad front to the mouth of the Don, where another concentration of troops took place. The offensive continued until the autumn of 1237 and ended with the defeat of the Cumans and Alans. After that, the Mongols conquered the lands of the Burtas, Mokshas, and Erzyas. The grandiose Zolotarevskoe battle took place near a strategic crossing over the Sura. According to the historian Vadim Kargalov (1932-2009), the fighting in 1237 was undertaken to create a springboard for a campaign against Rus'. By the end of the year, a huge Mongol army and detachments allied with Batu stood on the borders of Russia. Preparations for a winter campaign against Northeastern Rus' by the Mongols began in the autumn of 1237. Their troops were grouped near Voronezh, and detachments that had previously fought with the Cumans and Alans were drawn there.\nInvasion of Batu Khan.\nThe vast Mongolian Great Khanate army of around 120,000 mounted archers, commanded by Batu Khan and Subutai, crossed the Volga River and invaded Volga Bulgaria in late 1236. It took them only a month to extinguish the resistance of the Volga Bulgars, the Cumans-Kipchaks and the Alans.\nImmediately prior to the invasion, Friar Julian from Hungary had travelled to the eastern border of the Rus' and learned of the Mongol army, which was waiting for the onset of winter so that they could cross the frozen rivers and swamps. In his letter to the Pope's legate in Hungary, Julian described meeting Mongol messengers who had been detained by Yuri II of Vladimir on their way to Hungary. Yuri II gave their letter to Julian.\nIn November 1237, Batu Khan sent his envoys to the court of Yuri II and demanded his submission. According to the Laurentian Codex, the Mongols actually came seeking peace, but Yuri II treated them with disdain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As they did before, the messengers came, those evil bloodsuckers, saying: \"Make peace with us\". He did not want that, as the prophet said: \"Glorious war is better than disgraceful peace\". These godless men with their deceitful peace will cause great dismay to our lands, as they have already done much evil here.\u2014\u200a\nRegardless of what impression Yuri II may have given the Mongol delegations, of which several are mentioned, he did his best to avoid direct conflict. He sent them away with what were described as gifts, which were essentially tribute or bribes to keep them from invading.\nThe Mongols attacked from several directions. One section attacked Suzdal, one from the Volga, and another from the south towards Ryazan. According to Rashid al-Din Hamadani, the Siege of Ryazan was conducted by Batu, Orda, G\u00fcy\u00fck, M\u00f6ngke, Kulkan, Kadan, and B\u00fcri. The city fell after three days. Alarmed by the news, Yuri II sent his sons to detain the invaders, but they were defeated and ran for their lives. Yuri II also fled Vladimir for Yaroslavl.\nHaving burnt down Kolomna and Moscow, the horde laid siege to Vladimir on 4 February 1238. Three days later, the capital of Vladimir-Suzdal was taken and burnt to the ground. The royal family perished in the fire, while the grand prince retreated northward. Crossing the Volga, Vladimir mustered a new army, which was encircled and totally annihilated by the Mongols in the Battle of the Sit River on 4 March.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And the Tartars took the town [of Ryazan] on December 21... They likewise killed the [Prince] and Knyaginya, and men, women and children, monks, nuns and priests, some by fire, some by the sword and violated nuns, priests' wives, good women and girls in the presence of their mothers and sisters.\u2014\u200a\nThereupon Batu Khan divided his army into smaller units, which ransacked fourteen cities of northeastern Rus': Rostov, Uglich, Yaroslavl, Kostroma, Kashin, Ksnyatin, Gorodets, Galich, Pereslavl-Zalessky, Yuryev-Polsky, Dmitrov, Volokolamsk, Tver, and Torzhok. Chinese siege engines were used by the Mongols under Tolui to raze the walls of many cities. The most difficult to take was the small town of Kozelsk, whose boy-prince Vasily, son of Titus Mstislavich, and inhabitants resisted the Mongols for seven weeks, killing 4,000. As the story goes, at the news of the Mongol approach, the whole town of Kitezh with all its inhabitants was submerged into a lake, where, as legend has it, it may be seen to this day. Major principalities and urban centres which escaped destruction or suffered little to no damage from the Mongol invasion included Novgorod, Pskov, Smolensk, Polotsk, Vitebsk, and probably Rostov and Uglich. The Mongols planned to advance on Novgorod, but the principality was spared the fate of its brethren by the decision to preemptively surrender. In mid-1238, Batu Khan devastated the Crimea and pacified Mordovia. In the winter of 1239, he sacked Chernigov and Pereyaslavl.\nWhile Kiev and its grand prince was still formally acknowledged as senior amongst the principalities of Rus', frequent internecine dynastic feuding among rival claimants had left the city weakened. Indeed, by the time Kiev fell to the Mongols, the head of the city's defenses owed allegiance to Prince Daniel of the Principality of Galicia\u2013Volhynia. Prince Daniel had taken Kiev under his protection the previous year by arrangement with Prince Michael of Kiev, who fled after originally resisting the Mongols, then losing to them his main stronghold, Chernigov.\nThe Mongols approach on Kiev in November 1240 apparently made a grim impression upon its defenders. The chronicler wrote, \"And nothing could be heard above the squeaking of his carts, the bawling of his [Batu\u2019s] innumerable camels, and the neighing of his herds of horses, and the Land of Rus\u2019 was full of enemies.\" After many days of siege, the horde stormed Kiev in December 1240. The city was ransacked and pillaged immensely, although the building of St. Sophia Cathedral survived intact. Historian Serhii Plokhy relates the description of one Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, an ambassador of Pope Innocent IV who passed through Kiev six years later: \"When we were journeying through that land, we came across countless skulls and bones of dead men lying about on the ground\".\nBatu Khan's forces went on to ravage much of Galicia\u2013Volhynia, despite Daniel's fierce resistance. However, Batu Khan failed to capture Kremenets, Danilov and Kholm, which he was forced to bypass after unsuccessful sieges. The Tartars then resolved to \"reach the ultimate sea\", where they could proceed no further and invaded Hungary (under Batu Khan) and Poland (under Baidar and Kaidu). Batu Khan captured Pest, and then on Christmas Day 1241, Esztergom.\nThe principalities became part of the Jochid appanage ruled by Batu. Batu sited a semi-nomadic capital, called Sarai or Sarai Batu (Batu's Palaces), on the lower Volga. The Jochid appanage came to be known as the Golden Horde.\nLegacy.\nCarpine's account.\nThe \"Ystoria Mongalorum\", written by Italian diplomat Giovanni da Pian del Carpine () in Latin just after he visited Kiev in 1246, contains a brief passage mentioning the siege of Kiev that happened several years earlier. Although frequently cited by earlier historians, the accuracy of this account has been questioned, especially because the passage from the first redaction of Carpini's manuscript copies was substantially expanded in the second redaction, which breaks the narrative of the first, and partially contradicts it.\nWhile the first redaction text states that the Mongols \"put the inhabitants to death\", suggesting that the entire population was killed and there were no survivors, this is contradicted by the second-redaction statement that \"the inhabitants are kept in complete servitude\", meaning that at least some had to be left alive to be \"kept in complete servitude\". The added text thus seems likely to be an inauthentic interpolation. Questions have also been raised as to whether Carpini really \"was describing Kiev or some other town he was told was Kiev\", as there are no other extant descriptions of what Kiev looked like at the time, and Carpini does not mention any landmarks such as Saint Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv that would make this identification unambiguous.\nImpact on development.\nThe influence of the Mongol invasion on the territories was uneven. Colin McEvedy estimates the population dropped from 7.5 million prior to the invasion to seven million afterwards. Centres such as Kiev took centuries to rebuild and recover from the devastation of the initial attack. The Novgorod Republic continued to prosper, and a new entity, the Principality of Moscow, began to flourish under the Mongols.\nMoscow's eventual dominance in northeastern Rus' was in large part attributable to the Mongols. Moscow drew people and wealth, developed trade links, and established an autocratic political system which exerted a powerful influence on Russian society. After the prince of Tver led an uprising in 1327, the rival prince Ivan I of Moscow joined the Mongols in crushing Tver and devastating its lands. By doing so, he eliminated his rival, allowed the Russian Orthodox Church to move its headquarters to Moscow, and was granted the title of Grand Prince by the Mongols.\nAs such, the Muscovite prince became the chief intermediary between the Mongol overlords and the Russian princes, which paid further dividends for Moscow's rulers. In the 14th century, the Muscovite princes began \"gathering Russian lands\" to increase its population and wealth. While the Mongols often raided other territories, they tended to respect the lands controlled by their principal collaborator. This, in turn, attracted nobles and their servants who sought to settle in the relatively secure and peaceful lands of Moscow. Although a Russian army defeated the Golden Horde at the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380, the Mongol domination of Russian-inhabited territories, with the requisite demands of tribute, continued until the Great Stand on the Ugra River in 1480.\nDecline of cities.\nThe invasion had significant consequences on the population. Many cities and fortified points were wiped out, with only a fraction surviving. The once flourishing cities of Kiev, Novgorod, and Vladimir suffered a sharp decline, with their populations shrinking to a fraction of what they were before the invasion. For example, Kiev, which had around 50,000 people, had only about 200 houses left after the invasion, according to the papal legate Giovanni da Pian del Carpine.\nThe decline of cities was also accompanied by a decline in culture, crafts, and trade. The pre-Mongol period was considered the heyday of culture, crafts, and trade in ancient Rus', but after the invasion, many cities fell into decay, and stone construction was halted for a long time. Economic ties between cities and surrounding villages were severed, and it took more than 100 years for Russian cities to recover from the invasion of Batu Khan and its consequences.\nThe destruction of cities and the decline in culture and economy had long-term consequences for Russia. The country was left behind in terms of economic development. The Mongol-Tatar invasion also had a significant impact on Russia's political development, as it paved the way for the emergence of the centralized Moscow state, which gradually absorbed other principalities and became the dominant power in Russia. Overall, the invasion of Batu Khan had a profound and lasting impact on the history of Russia.\nEconomic setbacks.\nStone construction in Russian cities practically ceased for several decades. The production of complex crafts, such as glass jewelry, Cloisonn\u00e9 enamel, niello, granulation, and polychrome glazed ceramics stopped. As a result, the Russian handicraft industry regressed several centuries, while the guild industry in the West progressed to the era of primitive accumulation. The Russian handicraft industry had to reacquire the gains that had been made before the invasion.\nPopulation migration.\nAs a result of the invasion many people were forced to flee in front of the advancing tumens of Batu, and in northeastern Rus', residents of the Vladimir-Suzdal and Ryazan principalities sought refuge in more northern lands beyond the Volga. Others fled to sparsely populated areas, taking refuge in dense forests. However, after the departure of the Mongol-Tatars, most of them returned to their former places of residence.\nIn fact, just a year after the fall of the Vladimir-Suzdal principality, the number of returnees was so great that Prince Yaroslav Yaroslavich was able to gather a large army among them for a campaign against the Lithuanians. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of South Russia's principalities, such as Kiev, Pereyaslav, and Chernigov, fled to northeastern Russia immediately after the invasion.\nHowever, this was not the end of population migrations. Vladimir, Suzdal, Pereslavl-Zalessky, and other cities of northeastern Rus' were repeatedly targeted by Mongol-Tatar campaigns in the second half of the 13th century. As a result, many of their inhabitants gradually moved either to the vicinity of Moscow and Tver, or to the north in regions such as Yaroslavl, Galich, Veliky, Ustyug, and more.\nInfluence on society.\nHistorians have debated the long-term influence of Mongol rule on society. The Mongols have been blamed for the destruction of Kievan Rus' and the breakup of a \"Russian\" nationality into three components, and the introduction of the concept of \"oriental despotism\" into Russia. Such fears also manifested into the Yellow Peril inside Imperial Russia. \nHowever, most historians agree that Kievan Rus' was not a homogenous entity in a political, cultural, or ethnic sense, and that the invasions only accelerated the period of feudal fragmentation that had begun prior to the invasions. Historians also credit the Mongol regime with an important role in the development of Muscovy as a state. Under Mongol occupation, for example, Muscovy developed its \"mestnichestvo\" hierarchy, postal road network (based on Mongolian \"ortoo\" system, known in Russian as \"yam\", hence the terms \"yamshchik\", \"Yamskoy Prikaz\", etc.), census, fiscal system and military organization.\nThe period of Mongol rule over the former Rus' polities included significant cultural and interpersonal contacts between the Slavic and Mongolian ruling classes. By 1450, the Tatar language had become fashionable in the court of the Grand Prince of Moscow, Vasily II, who was accused of excessive love of the Tatars and their speech, and many Russian noblemen adopted Tatar surnames (for example, a member of the Veliamanov family adopted the Turkic name \"Aksak\" and his descendants were the Aksakovs).\nMany Russian boyar (noble) families traced their descent from the Mongols or Tatars, including Veliaminov-Zernov, Godunov, Arseniev, Bakhmetev, Bulgakov (descendants of Bulgak) and Chaadaev (descendants of Genghis Khan's son Chagatai Khan). In a survey of Russian noble families of the 17th century, over 15% of the Russian noble families had Tatar or Oriental origins.\nThe Mongols brought about changes in the economic power of states and overall trade. In the religious sphere, St. Paphnutius of Borovsk was the grandson of a Mongol baskak, or tax collector, while a nephew of Khan Bergai of the Golden Horde converted to Christianity and became known as the monk St. Peter Tsarevich of the Horde.\nIn the judicial sphere, under Mongol influence capital punishment, which during the times of Kievan Rus' had only been applied to slaves, became widespread, and the use of torture became a regular part of criminal procedure. Specific punishments introduced in Moscow included beheading for alleged traitors and branding of thieves (with execution for a third arrest).\nDonald Ostrowski argues that Muscovy's adoption of Mongol institutions and practices may demonstrate the pragmatism of the Muscovite leaders, which enabled them to eventually \"triumph over their competitors in northeastern Rus'\".\nHistoriography.\nAccording to Charles J. Halperin (2011), Fomenko and Nosovskii's popular pseudohistorical \"Novaia khronologiia\" (New Chronology), which received some attention in the early 1980s, arose out of \"the dilemma of the Mongol conquest in Russian historiography\": embarrassment among defensive Russian nationalists who object to \"Russophobic\" arguments that Russia acquired \"barbarian\" customs, institutions, and culture from uncivilized nomads. \nAmerican Cold War analysts, also linked the Soviet government's autocratic rule to Tatar influences during its history, and biographies of Russian leaders often stressed their possible Asiatic ancestries. They maintained that Asiatic influences rendered the Russians untrustworthy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45032", "revid": "39724154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45032", "title": "Dordogne", "text": "Department of France in Nouvelle-Aquitaine\nDordogne ( , ; ; ) is a large rural department in southwest France, with its prefecture in P\u00e9rigueux. Located in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region roughly half-way between the Loire Valley and the Pyrenees, it is named after the river Dordogne, which runs through it. It corresponds roughly to the ancient county of P\u00e9rigord. In January 2023, Dordogne had a population of 412,807.\nHistory.\nThe county of P\u00e9rigord dates back to when the area was inhabited by ancient celtic Gaulish tribes. It was originally home to four tribes, and since \"four tribes\" in the Gaulish language is \"Petrocore\", the area eventually became known as the county of Le P\u00e9rigord. Its inhabitants became known as the P\u00e9rigordins (or P\u00e9rigourdins), and there are four P\u00e9rigords in the Dordogne.\nThe Petrocores took part in the resistance against the Roman occupation of Gaul. Concentrated in a few major sites are the vestiges of the Gallo-Roman period \u2013 the gigantic ruined tower and arenas in P\u00e9rigueux (formerly Vesone), the P\u00e9rigord museum's archaeological collections, villa remains in Montcaret, and the Roman tower of La Rigale Castle in Villetoureix. The earliest \"cluzeaux\" (artificial caves either above or below ground) can be found throughout the Dordogne. These subterranean refuges and lookout huts were large enough to shelter entire local populations. According to Julius Caesar, the Gauls took refuge in these caves during the resistance.\nAfter Guienne province was transferred to the English Crown under the Plantagenets following the remarriage of Eleanor of Aquitaine in 1152, Perigord was transferred to English suzerainty. Being situated at the boundaries of influence of the monarchies of France and England, it oscillated between the two dynasties for more than three hundred years of struggle until the end of the Hundred Years' War in 1453. The county was torn apart, which modeled its physiognomy.\nDuring the calmer periods of the late 15th and early 16th centuries, the Castillon plain on the banks of the Dordogne saw developments in urban architecture. Fine Gothic and Renaissance residences were constructed in P\u00e9rigueux, Bergerac, and Sarlat. In the countryside, the nobility erected the majority of more than 1200 chateaux, manors and country houses. In the second half of the 16th century, however, as war waged in the region, attacks, pillaging, and fires of the Wars of Religion reached a pinnacle of violence, which was partly focused on P\u00e9rigord. At the time, Bergerac was one of the most powerful Huguenot strongholds, along with La Rochelle. Following these wars, P\u00e9rigord, fief of Henry of Navarre, was to return to the Crown for good and would continue to suffer from the various political changes of the French nation, from the Revolution to the dark days of the French Resistance.\nAssociated with the region are several important literary figures: Arnaut Daniel, Bertran de Born, Michel de Montaigne, \u00c9tienne de La Bo\u00e9tie, Brant\u00f4me, F\u00e9nelon, Maine de Biran, Eugene Le Roy, and Andr\u00e9 Maurois; as well as Talleyrand, Saint-Exup\u00e9ry and Biron.\nIn addition to its castles, chateaux, churches, bastides, and cave fortresses, the P\u00e9rigord region has preserved a number of ancient villages which retain their market halls, dovecotes, bories (stone huts), and abbeys. Saint-L\u00e9on-sur-V\u00e9z\u00e8re, Connezac, Saint-Jean-de-C\u00f4le, La Roque-Gageac, and many others contain important and visually interesting architectural examples. The old quarters of P\u00e9rigueux or Bergerac have been restored and developed into pedestrian areas. A number of small towns, such as Brant\u00f4me, Issigeac, Eymet and Mareuil, have withstood the changes of modern times. A special mention should be made in this respect to Sarlat and its Black P\u00e9rigord area.\nDordogne is one of the original 83 departments created on 4 March 1790 during the French Revolution. It was created from the former province of P\u00e9rigord, the county of P\u00e9rigord. Its borders continued to change over subsequent decades.\nIn 1793 the communes of Boisseuilh, Coubjours, G\u00e9nis, Payzac, Saint-Cyr-les-Champagnes, Saint-Mesmin, Salagnac, Savignac, Saint-Tri\u00e9 and Teillots were transferred from Corr\u00e8ze to Dordogne.\nIn 1794 Dordogne ceded Cavarc to Lot-et-Garonne. Later in 1794 (albeit during the subsequent year under the Republican Calendar in use at the time), Dordogne gained Parcoul from Charente-Inf\u00e9rieure.\nFollowing the restoration, in 1819, the commune of Bonrepos was suppressed and merged with the adjacent commune of Souillac in Lot.\nIn 1870 the region was witness to the tragic Hautefaye incident, which occurred shortly after France's declaration of war against Prussia. A young aristocrat named Alain de Mon\u00e9ys was brutally tortured and then burned alive, by a crowd of between 300 and 800 people on 16 August in a public square in the village of Hautefaye in the north-west region of the department. Details of the incident are gruesome, but remain unclear: the leading participants appear to have been drunk. Additionally, since the incident occurred prior to the introduction of mass education, most of the witnesses would have been unable (and possibly unwilling) to write down what they had seen. But at some stage the victim died, and following a trial four individuals identified as culpable were in turn condemned to die by guillotine. The sentence was carried out in the same public square on 13 February 1871.\nIt was suggested that the victim had reported some (bad) news regarding the ongoing war in a way that implied support for the enemy, although subsequently it became clear that his patriotic credentials were beyond reproach. It was also suggested that the mob had been antagonized when he called out, \"Vive la R\u00e9publique!\" (Long live the republic) at a time when the patriotic villagers valued the imperial regime, which Parisian revolutionaries were in the process of destroying. This incident has been studied by historian Alain Corbin, among others.\nGeography.\nThe department is part of the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine and is surrounded by the six d\u00e9partements of Haute-Vienne, Corr\u00e8ze, Lot, Lot-et-Garonne, Gironde, Charente-Maritime, and Charente. Dordogne is the third-largest department of metropolitan France, as well as the largest landlocked department in the country. In total area, it is larger than Cyprus and smaller than Cape Verde.\nPrincipal towns.\nThe most populous commune is P\u00e9rigueux, the prefecture. As of 2019 there are nine communes with more than 5,000 inhabitants:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population peaked at 505,789 in 1851 according to that year's census. After that the population declined to 373,000 by 1975. This reflected the long term population decline observed in many of the rural departments resulting from changes in agriculture and the lure of higher industrial wages available in more urbanized regions. Between 1975 and 2010, the population increased again, reaching 415,000.\nDordogne has a British immigrant community. The region has between 5,000 and 10,000 British residents and 800 British entrepreneurs, drawn by the French lifestyle, warm climate, and lower cost of living. The village of Eymet is at the heart of the trend, with 200 British families among 2,600 inhabitants.\nPolitics.\nThe President of the Departmental Council is Germinal Peiro of the Socialist Party.\nTourism.\nThere are more than 1,500 castles in Dordogne, making it \"The Other Chateau Country\", including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe famous caves of Lascaux have been closed to the public, but a replica of Lascaux II is open to visitors and is a major tourist attraction. P\u00e9rigueux has important Roman ruins, including an arena which is still visible inside a public park located near the town centre.\nDordogne is particularly popular with Britons as well as people from a variety of other countries, as a location for second homes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45033", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45033", "title": "Straw man proposal", "text": "Business term\nA straw-man proposal (alternatively straw-dog or straw-person) is a brainstormed simple draft proposal intended to generate discussion of its disadvantages and to spur the generation of new and better proposals. The term is considered American business jargon, but it is also encountered in engineering office culture.\nOften, a straw man document will be prepared by one or two people prior to kicking off a larger project. In this way, the team can jump start their discussions with a document that is likely to contain many, but not all, of the key aspects to be discussed. As the document is revised, it may be given other edition names such as the more solid-sounding \"stone-man\", \"iron-man\", and so on.\nOrigins.\nThe name refers to the concept of a straw man, a constructed human figure stuffed with straw.\nThe expression was already in use in the United States Department of Defense circa 1975 in their Large Organization Model Building paradigm (LOMB) and was apparently in use with this meaning (initial proposal) in the United States Air Force before that. The succession of names comes from the requirements document for the programming language Ada. In the High Order Language Working Group (HOLWG) the process to define Ada generated requirements documents sporting different names, representing the various stages of development of the Ada language, as described in 1993 by Col William Whitaker in an article \"ACM SIGPLAN Notices\". They are:\nOther references include \"The Ada Environment\", LTC Rodney A. Edge, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, DC 20307, Thomas A. Marciniak, M.D., National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20205 \nSoftware development.\nIn software development, a crude plan or document may serve as the strawman or starting point in the evolution of a project. The strawman is not expected to be the last word; it is refined until a final model or document is obtained that resolves all issues concerning the scope and nature of the project. In this context, a strawman can take the form of an outline, a set of charts, a presentation, or a paper.\nThe \u2018Straw Man\u2019 also fits in neatly with the concept of iterative design, repeating and re-drafting to improve an initial concept or design. If anything is built, often, it may not end up in the final product. It might be that the decision is to not continue at all, in which case, the \u2018Straw Man\u2019 approach may have saved a lot of wasted work in the long run. Or, the final approach may be very different from the first model. Either way, the \u2018Straw Man\u2019 will have proven its worth by having re-directed the approach before any significant work is undertaken.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45035", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45035", "title": "Likelihood-ratio test", "text": "Statistical test that compares goodness of fit\nIn statistics, the likelihood-ratio test is a hypothesis test that involves comparing the goodness of fit of two competing statistical models, typically one found by maximization over the entire parameter space and another found after imposing some constraint, based on the ratio of their likelihoods. If the more constrained model (i.e., the null hypothesis) is supported by the observed data, the two likelihoods should not differ by more than sampling error. Thus the likelihood-ratio test tests whether this ratio is significantly different from one, or equivalently whether its natural logarithm is significantly different from zero.\nThe likelihood-ratio test, also known as Wilks test, is the oldest of the three classical approaches to hypothesis testing, together with the Lagrange multiplier test and the Wald test. In fact, the latter two can be conceptualized as approximations to the likelihood-ratio test, and are asymptotically equivalent. In the case of comparing two models each of which has no unknown parameters, use of the likelihood-ratio test can be justified by the Neyman\u2013Pearson lemma. The lemma demonstrates that the test has the highest power among all competitors.\nDefinition.\nGeneral.\nSuppose that we have a statistical model with parameter space formula_1. A null hypothesis is often stated by saying that the parameter formula_2 lies in a specified subset formula_3 of formula_1. The alternative hypothesis is thus that formula_2 lies in the complement of formula_3, i.e. in formula_7, which is denoted by formula_8. The likelihood ratio test statistic for the null hypothesis formula_9 is given by:\nformula_10\nwhere the quantity inside the brackets is called the likelihood ratio. Here, the formula_11 notation refers to the supremum. As all likelihoods are positive, and as the constrained maximum cannot exceed the unconstrained maximum, the likelihood ratio is bounded between zero and one.\nOften the likelihood-ratio test statistic is expressed as a difference between the log-likelihoods\nformula_12\nwhere \nformula_13\nis the logarithm of the maximized likelihood function formula_14, and formula_15 is the maximal value in the special case that the null hypothesis is true (but not necessarily a value that maximizes formula_14 for the sampled data) and\nformula_17\ndenote the respective arguments of the maxima and the allowed ranges they're embedded in. Multiplying by \u22122 ensures mathematically that (by Wilks' theorem) formula_18 converges asymptotically to being \u03c7\u00b2-distributed if the null hypothesis happens to be true. The finite-sample distributions of likelihood-ratio statistics are generally unknown.\nThe likelihood-ratio test requires that the models be nested \u2013 i.e. the more complex model can be transformed into the simpler model by imposing constraints on the former's parameters. Many common test statistics are tests for nested models and can be phrased as log-likelihood ratios or approximations thereof: e.g. the \"Z\"-test, the \"F\"-test, the \"G\"-test, and Pearson's chi-squared test; for an illustration with the one-sample \"t\"-test, see below.\nIf the models are not nested, then instead of the likelihood-ratio test, there is a generalization of the test that can usually be used: for details, see \"relative likelihood\".\nCase of simple hypotheses.\nA simple-vs.-simple hypothesis test has completely specified models under both the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis, which for convenience are written in terms of fixed values of a notional parameter formula_2:\nformula_20\nIn this case, under either hypothesis, the distribution of the data is fully specified: there are no unknown parameters to estimate. For this case, a variant of the likelihood-ratio test is available:\nformula_21\nSome older references may use the reciprocal of the function above as the definition. Thus, the likelihood ratio is small if the alternative model is better than the null model.\nThe likelihood-ratio test provides the decision rule as follows:\nThe values formula_22 and formula_23 are usually chosen to obtain a specified significance level formula_24, via the relation\nformula_25\nThe Neyman\u2013Pearson lemma states that this likelihood-ratio test is the most powerful among all level formula_24 tests for this case.\nInterpretation.\nThe likelihood ratio is a function of the data formula_27; therefore, it is a statistic, although unusual in that the statistic's value depends on a parameter, formula_2. The likelihood-ratio test rejects the null hypothesis if the value of this statistic is too small. How small is too small depends on the significance level of the test, i.e. on what probability of Type\u00a0I error is considered tolerable (Type\u00a0I errors consist of the rejection of a null hypothesis that is true).\nThe numerator corresponds to the likelihood of an observed outcome under the null hypothesis. The denominator corresponds to the maximum likelihood of an observed outcome, varying parameters over the whole parameter space. The numerator of this ratio is less than the denominator; so, the likelihood ratio is between 0 and 1. Low values of the likelihood ratio mean that the observed result was much less likely to occur under the null hypothesis as compared to the alternative. High values of the statistic mean that the observed outcome was nearly as likely to occur under the null hypothesis as the alternative, and so the null hypothesis cannot be rejected.\nAn example.\nThe following example is adapted and abridged from .\nSuppose that we have a random sample, of size n, from a population that is normally-distributed. Both the mean, \u03bc, and the standard deviation, \u03c3, of the population are unknown. We want to test whether the mean is equal to a given value, \"\u03bc\"0.\nThus, our null hypothesis is \"H\"0:\u00a0 \"\u03bc\" \n \"\u03bc\"0\u00a0 and our alternative hypothesis is \"H\"1:\u00a0 \"\u03bc\" \u2260 \"\u03bc\"0\u00a0. The likelihood function is \nformula_29\nWith some calculation (omitted here), it can then be shown that \nformula_30 \nwhere t is the t-statistic with \"n\"\u2009\u2212\u20091 degrees of freedom. Hence we may use the known exact distribution of \"t\"\"n\"\u22121 to draw inferences.\nAsymptotic distribution: Wilks\u2019 theorem.\nIf the distribution of the likelihood ratio corresponding to a particular null and alternative hypothesis can be explicitly determined then it can directly be used to form decision regions (to sustain or reject the null hypothesis). In most cases, however, the exact distribution of the likelihood ratio corresponding to specific hypotheses is very difficult to determine.\nAssuming \"H\"0 is true, there is a fundamental result by Samuel S. Wilks: As the sample size formula_31 approaches formula_32, and if the null hypothesis lies strictly within the interior of the parameter space, the test statistic formula_18 defined above will be asymptotically chi-squared distributed (formula_34) with degrees of freedom equal to the difference in dimensionality of formula_1 and formula_3. This implies that for a great variety of hypotheses, we can calculate the likelihood ratio formula_37 for the data and then compare the observed formula_18 to the formula_34 value corresponding to a desired statistical significance as an \"approximate\" statistical test. Other extensions exist.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45037", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45037", "title": "Likelihood", "text": ""}
{"id": "45041", "revid": "72", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45041", "title": "Mazury", "text": ""}
{"id": "45043", "revid": "12583600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45043", "title": "PSD", "text": "PSD may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45047", "revid": "1319840539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45047", "title": "The Memory of Earth", "text": "1992 novel by Orson Scott Card\nThe Memory of Earth (1992) is a science fiction novel by American writer Orson Scott Card. It is the first book of the \"Homecoming Saga\", a loose fictionalization of the first half of the first book (1 Nephi) in the Book of Mormon.\nInspiration.\nAs a lifelong member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Card has been influenced by his membership in the church in many of his works including Enders Game and The Tales of Alvin Maker. He was especially influenced by the Book of Mormon in his creative endeavors. Speaking of specific influences in his writing. \"It shows up in my style. Anybody who wonders why practically every sentence begins with \"and,\" \"then,\" \"but\"\u2014you just have to think of the phrase \"And it came to pass,\" and you will understand where that comes from. You see, if a sentence is important and true, I instinctively feel that it must begin with a conjunction.\" As a young writer he was drawn to tell stories from the Book of Mormon in his own works. The Memory of Earth is directly inspired by the Book of Mormon in its plot, themes and message.\nPlot summary.\nHumanity has lived for 40 million years on a planet called Harmony, after leaving an Earth that has been destroyed by human conflict. In order not to repeat the mistakes that led to\nthe destruction of civilization on Earth, a computer, known as the Oversoul, was left as guardian of this planet.\nIts main mission was to prevent humans from developing technologies that could make wars a global affair. For that, humans were genetically modified so they could communicate with the Oversoul. The Oversoul uses this connection to make humans quite easily distracted when thinking about forbidden technologies, leading them to forget that train of thought. However, after this long time the Oversoul is beginning to fail, and it chooses a group of humans to return to Earth in search of the Keeper of Earth, in the hopes it will be able to find a way to maintain power over the people on Harmony.\nTo this end the Oversoul recruits Volemak, father of the protagonist of the story, Nafai. Nafai and Issib, his brother, begin to try and defy the Oversoul's capability to override thought. Through this they learn of the danger that it is in. Nafai begins hearing the Oversoul's voice in his mind. The first book focuses on the family's eventual betrayal, the taking of the Index, and the downfall of the man Gaballufix, who had been planning to ally the city of Basilica, the home of the main characters and the setting of the first half of the book, with a malignant nation.\nNafai, Elemak and Mebbekew, his older half brothers, Issib and his father Volemak are eventually forced to leave the city. They come back to retrieve the Index of the Oversoul, which allows them to communicate with it directly. Because of Nafai's careless blunders and miraculous successes, Elemak, Nafai's oldest brother, begins to hate him, a theme that will play out throughout the rest of the saga.\nCharacters.\nThe characters listed here are those whose primary role is in \"The Memory of Earth.\" For other characters, see Homecoming Saga or individual books.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45048", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45048", "title": "Likelihood density function", "text": ""}
{"id": "45049", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45049", "title": "Italian Radicals (disambiguation)", "text": "The Italian Radicals are a liberal political party in Italy, formed in 2001.\nIn politics, Italian Radicals may also refer to:\nIn architecture and design, Italian Radicals refers also to the Radical movement, 1965\u20131975\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45051", "revid": "12361459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45051", "title": "Shields (Star Trek)", "text": "Fictional technology from the Star Trek universe\nIn the \"Star Trek\" fictional universe, shields refer to a 23rd and 24th century technology that provides starships, space stations, and entire planets with limited protection against damage. They are sometimes referred to as \"deflectors\", \"deflector shields\", or (in \"\") \"screens\". Types of shields include \"navigational deflectors\".\nHistory.\nThe term 'shields' first appears in the ' episode \"Balance of Terror\", in which they were deployed, albeit to little effect, by a Federation outpost under attack from a Romulan Warbird. The first depicted use by a starship was in the \"Star Trek\" episode \"\", in which the USS \"Enterprise\" raises its 'screens' after being attacked by an alien warship although the term 'shields' is not used in this episode. Shields are not mentioned during the earlier seasons of the ' series, starships instead using \"polarized hull plating\" to make their hull more resistant to damage.\nDesign.\nLike most technologies in the \"Star Trek\" fictional universe, the exact operation of shield technology is never precisely described. Characters discuss its existence and manipulation, while only superficially describing its exact physics, which result in a field being projected around a ship or other body, deflecting or dispersing projectiles and energy weapons. Shields are not shown unless struck, and are then often shown briefly for dramatic effect as a translucent bubble of energy.\nShields are said to be made of a screen of gravitons that can deflect beam and projectile weaponry.\nIn \"The Making of Star Trek\", authors Gene Roddenberry and Stephen Whitfield write that shields are force fields similar in nature to the navigational deflector, while \"Mr. Scott's Guide to the Enterprise\" further states that shields on post-refit Constitution-class vessels - of which the USS \"Enterprise\" of \"\" is an example - were generated by the subatomic scan and replication of an alloy known as diburnium-osmium, and then projected as a force field beyond a ship's hull along the shield grid. In \"That Which Survives\", the alloy of diburnium and osmium is stated to be the hardest alloy known to the Federation.\nShields can be weakened by attack, and are often shown to collapse after prolonged bombardment. Shields may be unable to repel certain types of weapons; the phased polaron weapons used by the Dominion - one of the primary antagonists of ' - are initially unhindered by the shields of Starfleet ships.\nThe USS \"Defiant\", introduced in the third season of \"Deep Space Nine\", was said to use ablative armor in addition to shields; this technology also appeared in the alternate time line of the early 25th century shown in the \" series finale \", where it withstood repeated assaults by Borg weaponry and tractor beams.\nAnother type of shield, the \"navigational deflector\" (also known just as the deflector, the deflector array, the deflector dish, the main deflector, the nav deflector, or the parabolic dish), was a force beam generator, usually a dish on the front of a ship, that was primarily used to deflect objects that might collide with the ship specially when traveling using Warp drive when even minute particles could cause serious damage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45053", "revid": "16770941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45053", "title": "Georges Perec", "text": "French novelist, filmmaker, documentalist, and essayist\nGeorges Perec (; 7 March 1936 \u2013 3 March 1982) was a French novelist, filmmaker, documentalist, and essayist. He was a member of the Oulipo group. His father died as a soldier early in the Second World War and his mother was killed in the Holocaust. Many of his works deal with absence, loss, and identity, often through word play.\nEarly life.\nBorn in a working-class district of Paris, Perec was the only son of Icek Judko and Cyrla (Schulewicz) Peretz, Polish Jews who had emigrated to France in the 1920s. He was a distant relative of the Yiddish writer Isaac Leib Peretz. Perec's father, who enlisted in the French Army during World War II, died in 1940 from untreated gunfire or shrapnel wounds, and his mother was killed in the Holocaust, probably in Auschwitz sometime after 1943. Perec was taken into the care of his paternal aunt and uncle in 1942, and in 1945, he was formally adopted by them.\nCareer.\nPerec started writing reviews and essays for \"La Nouvelle Revue fran\u00e7aise\" and \"Les Lettres nouvelles\", prominent literary publications, while studying history and sociology at the Sorbonne. In 1958/59 Perec served in the French army as a paratrooper (); he married Paulette Petras after being discharged. They spent one year (1960/1961) in Sfax, Tunisia, where Paulette worked as a teacher; these experiences are reflected in \", which is about a young Parisian couple who also spend a year in Sfax.\nIn 1961 Perec began working at the Neurophysiological Research Laboratory in the unit's research library funded by the CNRS and attached to the H\u00f4pital Saint-Antoine in Paris as an archivist, a low-paid position which he retained until 1978. A few reviewers have noted that the daily handling of records and varied data may have influenced his literary style. In any case, Perec's work on the reassessment of the academic journals under subscription was influenced by a talk about the handling of scientific information given by Eugene Garfield in Paris, and he was introduced to Marshall McLuhan by Jean Duvignaud. Perec's other major influence was the Oulipo, which he joined in 1967, meeting Raymond Queneau, among others. Perec dedicated his masterpiece, (\") to Queneau, who died before it was published.\nPerec began working on a series of radio plays with his translator Eugen Helmle and the musician Philippe Drogoz in the late 60s; less than a decade later, he was making films. His first cinematic work, based on his novel , was co-directed by Bernard Queysanne, and won the feature-film Prix Jean Vigo in 1974. Perec also created crossword-puzzles for \"Le Point\" from 1976 on.\n\"La Vie mode d'emploi\" (1978) brought Perec some financial and critical success\u2014it won the Prix M\u00e9dicis\u2014and allowed him to turn to writing full-time. He was a writer-in-residence at the University of Queensland in Australia in 1981, during which time he worked on \"53 Jours\" (\"53 Days\"), which remained unfinished. Shortly after his return from Australia, his health deteriorated. A heavy smoker, he was diagnosed with lung cancer. He died the following year in Ivry-sur-Seine at age 45, four days shy of his 46th birthday; his ashes are held at the columbarium of the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery.\nWork.\nMany of Perec's novels and essays abound with experimental word play, lists and attempts at classification, and they are usually tinged with melancholy.\nPerec's first novel \"Les Choses\" (published in English as \"\") (1965) was awarded the Prix Renaudot.\nPerec's most famous novel \"La Vie mode d'emploi\" (\"\") was published in 1978. Its title page describes it as \"novels\", in the plural, the reasons for which become apparent on reading. \"La Vie mode d'emploi\" is a tapestry of interwoven stories and ideas as well as literary and historical allusions, based on the lives of the inhabitants of a fictitious Parisian apartment block. It was written according to a complex plan of writing constraints and is primarily constructed from several elements, each adding a layer of complexity. The 99 chapters of his 600-page novel move like a knight's tour of a chessboard around the room plan of the building, describing the rooms and stairwell and telling the stories of the inhabitants. At the end, it is revealed that the whole book actually takes place in a single moment, with a final twist that is an example of \"cosmic irony\". It was translated into English by David Bellos in 1987.\nPerec is noted for his constrained writing. His 300-page novel \"La disparition\" (1969) is a lipogram, written with natural sentence structure and correct grammar, but using only words that do not contain the letter \"e\". It has been translated into English by Gilbert Adair under the title \"A Void\" (1994). His novella \"Les revenentes\" (1972) is a complementary univocalic piece in which the letter \"e\" is the only vowel used. This constraint affects even the title, which would conventionally be spelt \"Revenantes\". An English translation by Ian Monk was published in 1996 as \"The Exeter Text: Jewels, Secrets, Sex\" in the collection \"Three\". It has been remarked by Jacques Roubaud that these two novels draw words from two disjoint sets of the French language, and that a third novel would be possible, made from the words not used so far (those containing both \"e\" and a vowel other than \"e\").\n\"W ou le souvenir d'enfance\", (\"W, or the Memory of Childhood\", 1975) is a semi-autobiographical work that is hard to classify. Two alternating narratives make up the volume: The first is a fictional outline of a remote island country called \"W\", which at first appears to be a utopian society modelled on the Olympic ideal but is gradually exposed as a horrifying, totalitarian prison much like a concentration camp. The second is a description of Perec's childhood during and after World War II. Both narratives converge towards the end, highlighting the common theme of the Holocaust.\n\"Cantatrix sopranica L. Scientific Papers\" is a spoof scientific paper detailing experiments on the \"yelling reaction\" provoked in sopranos by pelting them with rotten tomatoes. All references in the paper are multi-lingual puns and jokes; e.g., \"(Karybb &amp; Szyla, 1973)\".\nDavid Bellos, who has translated several of Perec's works, wrote an extensive biography of Perec entitled \"\", which won the Acad\u00e9mie Goncourt's \"bourse\" for biography in 1994.\nThe Association Georges Perec has extensive archives on the author in Paris.\nIn 1992 Perec's initially rejected novel \"Gaspard pas mort\" (\"Gaspard not dead\"), believed to be lost, was found by David Bellos amongst papers in the house of Perec's friend Alain Gu\u00e9rin. The novel was reworked several times and retitled \"Le Condotti\u00e8re\" and published in 2012; its English translation by Bellos followed in 2014 as \"Portrait of a Man\" after the 1475 painting of that name by Antonello da Messina. The initial title borrows the name Gaspard from the Paul Verlaine poem \"Gaspar Hauser Chante\" (inspired by Kaspar Hauser, from the 1881 collection \"Sagesse\") and characters named \"Gaspard\" appear in both \"W, or the Memory of Childhood\" and \"\", while in \"MICRO-TRADUCTIONS, 15 variations discr\u00e8tes sur un po\u00e8me connu\" he creatively re-writes the Verlaine poem fifteen times.\nMemorials.\nAsteroid no. 2817, discovered in 1982, was named after Perec. In 1994, a street in the 20th arrondissement of Paris was named after him, rue Georges-Perec. The French postal service issued a stamp in 2002 in his honour; it was designed by Marc Taraskoff and engraved by Pierre Albuisson. He was featured as a Google Doodle on his 80th birthday.\nWorks.\nBooks.\nThe most complete bibliography of Perec's works is Bernard Magn\u00e9's \"Tentative d'inventaire pas trop approximatif des \u00e9crits de Georges Perec\" (Toulouse, Presses Universitaires du Mirail, 1993).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographies\nCriticism"}
{"id": "45054", "revid": "147617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45054", "title": "Liverpudlian", "text": ""}
{"id": "45055", "revid": "1282508022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45055", "title": "Siracusa", "text": "Siracusa may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45056", "revid": "42383571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45056", "title": "Marsala", "text": "Marsala (, ; ) is a city and comune located in the Province of Trapani in the westernmost part of Sicily. With a population of 79,693, Marsala is the fifth largest city in Sicily.\nThe town is famous for the docking of Giuseppe Garibaldi on 11 May 1860 (the \"Expedition of the Thousand\") and for its Marsala wine. A feature of the area is the Stagnone Lagoon Natural Reserve \u2013 a marine area with salt ponds.\nEtymology.\nThe modern name is likely derived from the Arabic (\"mars\u0101 \u02bfaliyy\", \"Ali's harbor\"), or possibly (\"mars\u0101 ll\u0101h\", \"God's harbor\").\nHistory.\nCarthaginian Period.\nThe Carthaginian army sent to conquer Selinunte in 409 BC landed and camped near the site of the later Lilybaeum. In 397\u00a0BC when the Phoenician colony of Motya on the southwestern coast of Sicily was invaded and destroyed by the Syracusan tyrant Dionysius I, the survivors founded a town on the mainland nearby, the site of modern-day Marsala, which they called by a Punic name, recorded in Greek as \"Lil\u00fdbaion\" () and in Latin as \"\". Over the following two centuries, it became a trade centre for manufactured goods and served as a strategic port between Carthage and Carthaginian territories in Sardinia. It was built with strong defensive walls from the beginning and had three linked harbours. Punic Lilybaion was never conquered although it was besieged several times e.g. by Pyrrhus of Epirus and the Romans. The walls were ultimately over 10m high and 7m thick. They were strengthened for Pyrrhus' Siege of Lilybaeum in 278 BC by a second wall 10m from the first. The siege lasted 2 months before he withdrew. It was the only city which Pyrrhus could not conquer during his campaign at Sicily.\nThe First Punic War began here when the Punic army landed at Lilybaion in 265\u2013264\u00a0BC, then marched across Sicily to Messina, where the opening clash of the war took place.\nIn 250 BC the Romans sent a huge naval expedition of up to 240 ships towards Lilybaeum, the Carthaginian headquarters. A massive Roman army of 4 legions under the two consuls was also sent. The Carthaginians also understood the importance of this port and put their whole force together to save the city including about 10,000 mercenaries (Celts and Greeks). The Carthaginians sailed 50 ships from Africa under the command of Hannibal to try to save the city by charging towards the centre of the harbour. The Romans did not attempt to stop the entry of the fleet because of their sudden appearance and unfavourable winds in a foreign port.\nThe Roman fleet was defeated at Drepana in 249 BC when attempting a surprise attack there, followed by the destruction of the rest of the fleet soon afterwards in a storm. This forced the Romans to settle in for a long siege.\nThe Siege of Lilybaeum (250 BC) lasted for 9 years without Roman success. Carthage was able to reinforce and re-supply Lilybaeum during the war. Some of the Gallic mercenaries planned to betray the city but Alexon, who had previously saved Agrigentum from similar treachery, foiled the plot by informing the Carthaginian commander Himilco.\nIn 241 BC the city was given to the Romans as part of the peace treaty ending the First Punic War and then became one of the most important cities in Sicily.\nRoman Lilybaeum.\nIn 218 BC, in the Second Punic War, the Battle of Lilybaeum was fought between the navies of Carthage and Rome when Carthage attempted a secret raid on the city to re-establish a base. Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, the praetor at Lilybaeum, was told about the impending raid and prepared his 20 ships which managed to defeat the 50 opposing quinqueremes.\nIn the republican period the city was enriched with mansions and public buildings and dubbed \"splendidissima urbs\" by Cicero, who served as quaestor in the region between 76 and 75\u00a0BC. During the Civil Wars Lilybaeum was twice besieged, in 43 BC by Sextus Pompeius and 38 by Lepidus during which the walls were further strengthened as shown by an inscription.\nThe city walls were abandoned in the 4th c. AD as shown by buildings erected over or beside the walls.\nPost-Roman Period.\nThe city was the seat of the Diocese of Lilybaeum from at least the early 5th century AD. Ravaged by Vandals during the 5th century AD, the town was annexed in the 6th century to Justinian's Byzantine Empire. In this period the town was struck by dysentery, raided by pirates, and neglected by Constantinople. The arrival of the Arabs at the nearby Granitola mount in the 8th century entailed the resumption of commerce and the start of the rebirth of the town. The town was renamed \"Marsa \u02bfAl\u012b\" \"\u02bfAl\u012b's harbour\" or maybe, \"Marsa \u02bf\u0101liyy\", \"Big harbour\", for the width of the ancient harbour, placed near Punta d'Alga. Another possible derivation is \"Marsa All\u0101h\", \"God's harbour\".\nSince the end of the 11th century, the area has been conquered by Norman, Angevin and Aragonese troops. During this time, Marsala became wealthy, primarily through trade. However the blocking up of the harbour of Punta Alga, decreed by Emperor Charles V so as to stop Saracen forays, brought an end to this period of prosperity.\nThe development of Marsala wine at the end of the 18th century, headed by English merchants settled in Sicily, considerably improved local trade. This triggered an economic expansion in Marsala, including the funding of infrastructure projects such as the current harbour of Margitello.\nOn 11 May 1860 Giuseppe Garibaldi landed at Marsala, beginning the process of Italian unification.\nOn 11 May 1943, in the lead-up to the World War II Allied invasion of Sicily, an Allied bombardment of the town permanently damaged its Baroque centre and claimed many victims: \"Marsala Wiped Off the Map\" titled the New York Times on 13 May 1943.\nMythology.\nIn Greek mythology, Butes was the only Argonaut who jumped in the sea while sailing past the Sirens because he couldn't resist the charm of their singing, but Aphrodite saved him and transferred him to Lilybaeum.\nArchaeology.\nThe archaeological area of Marsala has been investigated both through excavations and topographic studies. Lilybaeum, the ancient town, took up a rectangular area on Capo Boeo, a low and rocky promontory sloping gently down towards the sea. The urban layout of the town can be dated back to the 2nd century BC with modern-day \"Viale Vittorio Veneto\" the \"Decumanus Maximus\" and \"Viale Cesare Battisti\" the \"Cardo Maximus\".\nBased on the archaeological findings at Capo Boeo, Lilybaeum was rebuilt twice, in the 1st century BC and in the 3rd century AD. There is not enough evidence to associate the latter with the 365 Crete earthquake, even though literature and archaeological discoveries elsewhere show that other Sicilian towns, such as Selinunte, \"were\" affected.\nSeveral fragments of the city walls and floors and walls of public and private buildings are visible. Excavations in several places under the modern city have revealed rich mosaic floors in town houses.\nThe Baglio Anselmi Archaeological Museum houses an example of Carthaginian ship possibly used during the Battle of the Aegates Islands (241 BC) found on the seabed off the coast of Marsala, as well as other ancient remains from the area, such as pottery, marble sculptures and mosaics. Many fine painted tombs and funerary monuments have been excavated showing unique preservation of colours.\nThe three entrance gates into the town dating from Norman times: Porta Nuova, Porta di Mare and Porta Mazara were rebuilt in the 17th and 18th centuries in a much grander form: Porta Mazara, () rebuilt in 1572, located in the south-east; Porta di Mare () (renamed to Porta Garibaldi), rebuilt in 1685, located in the south-west of the town; Porta Nuova () was rebuilt in 1790, and is located in the north-west of the town. The city council decided to demolish the city walls in 1887 to make way for the rapidly-expanding town. Along with this demolition was demolished the north-east gate called Porta Trapani, constructed in the early 17th century, nicknamed \"Porticella\" due to its small size in comparison to the other three gates of the town; it used to be located at the intersection of \"Via Pellegrino\" and \"Via Sardegna\".\nGeography.\nSituated at the extreme western point of Sicily, the town was founded on Lilibeo Cape from where the Aegadian Islands and the Stagnone Lagoon can be seen.\nTerritory.\nThe territory of Marsala, , has a rich cultural and landscape heritage; its area includes the Stagnone Lagoon, a Natural Reserve in which is located the island of Mozia.\nThe city of Marsala had a population of about 86,000 until the end of 1970, when Petrosino, a village formerly part of Marsala, decided to become a self-governing town after a local referendum.\nThe area of Marsala is classified as a seismic zone 2 (medium). In the last 200 years three earthquakes of medium-high intensity were recorded:\nClimate.\nMarsala has a hot-summer mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"), similar to most coastal towns in Sicily, with hot and dry summers coupled with moderately wet and mild winters. Weather in Marsala is similar to that of nearby Trapani.\nSummers are generally warm with a record maximum temperature of in August 2017. In the summer, due to how dry it is, it is not unusual to experience the effect of Sirocco wind, which brings dust and sand from the Sahara.\nWinters are generally rainy and cooler with temperatures ranging between minimum of (in December 2014) and . Snowfall occurs very rarely, since the temperature has never dropped below freezing, although snow has fallen before, for example in December 2014.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2025, there are 79,693 people residing in Marsala, of whom 49.7% are male and 50.3% are female. Minors make up 15.2% of the population, and pensioners make up 25.0%. This compares with the Italian average of 14.9% minors and 24.7% pensioners.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Marsala still depends on the production of wine, although tourism is a growing industry and it too is becoming an important source of income for the city. With its coastline of sandy beaches and clear sea, access to the nearby Aegadian Islands and the natural environment of the Saline Della Laguna and Stagnone Lagoon, Marsala is an important Sicilian tourist destination.\nCulture.\nLarge-scale wine production started in 1773, encouraged by English trader John Woodhouse. Important winemaking establishments include Ingham-Whitaker, le Cantine Florio, Martinez, Pellegrino, Rallo, Mineo, Bianchi, Baglio Hopps, Donnafugata, Alagna, Caruso e Minini. Marsala cellars produce also red and white wines. Varieties include Alcesti, De Bartoli, Fina, Vinci, Birgi, Mothia, Paolini e Baglio Oro. In 2012, Marsala was named the European Capital of Wine.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMarsala is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45057", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45057", "title": "Framestore", "text": "British visual effects and computer animation company\nFramestore is a British visual effects and computer animation studio based on Chancery Lane in London, England. The company was founded in 1986. Framestore specializes in visual effects for film and prestige TV, advertising, rides, and immersive experiences. It is the largest production house in Europe, employing roughly 3,000 staff, including 1,000 in London, and 1,500 across studios in Chicago, New York, Los Angeles, Montreal, Melbourne and Mumbai.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nFramestore was founded in 1986 by William Sargent and Sharon Reed, together with three friends. Tim Webber joined Framestore in 1988 and led the company's push into digital film and television, developing Framestore's virtual camera and motion rig systems. In 1992, Mike Milne started the CGI department, adding computer-generated imagery animation to the company's range of facilities.\nMerger with CFC.\nIn 1997, Framestore acquired the Computer Film Company, which was one of the UK's first digital film visual effects companies, developing technology for digital film scanning, compositing, and output. CFC was founded in London in 1984 by Mike Boudry, Wolfgang Lempp (now CTO at Filmlight) and Neil Harris (Lightworks). CFC's first film was \"The Fruit Machine\", in 1988, which utilised early morphing techniques.\nIn 2004, Framestore opened their first satellite office in New York City, to focus on advertising. This was followed by another office in Iceland in 2008, which has since been closed and has reopened as a local VFX company, RVX. In 2013 Framestore opened an office in Montreal, followed by another in Los Angeles the same year. In 2014, it launched a production arm.\nEarly projects for the company include the delivery of its first feature animation project \"The Tale of Despereaux\" with Universal; the completion of Europe's first digital intermediate for the film \"Chicken Run\" in 2000; contribution of scenes for the 2009 film \"Avatar\", and the completion as a production project of four British feature films which opened in theaters between during 2009 and 2010.\nAcquisition by CIH.\nIn November 2016, Framestore agreed to let the Shanghai-based Cultural Investment Holdings Co acquire 75% of it for \u00a3112.50 million. The company worked on projects such as \"Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them\", \"Beauty and the Beast\", and \"Paddington 2.\" In April 2017, Framestore announced that they had opened a third US location, in Chicago, Illinois.\nThe company also worked on the 2017 film \"Darkest Hour\" directed by Joe Wright, working out of the Montreal facility of Framestore to create historically accurate backdrops for 85 shots in the film, including battle scenes.\nThe team created around 300 shots for the 2017 film \"Blade Runner 2049\", with Framestore winning a special visual effects award at the 2018 British Academy Film Awards. They have also worked on \"Black Mirror\", creating props such as the 60s-style spaceship in the premiere of the fourth season.\nIn November 2020, Framestore announced that they have acquired Deluxe's former creative assets including Method Studios and Company 3 to expand their VFX and post-production landscapes.\nReception.\nFramestore has been awarded two Scientific and Technical Academy Awards, and 14 Primetime Emmys. In 2008, Framestore won their first Academy Award for Best Visual Effects for the film \"The Golden Compass\"; they also won the BAFTA Award for that film the same year. Framestore was also nominated for Academy Awards in 2009 (\"The Dark Knight\") and again in 2010 (\"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 1\").\nTim Webber was the VFX supervisor on \"Gravity\" (2013), and the techniques involved in the film realised by Webber and the Framestore team took three years to complete. The team won the Best Visual Effects awards BAFTA Award for Best Special Visual Effects at the 67th British Academy Film Awards, and the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects award at the 86th Academy Awards. \nThe company then won both the Academy Award and BAFTA for Best Visual Effects in 2018 for its work on Blade Runner 2049.\nIn advertising the team has also won major awards including Cannes Lions, British Television Advertising Awards, Clios, D&amp;AD and others.\nThe company's R&amp;D team spin off to create the technology company Filmlight, which in 2010 received four Scientific Academy Awards.\nFramestore won the 2020 BAFTA TV Craft Awards for Special, Visual &amp; Graphic Effects for its extensive work on the HBO / BBC series His Dark Materials.\nAdvertising and trade characters.\nFramestore has collaborated with companies and advertising agencies to create trade characters, and also created an attempted photorealistic computer-generated Audrey Hepburn for a Galaxy chocolate advert. A combination of elements including body doubles, motion-capture, FACS and the rendering software Arnold were used to mimic the appearance of the actress 20 years after her death. The advert drew press attention both for the cutting-edge technology utilized and the ethical implications of using a person's likeness posthumously for commercial purposes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45059", "revid": "20650448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45059", "title": "Part of speech", "text": "Category of words based on shared grammatical properties in a clause\nIn grammar, a part of speech or part-of-speech (abbreviated as POS or PoS, also known as word class or grammatical category) is a category of words (or, more generally, of lexical items) that have similar grammatical properties. Words that are assigned to the same part of speech generally display similar syntactic behavior (they play similar roles within the grammatical structure of sentences), sometimes similar morphological behavior in that they undergo inflection for similar properties and even similar semantic behavior. Commonly listed English parts of speech are noun, verb, adjective, adverb, pronoun, preposition, conjunction, interjection, numeral, article, and determiner.\nOther terms than \"part of speech\"\u2014particularly in modern linguistic classifications, which often make more precise distinctions than the traditional scheme does\u2014include word class, lexical class, and lexical category. Some authors restrict the term \"lexical category\" to refer only to a particular type of syntactic category; for them the term excludes those parts of speech that are considered to be function words, such as pronouns. The term form class is also used, although this has various conflicting definitions. Word classes may be classified as open or closed: \"open classes\" (typically including nouns, verbs and adjectives) acquire new members constantly, while \"closed classes\" (such as pronouns and conjunctions) acquire new members infrequently, if at all.\nAlmost all languages have the word classes noun and verb, but beyond these two there are significant variations among different languages. For example:\nBecause of such variation in the number of categories and their identifying properties, analysis of parts of speech must be done for each individual language. Nevertheless, the labels for each category are assigned on the basis of universal criteria.\nHistory.\nThe classification of words into lexical categories is found from the earliest moments in the history of linguistics.\nIndia.\nIn the \"Nirukta\", written in the 6th or 5th century BCE, the Sanskrit grammarian Y\u0101ska defined four main categories of words:\nThese four were grouped into two larger classes: inflectable (nouns and verbs) and uninflectable (pre-verbs and particles).\nThe ancient work on the grammar of the Tamil language, \"Tolk\u0101ppiyam\", argued to have been written around 2nd century CE, classifies Tamil words as \"peyar\" (\u0baa\u0bc6\u0baf\u0bb0\u0bcd; noun), \"vinai\" (\u0bb5\u0bbf\u0ba9\u0bc8; verb), \"idai\" (part of speech which modifies the relationships between verbs and nouns), and \"uri\" (word that further qualifies a noun or verb).\nWestern tradition.\nA century or two after the work of Y\u0101ska, the Greek scholar Plato wrote in his \"Cratylus\" dialogue, \"sentences are, I conceive, a combination of verbs [\"rh\u00eama\"] and nouns [\"\u00f3noma\"]\". Aristotle added another class, \"conjunction\" [\"s\u00fdndesmos\"], which included not only the words known today as conjunctions, but also other parts (the interpretations differ; in one interpretation it is pronouns, prepositions, and the article).\nBy the end of the 2nd century BCE, grammarians had expanded this classification scheme into eight categories, seen in the \"Art of Grammar\", attributed to Dionysius Thrax:\nIt can be seen that these parts of speech are defined by morphological, syntactic and semantic criteria.\nThe Latin grammarian Priscian (fl. 500 CE) modified the above eightfold system, excluding \"article\" (since the Latin language, unlike Greek, does not have articles) but adding \"interjection\".\nThe Latin names for the parts of speech, from which the corresponding modern English terms derive, were \"nomen\", \"verbum\", \"participium\", \"pronomen\", \"praepositio\", \"adverbium\", \"conjunctio\" and \"interjectio\". The category \"nomen\" included substantives (\"nomen substantivum\", corresponding to what are today called nouns in English), adjectives \"(nomen adjectivum)\" and numerals \"(nomen numerale)\". This is reflected in the older English terminology \"noun substantive\", \"noun adjective\" and \"noun numeral\". Later the adjective became a separate class, as often did the numerals, and the English word \"noun\" came to be applied to substantives only.\nClassification.\nWorks of English grammar generally follow the pattern of the European tradition as described above, except that participles are now usually regarded as forms of verbs rather than as a separate part of speech, and numerals are often conflated with other parts of speech: nouns (cardinal numerals, e.g., \"one\", and collective numerals, e.g., \"dozen\"), adjectives (ordinal numerals, e.g., \"first\", and multiplier numerals, e.g., \"single\") and adverbs (multiplicative numerals, e.g., \"once\", and distributive numerals, e.g., \"singly\"). Eight or nine parts of speech are commonly listed:\nSome traditional classifications consider articles to be adjectives, yielding eight parts of speech rather than nine. And some modern classifications define further classes in addition to these. For discussion see the sections below.\nAdditionally, there are other parts of speech including particles (\"yes\", \"no\") and postpositions (\"ago\", \"notwithstanding\") although many fewer words are in these categories.\nThe classification below, or slight expansions of it, is still followed in most dictionaries:\nEnglish words are not generally marked as belonging to one part of speech or another; this contrasts with many other European languages, which use inflection more extensively, meaning that a given word form can often be identified as belonging to a particular part of speech and having certain additional grammatical properties. In English, most words are uninflected, while the inflected endings that exist are mostly ambiguous: \"-ed\" may mark a verbal past tense, a participle or a fully adjectival form; \"-s\" may mark a plural noun, a possessive noun, or a present-tense verb form; \"-ing\" may mark a participle, gerund, or pure adjective or noun. Although \"-ly\" is a frequent adverb marker, some adverbs (e.g. \"tomorrow\", \"fast\", \"very\") do not have that ending, while many adjectives do have it (e.g. \"friendly\", \"ugly\", \"lovely\"), as do occasional words in other parts of speech (e.g. \"jelly\", \"fly\", \"rely\").\nMany English words can belong to more than one part of speech. Words like \"neigh\", \"break\", \"outlaw\", \"laser\", \"microwave\", and \"telephone\" might all be either verbs or nouns. In certain circumstances, even words with primarily grammatical functions can be used as verbs or nouns, as in, \"We must look to the \"hows\" and not just the \"whys\".\" The process whereby a word comes to be used as a different part of speech is called conversion or zero derivation.\nFunctional classification.\nLinguists recognize that the above list of eight or nine word classes is drastically simplified. For example, \"adverb\" is to some extent a catch-all class that includes words with many different functions. Some have even argued that the most basic of category distinctions, that of nouns and verbs, is unfounded, or not applicable to certain languages. Modern linguists have proposed many different schemes whereby the words of English or other languages are placed into more specific categories and subcategories based on a more precise understanding of their grammatical functions.\nCommon lexical category set defined by function may include the following (not all of them will necessarily be applicable in a given language):\nWithin a given category, subgroups of words may be identified based on more precise grammatical properties. For example, verbs may be specified according to the number and type of objects or other complements which they take. This is called subcategorization.\nMany modern descriptions of grammar include not only lexical categories or word classes, but also \"phrasal categories\", used to classify phrases, in the sense of groups of words that form units having specific grammatical functions. Phrasal categories may include noun phrases (NP), verb phrases (VP) and so on. Lexical and phrasal categories together are called syntactic categories.\nOpen and closed classes.\nWord classes may be either open or closed. An \"open class\" is one that commonly accepts the addition of new words, while a \"closed class\" is one to which new items are very rarely added. Open classes normally contain large numbers of words, while closed classes are much smaller. Typical open classes found in English and many other languages are nouns, verbs (excluding auxiliary verbs, if these are regarded as a separate class), adjectives, adverbs and interjections. Ideophones are often an open class, though less familiar to English speakers, and are often open to nonce words. Typical closed classes are prepositions (or postpositions), determiners, conjunctions, and pronouns.\nThe open\u2013closed distinction is related to the distinction between lexical and functional categories, and to that between content words and function words, and some authors consider these identical, but the connection is not strict. Open classes are generally lexical categories in the stricter sense, containing words with greater semantic content, while closed classes are normally functional categories, consisting of words that perform essentially grammatical functions. This is not universal: in many languages verbs and adjectives are closed classes, usually consisting of few members, and in Japanese the formation of new pronouns from existing nouns is relatively common, though to what extent these form a distinct word class is debated.\nWords are added to open classes through such processes as compounding, derivation, coining, and borrowing. When a new word is added through some such process, it can subsequently be used grammatically in sentences in the same ways as other words in its class. A closed class may obtain new items through these same processes, but such changes are much rarer and take much more time. A closed class is normally seen as part of the core language and is not expected to change. In English, for example, new nouns, verbs, etc. are being added to the language constantly (including by the common process of verbing and other types of conversion, where an existing word comes to be used in a different part of speech). However, it is very unusual for a new pronoun, for example, to become accepted in the language, even in cases where there may be felt to be a need for one, as in the case of gender-neutral pronouns.\nThe open or closed status of word classes varies between languages, even assuming that corresponding word classes exist. Most conspicuously, in many languages verbs and adjectives form closed classes of content words. An extreme example is found in Jingulu, which has only three verbs, while even the modern Indo-European Persian has no more than a few hundred simple verbs, a great deal of which are archaic. (Some twenty Persian verbs are used as light verbs to form compounds; this lack of lexical verbs is shared with other Iranian languages.) Japanese is similar, having few lexical verbs. Basque verbs are also a closed class, with the vast majority of verbal senses instead expressed periphrastically.\nIn Japanese, verbs and adjectives are closed classes, though these are quite large, with about 700 adjectives, and verbs have opened slightly in recent years. Japanese adjectives are closely related to verbs (they can predicate a sentence, for instance). New verbal meanings are nearly always expressed periphrastically by appending to a noun, as in , and new adjectival meanings are nearly always expressed by adjectival nouns, using the suffix when an adjectival noun modifies a noun phrase, as in . The closedness of verbs has weakened in recent years, and in a few cases new verbs are created by appending to a noun or using it to replace the end of a word. This is mostly in casual speech for borrowed words, with the most well-established example being , from . This recent innovation aside, the huge contribution of Sino-Japanese vocabulary was almost entirely borrowed as nouns (often verbal nouns or adjectival nouns). Other languages where adjectives are closed class include Swahili, Bemba, and Luganda.\nBy contrast, Japanese pronouns are an open class and nouns become used as pronouns with some frequency; a recent example is , now used by some as a first-person pronoun. The status of Japanese pronouns as a distinct class is disputed, however, with some considering it only a use of nouns, not a distinct class. The case is similar in languages of Southeast Asia, including Thai and Lao, in which, like Japanese, pronouns and terms of address vary significantly based on relative social standing and respect.\nSome word classes are universally closed, however, including demonstratives and interrogative words.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45061", "revid": "41068046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45061", "title": "From Hell", "text": "Graphic novel by Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell\nFrom Hell is a graphic novel by writer Alan Moore and artist Eddie Campbell, originally published in serial form from 1989 to 1998. The full collection was published in 1999 by Top Shelf Productions.\nSet during the Whitechapel murders of the late Victorian era, the novel speculates upon the identity and motives of Jack the Ripper. The novel depicts several true events surrounding the murders, although portions have been fictionalised, particularly the identity of the killer and the precise nature and circumstances of the murders.\nThe title is taken from the first words of the \"From Hell\" letter, which some authorities believe was an authentic message sent from the killer in 1888. The collected edition is 572 pages long. The 2000 and later editions are the most common prints. The comic was loosely adapted into a film, released in 2001. In 2000, the graphic novel was banned in Australia for several weeks after customs officers seized copies of the seventh issue from a shipment intended for Quality Comics.\nDevelopment.\nMoore began developing the plot for \"From Hell\" in the late 1980s. Writer Neil Gaiman recalled Moore calling him up to discuss a television documentary he had just seen about Jack the Ripper, and then asking for Gaiman's help tracking down \"rare and forgotten biographies of possible Ripper suspects at the British Museum\".\n\"From Hell\" takes as its premise Stephen Knight's theory that the Jack the Ripper murders were part of a conspiracy to conceal the birth of an illegitimate royal baby fathered by Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence, slightly modified: the involvement of Walter Sickert is reduced, and Knight's allegation that the child's mother was a Catholic has been dropped. Knight's theories have been described as \"a good fictional read\" whose \"conclusions have been disproved numerous times\".\nPublication history.\n\"From Hell\" was originally serialized as one of several features in \"Taboo\", an anthology comic book published by Steve Bissette's Spiderbaby Grafix. After running in \"Taboo\" #2\u20137 (1989\u20131992), Moore and Campbell moved the project to its own series, published first by Tundra Publishing, then by Kitchen Sink Press. The series was published in ten volumes between 1991 and 1996, and an appendix, \"From Hell: The Dance of the Gull-catchers\", was published in 1998. The entire series was collected in a trade paperback and published by Eddie Campbell Comics in 1999; trade paperback and hardcover versions were published by Top Shelf Productions in the United States and Knockabout Comics in the UK. A fully colorized Master Edition was serialized starting in September 2018.\nPlot.\nPrince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence, also known as Prince Eddy, secretly marries and fathers a child with Annie Crook, a shop girl in London's East End. Prince Eddy had visited the area under an assumed name and Annie is unaware of her husband's royal position. Queen Victoria becomes aware of the marriage and has Albert separated forcibly from his wife, whom she places in an asylum. Victoria then instructs her royal physician Sir William Gull to impair Annie's sanity, which he does by damaging or impairing her thyroid gland. The prince's daughter is taken to Annie's parents by the artist Walter Sickert, a friend of Eddy's who had accompanied him on his trips to the East End. Annie's father believes the child to be his through an incestuous relationship with his daughter. Sickert reluctantly leaves the child with Annie's parents.\nThe potentially scandalous matter is resolved, until a group of prostitutes \u2013 Annie's friends Mary Kelly, Polly Nichols, Anne Chapman, and Liz Stride \u2013 who are aware of the illegitimate child and its royal connections, attempt to blackmail Sickert. After Queen Victoria learns of the blackmail attempt, Gull is enlisted to silence the group of women. The police are granted prior knowledge of Gull's intentions, and are adjured not to interfere until the plot is completed.\nGull, a high-ranking Freemason, murders the four women in Whitechapel with the aid of a carriage driver, John Netley. While he justifies the murders by claiming they are a Masonic warning to an apparent Illuminati threat to the throne, the killings are, in Gull's mind, part of an elaborate mystical ritual to ensure male societal dominance over women. While targeting Kelly, Gull also kills Catherine Eddowes, who was using Kelly's name as an alias. As the killings progress, Gull becomes psychologically unhinged and has a vision of the future while murdering a woman he believes to be Kelly.\nGull takes Netley on a tour of London landmarks, expounding on their hidden mystical significance. Later, Gull forces the semi-literate Netley to write the infamous From Hell letter. Following this, several people write letters to the police claiming to be the murderer, and the nickname \"Jack the Ripper\" becomes a household name.\nInspector Frederick Abberline, who once patrolled Whitechapel as a police officer, investigates the Ripper crimes without success. He meets Robert James Lees, a fraudulent psychic who acts as a spiritual advisor to Queen Victoria. Lees, acting on a personal grudge against Gull who had slighted him upon a previous encounter, contacts Abberline and identifies Gull as the murderer. Abberline and Lees confront Gull, who instantly confesses. Abberline reports the confession to his superiors at Scotland Yard, who cover up the discovery. The police inform both Abberline and Lees that Gull was operating alone and was gripped by insanity. Abberline later discovers Gull's intentions to cover up the matter of the royal \"bastard\" fathered by the Duke of Clarence. He resigns from the Metropolitan Police in protest of the official cover-up of the murders, and contemplates leaving England to join the Pinkertons.\nGull is tried by a secret Masonic council, which determines he is insane. Gull refuses to submit to the council, informing them that because of his accomplishments and his visions, no man amongst them may be counted as his peer and cannot judge the \"mighty work\" he has wrought. A phony funeral is staged, and Gull is imprisoned under a pseudonym \"Thomas Mason.\" The Freemasons frame boarding school teacher Montague Druitt as a suspect, killing him and making his death look like suicide. Years later, and moments before his death, Gull has an extended mystical experience, where his spirit travels through time, observing the crimes of the London Monster, instigating or inspiring a number of other killers (Peter Sutcliffe, Ian Brady), causing Netley's death, as well as serving as the inspiration for both Robert Louis Stevenson's \"Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\" and William Blake's painting \"The Ghost of a Flea\". The last experience his spirit undergoes before it \"becomes God\" is visiting a woman living in Ireland. The woman has four children who are named after the women murdered by Gull in Whitechapel. She is apparently able to see Gull's spirit, and abjures him to begone \"back to Hell.\"\nInterpretations and themes.\n\"From Hell\" was partly inspired by the title of Douglas Adams' novel \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\", in that it explores the notion that to solve a crime holistically, one would need to solve the entire society in which it occurred.\n\"From Hell\" also explores Moore's ideas on the nature of time. Early on, Gull's friend James Hinton discusses his son Howard's theory of the \"fourth dimension\", which proposes that time is a spatial dimension. All time co-exists, and it is only the limits of our perception that make it appear to progress. Sequences of related events can be seen as shapes in the fourth dimension: history can \"be said to have an architecture\", as Gull puts it. Gull's experiences seem to confirm this: he has visions of the 20th century during the murders, and as he is dying he experiences, and appears to influence, past and future events. Moore had earlier explored similar ideas in \"Watchmen\", where Doctor Manhattan perceives past, present and future simultaneously, and describes himself as \"a puppet who can see the strings\".\nCritic Gary Groth says the most elaborate theme in \"From Hell\" stems from Moore's statement that \"the Ripper murders \u2013 happening when they did and where they did \u2013 were almost like an apocalyptic summary of... that entire Victorian age.\"\nAwards.\n\"From Hell\" won several Eisner Awards, including \"Best Serialized Story\" (1993), \"Best Writer\" (1995, 1996, 1997), and \"Best Graphic Album \u2013 Reprint\" (2000). It won the 1995 Harvey Award for Best Continuing or Limited Series, and the collected edition won the 2000 Harvey Award for Best Graphic Album of Previously Published Work.\nThe book also won the 2000 Eagle Award for Favourite Trade Paperback/Reprint Collection, and the \"Prix de la critique\" at the Angoul\u00eame International Comics Festival in 2001, for the French edition published by \u00c9ditions Delcourt.\nThe collected edition was a top vote getter for the Comics Buyer's Guide Fan Award for Favorite Reprint Graphic Album in 1999.\nDuring its initial serialization, \"From Hell\" received the 1996 International Horror Guild Award for Graphic Story/illustrated Narrative, and the 1997 Ignatz Award for Outstanding Story.\nFilm adaptation.\nA film, loosely based on the series, was made by the Hughes brothers in 2001, starring Johnny Depp, Heather Graham, and Ian Holm. It received mixed reviews from critics, with a rating of 57% on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45063", "revid": "50846091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45063", "title": "Abelian category", "text": "Category with direct sums and certain types of kernels and cokernels\nIn mathematics, an abelian category is a category in which morphisms and objects can be added and in which kernels and cokernels exist and have desirable properties.\nThe motivating prototypical example of an abelian category is the category of abelian groups, Ab.\nAbelian categories are very \"stable\" categories; for example they are regular and they satisfy the snake lemma. The class of abelian categories is closed under several categorical constructions, for example, the category of chain complexes of an abelian category, or the category of functors from a small category to an abelian category are abelian as well. These stability properties make them inevitable in homological algebra and beyond; the theory has major applications in algebraic geometry, cohomology and pure category theory.\nMac Lane says Alexander Grothendieck defined abelian categories in 1957, but there is a reference that says Eilenberg's disciple, Buchsbaum, had proposed the concept in his 1955 PhD thesis, and Grothendieck popularized it under the name \"abelian category\".\nDefinitions.\nA category is abelian if it is \"preadditive\" and\nThis definition is equivalent to the following \"piecemeal\" definition:\nNote that the enriched structure on hom-sets is a \"consequence\" of the first three axioms of the first definition. This highlights the foundational relevance of the category of Abelian groups in the theory and its canonical nature.\nThe concept of exact sequence arises naturally in this setting, and it turns out that exact functors, i.e. the functors preserving exact sequences in various senses, are the relevant functors between abelian categories. This \"exactness\" concept has been axiomatized in the theory of exact categories, forming a very special case of regular categories.\nGrothendieck's axioms.\nIn his T\u014dhoku article, Grothendieck listed four additional axioms (and their duals) that an abelian category A might satisfy. These axioms are still in common use to this day. They are the following:\nand their duals\nAxioms AB1) and AB2) were also given. They are what make an additive category abelian. Specifically:\nGrothendieck also gave axioms AB6) and AB6*).\nElementary properties.\nGiven any pair \"A\", \"B\" of objects in an abelian category, there is a special zero morphism from \"A\" to \"B\". This can be defined as the zero element of the hom-set Hom(\"A\",\"B\"), since this is an abelian group.\nAlternatively, it can be defined as the unique composition \"A\" \u2192 0 \u2192 \"B\", where 0 is the zero object of the abelian category.\nIn an abelian category, every morphism \"f\" can be written as the composition of an epimorphism followed by a monomorphism.\nThis epimorphism is called the \"coimage\" of \"f\", while the monomorphism is called the \"image\" of \"f\".\nSubobjects and quotient objects are well-behaved in abelian categories.\nFor example, the poset of subobjects of any given object \"A\" is a bounded lattice.\nEvery abelian category A is a module over the monoidal category of finitely generated abelian groups; that is, we can form a tensor product of a finitely generated abelian group \"G\" and any object \"A\" of A.\nThe abelian category is also a comodule; Hom(\"G\",\"A\") can be interpreted as an object of A.\nIf A is complete, then we can remove the requirement that \"G\" be finitely generated; most generally, we can form finitary enriched limits in A.\nGiven an object formula_7 in an abelian category, flatness refers to the idea that formula_8 is an exact functor. See flat module or, for more generality, flat morphism.\nRelated concepts.\nAbelian categories are the most general setting for homological algebra.\nAll of the constructions used in that field are relevant, such as exact sequences, and especially short exact sequences, and derived functors.\nImportant theorems that apply in all abelian categories include the five lemma (and the short five lemma as a special case), as well as the snake lemma (and the nine lemma as a special case).\nSemi-simple Abelian categories.\nAn abelian category formula_9 is called semi-simple if there is a collection of objects formula_10 called simple objects (meaning the only sub-objects of any formula_11 are the zero object formula_12 and itself) such that an object formula_13 can be decomposed as a direct sum (denoting the coproduct of the abelian category)formula_14This technical condition is rather strong and excludes many natural examples of abelian categories found in nature. For example, most module categories over a ring formula_15 are not semi-simple; in fact, this is the case if and only if formula_15 is a semisimple ring.\nExamples.\nSome abelian categories found in nature are semi-simple, such as\nNon-examples.\nThere do exist some natural counter-examples of abelian categories which are not semi-simple, such as certain categories of representations. For example, the category of representations of the Lie group formula_28 has the representationformula_29which only has one subrepresentation of dimension formula_30. In fact, this is true for any unipotent grouppg 112.\nSubcategories of abelian categories.\nThere are numerous types of (full, additive) subcategories of abelian categories that occur in nature, as well as some conflicting terminology.\nLet A be an abelian category, C a full, additive subcategory, and \"I\" the inclusion functor.\nHere is an explicit example of a full, additive subcategory of an abelian category that is itself abelian but the inclusion functor is not exact. Let \"k\" be a field, formula_36 the algebra of upper-triangular formula_37 matrices over \"k\", and formula_38 the category of finite-dimensional formula_36-modules. Then each formula_38 is an abelian category and we have an inclusion functor formula_41 identifying the simple projective, simple injective and indecomposable projective-injective modules. The essential image of \"I\" is a full, additive subcategory, but \"I\" is not exact.\nHistory.\nAbelian categories were introduced by (under the name of \"exact category\") and in order to unify various cohomology theories. At the time, there was a cohomology theory for sheaves, and a cohomology theory for groups. The two were defined differently, but they had similar properties. In fact, much of category theory was developed as a language to study these similarities. Grothendieck unified the two theories: they both arise as derived functors on abelian categories; the abelian category of sheaves of abelian groups on a topological space, and the abelian category of \"G\"-modules for a given group \"G\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45064", "revid": "12277875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45064", "title": "370", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 370 (CCCLXX) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Augustus and Valens (or, less frequently, year 1123 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 370 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45067", "revid": "28021428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45067", "title": "Transnational Radical Party", "text": "Political association that adopts nonviolent means for civil rights\nThe Transnational Radical Party (TRP), whose official name is Nonviolent Radical Party, Transnational and Transparty (NRPTT), is a political association of citizens, members of parliament and members of government of various national and political backgrounds who intend to adopt nonviolent means to create an effective body of international law with respect for individuals, human, civil and political rights, as well as the affirmation of democracy and political freedom in the world. The TRP does not participate in elections and, despite being named \"party\", is a non-governmental organization (NGO), with consultative status at the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of the United Nations (UN) since 1995, adept in building synergies among political forces aimed at achieving the goals of its congressional motions.\nThe TRP is the direct evolution of the Radical Party, a political party in Italy, active from 1955 to 1989, and is a separate entity from the once-connected Italian Radicals party, founded in 2001 as PRT's section in the country.\nThe TRP often advocates the international use of Esperanto in its literature.\nHistory.\nThe TRP's forerunner, the Radical Party (PR), was established in 1955 by a left-wing splinter group from the centre-right Italian Liberal Party (PLI), under the leadership of Marco Pannella. In 1989, the PR was transformed into the TRP. In 1992, a majority of Italy's Radicals formed, at the national-level in Italian politics, the Pannella List. Since 1999, Radicals ran in elections under the banner of Bonino List, named after Emma Bonino. After a breakthrough in the 1999 European Parliament election, Italy's Radicals formed the Italian Radicals (RI).\nBackground and foundation.\nIn the 1979 European Parliament election, the first in which voters voted directly for the European Parliament, the PR obtained its best result ever countrywide (3.7% of the vote, resulting in the election of three MEPs, including Pannella). Following the election, the PR was involved with the Coordination of European Green and Radical Parties (CEGRP) and its unsuccessful efforts to create a single pan-European platform for green and radical politics. More importantly, since then, the party projected itself into international politics.\nIn 1988, after a decade during which transnational issues and values were emphasised, the PR's congress decided that the party would be transformed during 1989 into the TRP and that the latter would not present itself in elections (in order to avoid competition with the other parties and stimulate cooperation instead), while permitting \"dual membership\" with other parties. The new symbol featuring the stylised face of Mahatma Gandhi was the point of no return in the transformation of the PR into an instrument of political fight completely at disposal of issue-oriented campaigns.\nAll this provoked great controversy among Radicals. Some long-time members left in order to continue their own activity in other parties or retire from public life. However, also most TRP Radicals continued to be actively engaged in politics, sometimes supported by the TRP itself, sometimes seeking hospitality in traditional parties or creating entirely new electoral lists. In the 1989 European Parliament election Pannella stood as a successful candidate of the joint list between the PLI (his former party) and the Italian Republican Party, some Radicals formed the \"Anti-prohibition List on Drugs\" (1 MEP), while others joined the Rainbow Greens (2 MEPs). In the run-up of the 1992 general election the Pannella List was formed.\nSergio Stanzani and Emma Bonino were the first secretary and president of the party, respectively. In 1993 Bonino, who would be appointed to the European Commission in 1995, replaced Stanzani, and Pannella became president.\nInternational activities and ECOSOC recognition.\nThe TRP was soon involved in comparing the conditions of the rule of law among different democracies throughout the world. While its members and economic resources continued to come primarily from Italy, the party strengthened its activities worldwide, especially in the countries of post-communist Eastern Europe. In this respect, the TRP launched the Multilingual Telematics System, one of the first bulletin board systems in Italy to allow multiple connections at the same time with the many countries where the party had influence and membership.\nIn 1995, after an intense institutional work, the TRP became a non-governmental organization for the promotion of human rights' legislation and the affirmation of democracy and freedom worldwide. As such, it was granted the general consultative status at the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of the United Nations (UN).\nAlso in 1995, Olivier Dupuis, a long-time Radical from Belgium and founding member of the TRP who had moved to Budapest, Hungary in 1988 and from there had coordinated TRP's activities in Eastern Europe, was elected secretary of the party, while Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Hory, a French MEP of the Radical Party of the Left within the TRP-sponsored European Radical Alliance group, was president. In 1996, Dupuis took Pannella's seat in the European Parliament.\nWithin the UN, the party has been involved in a variety of issues: the moratorium on the death penalty and the proposal of a complete abolition, anti-prohibition against global mafias, fair justice, freedom of scientific research and the ban on female genital mutilation. Additionally, the TRP has allowed access to UN meetings to some stateless people, including Tibetans, Uyghurs and Montagnards, and led active monitoring of conflicts, such as the case of Ukraine versus Russia, or gave voice to dissidents opposed to authoritarian regimes like Cuba and Turkey. For its proposal of a peace plan in the Chechen\u2013Russian conflict, the party has collided with Russia and its members risked expulsion from the country.\n\"Italian plague\", decline and internal crisis.\nRadicals have often accused the Italian media of ignoring their initiatives and focusing merely on internal conflicts within the Radical world. The inadequate information on Radical initiatives by the Italian media has been meticulously verified by the TRP-sponsored \"Centro d'Ascolto dell'Informazione Radiotelevisiva\" and produced several sentences featuring compensations to be paid by RAI, the Italian public broadcaster, and commercial TV as well. Some confusion came from the fact that since the 2000s, rather than highlighting its expansion abroad, the TRP has preferred to focus on the \"Case Italy\", emblematic of the decadence of a constitutional political system into a \"real democracy\", that is to say a formal democracy in which its very institutions substantially act in contrast with the constitution. According to the TRP, Italy has become a \"partycratic regime\" and, as such, has started to spread the \"plague\" of \"real democracy\" around the democratic world. That was denounced by Radicals within international organisations and though the publication of a \"yellow book\" on the \"Italian plague\".\nHowever, the TRP effectively suffered internal problems too. In 2003 Dupuis resigned from secretary because of serious political differences with Pannella. In 2011\u201314 Demba Traor\u00e9, a politician from Mali, served briefly as secretary: he left the party without officially resigning, after being returned to the government of his own country. The TRP was later provisionally run by a committee, known as the \"senate\", led by Pannella and composed of the party's leading members.\nRe-organisation and break-up with Italian Radicals.\nAfter the death of Pannella in May 2016, an extraordinary congress was convened in September to overcome the long inactivity due to the absence of the secretary, as well as the economic problems undermining the party's viability. The congress adopted with 178 votes in favour, 79 against and 13 abstentions on the final resolution:\nThe minority faction, led by Bonino and Marco Cappato, in turn, controlled the RI, as confirmed in their November 2016 congress. In February 2017 the TRP severed its ties with the RI (accused of boycotting the TRP, using its assets without paying for them and pursuing an Italian-only electoral agenda), and the latter could no longer use the Radical headquarters. However, the RI's congress invited its members to adhere to the TRP. The 3,000-member target for 2017 was achieved by the TRP in December, while the RI had launched a pro-Europeanist electoral list named More Europe for the 2018 Italian general election.\nWith the 2019 congress, the TRP, having met the membership targe of 3,000 both in 2017 and 2018, returned to regular business. The new elected leadership included Turco as secretary, Diego Sabatinelli as president of the newly-formed general council and Irene Testa as treasurer, as well as three honorary presidents (Ettore Cannavera, Michael Giffoni and Gaia Tortora).\nIn 2024, the TRP announced an electoral pact with Forza Italia for the 2024 European Parliament election.\nLeadership.\nThe 2016 congress elected a collective Presidency, composed of the following members: Matteo Angioli, Angiolo Bandinelli, Marco Beltrandi, Rita Bernardini (coordinator), Maurizio Bolognetti, Antonella Casu (coordinator), Antonio Cerrone, Deborah Cianfanelli, Maria Antonietta Coscioni, Sergio D'Elia (coordinator), Mariano Giustino, Giuseppe Rippa, Giuseppe Rossodivita, Irene Testa, Maurizio Turco (coordinator and legal representative), Valter Vecellio, and Elisabetta Zamparutti.\nMembers.\nCurrent prominent members (as of December 2017):\nFormer prominent members:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45068", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45068", "title": "Phrase structure rules", "text": "Rewrite rule used to describe a given language's syntax\nPhrase structure rules are a type of rewrite rule used to describe a given language's syntax and are closely associated with the early stages of transformational grammar, proposed by Noam Chomsky in 1957. They are used to break down a natural language sentence into its constituent parts, also known as syntactic categories, including both lexical categories (parts of speech) and phrasal categories. A grammar that uses phrase structure rules is a type of phrase structure grammar. Phrase structure rules as they are commonly employed operate according to the constituency relation, and a grammar that employs phrase structure rules is therefore a \"constituency grammar\"; as such, it stands in contrast to \"dependency grammars\", which are based on the dependency relation.\nDefinition and examples.\nPhrase structure rules are usually of the following form:\nformula_1\nmeaning that the constituent formula_2 is separated into the two subconstituents formula_3 and formula_4. Some examples for English are as follows:\n&lt;chem&gt;S -&gt; NP \\quad VP&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;NP -&gt; (Det) \\quad N1&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem&gt;N1 -&gt; (AP) \\quad N1 \\quad (PP)&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe first rule reads: A S (sentence) consists of a NP (noun phrase) followed by a VP (verb phrase). The second rule reads: A noun phrase consists of an optional Det (determiner) followed by a N (noun). The third rule means that a N (noun) can be preceded by an optional AP (adjective phrase) and followed by an optional PP (prepositional phrase). The round brackets indicate optional constituents.\nBeginning with the sentence symbol S, and applying the phrase structure rules successively, finally applying replacement rules to substitute actual words for the abstract symbols, it is possible to generate many proper sentences of English (or whichever language the rules are specified for). If the rules are correct, then any sentence produced in this way ought to be grammatically (syntactically) correct. It is also to be expected that the rules will generate syntactically correct but semantically nonsensical sentences, such as the following well-known example:\nColorless green ideas sleep furiously\nThis sentence was constructed by Noam Chomsky as an illustration that phrase structure rules are capable of generating syntactically correct but semantically incorrect sentences. Phrase structure rules break sentences down into their constituent parts. These constituents are often represented as tree structures (dendrograms). The tree for Chomsky's sentence can be rendered as follows:\nA constituent is any word or combination of words that is dominated by a single node. Thus each individual word is a constituent. Further, the subject NP \"Colorless green ideas\", the minor NP \"green ideas\", and the VP \"sleep furiously\" are constituents. Phrase structure rules and the tree structures that are associated with them are a form of immediate constituent analysis.\nIn transformational grammar, systems of phrase structure rules are supplemented by transformation rules, which act on an existing syntactic structure to produce a new one (performing such operations as negation, passivization, etc.). These transformations are not strictly required for generation, as the sentences they produce could be generated by a suitably expanded system of phrase structure rules alone, but transformations provide greater economy and enable significant relations between sentences to be reflected in the grammar.\nTop down.\nAn important aspect of phrase structure rules is that they view sentence structure from the top down. The category on the left of the arrow is a greater constituent and the immediate constituents to the right of the arrow are lesser constituents. Constituents are successively broken down into their parts as one moves down a list of phrase structure rules for a given sentence. This top-down view of sentence structure stands in contrast to much work done in modern theoretical syntax. In Minimalism for instance, sentence structure is generated from the bottom up. The operation Merge merges smaller constituents to create greater constituents until the greatest constituent (i.e. the sentence) is reached. In this regard, theoretical syntax abandoned phrase structure rules long ago, although their importance for computational linguistics seems to remain intact.\nAlternative approaches.\nConstituency vs. dependency.\nPhrase structure rules as they are commonly employed result in a view of sentence structure that is \"constituency-based\". Thus, grammars that employ phrase structure rules are \"constituency grammars\" (= phrase structure grammars), as opposed to \"dependency grammars\", which view sentence structure as \"dependency-based\". What this means is that for phrase structure rules to be applicable at all, one has to pursue a constituency-based understanding of sentence structure. The constituency relation is a one-to-one-or-more correspondence. For every word in a sentence, there is at least one node in the syntactic structure that corresponds to that word. The dependency relation, in contrast, is a one-to-one relation; for every word in the sentence, there is exactly one node in the syntactic structure that corresponds to that word. The distinction is illustrated with the following trees:\nThe constituency tree on the left could be generated by phrase structure rules. The sentence S is broken down into smaller and smaller constituent parts. The dependency tree on the right could not, in contrast, be generated by phrase structure rules (at least not as they are commonly interpreted).\nRepresentational grammars.\nA number of representational phrase structure theories of grammar never acknowledged phrase structure rules, but have pursued instead an understanding of sentence structure in terms the notion of schema. Here phrase structures are not derived from rules that combine words, but from the specification or instantiation of syntactic schemata or configurations, often expressing some kind of semantic content independently of the specific words that appear in them. This approach is essentially equivalent to a system of phrase structure rules combined with a noncompositional semantic theory, since grammatical formalisms based on rewriting rules are generally equivalent in power to those based on substitution into schemata.\nSo in this type of approach, instead of being derived from the application of a number of phrase structure rules, the sentence \"Colorless green ideas sleep furiously\" would be generated by filling the words into the slots of a schema having the following structure:\n[NP[ADJ N] VP[V] AP[ADV]]\nAnd which would express the following conceptual content:\nX DOES Y IN THE MANNER OF Z\nThough they are non-compositional, such models are monotonic. This approach is highly developed within Construction grammar and has had some influence in Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar and lexical functional grammar, the latter two clearly qualifying as phrase structure grammars.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45070", "revid": "19346833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45070", "title": "Semantic property", "text": "Aspect of a linguistic unit\nSemantic properties or meaning properties are those aspects of a linguistic unit, such as a morpheme, word, or sentence, that contribute to the meaning of that unit. Basic semantic properties include being \"meaningful\" or \"meaningless\" \u2013 for example, whether a given word is part of a language's lexicon with a generally understood meaning; \"polysemy\", having multiple, typically related, meanings; \"ambiguity\", having meanings which aren't necessarily related; and \"anomaly\", where the elements of a unit are semantically incompatible with each other, although possibly grammatically sound. Beyond the expression itself, there are higher-level semantic relations that describe the relationship between units: these include synonymy, antonymy, and hyponymy.\nBesides basic properties of semantics, semantic property is also sometimes used to describe the semantic components of a word, such as \"man\" assuming that the referent is \"human\", \"male\", and \"adult\", or \"female\" being a common component of \"girl\", \"woman\", and \"actress\". In this sense, semantic properties are used to define the semantic field of a word or set of words.\nSemantic properties of nouns.\nSemantic properties of nouns/entities can be divided into eight classes: specificity, boundedness, animacy, gender, kinship, social status, physical properties, and function.\nPhysical properties refer to how an entity exists in space. It can include shape, size, and material, for example.\nThe function class of semantic properties refers to noun class markers that indicate the purpose of an entity or how humans utilize an entity. For example, in the Dyirbal language, the morpheme \"balam\" marks each entity in its noun class with the semantic property of edibility, and Burmese encodes the semantic property for the ability to cut or pierce. Encoding the functional property for transportation, housing, and speech are also attested in world languages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45071", "revid": "19090830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45071", "title": "Semantic class", "text": "A semantic class contains words that share a semantic feature. For example within nouns there are two sub classes, concrete nouns and abstract nouns. The concrete nouns include people, plants, animals, materials and objects while the abstract nouns refer to concepts such as qualities, actions, and processes. According to the nature of the noun, they are categorized into different semantic classes. Semantic classes may intersect. The intersection of \"female\" and \"young\" can be \"girl\".\nReferences.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45072", "revid": "50305317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45072", "title": "Semantic feature", "text": "A semantic feature is a component of the concept associated with a lexical item ('female' + 'performer' = 'actress'). More generally, it can also be a component of the concept associated with any grammatical unit, whether composed or not ('female' + 'performer' = 'the female performer' or 'the actress'). An individual semantic feature constitutes one component of a word's intention, which is the inherent sense or concept evoked.\nLinguistic meaning of a word is proposed to arise from contrasts and significant differences with other words.\nSemantic features enable linguistics to explain how words that share certain features may be members of the same semantic domain.\nCorrespondingly, the contrast in meanings of words is explained by diverging semantic features.\nFor example, \"father\" and \"son\" share the common components of \"human\", \"kinship\", \"male\" and are thus part of a semantic domain of male family relations.\nThey differ in terms of \"generation\" and \"adulthood\", which is what gives each its individual meaning.\nTheoretical context.\nThe analysis of semantic features is utilized in the field of linguistic semantics, more specifically the subfields of lexical semantics, and lexicology.\nOne aim of these subfields is to explain the meaning of a word in terms of their relationships with other words.\nIn order to accomplish this aim, one approach is to analyze the internal semantic structure of a word as composed of a number of distinct and minimal components of meaning.\nThis approach is called componential analysis, also known as semantic decomposition.\nSemantic decomposition allows any given lexical item to be defined based on minimal elements of meaning, which are called semantic features.\nThe term \"semantic feature\" is usually used interchangeably with the term \"semantic component\".\nAdditionally, semantic features/semantic components are also often referred to as semantic properties.\nThe theory of componential analysis and semantic features is not the only approach to analyzing the semantic structure of words.\nAn alternative direction of research that contrasts with componential analysis is prototype semantics.\nNotation.\nThe semantic features of a word can be notated using a binary feature notation common to the framework of componential analysis.\nA semantic property is specified in square brackets and a plus or minus sign indicates the existence or non-existence of that property.\nIntersecting semantic classes share the same features.\nSome features need not be specifically mentioned as their presence or absence is obvious from another feature.\nThis is a redundancy rule.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45073", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45073", "title": "Credit (disambiguation)", "text": " \nCredit refers to any form of deferred payment, the granting of a loan and the creation of debt.\nCredit may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45074", "revid": "45317835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45074", "title": "Sting", "text": "Sting may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45075", "revid": "42994528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45075", "title": "L. Sprague de Camp", "text": "American fiction writer (1907\u20132000)\nLyon Sprague de Camp (; November 27, 1907 \u2013 November 6, 2000) was an American author of science fiction, fantasy and non-fiction literature. In a career spanning 60 years, he wrote over 100 books, both novels and works of non-fiction, including biographies of other fantasy authors. He was a major figure in science fiction in the 1930s and 1940s.\nBiography.\nDe Camp was born in New York City, one of three sons of Lyon de Camp, a businessman in real estate and lumber, and Emma Beatrice Sprague. His maternal grandfather was the accountant, banker, pioneering Volap\u00fckist and Civil War veteran Charles Ezra Sprague. De Camp once noted that he rarely used pen-names, \"partly because my own true name sounds more like a pseudonym than most pseudonyms do.\"\nDe Camp began his education at the Trinity School in New York, then spent ten years attending the Snyder School in North Carolina, a military-style institution. His stay at the Snyder School was an attempt by his parents, who were heavy-handed disciplinarians, to cure him of intellectual arrogance and lack of discipline. He was awkward and thin, an ineffective fighter, and suffered from bullying by his classmates. His experiences at the school taught him to develop a detached, analytical style considered cold by all but his closest friends, though he could, like his father, be disarming and funny in social situations. He would later recall these challenging childhood experiences in the semi-autobiographical story \"Judgment Day\" (1955).\nAn aeronautical engineer by education, de Camp conducted his undergraduate studies at the California Institute of Technology (where his roommate was at one point noted rocket fuel scientist John Drury Clark), and earned his Bachelor of Science degree from Caltech in aeronautical engineering 1930. He earned his Master of Science degree in Engineering from the Stevens Institute of Technology in 1933. De Camp was also a surveyor and an expert in patents.\nHis first job was with the Inventors Foundation, Inc. in Hoboken, New Jersey, which was taken over by The International Correspondence Schools. De Camp transferred to the Scranton, Pennsylvania, division. He was principal of the School of Inventing and Patenting when he resigned in 1937. His first book \"Inventions and Their Management\" resulted. It was published in July 1937.\nOn August 12, 1939, de Camp married Catherine Crook, with whom he collaborated on science fiction and nonfiction beginning in the 1960s. They had two children.\nDuring World War II, de Camp served as a researcher at the Philadelphia Naval Yard along with his fellow writers Isaac Asimov and Robert A. Heinlein. De Camp eventually rose to the rank of lieutenant commander in the U.S. Navy as a reserve officer. From 1942 to 1989, the de Camps generally lived near Philadelphia; for decades their home was in Villanova, Pennsylvania.\nDe Camp was a member of the all-male literary and dining club the \"Trap Door Spiders\" in New York City, which served as the basis of Asimov's fictional group of mystery solvers the \"Black Widowers.\" De Camp himself was the model for the character named \"Geoffrey Avalon.\"\nDe Camp was a founding member of the Swordsmen and Sorcerers' Guild of America (SAGA), a loosely knit group of heroic fantasy writers that was founded during the 1960s and led by Lin Carter, with entry by credentials as a fantasy writer alone.\nThe de Camps moved to Plano, Texas, in 1989, and Sprague de Camp died there on November 6, 2000, seven months after his wife, on what would have been her birthday, at age 92. His ashes were inurned, together with hers, in the Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia.\nDe Camp's personal library of about 1,200 books was acquired for auction by Half Price Books in 2005. The collection included books inscribed by fellow writers, such as Isaac Asimov and Carl Sagan, as well as de Camp himself.\nCoinage of \"extraterrestrial\" and \"E.T.\".\n\"Extraterrestrial\", a coinage from \"extra\" + \"terrestrial\", meaning from beyond earth, is attested as an adjective as early as 1868, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". Its first use in connection with \"life\" beyond earth was likely by H. G. Wells, in his 1898 novel \"The War of the Worlds\". L. Sprague de Camp is credited with its first usage as a noun with the meaning of \"alien life\" and with coining the abbreviation \"E.T.\" in the first part of his two-part article \"Design for Life\", published in the May 1939 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\".\nHypothesis regarding sea serpent sightings.\nDe Camp made a suggestion in 1968 that fossil discoveries had influenced modern reports of sea monster sightings. The suggestion was made in his article \"Dinosaurs in Today's World\" in \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" v. 34, no. 3, March 1968, later reprinted in his nonfiction collection \"The Fringe of the Unknown\", Buffalo, New York: Prometheus, 1983. In 2019 de Camp's theory was scientifically tested by C. G. M. Paxton and D. Naish, who concluded that trends in the data of reported sightings appear to support his hypothesis.\nBody of work.\nDe Camp was a materialist who wrote works examining society, history, technology and myth. He published numerous short stories, novels, non-fiction works and poems during his career.\nA common theme in many of his works is a corrective impulse regarding similar previous works by other authors. De Camp was frequently disturbed by what he regarded as logical lapses and absurdities in others' writings. Some, like Asimov, felt de Camp's conscientiousness about facts limited the scope of his stories: de Camp was reluctant to use technological or scientific concepts (e.g., hyperspace or faster-than-light travel) if he regarded them as impossible. Thus, his response to Mark Twain's \"A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court\" was to write a similar time travel novel (\"Lest Darkness Fall\") in which the method of time travel was rationalized and the hero's technical expertise was constrained by the technological limitations of the age.\nIn like fashion, he reimagined space opera and planetary romance in his \"Viagens Interplanetarias\" series, and the prehistoric precursor civilizations characteristic of much heroic fantasy in his Pusadian series. When he was not debunking literary conventions he was often explaining them. For example, in the Harold Shea stories co-written with his longtime friend Fletcher Pratt (1897\u20131956), the magical premises of some bodies of myths and legends were accepted but examined and elucidated in terms of their own systems of inherent logic. The civilizations in \"The Compleat Enchanter\", for example, are built upon a cultural and technological reality based on scientific formulas. Characters may be transported to these different worlds, but the magic contained within those worlds is only feasible to the extent that it coincides with the technology of the day (e.g., the combustion engine). De Camp's explanatory tendency also carried over into his non-fictional writings, including advice to science fiction writers on handling the different states of languages in future worlds.\nScience fiction.\nDe Camp's science fiction is marked by his interests in linguistics, ancient history, and the history and philosophy of science. His first published story was \"The Isolinguals\", in the September 1937 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\"\u2014the last issue edited by F. Orlin Tremaine, prior to the long tenure of John W. Campbell. Most of his early science fiction stories were unrelated to each other, the exceptions being his \"Johnny Black\" tales about a black bear uplifted to human-level intelligence, and his \"Drinkwhiskey Institute\" stories, a series of tall tales involving time travel. Campbell's fantasy magazine, \"Unknown\", was suited to de Camp's idiosyncratic imagination, logic, and sense of humor. He contributed ten novels (five as collaborations), much of it characterized by humor and dry wit. De Camp eschewed the intention of being a satirist, insisting, instead, that the stories he wrote were meant less for instruction or improvement, as satire requires, and more for the amusement of his readers.\nDe Camp's treatment of time travel and alternate history in stories such as \"Lest Darkness Fall\" (1939), \"The Wheels of If\" (1940), \"A Gun for Dinosaur\" (1956), \"Aristotle and the Gun\" (1958), and \"The Glory That Was\" (1960) challenged the popular notion of his time that history consisted of an arbitrary series of accidents. Instead, de Camp, through background knowledge and logical thought, systematically demonstrated how technological advances could determine the pattern of an eventful history. \"Lest Darkness Fall\", \"The Wheels of If\" and \"Aristotle and the Gun\" have been recognized as seminal works in the field of alternate history.\nHis most extended work was his \"Viagens Interplanetarias\" series, set in a future where Brazil is the dominant power, particularly a sub-series of sword and planet novels set on the planet Krishna, beginning with \"The Queen of Zamba\". His most influential \"Viagens\" novel was the non-Krishna work \"Rogue Queen\", a tale of a hive society undermined by interstellar contact, which was one of the earliest science fiction novels to deal with sexual themes.\nFantasy.\nDe Camp was best known for his light fantasy, particularly two series written in collaboration with Pratt, the Harold Shea stories (from 1940 et seq.) and Gavagan's Bar (from 1950). Floyd C. Gale in 1961 said that they \"were far and away the finest team of fantasy collaborators\". De Camp and Pratt also wrote some stand-alone novels similar in tone to the Harold Shea stories, of which the most highly regarded is \"Land of Unreason\" (1942), and de Camp wrote a few more of this genre on his own.\nHe was also known for his sword and sorcery, a fantasy genre revived partly by his editorial work on and continuation of Robert E. Howard's Conan cycle. He also edited a series of fantasy anthologies credited with helping to spark the renaissance of heroic fantasy in the late 1960s.\nDe Camp also created three noteworthy sword and sorcery sequences. The Pusadian series (from 1951), composed of the novel \"The Tritonian Ring\" and several short stories, is set in an antediluvian era similar to Howard's.\nMore substantial is the Novarian series (from 1968), of which the core is the \"Reluctant King\" trilogy, beginning with \"The Goblin Tower\", de Camp's most accomplished effort in the genre, continuing in \"The Clocks of Iraz\", and concluding with \"The Unbeheaded King\". The trilogy features the adventurer Jorian, ex-king of Xylar. Jorian's world is an alternate reality to which our own serves as an afterlife. Other novels in the sequence include \"The Fallible Fiend\", a satire told from the point of view of a demon, and \"The Honorable Barbarian\", a follow-up to the trilogy featuring Jorian's brother as the hero.\nThe Incorporated Knight series comprises some 1970s short stories by de Camp and two novels written in collaboration with Catherine Crook de Camp, \"The Incorporated Knight\" (1988) and \"The Pixilated Peeress\" (1991). The early short stories were incorporated into the first of these. The sequence is set in the medieval era of another alternate world sharing the geography of our own, but in which a Neapolitan empire filled the role of Rome and no universal religion like Christianity ever arose, leaving its nations split among competing pagan sects. The setting is borrowed in part from \"Mandeville's Travels\".\nHistorical fiction.\nDe Camp also wrote historical fiction set in the era of classical antiquity from the height of the First Persian Empire to the waning of the Hellenistic period. Five novels published by Doubleday from 1958 to 1969 form a loosely connected series based on their common setting and occasional cross references. They were also linked by a common focus on the advancement of scientific knowledge, de Camp's chosen protagonists being explorers, artisans, engineers, innovators and practical philosophers rather than famous names from antiquity, who are relegated to secondary roles. The best known of his historical novels is \"The Dragon of the Ishtar Gate\".\nNonfiction.\nDe Camp's first book was \"Inventions and Their Management\", co-written with Alf K. Berle and published by International Textbook Company in 1937: a 733-page book with a three-page list of law cases cited.\nHe enjoyed debunking doubtful history and pseudoscientific claims about the supernatural. He conducted extensive research for what was to be a book on magic, witchcraft and occultism, though only the first chapter, \"The Unwritten Classics\" (March 1947), was published in the \"Saturday Review of Literature\". By May 1976, concerned with what Paul Kurtz described as \"an enormous increase in public interest in psychic phenomena, the occult and pseudoscience,\" de Camp joined the newly formed Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal along with astronomers George Abell, Bart Bok, and Carl Sagan; philosophers Brand Blanshard, Antony Flew, Sidney Hook, and Ernest Nagel; authors Isaac Asimov, Daniel Cohen, Charles Fair, Martin Gardner, and Phillip J. Klass; psychologists Ray Hyman and B.F Skinner; and magician James Randi. Despite being a long-time writer of fantasy, de Camp did not believe in ghosts in the supernatural sense. His ghosts dwelt only in his mind as memories of his parents. His mother, he wrote in a \"New York Times Magazine\" article, died of an overdose of faith healing. When considering claims of UFO sightings, astrology, and other subjects considered moot by the scientific community, de Camp would address the circular logic expressed by enthusiasts by insisting on first-hand, unbiased, measurable data to back up the claims. \"In the history of cultism,\" de Camp said in a Science News interview, \"one is always experiencing a feeling of deja vu.\"\nHe explained how ancient civilizations produced structures and architecture that many considered to be impossible for them, such as the Pyramids of Ancient Egypt. Works in this area include \"Lost Continents\", \"Citadels of Mystery\", and \"The Ancient Engineers\".\nSome others of his many and wide-ranging nonfiction works were \"The Great Monkey Trial\" (about the Scopes Trial), \"The Ragged Edge of Science\", \"Energy and Power\", \"The Heroic Age of American Invention\", \"The Day of the Dinosaur\" (which argued, among other things, that evolution took hold after Darwin because of the Victorian interest spurred by recently popularized dinosaur remains, corresponding to legends of dragons), \"Great Cities of the Ancient World\" and \"The Evolution of Naval Weapons\" (a United States government textbook).\nPublished in the July 1938 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\", \"Language for Time Travelers\" won de Camp the first non-fiction readership monthly honor awarded in the magazine for his exploration of the communication difficulties for time travelers as pronunciation and semantics shift over time.\nDe Camp's pioneering biographies of fantasy writers were many short articles and full-length studies of Robert E. Howard and H. P. Lovecraft, the first major independent biographies of both writers. Matthew Hartman, in a review of de Camp's \"Lovecraft: A Biography\", stated that de Camp \"does not defend his subject; he criticizes where criticism is due, and he explains in historical and sociological context, rather than attempting to excuse.\" De Camp's \"warts and all\" approach to his subjects has been branded by some fans as unflattering and unbalanced. For instance, Mark Finn, author of \"\", contends that de Camp deliberately framed his questions in regard to Howard to elicit answers matching his Freudian theories about him.\nDe Camp also wrote nonfiction radio scripts for Voice of America.\nDe Camp wrote a number of lesser-known but nonetheless significant works that explored such topics as racism, which he wrote could be more accurately described as ethnocentrism, noting that no scholar comparing the merits of various ethnicities has ever sought to prove that his own ethnicity was inferior to others. Isaac Asimov recalled de Camp finding the tendency of authors to portray human characters in outer-space science fiction as superior to aliens analogous to northern Europeans imagining they had some inherent superiority over other races.\nAwards and honors.\nDe Camp and Willy Ley won the 1953 International Fantasy Award for nonfiction recognizing their study of geographical myths, \"Lands Beyond\" (Rinehart, 1952). De Camp was a guest of honor at the 1966 World Science Fiction Convention, and was named the third Gandalf Grand Master of Fantasy, after Tolkien and Fritz Leiber, at the 1976 convention. The Science Fiction Writers of America made him its fourth SFWA Grand Master in 1979 and he won the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement in 1984, a Special Achievement Sidewise Award for Alternate History in 1996, citing \"seminal works in the field,\" and the Hugo Award for Nonfiction in 1997 for his autobiography, \"\".\nAt a meeting of the executive council of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI) in Denver, Colorado, in April 2011, de Camp was selected for inclusion in CSI's Pantheon of Skeptics. The Pantheon of Skeptics was created by CSI to remember the legacy of deceased fellows of CSI and their contributions to the cause of scientific skepticism. CSI was previously known as the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP).\nIn popular culture.\nL. Sprague de Camp has been depicted in fictional works by a number of other authors. Randall Garrett conflated him with J. R. R. Tolkien's Gandalf in the character of the magician \"Sir Lyon Gandolphus Gray\" in his Lord Darcy series. He was the model for the \"Geoffrey Avalon\" character in Isaac Asimov's fictional group of mystery solvers the \"Black Widowers,\" and the unnamed court magician in Lawrence Watt-Evans' \"Return to Xanadu\" (\"\", 2005).\nHe also appears without fictional disguise in the short stories \"Green Fire\" by Eileen Gunn, Andy Duncan, Pat Murphy, and Michael Swanwick (\"Asimov's Science Fiction\", April 2000) and \"Father Figures\" by Susan Shwartz (\"The Enchanter Completed: A Tribute Anthology for L. Sprague de Camp\", 2005), and in the novels \"In the Courts of the Crimson Kings\" (2008) by S. M. Stirling and \"The Astounding, the Amazing, and the Unknown\" (2011) by Paul Malmont.\nA semi-fictionalized version of de Camp appears in the third episode of the 2017 TV series \"\", as one of several academics and authors consulted by the FBI on the basis of the citation of their work in the \"Unabomber Manifesto\". In the scene depicting this meeting, de Camp's name appears on a placard as \"L. Sprague de Camp, S.A.G.A. Author, \"The Ancient Engineers\".\" De Camp's name does not specifically appear in the episode credits, which identify the roles of actors in the scene as composite characters. \"The Ancient Engineers\" is cited in endnote 18 of the manifesto.\nSelected works.\nThis selection is limited to books.\nHistorical fiction.\nIn chronological order:\nNonfiction.\nLinguistic studies.\nSome search results can be found through https://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45076", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45076", "title": "Sixth Column", "text": "1941 SF novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nSixth Column, also known under the title The Day After Tomorrow, is a science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, based on a then-unpublished story by editor John W. Campbell, and set in a United States that has been conquered by the PanAsians, who are asserted to be neither Japanese nor Chinese. Originally published as a serial in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (January, February, and March 1941, using the pen name Anson MacDonald) it was published in hardcover in 1949. It is most known for its race-based premise.\nPlot summary.\nA top secret research facility hidden in the Colorado mountains is the last remaining outpost of the United States Army after its defeat by the PanAsians. The conquerors had absorbed the Soviets after being attacked by them and had then gone on to absorb India as well. The invaders are ruthless and cruel. As an example, they crush an abortive rebellion by killing 150,000 American civilians as punishment. Noting that the invaders have allowed the free practice of religion (the better to pacify their slaves), the Americans set up their own church in order to build a resistance movement \u2013 a \"sixth column\", as opposed to a traitorous fifth column.\nThe laboratory is in turmoil as the novel begins. All but six of the personnel have died suddenly, due to unknown forces released by an experiment operating within the newly discovered magneto-gravitic or electro-gravitic spectra. The surviving scientists soon learn that they can selectively kill people by releasing the internal pressure of their cell membranes, among other things. Using this discovery, they construct a race-selective weapon that will stun or kill only Asians.\nBackground.\nThe idea for the story of \"Sixth Column\" was proposed by John W. Campbell, who had written a similar unpublished story called \"All\" (it would eventually be published in the anthology \"The Space Beyond\"). Heinlein would later write that he \"had to reslant it to remove racist aspects of the original story line\" and he also wrote that he did not \"consider it to be an artistic success.\"\nHeinlein's work on Campbell's \"All\" was considerably more than just a re-slanting; Campbell's story was felt to be unpublishable as it stood, written in a pseudo-archaic dialect (sometimes inconsistently), and provided no scientific explanations for miraculous powers of the American super-weapons, which the PanAsians have no explanation for other than to conclude that weapons' powers must be divine. Science fiction writer-critic George Zebrowski believed that Heinlein intended the novel's Calhoun, who, after going insane, believes the false religion created by the Americans, as a parody of Campbell himself. The bulk of Heinlein's work on the novel, e.g. the explanations of the weapons' effectiveness and the strategy for the Americans' rebellion, is not present in \"All\".\nReception.\nBoucher and McComas found the novel to be \"a fine example of serious pulp science fiction.\" P. Schuyler Miller compared \"Sixth Column\" to \"the old E. Phillips Oppenheim or modern Eric Ambler intrigue, thrust and counterthrust with civilization at stake.\"\nPortrayal of racism.\nThe book was serialized in early 1941, at a time that the Second Sino-Japanese War was in its fourth year and large parts of China had been occupied in brutal fashion by the Japanese. The book is notable for its frank portrayal of racism on both sides. The conquerors regard themselves as a chosen people predestined to rule over lesser races, and they refer to white people as slaves. \"Three things only do slaves require: work, food, and their religion.\" They demand outward signs of respect, such as jumping promptly into the gutter when a member of the chosen race walks by, and the slightest hesitation to show the prescribed courtesies earns a swagger stick across the face. One character is Frank Mitsui, an Asian American whose family was murdered by the invaders because they did not fit in the new PanAsiatic racial order. The Americans in the novel respond to their conquerors' racism by often referring to them in unflattering terms, such as \"flat face\" and \"slanty\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45077", "revid": "46271519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45077", "title": "Giacomo Leopardi", "text": "Italian poet, philosopher, and writer (1798\u20131837)\nCount Giacomo Taldegardo Francesco di Sales Saverio Pietro Leopardi (29 June 1798 \u2013 14 June 1837) was an Italian philosopher, poet, essayist, and philologist. Considered the greatest Italian poet of the 19th century and one of the greatest authors of his time worldwide, as well as one of the principals of literary Romanticism, his constant reflection on existence and on the human condition\u2014of sensuous and materialist inspiration\u2014has also earned him a reputation as a deep philosopher. He is widely seen as one of the most radical and challenging thinkers of the 19th century, and one of the crowns of Italian Romanticism together with Alessandro Manzoni, even if he expressed different and sometimes opposing positions compared to the latter. Although he lived in a secluded town in the conservative Papal States, he came into contact with the main ideas of the Enlightenment, and, through his own literary evolution, created a remarkable and renowned poetic work, related to the Romantic era. The strongly lyrical quality of his poetry made him a central figure on the European and international literary and cultural landscape.\nBiography.\nLeopardi was born into a local noble family in Recanati, in the Marche, at the time ruled by the papacy. His father, Count Monaldo Leopardi, who was fond of literature and a committed reactionary, remained an advocate of traditional ideals. His mother, Marchioness Adelaide Antici Mattei, was a cold and authoritarian woman, obsessed with rebuilding the family's financial fortunes, which had been destroyed by her husband's gambling addiction. A rigorous discipline of religion and economy reigned in the home. However, Giacomo's happy childhood, which he spent with his younger brother Carlo Orazio and his sister Paolina, left its mark on the poet, who recorded his experiences in the poem \"Le Ricordanze\".\nFollowing a family tradition, Leopardi began his studies under the tutelage of two priests, but his thirst for knowledge was quenched primarily in his father's rich library. Initially guided by Father Sebastiano Sanchini, Leopardi undertook vast and profound reading. These \"mad and most desperate\" studies included an extraordinary knowledge of classical and philological culture\u00a0\u2013 he could fluently read and write Latin, ancient Greek and Hebrew\u00a0\u2013 but he lacked an open and stimulating formal education.\nBetween the ages of twelve and nineteen, he studied constantly, driven also by a need to escape spiritually from the rigid environment of the paternal palazzo. His continual studies undermined an already fragile physical constitution, and his illness, probably Pott's disease or ankylosing spondylitis, denied him youth's simplest pleasures. He was 1.65 meters (5\u00a0ft 5 in) tall, but his health problems led him to stand only 1,41m (4 feet 8 inches) tall.\nIn 1817 the classicist Pietro Giordani arrived at the Leopardi estate. He became a lifelong friend of Giacomo, who derived from this a sense of hope for the future. Meanwhile, his life at Recanati weighed on him increasingly, to the point where he attempted to escape in 1818, but he was caught by his father and brought home. Thereafter relations between father and son continued to deteriorate, and Giacomo was constantly monitored by the rest of the family.\nWhen in 1822 he was briefly able to stay in Rome with his uncle, he was deeply disappointed by its atmosphere of corruption and decadence and by the hypocrisy of the Church. He was impressed by the tomb of Torquato Tasso, to whom he felt bound by a common sense of unhappiness. While Foscolo lived tumultuously between adventures, amorous relations, and books, Leopardi was barely able to escape from his domestic oppression. To Leopardi, Rome seemed squalid and modest when compared to the idealized image that he had created of it. He had already suffered disillusionment in love at home, with his cousin Geltrude Cassi. Meanwhile, his physical ailments continued to worsen.\nIn 1824, a bookstore owner, Stella, called him to Milan, asking him to write several works, including \"Crestomazia della prosa e della poesia italiane\". He moved during this period between Milan, Bologna, Florence and Pisa. In 1827 in Florence, Leopardi met Alessandro Manzoni, although they did not see things eye to eye. He paid a visit to Giordani and met the historian Pietro Colletta.\nIn 1828, physically infirm and worn out by work, Leopardi refused the offer of a professorship in Bonn or Berlin, made by the Ambassador of Prussia in Rome. In the same year, he had to abandon his work with Stella and return to Recanati. In 1830, Colletta offered him a chance to return to Florence, thanks to a financial contribution from the \"Friends of Tuscany\". The subsequent printing of the \"Canti\" allowed him to live away from Recanati until 1832. Leopardi found kindred company among the liberals and republicans seeking to liberate Italy from its yoke to Austria. Although his idiosyncratic and pessimistic ideas made him a party of one, he railed against Italy's \"state of subjection\" and was \"in sympathy with the ideals of constitutionalism, republicanism and democracy, and supportive of movements urging Italians to fight for their independence.\"\nLater, he moved to Naples near his friend Antonio Ranieri, hoping to benefit physically from the climate. Here he became a close friend of the Freemason Alessandro Poerio, while since 1817 he had an intimate and confidential correspondance with the Freemason Pietro Giordani.\nLeopardi died in Naples during the cholera epidemic of 1837, the immediate cause probably being pulmonary edema or heart failure, due to his fragile physical condition. Thanks to Antonio Ranieri's intervention with the authorities, Leopardi's remains were not buried in a common grave (as the strict hygiene regulations of the time required), but in the atrium of the Church of San Vitale at Fuorigrotta. In 1898 his tomb was moved to the Parco Virgiliano and declared a national monument.\nThere has been speculation in academic circles that Leopardi may have had homoromantic tendencies. His intimate friendships with other men, particularly Ranieri, involved expressions of love and desire beyond what was typical even of Romantic poets. In an account of his time in Tuscany, it was written that he \"became frenzied about love\" whenever in the presence of the handsome younger brother of a woman he and Ranieri both admired (Fanny Targioni-Tozzetti), and that when so frenzied he would direct his sentiments towards Ranieri. In 1830, Leopardi received a letter from Pietro Colletta, nowadays interpreted as a declaration of masonic brotherhood. Leopardi's close friend Antonio Ranieri was a Master Mason. Nonetheless, over the course of his life Leopardi had more than twenty-five sentimental female friendships, such as the ones with Teresa Carniani Malvezzi or Charlotte Napol\u00e9one Bonaparte.\nThe Leopardi family share the origin of Tomasi's family, at the time of the Roman emperor Constantine the Great.\nPoetical works.\nFirst academic writings (1813\u20131816).\nThese were rough years for Leopardi, as he started developing his concept of Nature. At first, he saw this as \"benevolent\" to mankind, helping to distract people from their sufferings. Later, by 1819, his idea of Nature became dominated by a destructive mechanism.\nUp to 1815, Leopardi was essentially an erudite philologist. Only thereafter he began to dedicate himself to literature and the search for beauty, as he affirms in a famous letter to Giordani of 1817. \"Pompeo in Egitto\" (\"Pompey in Egypt\", 1812), written at the age of fourteen, is an anti-Caesar manifesto. Pompey is seen as the defender of republican liberties. \"Storia dell'Astronomia\" (\"History of Astronomy\", 1813) is a compilation of all of the knowledge accumulated in this field up to the time of Leopardi. From the same year is \"Saggio sopra gli errori popolari degli antichi\" (\"Essay on the popular errors of the ancients\"), which brings the ancient myths back to life. The \"errors\" are the fantastic and vague imaginings of the ancients. Antiquity, in Leopardi's vision, is the infancy of the human species, which sees the personifications of its myths and dreams in the stars.\nThe year 1815 saw the production of \"Orazione agli Italiani in Occasione della Liberazione del Piceno\" (\"Oration to the Italians on the liberation of Piceno\"), a paean to the 'liberation' achieved by Italy after the intervention of the Austrians against Murat. In the same year he translated \"Batracomiomachia\" (the war between the frogs and mice in which Zeus eventually sends in the crabs to exterminate them all), an ironic rhapsody which pokes fun at Homer's \"Iliad\", once attributed to the epic poet himself.\nIn 1816 Leopardi published \"Discorso sopra la vita e le opere di Frontone\" (\"Discourse on the life and works of Fronto\"). In the same year, however, he entered a period of crisis. He wrote \"L'appressamento della morte\", a poem in \"terza rima\" in which the poet experiences death, which he believes to be imminent, as a comfort. Meanwhile, there began other physical sufferings and a serious degeneration of his eyesight. He was acutely aware of the contrast between the interior life of man and his incapacity to manifest it in his relations with others.\nLeopardi abandoned his philological studies and moved increasingly toward poetry by reading Italian authors of the 14th, 16th and 17th centuries, as well as some of his Italian and French contemporaries. His vision of the world underwent a change: he ceased to seek comfort in religion, which had permeated his childhood, and became increasingly inclined toward an empirical and mechanistic vision of the universe inspired by John Locke among others.\nIn 1816 the idylls \"Le rimembranze\" and \"Inno a Nettuno\" (\"Hymn to Neptune\") were published. The second, written in ancient Greek, was taken by many critics as an authentic Greek classic. He also translated the second book of the \"Aeneid\" and the first book of the \"Odyssey\". In the same year, in a letter to the compilers of the \"Biblioteca Italiana\" (Monti, Acerbi, Giordani), Leopardi argued against Madame de Sta\u00ebl's article inviting Italians to stop looking to the past, but instead study the works of foreigners, so as to reinvigorate their literature. Leopardi maintained that \"knowing\", which is acceptable, is not the same thing as \"imitating\", which is what Madame de Stael demanded, and that Italian literature should not allow itself to be contaminated by modern forms of literature, but look to the Greek and Latin classics. A poet must be original, not suffocated by study and imitation: only the first poet in the history of humanity could have been truly original, since he had had no one to influence him. It was, therefore, necessary to get as close to the originals as possible, by drawing inspiration from one's own feelings, without imitating anyone.\nThanks to his friendship with Giordani, with whom, in 1817, he had begun a prolific correspondence, his distancing from the conservatism of his father became even sharper. It was in the following year that he wrote \"All'Italia\" (\"To Italy\") and \"Sopra il monumento di Dante\" (\"On the Monument of Dante\"), two very polemical and classical patriotic hymns in which Leopardi expressed his adherence to liberal and strongly secular ideas.\nIn the same period, he participated in the debate, which engulfed the literary Europe of the time, between the classicists and the romanticists, affirming his position in favour of the first in the \"Discorso di un Italiano attorno alla poesia romantica\" (\"Discourse of an Italian concerning romantic poetry\").\nIn 1817 he fell in love with Gertrude Cassi Lazzari and wrote \"Memorie del primo amore\" (\"Memories of first love\"). In 1818 he published \"Il primo amore\" and began writing a diary which he would continue for fifteen years (1817\u20131832), the \"Zibaldone\".\nThe first \"canti\" (1818).\n\"All'Italia\" and \"Sopra il monumento di Dante\" marked the beginning of the series of major works. In the two \"canti\", the concept of \"excessive\" or \"over-civilization\" which is deleterious for life and beauty first makes its appearance. In the poem \"All'Italia\", Leopardi laments the fallen at the Battle of Thermopylae (480 BC, fought between the Greeks under Leonidas and the Persians under Xerxes), and evokes the greatness of the past. In the second \"canto\", he turns to Dante and asks him for pity for the pathetic state of his fatherland. In the great \"canti\" which follow (forty-one, including fragments), there is a gradual abandonment of the reminiscences, of literary allusions and of conventionalisms.\nIn 1819, the poet attempted to escape from his oppressive domestic situation, by travelling to Rome. But he was caught by his father. In this period, his personal pessimism evolves into the peculiar philosophical pessimism of Leopardi. \"Le Rimembranze\" and \"L'appressamento della morte\" also belong to this early period of the art of Leopardi.\nThe \"Idilli\" (1819\u20131821).\nThe six \"Idilli\" (\"Idylls\"), namely \"Il sogno\" (\"The dream\"), \"L'Infinito\" (\"The Infinite\"), \"La sera del d\u00ec di festa\" (\"The evening of the feast day\"), \"Alla Luna\" (\"To the Moon\"), \"La vita solitaria\" (\"The solitary life\") and \"Lo spavento notturno\" (\"Night-time terror\"), followed hard upon the first canti. \"Il sogno\" is still Petrarchesque, while the others which followed are the fruit of a more mature and independent art. Leopardi establishes with nature a sort of accord which attenuates the pain and discomfort.\nIn all of the idylls, the initial sparks, offered by memory or by the sweetness of nature, transmute their colours into the intuition of universal pain, of the transience of things, of the oppressive weight of eternity, of the inexorable passing of time, of the blind power of nature.\n\"L'Infinito\".\n The highest expression of poetry is reached in Leopardi in \"L'Infinito\", which is at once philosophy and art, since in the brief harmony of the verses are concentrated the conclusions of long philosophical meditations. The theme is a concept, which the mind can only with extreme difficulty conceive. The poet narrates an experience he often has when he sits in a secluded place on a hill. His eyes cannot reach the horizon, because of a hedge surrounding the site; his thought, instead, is able to imagine spaces without limits:\n&lt;poem style=\"padding: 1em;\"&gt;\"Sempre caro mi fu quest'ermo colle,\nE questa siepe, che da tanta parte\nDell'ultimo orizzonte il guardo esclude.\"\n\"Always dear to me was this solitary hill,\nand this hedgerow, which from so great a part\nof the farthest horizon excludes the sight.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nAnother interpretation suggests that this hill represents the heights human thought achieves, but at the top, there is a hedge that prevents one from seeing the ultimate horizon, beyond death and existence. Thus this hedge can be interpreted as signifying the limits of human understanding regarding human existence in the Universe. This is why the poem begins with \"Sempre caro mi fu\" which can be translated as \"It was always precious for me\". The silence is deep; when a breath of wind comes, this voice sounds like the voice of present time, and by contrast, it evokes all times past, and eternity. Thus, the poet's thought is overwhelmed by new and unknown suggestions, but \"il naufragar m'\u00e8 dolce in questo mare\" (\"shipwreck / seems sweet to me in this sea.\" English translation by A. S. Kline).\nThe \"Canzoni\" (1820\u20131823).\nLeopardi returns to the evocation of ancient eras and exhorts his contemporaries to seek in the writings of the classics the noble ancient virtues.\n\"Ad Angelo Mai\".\nOn the occasion of the discovery of the \"De Republica\" of Cicero on the part of Mai, Leopardi wrote the poem \"Ad Angelo Mai\" (\"To Angelo Mai\") in which he invokes the figures of many Italian poets, from Dante and Petrarch to Torquato Tasso whom he felt so near to himself, to his contemporary Vittorio Alfieri.\n\"Nelle nozze della sorella Paolina\".\nIn the lyrical \"Nelle nozze\" (\"On the marriage of my sister Paolina\"), an event that failed to happen, in the course of wishing happiness for his sister, the poet uses the opportunity to exalt the strength and the virtue of the women of antiquity and to denigrate his own time because it did not allow one to be virtuous and happy, since only after death are those who have lived a morally good life praised.\n\"Ad un vincitor di pallone\".\nThe canto \"Ad un vincitor di pallone\" (\"To the winner of a ballgame\") expresses disdain for the tedium of a life that is nothing but a monotonous repetition of human affairs and to which only danger can restore value: only he who has been near the gates of death is able to find sweetness in life.\n\"Bruto minore\".\nIn \"Bruto minore\" (\"Brutus the Younger\"), Brutus the assassin of Caesar is depicted as a man who has always believed in honour, virtue and liberty and who has ultimately sacrificed everything for these ideals. He has come to the realization, too late to change things, that everything was done in vain, that everything has been pointless, and that he will even die dishonoured and disgraced for his well-intentioned actions.\nHis meditations bring him to the conclusion that morality is meaningless; Jove rewards only the selfish and plays arbitrary games with hapless mankind. Man is more unhappy than the rest of the animal kingdom because the latter do not know that they are unhappy and therefore do not meditate on the question of suicide and, even if they could, nothing would prevent them from carrying out the act without hesitation.\n\"Ultimo canto di Saffo\".\nSappho is also a tragic figure. In fact, she is a great and generous spirit, an exceptional mind and a sublime character trapped in a miserable body. Sappho loved the light (the loved one, according to the legend, was named Phaon, in Greek \u03a6\u03ac\u03c9\u03bd, from \u03c6\u1ff6\u03c2, light) but her life was made of shadow; she loved nature and beauty, but nature has been like an evil stepmother to her and she, who is sensitive, cultured and refined, is closed in the prison of a deformed body. Nor can the greatness of her genius help to release her from this horror.\nIn Sappho, Leopardi sees himself retarded, but in reality, the poet of Lesbos was neither deformed nor unhappy as she is depicted by Leopardi, who based his depiction on a false traditional belief. Sappho knew, tasted, and sang of beauty and love more than was possible for Leopardi. But the resignation to unhappiness, to pain and to solitude, and the renunciation of the joys of life, sounds in the verses of Leopardi like the sincere sigh of a feminine soul.\nThe canto begins as a sweet apostrophe to the placid nights, once dear to the serene poet, but the words turn rapidly to a violent evocation of nature in tempest which echoes her inner turmoil. The anguishing and accusative questions which Leopardi poses to a destiny which has denied beauty to the miserable Sappho are cut short by the thought of death. After having wished to the man she has loved in vain that little bit of happiness which is possible to attain on this earth, Sappho concludes by affirming that of all the hopes for joy, of all the illusions, there remains to await her only Tartarus.\n\"Alla primavera\" and \"Al conte Carlo Pepoli\".\nThe canti \"Alla primavera\" (\"To Spring\") and \"Al conte Carlo Pepoli\" (\"To Count Carlo Pepoli\") emerge from the same spiritual situation. The first laments the fall of the great illusions (\"gli ameni inganni\") and the imaginary mythological worlds of the past, which embellished and enriched the fantasy of man. The second decries the loss of happiness that has resulted.\nIn \"Alla primavera\", Leopardi praises the ancient times when the nymphs populated the fields, the woods, the springs, the flowers and the trees. Although the lyrical style is apparently classical, it is also pervaded by the characteristic dissatisfaction with the presence of the romantics. Leopardi, here, romanticizes the pure intentions of the Greeks, since he was actually romantic in his sentiments and classical in his imagination and intellect.\nIn the \"Epistolario a Carlo Pepoli\", Leopardi attempts to prove to his friend the thesis (reminiscent of Buddhism) according to which, since life has no other aim but happiness and since happiness is unattainable, all of life is nothing but an interminable struggle. But he who refuses to work is oppressed by the tedium of life and must seek distraction in useless pastimes. Moreover, those who dedicate themselves to poetry, if they have no fatherland, are tormented more than those who do by a lack of freedom because they fully appreciate the value of the idea of nationhood.\nAt this point, a disillusioned Leopardi considers abandoning poetry for philosophy, but without any hope of glory. He has resigned himself to the certainty of pain and of boredom to which mankind is condemned and he therefore believes it necessary to abandon the illusions and poetry in order to speculate on the laws and destiny of the universe.\n\"Alla sua donna\".\nIn 1823, he wrote the canto \"Alla sua donna\" (\"To his woman\"), in which he expresses his ardent aspiration for a feminine ideal which, with love, might render life beautiful and desirable. During his youth, he had dreamt in vain of encountering a woman who embodied such a feminine ideal: a platonic idea, perfect, untouchable, pure, incorporeal, evanescent, and illusory.\nIt is a hymn not to one of Leopardi's many \"loves\", but to the discovery that he had unexpectedly made\u2014at that summit of his life from which he would later decline\u2014that what he had been seeking in the lady he loved was \"something\" beyond her, that was made visible in her, that communicated itself through her, but was beyond her. This beautiful hymn to Woman ends with this passionate invocation:\n\"Operette morali\" (1824).\nBetween the years 1823 and 1828, Leopardi set aside lyric poetry in order to compose his prose magnum opus, \"Operette morali\" (\"Small Moral Works\"), which consists (in its final form) of a series of 24 innovative dialogues and fictional essays treating a variety of themes that had already become familiar to his work by then. One of the most famous dialogues is: \"Dialogo della Natura e di un Islandese\", in which the author expresses his main philosophical ideas.\n\"Canti Pisano-Recanatesi\" (1823\u20131832).\nAfter 1823, Leopardi abandoned the myths and illustrious figures of the past, which he now considered to be transformed into meaningless symbols and turned to writing about suffering in a more \"cosmic\" sense.\n\"Il Risorgimento\".\nIn 1828, Leopardi returned to lyric poetry with \"Il Risorgimento\" (\"Resurgence\"). The poem is essentially a history of the spiritual development of the poet from the day in which he came to believe that every pulse of life had died out in his soul to the moment in which the lyrical and the sentimental were reawakened in him. A strange torpor had rendered him apathetic, indifferent to suffering, to love, to desire, and to hope. Life had seemed desolate to him until the ice began to melt and the soul, reawakening, finally felt the revivification of the ancient illusions. Having reconquered the gift of sentiment, the poet accepts life as it is because it is revived by the feeling of suffering which torments his heart and, so long as he lives, he will not rebel against those who condemn him to live. This recovered serenity consists in the contemplation of one's own conscience of one's own sentiments, even when desolation and despair envelop the soul.\nLeopardi rejoices to have rediscovered in himself the capacity to be moved and to experience pain, after a long period of impassibility and boredom. With \"Risorgimento\", lyricism is reawakened in the poet, who composes canti, generally brief, in which a small spark or a scene is expanded, extending itself into an eternal vision of existence. He revokes images, memories and moments of past happiness.\n\"A Silvia\".\nIn 1828, Leopardi composed perhaps his most famous poem, \"A Silvia\" (\"To Silvia\"). The young lady of the title\u2014possibly the daughter of a servant in the Leopardi household\u2014is the image of the hopes and illusions of the young poet, destined to succumb far too early in the struggle against reality, just as the youth of Silvia is destroyed by tuberculosis, the \"chiuso morbo\". It is often asked whether Leopardi was actually in love with this young woman, but to seek confirmation in biographical evidence is to miss the point of the poem. \"A Silvia\" is the expression of a profound and tragic \"love of life\" itself, which Leopardi, despite all the suffering, the psychological torments and the negative philosophizing, could not suppress in his spirit. This poem demonstrates why Leopardi's so-called \"nihilism\" does not run deep enough to touch the well-spring of his poetry: his love of man, of nature, and of beauty. However, the accusation Leopardi makes against Nature is very strong, as being responsible for the sweet dreams of youth and for the subsequent suffering, after \"the appearance of truth\" (\"l'apparir del vero\", v.60) has shattered them.\n\"Il passero solitario\".\nThe canto \"Il passero solitario\" (\"The Lonely Sparrow\") is of a classical perfection for the structure of the verses and for the sharpness of the images. Leopardi contemplates the bounty of nature and the world which smiles at him invitingly, but the poet has become misanthropic and disconsolate with the decline of his health and youth and the deprivation of all joy. He senses the feast which nature puts forth to him, but is unable to take part in it and foresees the remorse which will assail him in the years to come when he will regret the youthful life that he never lived. In this sense, he is alone just like, or worse than, the sparrow, since the latter lives alone by instinct, while the poet is endowed with reason and free will.\n\"Le Ricordanze\".\nIn 1829, at Recanati, where he was constrained to return, against his wishes, because of increasing infirmity and financial difficulties, the poet wrote \"Le Ricordanze\" (\"Memories\"), perhaps the poem where autobiographical elements are the most evident. It narrates the story of the painful joy of the man who feels his sentiments to be stirred by seeing again places full of childhood and adolescence memories. These sentiments now confront a horrible and merciless reality and deep regret for lost youth. The ephemeral happiness is embodied in Nerina (a character perhaps based on the same inspiration as Silvia, Teresa Fattorini).\nNerina and Silvia are both dreams, evanescent phantasms; life for Leopardi is an illusion, the only reality being death. The woman, Silvia, Nerina, or \"la sua donna\" is always only the reflection of the poet himself, since life itself is, for him, an elusive and deceptive phantasm.\n\"La quiete dopo la tempesta\".\nIn 1829, Leopardi wrote \"La quiete dopo la tempesta\" (\"The Calm After the Storm\"), in which the light and reassuring verses at the beginning evolve into the dark desperation of the concluding strophe, where pleasure and joy are conceived of as only momentary cessations of suffering and the highest pleasure is provided only by death. It also delegates his dignity onto the crowd nor grieving himself on the sorrows he is obsessed and afterwards, his prowess dominates.\n\"Il sabato del villaggio\".\nThe same year's \"Il sabato del villaggio\" (\"Saturday in the village\"), like \"La quiete dopo la tempesta\", opens with the depiction of the calm and reassuring scene of the people of the village (Recanati) preparing for Sunday's rest and feast. Later, just as in the other poem, it expands into deep, though brief and restrained, poetic-philosophical considerations on the emptiness of life: the joy and illusion of expectation must come to an unsatisfactory end in the Sunday feast; likewise, all the sweet dreams and expectations of youth will turn into bitter disillusion.\n\"Canto notturno di un pastore errante dell'Asia\".\nAround the end of 1829 or the first months of 1830, Leopardi composed the \"Canto notturno di un pastore errante dell'Asia\" (\"Night-time chant of a wandering Asian sheep-herder\"). In writing this piece, Leopardi drew inspiration from the reading of \"Voyage d'Orenbourg \u00e0 Boukhara fait en 1820\", by the Russian baron Meyendorff, in which the baron tells of how certain sheep-herders of central Asia belonging to the Kirghiz population practised a sort of ritual chant consisting of long and sweet strophes directed at the full moon. The canto, which is divided into five strophes of equal length, takes the form of a dialogue between a sheepherder and the moon. The canto begins with the words \"Che fai tu Luna in ciel? Dimmi, che fai, / silenziosa Luna?\" (\"What do you do Moon in the sky? Tell me, what do you do, / silent Moon?\"). Throughout the entire poem, in fact, the moon remains silent, and the dialogue is transformed therefore into a long and urgent existential monologue of the sheep-herder, in desperate search of explanations to provide a sense to the pointlessness of existence. The two characters are immersed in an indeterminate space and time, accentuating the universal and symbolic nature of their encounter: the sheep-herder represents the human species as a whole and his doubts are not contingent\u2014that is, anchored to a here and now\u2014but are rather characteristic of man at all times; the moon, on the other hand, represents Nature, the \"beautiful and terrible\" force that fascinates and, at the same time, terrifies the poet.\nThe sheepherder, a man of humble condition, directs his words to the moon in a polite but insistent tone, seething with melancholy. It is precisely the absence of response on the part of the celestial orb which provokes him to continue to investigate, ever more profoundly, into the role of the moon, and therefore into that of humanity, with respect to life and the world, defining ever more sharply the \"arid truth\" so dear to the poetry of Leopardi. In the first strophe, in fact, the sheep-herder, even while defining the moon as silent, actually expects a response from it and discovers many analogies between his own condition and that of the moon: both of them arise in the morning, follow their always self-identical paths and finally stop to rest. The life of the moon, as much as that of the sheep-herder, seems completely senseless. There appears, however, in the middle of this strophe, a very important distinction: the course of human life is finite and its passage, similar to that of a \"vecchierel bianco\" (Petrarch, \"Canzoniere\", XVI), terminates tragically in the \"horrid abyss\" of death. Such a condition, which is defined in the second strophe as a condition of profound suffering (\"se la vita \u00e8 sventura, perch\u00e9 da noi si dura?\") is extremely different from that of the Moon, which seems instead to be eternal, \"virgin\", and \"intact\".\nIn the third strophe, the sheep-herder turns again to the moon with renewed vigour and hope, believing that the orb, precisely because of this privileged extra-worldly condition, can provide him with the answers to his most urgent questions: what is life? What could possibly be its purpose since it is necessarily finite? What is the first cause of all being? But the moon, as the sheep-herder learns quickly, cannot provide the answers to these questions even if it knew them, since such is nature: distant, incomprehensible, mute if not indifferent to the concerns of man. The sheepherder's search for sense and happiness continues all the way to the final two strophes. In the fourth, the sheep-herder turns to his flock, observing how the lack of self-awareness that each sheep has allows it to live out, in apparent tranquillity, its brief existence, without suffering or boredom. But this idea is ultimately rejected by the sheep-herder himself in the final strophe, in which he admits that, probably, in whatever form life is born and manifests itself, whether moon, sheep or man, whatever it is capable of doing, life is equally bleak and tragic.\nIn this period, Leopardi's relations with his family are reduced to a minimum and he is constrained to maintain himself on his own financially. In 1830, after sixteen months of \"notte orribile\" (awful night), he accepted a generous offer from his Tuscan friends, which enabled him to leave Recanati.\nThe last \"Canti\" (1832\u20131837).\nIn the last \"canti\", philosophical investigation predominates, with the exception of \"Tramonto della Luna\" (\"Decline of the Moon\") which is a decisive return to idyllic lyricism.\n\"Il pensiero dominante\".\nIn 1831, Leopardi wrote \"Il pensiero dominante\" (\"The Dominating Thought\"), which exalts love as a living or vitalizing force in itself, even when it is unrequited. The poem, however, features only the desire for love without the joy and the vitalizing spirit and, therefore, remaining thought, illusion. Leopardi destroys everything, condemns everything, but wishes to save love from the universal miasma and protect it at least within the profundity of his own soul. The more desolate the solitude which surrounds him, the more tightly he grasps onto love as the faith in his idealized, illusory, eternal woman (\"sua donna\") who placates suffering, disillusion and bitterness. The poet of universal suffering sings of a good which surpasses the ills of life and, for an instant, seems to become the singer of possible happiness. But the idea of death as the only hope for man returns, since the world offers only two beautiful things: love and death.\n\"Il pensiero dominante\" represents the first ecstatic moment of love, which almost nullifies the awareness of human unhappiness. It is worth the price of tolerating the suffering of a long life in order to experience the joy of such beauty. \"Il pensiero dominante\" and \"Il risorgimento\" are the only poems of joy written by Leopardi, though even in those two poems there always reappears, inextinguishable, the pessimism which sees in the object of joy a vain image created by the imagination.\n\"Amore e Morte\".\nThe concept of the love-death duality is taken up again in the 1832 canto \"Amore e Morte\" (\"Love and Death\"). It is a meditation on the torment and annihilation which accompanies love. Love and death, in fact, are twins: one is the generator of all things beautiful and the other puts an end to all ills. Love makes strong and cancels the fear of death and when it dominates the soul, it makes it desire death. Some, who are won over by passion, will die for it happily. Others kill themselves because of the wounds of love. But happiness consists in dying in the drunkenness of passion. Of the two twins, Leopardi dares to invoke only death, which is no longer symbolized by the horrid Ade of Saffo, but by a young virgin who grants peace for eternity. Death is the sister of love and is the great consoler who, along with her brother, is the best that the world can offer.\n\"Consalvo\".\nAlso in 1832, inspired by a 17th-century poem by Girolamo Graziani titled \"Il Conquisto di Granata\" (\"The Capture of Granada\"), Leopardi wrote \"Consalvo\". Consalvo obtains a kiss from the woman he has long loved unrequitedly only when, gravely injured, he is at the point of death. Consalvo is different from the other canti in that it has the form of a novella in verse or of a dramatic scene. It is the fruit of the sentimental and languid literature which characterized much of the romanticism outside of Italy. \nIn the early 20th century, the poem was placed into a musical setting as a symphonic poem of the same title by the young italian flautist Nicholas Laucella during a premier performance at Carnegie Hall with the New York Philharmonic in 1911.\n\"Aspasia\".\nWritten in 1834, \"Aspasia\" emerges, like \"Consalvo\", from the painful experience of desperate and unrequited love for Fanny Targioni Tozzetti. Aspasia-Fanny is the only real woman represented in the poetry of Leopardi. Aspasia is an able manipulator whose perfect body hides a corrupt and prosaic soul. She is the demonstration that beauty is dishonest.\nThe poet, vainly searching for love, takes his revenge on destiny and the women who have rejected him, above all Targioni, whose memory continues to disturb the poet after more than a year away from her. The memory of the woman loved in vain constantly returns, but the canto, inspired by disdain for the provocative and, simultaneously, distancing behaviour of the woman also expresses resignation to one's fate and the pride of having been able to recover one's own independence. Aspasia, in her limitedness as a woman, cannot grasp the profundity of masculine thought.\n\"A se stesso\".\n\"A se stesso\" (To himself) is an 1833 canto in which Leopardi talks to his heart. The last deceit, love, is dead too. He thought that love was one of the few things that makes life worth living but he changed his mind after his beloved Fanny's refusal. She, moreover, was in love with Antonio Ranieri, Leopardi's best friend, who remained with the poet until the end. His desire, his hope, and his \"sweet deceits\" are ended. His heart has beaten all his life but it's time for it to stop beating and stay still. There is no place for hope anymore. All he wants is dying, because death is the only good gift nature has given to human beings. In \"Love and Death\", love was still considered a good thing because when you are in love you have stronger feelings, you feel alive in an always new way. Now he has become sceptical also about love, because if he can't have Fanny, nothing remains for him in life. He just wants to die, to make all the suffering end. Death is a gift as it is the end of all human pain, which is inevitable because it's in the essence of men, it's in the cruel project of nature. The last verse is \"e l'infinita vanit\u00e0 del tutto\" which means \"and the infinite vanity of the whole\" and it indicates the inanity of human life and the human world.\n\"Sopra un bassorilievo antico sepolcrale\".\nIn the canto \"Sopra un bassorilievo antico sepolcrale\" (\"Over an Ancient Sepulchre Bas-relief\"), a young woman has died and is represented in the act of saying goodbye to her loved ones. The poet weighs the pros and cons of death, remaining in doubt about whether the young woman's destiny is good or bad.\nLeopardi, even while being highly conscious of the indifference of nature, never ceased entirely to love it. In these verses, the poet poses challenging and pointed questions to nature, enumerating the ills and sufferings which, because of death, are inflicted on humanity. Under the influence of love, the poet had apparently found happiness at least in death (\"Il pensiero dominante\", \"Amore e morte\"). Now, instead, even this last illusion has fallen and he sees nothing but unhappiness everywhere.\n\"Sopra il ritratto di una bella donna\".\n\"Sopra il ritratto di una bella donna scolpito nel monumento sepolcrale della medesima\" (\"On the portrait of a beautiful woman sculpted in her sepulchral monument\") is basically an extension of the above.\nThe poet, drawing his inspiration from a funerary sculpture, evokes the image of a beautiful woman and compares her breathtaking beauty to the heart-rendingly sad image that she has become; one that is no more than mud, dust and skeleton. As well as being centred on the transience of beauty and of human things, the poem points to the specular antinomy between human ideals and natural truth. Leopardi does not deny\u2014if anything, he emphasizes\u2014the beauty of the human species in general, and by the end of the poem extends his point to all possible forms of beauty, intellectual as well as aesthetic. However, this universal beauty remains unattainable to a human nature that is nothing but \"polvere e ombra\" (\"dust and shadow\"), and that may touch\u2014but never possess\u2014the ideals that it perceives, remain rooted in the natural world in which it was born, as well as to its demands.\n\"La ginestra\".\nIn 1836, while staying near Torre del Greco in a villa on the hillside of Vesuvius, Leopardi wrote his moral testament as a poet, \"La Ginestra\" (\"The Broom\"), also known as \"Il Fiore del Deserto\" (\"The flower of the desert\"). The poem consists of 317 verses and uses free strophes of hendecasyllables and septuplets as its meter. It is the longest of all the \"Canti\" and has an unusual beginning. In fact, among all the Leopardian canti only this one begins with a scene of desolation, to be followed by an alternation between the enchantment of the panorama and of the starry night sky. On the literary level, it is the maximum realization of that anti-idyllic \"new poetic\" with which Leopardi had already experimented from the 1830s.\nLeopardi, after having described the nothingness of the world and of man with respect to the universe; after having lamented the precariousness of the human condition threatened by the capriciousness of nature, not as exceptional evils but as continuous and constant; and after having satirized the arrogance and the credulity of man, who propounds ideas of progress and hopes, even while knowing he is mortal, to render himself eternal, concludes with the observation that reciprocal solidarity is the only defence against the common enemy which is nature (see \"Operette morali\", \"Dialogo di Plotino e Porfirio\").\nIn this canto, in which Leopardi expresses his vast thought about mankind, history, and nature, autobiographical elements can be found: both direct (the places described are those which surround the poet in his late years) and indirect, in the image of a man who is poor, weak, but courageous enough to be aware of his real condition. The humble plant of ginestra, living in desolate places without surrendering to the force of Nature, resembles this ideal man, who rejects any illusions about himself and does not invoke from Heaven (or Nature) an impossible help.\nVesuvius, the great mountain which brings destruction, dominates the entire poem. The only attainable truth is death, toward which man must inexorably advance, abandoning every illusion and becoming conscious of his own miserable condition. Such awareness will placate mutual hatred.\nIt is a vast poem, symphonically constructed with brilliant alternations of tone, from the grandiose and tragic painting of the volcano threatening destruction and of extensions of infertile lava, to the sharp ideological argumentation, to the cosmic sparks which project the nothingness of the earth and of man in the immensity of the universe, to the vision of the infinite passage of centuries of human history on which the immutable threat of nature has always weighed, to the gentle notes dedicated to the \"flower in the desert\", in which are compressed complex symbolic meanings: pity toward the sufferings of man and the dignity which should be characteristic of man when confronted with the invincible force of a nature which crushes him.\nAn essential change occurs with the \"Ginestra\", which closes the poetic career of Leopardi along with \"Il tramonto della Luna\", which takes up the old themes of the fall of youthful illusions. The poem reiterates and reaffirms the sharp anti-optimistic and anti-religious polemic, but in a new and democratic register. Here, Leopardi no longer denies the possibility of \"civic\" progress: he seeks to construct an idea of progress founded precisely on his pessimism.\n\"Il tramonto della Luna\".\n\"Il tramonto della Luna\" (\"The Waning of the Moon\"), the last canto, was composed by Leopardi in Naples shortly before his death. The moon wanes, leaving nature in total darkness, just as youth passes away leaving life dark and derelict. The poet seems to presage the imminence of his own death.\nIn 1845, Ranieri published the definitive edition of the \"Canti\" according to the will of the author.\nOther poems.\n\"Palinodia al marchese Gino Capponi\".\nIn the \"Palinodia al marchese Gino Capponi\" (\"Palinody to Marquis Gino Capponi\"), Leopardi fakes a retraction (\"Palinodia\") of his pessimism. The work, written in 1835, was intended to be satirical (he first believes that man is unhappy and miserable, but now progress has made him reconsider his position), but the thought of the inevitable destruction to which nature condemns everything leads him to express bitter conclusions in spite of himself. Regarding this work, Marquis Capponi wrote in a letter to Leopardi that he shared, at least in part, many of his ideas and thanked him for the \"noble verses\". However, in a letter addressed to Viesseux, he expressed himself in rather different terms: \"Now it behoves that I write [back] to that damned hunchback who has put it into his head to mock me.\"\n\"Paralipomeni della Batracomiomach\u00eca\".\nThe satiric tone adopted by Leopardi through much of the \"Operette morali\" is also evinced in some of his late poetic texts, such as the \"Palinodia\" and \"I nuovi credenti\". But the clearest demonstration of his mastery of this art form is probably the \"Paralipomeni della Batracomiomachia\", a brief comic-heroic poem of eight stanzas of eight lines each. Leopardi wrote it between 1831 and 1835, beginning it during his last stay in Florence and finishing it in Naples. The publication took place, posthumously, in Paris in 1842, provoking a universal reaction of outrage and condemnation, as much for the cutting and anti-heroic representation of the events of the Risorgimento as for the numerous materialistic philosophical digressions.\nThe term \"Paralip\u00f2meni\" is Greek for \"things left undone or unsaid\". \"Batracomiomach\u00eca\" means \"war between the frogs and the mice\". Batracomiomachia was also the title of a pseudo-Homeric poem which was actually written in the 4th or 5th century BC and translated by Leopardi between 1815 and 1826. The title, therefore, alludes to an integration of the original work, which is taken up again where it left off and the narrative progresses. The subject is a fable regarding the conflict between the mice that inhabit the nation of Topaia and the invading crabs. But behind the plot, there is hidden a robust sarcastic and polemical motivation. The animals and their doings have an allegorical value. In the crabs, portrayed unsympathetically and with monstrous characteristics, are to be recognized as the Austrians; in the mice, sometimes generous but mostly ingenuous and cowardly, the liberal Italians. The poem represents the historical events that took place between 1815 and 1821: the climate of the Restoration desired by the Holy Alliance and the fruitless attempts at the insurrection of 1820\u201321. Even the revolutionary movements of 1831 are included by Leopardi, who was able to follow them by way of the moderate Tuscan circles which he frequented and who perhaps provided him with the inspiration for the work.\nThe adoption of the poetic genre required the abandonment of the lyric style and the adoption of a narrative pace marked by a constant critical-satirical tension toward the ideological and philosophical beliefs of contemporary culture: Christian spiritualism, faith in progress, and anthropocentrism. Even the slogans of the political struggle of the liberals are derided, both in their expression of expectation of foreign intervention and in their faith in the model of a constitutional monarchy. In this fashion, the \"Paralipomeni\" represent another part of Leopardi's polemical war with the present, and above all an exceptional sally into the territory of historical/political commentary, generally not confronted by Leopardi in a direct form. Of the Italian Risorgimento, he delineates the fundamental limits here with an extraordinary tempestivity: the tendency to compromise with ancient interests and constituted powers, the vanity, the opportunism, the ideological ingenuousness, the lack of an opportune pragmatic awareness. The style generally renounces the expressive concentration of the lyric texts and extends itself in a wide and relaxed discursive pace, with alterations between adventurous moments and ferociously caricatural and polemical points, of description and philosophical digressions.\n\"Pensieri\" (1837).\nIn March 1837, shortly before his death, Leopardi announced that he would gather into one volume some \"thoughts\" (\"pensieri\") on man and society. Such a collection was supposed to be part of a French edition of the complete works of Leopardi. A few months later (on 14 June) the poet died, leaving the work incomplete and the fragments were published by his friend Ranieri, who also provided the title.\nThe bulk of the contents of \"Pensieri\" are derived from the \"Zibaldone\". The tone is sharply argumentative with respect to humanity, which Leopardi judges to be malevolent and it almost seems as if the poet wants to take his final revenge on the world.\nPhilosophical works.\nThe \"Zibaldone\".\nThe \"Zibaldone di pensieri\" (see also Commonplace book#Zibaldone) is a collection of personal impressions, aphorisms, philosophical observations, philological analyses, literary criticism and various types of notes which was published posthumously in seven volumes in 1898 with the original title of \"Pensieri di varia filosofia e di bella letteratura\" (\"Miscellaneous Thoughts on Philosophy and Good Literature\").\nThe publication took place thanks to a special governmental commission presided over by Giosu\u00e8 Carducci on the occasion of the centennial anniversary of the poet's birth. It was only in 1937, after the republication of the original text enriched with notes and indices by the literary critic Francesco Flora, that the work definitively took on the name by which it is known today.\nIn the \"Zibaldone\", Leopardi compares the innocent and happy state of nature with the condition of modern man, corrupted by an excessively developed faculty of reason which, rejecting the necessary illusions of myth and religion in favour of a dark reality of annihilation and emptiness, can only generate unhappiness. The \"Zibaldone\" contains the poetic and existential itinerary of Leopardi himself; it is a miscellanea of philosophical annotations, schemes, entire compositions, moral reflections, judgements, small idylls, erudite discussions and impressions. Leopardi, even while remaining outside of the circles of philosophical debate of his century, was able to elaborate an extremely innovative and provocative vision of the world. It is not much of a stretch to define Leopardi as the father of what would eventually come to be called nihilism.\nSchopenhauer, in mentioning the great minds of all ages who opposed optimism and expressed their knowledge of the world's misery, wrote: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But no one has treated this subject so thoroughly and exhaustively as Leopardi in our own day. He is entirely imbued and penetrated with it; everywhere his theme is the mockery and wretchedness of this existence. He presents it on every page of his works, yet in such a multiplicity of forms and applications, with such a wealth of imagery, that he never wearies us, but, on the contrary, has a diverting and stimulating effect.\u2014\u200a\nJohn Gray, reviewing the first complete English translation of the \"Zibaldone\" in 2013, wrote that \"Leopardi\u2019s subtle sensibility eludes conventional intellectual categories and the true achievement of this subversive genius has been little recognised [...] The first full English version of the Zibaldone is a major event in the history of ideas\", stating that, thanks to the translation, \"Leopardi will be ranked among the supreme interrogators of the modern condition\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45080", "revid": "29164674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45080", "title": "Vasco da Gama", "text": "Portuguese explorer (c. 1460s \u2013 1524)\nVasco da Gama ( , ; c.\u20091460s \u2013 24 December 1524) was a Portuguese mariner, explorer and nobleman. His discovery of the first direct maritime route between Europe and India via the Cape of Good Hope and across the Indian Ocean from Malindi in Kenya to Kozhikode was to open up European exploration of, and commerce with, India, and is considered a landmark event and a turning point in World history.\nDa Gama's first voyage (1497\u20131499) was the first to link Europe and Asia using an ocean route that rounded the southern tip of Africa, although he was not the first Portuguese mariner to round the Cape. This route allowed the Portuguese to avoid sailing across the highly disputed Mediterranean Sea and traversing the dangerous Arabian Peninsula. A milestone in Portuguese maritime exploration, this voyage marked the beginning of a sea-based phase of international trade and an age of global imperialism. The Portuguese later established a long-lasting colonial empire along the route from Africa to Asia. The outward and return voyages constituted the longest known ocean voyages ever completed.\nSailors had been trying to reach the Indies for decades, with thousands of lives and dozens of vessels lost in shipwrecks and attacks. Da Gama finally accomplished the feat when he landed at Kozhikode on 20 May 1498. Unchallenged access to the Indian spice routes boosted the economy of the Portuguese Empire, which was previously based along North and coastal West Africa. The main spices first obtained from Southeast Asia were pepper and cinnamon, but other commodities new to Europe were soon included in trade. Portugal maintained a commercial monopoly of these commodities for several decades. It was not until a century later that other European powers were able to challenge Portugal's monopoly and naval supremacy in the Cape Route.\nDa Gama led two of the Portuguese India Armadas, the first and the fourth. The latter was the largest, and departed for India three years after his return from the first. As reward for his accomplishments, da Gama was appointed Governor of India in 1524, with the title of Viceroy, and was ennobled the Count of Vidigueira in 1519. He remains a leading figure in the history of exploration; homages worldwide have celebrated his explorations and accomplishments. The Portuguese national epic poem, \"Os Lus\u00edadas\", was written in his honor by Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es.\nEarly life.\nVasco da Gama was born in the town of Sines, one of the few seaports on the Alentejo coast in southwest Portugal. According to the Portuguese historian Teixeira de Arag\u00e3o, he was born in a house near the church of Nossa Senhora das Salas. Some authors write that he was born in or around 1460, while others give 1469 as the year of his birth.\nVasco da Gama's paternal grandfather and namesake was born in Oliven\u00e7a. Vasco's father was Est\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama, who had served in the 1460s as a knight of the household of Ferdinand, Duke of Viseu. He rose in the ranks of the military Order of Santiago. Est\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama was appointed (civil governor) of Sines in the 1460s, a post he held until 1478; after that he continued as a receiver of taxes and holder of the Order's commendas in the region.\nEst\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama married Isabel Sodr\u00e9, a daughter of Jo\u00e3o Sodr\u00e9 (also known as Jo\u00e3o de Resende), scion of a well-connected family of English descent. Her father and her brothers, Vicente Sodr\u00e9 and Br\u00e1s Sodr\u00e9, had links to the household of Infante Diogo, Duke of Viseu, and were prominent figures in the military Order of Christ. Vasco da Gama was the third of five sons of Est\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama and Isabel Sodr\u00e9 \u2013 in (probable) order of age: Paulo da Gama, Jo\u00e3o Sodr\u00e9, Vasco da Gama, Pedro da Gama and Aires da Gama. Vasco also had one known sister, Teresa da Gama, who married Lopo Mendes de Vasconcelos.\nLittle is known of da Gama's early life. Teixeira de Arag\u00e3o suggests that he studied at the inland town of \u00c9vora, which is where he may have learned mathematics and navigation. Da Gama's near-contemporary Gaspar Correia and others have claimed that he studied under Abraham Zacuto, an astrologer and astronomer, but da Gama's biographer Sanjay Subrahmanyam thinks this dubious.\nAround 1480, da Gama followed his father (rather than the Sodr\u00e9s) and joined the Order of Santiago. The master of Santiago was Prince John, who ascended to the throne in 1481 as King John II of Portugal. John II doted on the Order, and the da Gamas' prospects rose accordingly.\nIn 1492, John II dispatched da Gama on a mission to the port of Set\u00fabal and to the Algarve to seize French ships in retaliation for peacetime depredations against Portuguese shipping \u2013 a task that da Gama rapidly and effectively performed.\nExploration before da Gama.\nFrom the earlier part of the 15th century, Portuguese expeditions organized by Prince Henry the Navigator had been reaching down the African coastline, principally in search of West African riches (notably, gold and slaves). They had greatly extended Portuguese maritime knowledge but had little profit to show for the effort. After Henry's death in 1460, the Portuguese Crown showed little interest in continuing this effort and, in 1469, licensed the neglected African enterprise to a private Lisbon merchant consortium led by Fern\u00e3o Gomes. Within a few years, Gomes' captains expanded Portuguese knowledge across the Gulf of Guinea, doing business in gold dust, melegueta pepper, ivory and sub-Saharan slaves. When Gomes' charter came up for renewal in 1474, Prince John (the future John II), asked his father Afonso V of Portugal to pass the African charter to him.\nUpon becoming king in 1481, John II of Portugal set out on many long reforms. To break the monarch's dependence on the feudal nobility, John II needed to build up the royal treasury; he considered royal commerce to be the key to achieving that. Under John II's watch, the gold and slave trade in West Africa was greatly expanded. He was eager to break into the highly profitable spice trade between Europe and Asia, which was conducted chiefly by land. At the time, this was virtually monopolized by the Republic of Venice, which operated overland routes via Levantine and Egyptian ports, through the Red Sea across to the spice markets of India. John II set a new objective for his captains: to find a sea route to Asia by sailing around the African continent.\nBy the time Vasco da Gama was in his 20s, the king's plans were coming to fruition. In 1487, John II dispatched two spies, Pero da Covilh\u00e3 and Afonso de Paiva, overland via Egypt to East Africa and India, to scout the details of the spice markets and trade routes. The breakthrough came soon after, when John II's captain Bartolomeu Dias returned from rounding the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, having explored as far as the Fish River () in modern-day South Africa and having verified that the unknown coast stretched away to the northeast.\nAn explorer was needed who could prove the link between the findings of Dias and those of da Covilh\u00e3 and de Paiva and connect these separate segments into a potentially lucrative trade route across the Indian Ocean.\nFirst voyage.\nOn 8 July 1497 Vasco da Gama led a fleet of four ships with a crew of 170 men from Lisbon. The distance traveled in the journey around Africa to India and back was greater than the length of the equator. The navigators included Portugal's most experienced, Pero de Alenquer, Pedro Escobar, Jo\u00e3o de Coimbra, and Afonso Gon\u00e7alves. It is not known for certain how many people were in each ship's crew but approximately 55 returned, and two ships were lost. Two of the vessels were carracks, newly built for the voyage; the others were a caravel and a supply boat.\nThe four ships were:\nJourney to the Cape.\nThe expedition set sail from Lisbon on 8 July 1497. It followed the route pioneered by earlier explorers along the coast of Africa via Tenerife and the Cape Verde Islands. After reaching the coast of present-day Sierra Leone, da Gama took a course south into the open ocean, crossing the equator and seeking the South Atlantic westerlies that Bartolomeu Dias had discovered in 1487. This course proved successful and on 4 November 1497, the expedition made landfall on the African coast. For over three months the ships had sailed more than of open ocean, by far the longest journey without landfall made by that time.\nBy 16 December, the fleet had passed the Great Fish River (Eastern Cape, South Africa) \u2013 where Dias had anchored \u2013 and sailed into waters previously unknown to Europeans. With Christmas pending, da Gama and his crew gave the coast they were passing the name Natal, which carried the connotation of \"birth of Christ\" in Portuguese.\nMozambique.\nVasco da Gama spent 2 to 29 March 1498 in the vicinity of Mozambique Island. Arab-controlled territory on the East African coast was an integral part of the network of trade in the Indian Ocean. Fearing the local population would be hostile to Christians, da Gama impersonated a Muslim and gained audience with the Sultan of Mozambique. With the paltry trade goods he had to offer, the explorer was unable to provide a suitable gift to the ruler. Soon the local populace became suspicious of da Gama and his men. Forced by a hostile crowd to flee Mozambique, da Gama departed the harbor, firing his cannons into the city in retaliation.\nMombasa.\nIn the vicinity of modern Kenya, the expedition resorted to piracy, looting Arab merchant ships that were generally unarmed trading vessels without heavy cannons. The Portuguese became the first known Europeans to visit the port of Mombasa from 7 to 13 April 1498, but were met with hostility and soon departed.\nMalindi.\nVasco da Gama continued north, arriving on 14 April 1498 at the friendlier port of Malindi, whose leaders were in conflict with those of Mombasa. There, da Gama and his crew contracted the services of a Gujarati pilot who used his knowledge of the monsoon winds to guide the expedition the rest of the way to Kozhikode, located on the southwest coast of India. One now debased tale describes the pilot as the famous Arab navigator Ibn Majid, but other contemporaneous accounts place Ibn Majid elsewhere, and he could not have been near the vicinity at the time. Ibn Majid was also, aged 77, too old at the time to have made the journey. Vasco da Gama left Malindi for India on 24 April 1498.\nKozhikode, India.\nThe fleet arrived in Kappadu near Kozhikode (known as Kozhikode at the time, subsequently known as Calicut and now renamed Kozhikode) on the Malabar Coast (present-day Kerala state of India) on 20 May 1498. The Zamorin (Samoothiri) of Kozhikode, who was at that time staying in his second capital at Ponnani, returned to the city on hearing the news of the foreign fleet's arrival. The navigator was received with traditional hospitality, including a grand procession of at least 3,000 armed Nairs, but an interview with the Zamorin failed to produce any concrete results. When local authorities asked da Gama's fleet, \"What brought you hither?\", they replied that they had come \"in search of Christians and spices.\" For a moment he thought that he found long-lost Christians. He entered a temple, saw the statue of the Virgin Mary and fell on his knees in front of the statue. It turned out to be the Hindu goddess Parvati in a Brahmin temple. The presents that da Gama sent to the Zamorin as gifts from Dom Manuel\u00a0\u2013 four cloaks of scarlet cloth, six hats, four branches of corals, twelve , a box with seven brass vessels, a chest of sugar, two barrels of oil and a cask of honey\u00a0\u2013 were trivial, and failed to impress. While the Zamorin's officials wondered at why there was no gold or silver, the Muslim merchants who considered da Gama their rival suggested that the latter was only an ordinary pirate and not a royal ambassador. Vasco da Gama's request for permission to leave a factor behind him in charge of the merchandise he could not sell was turned down by the King, who insisted that da Gama pay customs duty\u00a0\u2013 preferably in gold\u00a0\u2013 like any other trader, which strained the relation between the two. Annoyed by this, da Gama carried a few Nairs and sixteen fishermen (\"mukkuva\") off with him by force.\nReturn.\nVasco da Gama left Kozhikode on 29 August 1498. Eager to set sail for home, he ignored the local knowledge of monsoon wind patterns that were still blowing onshore. The fleet initially inched north along the Indian coast, and then anchored in at Anjediva island for a spell. They finally struck out for their Indian Ocean crossing on 3 October 1498. But with the winter monsoon yet to set in, it was a harrowing journey. On the outgoing journey, sailing with the summer monsoon wind, da Gama's fleet crossed the Indian Ocean in only 23 days; now, on the return trip, sailing against the wind, it took more than 90 days.\nDa Gama saw land again only on 2 January 1499, passing before the coastal Somali city of Mogadishu, then under the influence of the Ajuran Empire in the Horn of Africa. The fleet did not make a stop, but passing before Mogadishu, the anonymous diarist of the expedition noted that it was a large city with houses of four or five storeys high and big palaces in its center and many mosques with cylindrical minarets.\nDa Gama's fleet finally arrived in Malindi on 7 January 1499, in a terrible state \u2013 approximately half of the crew had died during the crossing, and many of the rest were afflicted with scurvy. Not having enough crewmen left standing to manage three ships, da Gama ordered the \"S\u00e3o Rafael\" scuttled off the East African coast, and the crew re-distributed to the remaining two ships, the \"S\u00e3o Gabriel\" and the \"Berrio\". While there he was also granted permission by the Sultan to set up a (a stone pillar). The Vasco da Gama Pillar, as it is still known locally, seems to be the only one of the many set up by da Gama to survive to the present day.\nAfter leaving Malindi, the sailing was smoother. By early March, the fleet had arrived in Mossel Bay, and crossed the Cape of Good Hope in the opposite direction on 20 March, reaching the western coast of Africa by 25 April.\nThe diary record of the expedition ends abruptly here. Reconstructing from other sources, it seems they continued to Cape Verde, where Nicolau Coelho's \"Berrio\" separated from Vasco da Gama's \"S\u00e3o Gabriel\" and sailed on by itself. The \"Berrio\" arrived in Lisbon on 10 July 1499 and Nicolau Coelho personally delivered the news to King Manuel I and the royal court, then assembled in Sintra. In the meantime, back in Cape Verde, da Gama's brother, Paulo da Gama, had fallen grievously ill. Da Gama elected to stay by his side on Santiago island and handed the \"S\u00e3o Gabriel\" over to his clerk, Jo\u00e3o de S\u00e1, to take home. The \"S\u00e3o Gabriel\" under S\u00e1 arrived in Lisbon sometime in late July or early August. Da Gama and his sickly brother eventually hitched a ride with a Guinea caravel returning to Portugal, but Paulo da Gama died en route. Da Gama disembarked at the Azores to bury his brother at the monastery of S\u00e3o Francisco in Angra do Heroismo, and lingered there for a little while in mourning. He eventually took passage on an Azorean caravel and finally arrived in Lisbon on 29 August 1499 (according to Barros), or early September (8th or 18th, according to other sources). Despite his melancholic mood, da Gama was given a hero's welcome and showered with honors, including a triumphal procession and public festivities. King Manuel wrote two letters in which he described da Gama's first voyage, in July and August 1499, soon after the return of the ships. Girolamo Sernigi also wrote three letters describing da Gama's first voyage soon after the return of the expedition.\nThe expedition had exacted a large cost \u2013 two ships and over half the men had been lost. It had also failed in its principal mission of securing a commercial treaty with Kozhikode. Nonetheless, the small quantities of spices and other trade goods brought back on the remaining two ships demonstrated the potential of great profit for future trade. Vasco da Gama was justly celebrated for opening a direct sea route to Asia. His path would be followed up thereafter by yearly Portuguese India Armadas.\nThe spice trade would prove to be a major asset to the Portuguese royal treasury, and other consequences soon followed. For example, da Gama's voyage had made it clear that the east coast of Africa, the \"Contra Costa\", was essential to Portuguese interests; its ports provided fresh water, provisions, timber, and harbors for repairs, and served as a refuge where ships could wait out unfavorable weather. One significant result was the colonization of Mozambique by the Portuguese Crown.\nRewards.\nIn December 1499, King Manuel I of Portugal rewarded Vasco da Gama with the town of Sines as a hereditary fief (the town his father, Est\u00eav\u00e3o, had once held as a ). This turned out to be a complicated affair, for Sines still belonged to the Order of Santiago. The master of the Order, Jorge de Lencastre, might have endorsed the reward \u2013 after all, da Gama was a Santiago knight, one of their own, and a close associate of Lencastre himself. But the fact that Sines was awarded by the king provoked Lencastre to refuse out of principle, lest it encourage the king to make other donations of the Order's properties. Da Gama would spend the next few years attempting to take hold of Sines, an effort that would estrange him from Lencastre and eventually prompt da Gama to abandon his beloved Order of Santiago, switching over to the rival Order of Christ in 1507.\nIn the meantime, da Gama made do with a substantial hereditary royal pension of 300,000 . He was awarded the noble title of (lord) in perpetuity for himself, his siblings and their descendants. On 30 January 1502, da Gama was awarded the title of (\"Admiral of the Seas of Arabia, Persia, India and all the Orient\") \u2013 an overwrought title reminiscent of the ornate Castilian title borne by Christopher Columbus. Another royal letter, dated October 1501, gave da Gama the personal right to intervene and exercise a determining role on \"any\" future India-bound fleet.\nAround 1501, Vasco da Gama married Catarina de Ata\u00edde, daughter of \u00c1lvaro de Ata\u00edde, the \"\" of Alvor (Algarve), and a prominent nobleman connected by kinship with the powerful Almeida family (Catarina was a first cousin of Dom Francisco de Almeida).\nSecond voyage.\nThe follow-up expedition, the Second India Armada, launched in 1500 under the command of Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral with the mission of making a treaty with the Zamorin of Kozhikodeand setting up a Portuguese factory in the city. However, Pedro Cabral entered into a conflict with the local Arab merchant guilds, with the result that the Portuguese factory was overrun in a riot and up to 70 Portuguese were killed. Cabral blamed the Zamorin for the incident and bombarded the city. Thus war broke out between Portugal and Kozhikode.\nVasco da Gama invoked his royal letter to take command of the Fourth India Armada, scheduled to set out in 1502, with the explicit aim of taking revenge upon the Zamorin and force him to submit to Portuguese terms. The heavily armed fleet of fifteen ships and eight hundred men left Lisbon on 12 February 1502. It was followed in April by another squadron of five ships led by his cousin, Est\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama (the son of Aires da Gama), which caught up to them in the Indian Ocean. The Fourth Armada was a veritable da Gama family affair. Two of his maternal uncles, Vicente Sodr\u00e9 and Br\u00e1s Sodr\u00e9, were pre-designated to command an Indian Ocean naval patrol, while brothers-in-law \u00c1lvaro de Ata\u00edde (brother of Vasco's wife Catarina) and Lopo Mendes de Vasconcelos (betrothed to Teresa da Gama, Vasco's sister) captained ships in the main fleet.\nOn the outgoing voyage, da Gama's fleet opened contact with the East African gold trading port of Sofala and reduced the sultanate of Kilwa to tribute, extracting a substantial sum of gold.\nPilgrim ship incident.\nOn reaching India in October 1502, da Gama's fleet intercepted \"Mirim\", a ship of Muslim pilgrims at Madayi travelling from Kozhikode to Mecca. Described in detail by eyewitness Thom\u00e9 Lopes and chronicler Gaspar Correia, da Gama looted the ship with over 400 pilgrims on board including 50 women, locked in the passengers, the owner and an ambassador from Egypt and burned them to death. They offered their wealth, which \"could ransom all the Christian slaves in the Kingdom of Fez and much more\" but were not spared. Da Gama looked on through the porthole and saw the women bringing up their gold and jewels and holding up their babies to beg for mercy. The lives of twenty children were spared against a forced conversion to Christianity.\nKozhikode.\nAfter stopping at Cannanore, Gama drove his fleet before Kozhikode, demanding redress for the treatment of Cabral. Having known of the fate of the pilgrims' ship, the Zamorin adopted a conciliatory attitude towards the Portuguese and expressed willingness to sign a new treaty, but da Gama made a call to the Hindu king to expel all Muslims from Kozhikode before beginning negotiations, which was turned down. At the same time however, the Zamorin sent a message to his rebellious vassal, the Raja of Cochin, urging cooperation and obedience to counter the Portuguese threat; the ruler of Cochin forwarded this message to Gama, which reinforced his opinion of the Indians as duplicitous. After da Gama's demand for the expulsion of Muslims from Kozhikode, the Zamorin sent the high priest Talappana Namboothiri (the very same person who conducted da Gama to the Zamorin's chamber during his much celebrated first visit to Kozhikodein May 1498) for talks. Da Gama called him a spy, ordered the priest's lips and ears to be cut off and after sewing a pair of dog's ears to his head, sent him away. The Portuguese fleet then bombarded the unfortified city for nearly two days from the sea, severely damaging it. He also captured several rice vessels and cut off the crew's hands, ears and noses, dispatching them with a note to the Zamorin, in which Gama declared that he would be open to friendly relations once the Zamorin had paid for the items plundered from the feitoria as well as the gunpowder and cannonballs.\nSea battle.\nThe violent treatment meted out by da Gama quickly brought trade along the Malabar Coast of India, upon which Calicut (Kozhikode) depended, to a standstill. The Zamorin ventured to dispatch a fleet of strong warships to challenge da Gama's armada, but which Gama managed to defeat in a naval battle before Kozhikode harbor.\nCochin.\nDa Gama loaded up with spices at Cochin and Cannanore, small nearby kingdoms at war with the Zamorin, whose alliances had been secured by prior Portuguese fleets. The 4th armada left India in early 1503. Da Gama left behind a small squadron of caravels under the command of his uncle, Vicente Sodr\u00e9, to patrol the Indian coast, to continue harassing Kozhikode shipping, and to protect the Portuguese factories at Cochin and Cannanore from the Zamorin's inevitable reprisals.\nVasco da Gama arrived back in Portugal in September 1503, effectively having failed in his mission to bring the Zamorin to submission. This failure, and the subsequent more galling failure of his uncle Vicente Sodr\u00e9 to protect the Portuguese factory in Cochin, probably counted against any further rewards. When the Portuguese king Manuel I decided to appoint the first governor and viceroy of Portuguese India in 1505, da Gama was conspicuously overlooked, and the post given to Francisco de Almeida.\nInterlude.\nFor the next two decades, Vasco da Gama lived out a quiet life, unwelcome in the royal court and sidelined from Indian affairs. His attempts to return to the favor of Manuel I, including switching over to the Order of Christ in 1507, yielded little. Almeida, the larger-than-life Afonso de Albuquerque and, later on, Albergaria and Sequeira, were the king's preferred point men for India.\nAfter Ferdinand Magellan defected to the Crown of Castile in 1518, Vasco da Gama threatened to do the same, prompting the king to undertake steps to retain him in Portugal and avoid the embarrassment of losing his own \"Admiral of the Indies\" to Spain. In 1519, after years of ignoring his petitions, King Manuel I finally hurried to give Vasco da Gama a feudal title, appointing him the first Count of Vidigueira, a title created by a royal decree issued in \u00c9vora on 29 December, after a complicated agreement with Dom Jaime, Duke of Braganza, who ceded him on payment the towns of Vidigueira and Vila dos Frades. The decree granted Vasco da Gama and his heirs all the revenues and privileges related, thus promoting da Gama from a petty noble to one of the relatively few titled nobles in Portugal.\nThird voyage and death.\nAfter the death of King Manuel I in late 1521, his son and successor, King John III of Portugal set about reviewing the Portuguese government overseas. Turning away from the old Albuquerque clique (now represented by Diogo Lopes de Sequeira), John III looked for a fresh start. Vasco da Gama re-emerged from his political wilderness as an important adviser to the new king's appointments and strategy. Seeing the new Spanish threat to the Maluku Islands as the priority, Vasco da Gama advised against the obsession with Arabia that had pervaded much of the Manueline period, and continued to be the dominant concern of Duarte de Menezes, then-governor of Portuguese India. Menezes also turned out to be incompetent and corrupt, subject to numerous complaints. As a result, John III decided to appoint Vasco da Gama himself to replace Menezes, confident that the magic of his name and memory of his deeds might better impress his authority on Portuguese India, and manage the transition to a new government and new strategy.\nBy his appointment letter of February 1524, John III granted Vasco da Gama the privileged title of \"Viceroy\", being only the second Portuguese governor to enjoy that title (the first was Francisco de Almeida in 1505). His second son, Est\u00eav\u00e3o da Gama was simultaneously appointed ('Captain-major of the Indian Sea', commander of the Indian Ocean naval patrol fleet), to replace Duarte's brother, Lu\u00eds de Menezes. As a final condition, Gama secured from John III of Portugal the commitment to appoint all his sons successively as Portuguese captains of Malacca.\nSetting out in April 1524, with a fleet of fourteen ships, Vasco da Gama took as his flagship the famous large carrack \"Santa Catarina do Monte Sinai\" on her last journey to India, along with two of his sons, Est\u00eav\u00e3o and Paulo. \nThe underwater quake.\nAfter a troubled journey in which four or five of the ships were lost en route, he arrived in India in September. \nEarly on the morning of September 8, as the ships laid becalmed near Dabul the sea began to boil and the vessels pitched and rocked violently for about an hour as the result of a submarine earthquake. The Portuguese crews were frightened, and one death occurred as a sailor jumped overboard in panic and drowned. Gama capitalized on the situation and so as to reassure his men cried out:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDeath.\nVasco da Gama immediately invoked his high viceregal powers to impose a new order in Portuguese India, replacing all the old officials with his own appointments. But da Gama contracted malaria not long after arriving and died in the city of Cochin in india on Christmas Eve in 1524, three months after his arrival. As per royal instructions, da Gama was succeeded as governor of India by one of the captains who had come with him, Henrique de Menezes (no relation to Duarte). Da Gama's sons Est\u00eav\u00e3o and Paulo immediately lost their posts and joined the returning fleet of early 1525 (along with the dismissed Duarte de Menezes and Lu\u00eds de Menezes).\nVasco da Gama's body was first buried at St. Francis Church, at Fort Kochi in the city of Kochi, but his remains were returned to Portugal in 1539. The body of Vasco da Gama was re-interred in Vidigueira in a casket decorated with gold and jewels.\nThe Monastery of the Hieronymites, in Bel\u00e9m, which later became the necropolis of the Portuguese royal dynasty of Aviz, was erected in the early 1500s near the launch point of Vasco da Gama's first journey; its construction funded by a tax on the profits of the yearly Portuguese India Armadas. In 1880, what were believed to be da Gama's remains and those of the poet Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es (who celebrated da Gama's first voyage in his 1572 epic poem, \"Os Lus\u00edadas\"), were moved to new carved tombs in the nave of the monastery's church, only a few meters away from the tombs of the kings Manuel I and John III, whom da Gama had served.\nHowever, by 1884, Teixeira de Arag\u00e3o, one of the advocates for the transfer of da Gama's remains to the monastery, discovered documents suggesting that the wrong remains had been exhumed from Vidigueira. Apparently, da Gama's gravestone had been exchanged with that of his great-grandson Francisco da Gama, whose tomb lay opposite his, likely during restoration works in 1841. Additionally, it was found that the casket moved in 1880 contained the bones of more than one person, whereas the other tomb contained only one skeleton. It was not until May 1898, during the celebrations of the fourth centenary of da Gama's arrival in Kozhikode, that the remains from the other tomb in the chapel of Vidigueira were moved to the Hieronymite monastery. In 1994, a member of the family that now owns the estate where da Gama's remains were until the 1880s claimed that the real bones of Vasco da Gama were located in an unmarked spot on the estate, purportedly having been hidden there by the estate's owner in the 19th century, the Visconde de Ribeira Brava.\nMarriage and descendants.\nVasco da Gama and his wife, Catarina de Ata\u00edde, had six sons and one daughter:\nHis male-line issue became extinct in 1735, when the 7th Count of Vidigueira, Dom Vasco Baltasar Jos\u00e9 Lu\u00eds Gama died, leaving only one daughter from his marriage, Dona Maria Jos\u00e9 da Gama, who inherited the Vidigueira estate. The title thus continued through this female-line.\nLegacy.\nVasco da Gama is one of the most celebrated explorers from the Age of Discovery. Along with Henry the Navigator, he was one of the main people responsible for Portugal's success as an early colonizing power. Beside the first voyage to India, his astute mix of politics and war placed Portugal in a prominent position in Indian Ocean trade. Following da Gama's initial voyage, the Portuguese crown realized that securing outposts on the east coast of Africa would prove vital to maintaining national trade routes to the Far East. However, his fame is tempered by attitudes as displayed in the notorious Pilgrim Ship Incident.\nVasco da Gama reached the final pool of Os Grandes Portugueses (the Greatest Portuguese). The Portuguese national epic, the \"Lus\u00edadas\" of Lu\u00eds Vaz de Cam\u00f5es, largely concerns Vasco da Gama's voyages. The 1865 grand opera \"L'Africaine\", composed by Giacomo Meyerbeer from a libretto by Eug\u00e8ne Scribe, prominently includes the character of Vasco da Gama. The events depicted, however, are fictitious. Meyerbeer's working title for the opera was \"Vasco da Gama\". A 1989 production by the San Francisco Opera featured tenor Pl\u00e1cido Domingo in the role of da Gama. The 19th-century composer Louis-Albert Bourgault-Ducoudray composed an eponymous 1872 opera based on da Gama's life and exploits at sea. South African musician Hugh Masekela recorded an anti-colonialist song entitled \"Colonial Man\", which contains the lyrics \"Vasco da Gama was no friend of mine\", and another song entitled \"Vasco da Gama (The Sailor Man)\". Both were included in his 1976 album \"Colonial Man\".\nSeveral places in Lisbon's Parque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es are named after the explorer, such as the Vasco da Gama Bridge, Vasco da Gama Tower and the \"Centro Comercial Vasco da Gama\" shopping centre. The Ocean\u00e1rio in the Parque das Na\u00e7\u00f5es has a mascot of a cartoon diver with the name of \"Vasco\". The Portuguese Navy has a class of frigates named after him. There are three \"Vasco da Gama\" class frigates in total, of which the first one also bears his name. The Portuguese government erected two navigational beacons, Dias Cross and da Gama Cross, to commemorate da Gama and Bartolomeu Dias, who were the first modern European explorers to reach the Cape of Good Hope. When lined up, these crosses point to Whittle Rock, a large, permanently submerged shipping hazard in False Bay.\nThe port city of Vasco da Gama, Goa is named after him, as is the crater Vasco da Gama on the Moon. There are three football clubs in Brazil (including CR Vasco da Gama) and Vasco SC in Goa that were named after him. There is a church in Kochi, Kerala called Vasco da Gama Church, and a private residence on the island of Saint Helena. The suburb of Vasco in Cape Town honours him. The Vasco da Gama Garden in Macau is named after him. Vasco da Gama appears as an antagonist in the Indian film \"Urumi\". The film, directed by Santosh Sivan, depicts atrocities and progression to establish the Portuguese empire by da Gama in India.\nIn 2016, archaeologists working off the coast of Oman identified a shipwreck believed to be that of the \"Esmeralda\" from da Gama's 1502\u201303 fleet. The wreck was initially discovered in 1998. Underwater excavations took place between 2013 and 2015 through a partnership between the Oman Ministry of Heritage and Culture and Blue Water Recoveries Ltd., a shipwreck recovery company. The vessel was identified through such artifacts as a \"Portuguese coin minted for trade with India (one of only two coins of this type known to exist) and stone cannonballs engraved with what appear to be the initials of Vincente Sodr\u00e9, da Gama's maternal uncle and the commander of the \"Esmeralda\".\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45081", "revid": "39619725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45081", "title": "The Puppet Masters", "text": "1951 SF novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Puppet Masters is a 1951 science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, in which American secret agents battle parasitic invaders from outer space. It was originally serialized in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" (September, October, and November 1951).\nThe novel evokes a sense of paranoia and Heinlein repeatedly makes explicit the analogy between the mind-controlling parasites and the Communist Russians, echoing the prevailing Second Red Scare in the United States. The book takes up the then common theme of sightings of flying saucers, the plot assuming that the \"saucers\" seen in the 1950s were part of a preliminary reconnaissance of Earth, carried out by the extraterrestrials in preparation for a full-fledged invasion sixty years later.\nBackground.\nThe novel starts in 2007. Following a nuclear war between the Soviet Union and the Western Bloc, which left both sides battered but unbroken, both sides return to a state of Cold War. Washington, D.C., and other US cities devastated in nuclear strikes had been completely rebuilt. The Soviet Union and China remain a single bloc dominated by Moscow, and the sharp Sino-Soviet split of the late 1950s never happened.\nSocial customs have changed somewhat, in a way typical for Heinlein's fiction (i.e. having become more liberal, such as marriage contracts being possible with fixed terms, etc.) and ray guns and personal flying cars are commonplace. \"Slug throwing guns\" remain in possession of some private citizens, but are considered obsolete by professionals. Space stations exist and colonies have been established on the planet Venus (depicted, as common in science fiction of the time, as a tropical planet habitable by humans). There exists a wakefulness-promoting drug known as \"tempus fugit\" that most agents carry a tube of. Although they are considered not habit-forming, they do produce a mild euphoria, but are mostly used to stretch out the user's subjective perception of time 'by a factor of ten or more'.\nSpace technology is far more advanced than in the actual first decade of the 21st century. For example, in the last scene, a space warship is sent on a twelve-year trip to Titan, with not only life-support for a large crew, but also enough armaments to confront an entire world on its own.\nHowever, communications satellites have not been thought of, and television broadcasts are still limited to line-of-sight, as they were at the time of writing. This is of critical importance to the plot. The territory of the United States is divided into numerous transmission blocks, which receive television broadcasts from their neighbors and relay them onwards. When the invaders seize one of these blocks, they effectively control all communications within it and can isolate its inhabitants from the outside world, deny the central government any access to them, and consolidate control at their leisure.\nThe current president\u2014on his second term\u2014had established directly upon being first elected a new intelligence agency, known as the Section. Its creation was never authorized by Congress and its existence is kept secret, being funded by sums diverted from innocuous sounding items in the budget. It has a disguised underground headquarters in Washington, D.C., and a network of similarly disguised branch offices around the US. Unlike the clearly demarked spheres of the FBI and CIA, the Section carries out extensive espionage in Soviet territory, but also conducts operations inside the United States. If ordered to, its agents are ready to shoot and kill American citizens on US soil. The Section's Director, who had been the president's campaign manager, is universally called \"The Old Man\". Only gradually does the reader learn that he is the protagonist's actual father.\nPlot.\nIn the summer of 2007, Earth is under attack. Slug-like creatures, arriving in flying saucers, are attaching themselves to people's backs, taking control of their victims' nervous systems, and manipulating those people as puppets. The Old Man, the head of a clandestine national security agency called the Section, goes to Des Moines, Iowa, with Sam and Mary, two of his best agents, to investigate a flying saucer report, but much more seriously the ominous disappearance of the six agents sent previously. They discover that \"the slugs\" are steadily taking over Des Moines, but they cannot convince the US president to declare an emergency.\nSam takes two other agents and returns to Des Moines to get more evidence of the invasion. They fail and are forced to flee quickly, but in the confusion, a slug gains control of one of the agents. Back in Washington the team discovers the slug and captures it, but later it escapes and attaches itself to Sam, using Sam's skills and knowledge to make a clean escape.\nWhile under control, Sam uses the Constitution Club\u2014whose membership includes many important members of the city's political elite\u2014to gain more hosts for the slugs. The Old Man captures him, takes him to Section's new headquarters, and later coerces Sam into allowing himself to be possessed by the slug again. Under drug-induced hypnosis, Sam reveals that the slugs come from Titan, the sixth moon of Saturn. Later the Section exposes several possessed congressmen at a session of Congress, finally persuading the Congress that the United States is under attack. The law is passed requiring people to have bare backs to demonstrate that they are not carrying slugs.\nThe Army prepares a counterattack in the most heavily infested areas, planning to take over most broadcast centers and reveal the truth to the local residents. Sam drives alone to Kansas City and discovers that the slugs now possess almost all residents. He returns to Washington too late to stop the operation, which fails; the invading soldiers are either killed or captured by the slugs.\nSam and Mary take a short leave, get married and have a happy honeymoon that is interrupted by a slug that seems to have been targeting Sam for repossession. They return to work and discover that people are now required to be practically naked as the slugs learned to attach themselves to other body parts. Together with the Old Man, they go to Pass Christian, Mississippi, to inspect a flying saucer that had made a bad landing. Inside the alien ship, Mary is overwhelmed by repressed memories from the time she was a child on Venus and had been possessed by a slug. The slug had died from \"nine-day fever\", a deadly disease native to Venus.\nLearning that the disease kills slugs faster than their human hosts, the authorities adopt biological warfare and release infected apes into enemy-held territory. Slugs possess the apes and then quickly transmit the disease to each other. Several carefully timed days later, thousands of volunteers are parachuted to administer the cure to those people whose slugs have died. Sam and the Old Man join the effort in Jefferson City, Missouri.\nThe Old Man gets possessed by the last healthy slug in the city, captures Sam and escapes in an air-car heading to the Yucat\u00e1n, where the slug intends to restart its effort to conquer humanity. Sam manages to kill the slug and crash the air-car.\nSome years later, Sam and Mary board a spaceship headed for Saturn to take the offensive. Sam expresses the hope that a way would be found to save the small elf-like hosts whom the slugs enslaved.\nAlternative version.\nHeinlein's original version of the novel was 96,000 words, and was cut to 72,000 words for both the 1951 book version and the serialization in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\". For the \"Galaxy\" version, editor H. L. Gold also did extensive rewriting, to which Heinlein strenuously objected.\nIn 1990, two years after Heinlein's death, an expanded version was published with the consent of his widow, Virginia Heinlein. This edition contained material that had been cut from the original published version, because the book was deemed to be too long and controversial for the market in 1951. The uncut version seemed more risqu\u00e9 in 1951 than it did decades later. For example, in the uncut version the book begins with Sam waking up in bed with a blonde whom he had casually picked up the evening before, without even bothering to learn her name; the older version omitted all mention of her. The 1951 version does mention that men possessed by the invaders lost all sexual feeling\u2014an essential element in the early parts of the plot; the original publisher completely cut out a reference to the \"puppet masters\" later discovering human sexuality and embarking upon wild orgies, broadcast live on television in the areas under their control. Also all references to the Soviet Union were eliminated.\nReception.\nBoucher and McComas characterized \"The Puppet Masters\" as \"a thunderously exciting melodrama of intrigue\", noting that Heinlein displayed \"not only his usual virtues of clear logic, rigorous detail-work, and mastery of indirect exposition\", but also unexpected virtues like \"a startling facility in suspense devices [and] a powerful ingenuity in plotting\". P. Schuyler Miller, noting that the novel's \"climactic situations seem to be telegraphed\", suggested that Heinlein presented his background situations so effectively that readers solve the story's mysteries more quickly than Heinlein allowed his characters to. In his \"Books\" column for \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", Damon Knight selected the novel as one of the 10 best SF books of the 1950s.\nThe book was also reviewed in the 15 June 1951 issue of \"Kirkus Reviews\". The reviewer wrote\nThe recurrent enigma of the flying saucer is finally solved when an aerial pieplate is caught with its exhaust down by the F.B.I. of 2007. Hero Sam penetrates the contaminated area, brings a 'master' back\u2014a gelatinous gray mass which attaches itself to a soldier's body and controls his thought processes. Sam and his girl spot further landings, plan a counter campaign and eventually are able to rid the solar system of its parasites. Exciting, even if it exacts a strong stomach.\nAdaptations.\n\"The Brain Eaters\", a 1958 science fiction film directed by Bruno VeSota, bore a number of similarities to Heinlein's novel. Heinlein sued the film's producers, including executive producer Roger Corman, for plagiarism, asking $150,000 in damages. The case was settled out of court for $5,000, which included Heinlein's stipulation that his name not be used on screen or in any way with the production. The case halted actor John Payne's intention of producing a film based on Heinlein's novel.\nThe theme of the novel is echoed in \"The Invisibles\", an episode of \"The Outer Limits\" aired in 1964, and also in \"Operation -- Annihilate!\", the last episode of the first season of ' in 1967. Similarly, in the story line begun in the ' episode \" and completed in \", aliens from a faraway sector invade the bodies of high-ranking Starfleet admirals in an attempt to compromise the command structure and spearhead an invasion of Earth.\nThe novel was adapted, with some plot and character changes, into the 1994 film of the same name.\nInfluence.\n\"The Body Snatchers\" by Jack Finney (1954) takes up a similar premise of extraterrestrials taking over the bodies of humans. Also in the plot of the 1956 \"What Mad Universe\" by Fredric Brown\u2014as in that of \"Puppet Masters\"\u2014police and vigilantes ruthlessly shoot down anyone suspected of being controlled by the book's invaders from space.\nKenneth Von Gunden's novel \"Star Spawn\" takes up the basic premise of \"The Puppet Masters\" and transfers it to a medieval setting. Extraterrestrial parasites able to take over the bodies of humans and control them invade Medieval England and embark on conquering it, castle by castle\u2014and are eventually foiled by the highly resourceful Friar Gregory and his friend Sir Morrough the Knight.\nN. K. Jemisin's short story \"Walking Awake,\" included in her short story collection \"How Long 'til Black Future Month?\", is a response to Heinlein's novel. The story follows Sadie, a caregiver who is complicit in a system that raises human hosts for alien parasitic beings (beings we later learn are not aliens, but were created by humanity in the distant past).\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45082", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45082", "title": "Cad (disambiguation)", "text": "CAD is a commonly used acronym for computer-aided design.\nCAD or Cad may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45084", "revid": "7220190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45084", "title": "Henry V (play)", "text": "Play by Shakespeare\nThe Life of Henry the Fifth, often shortened to Henry V, is a history play by William Shakespeare, believed to have been written circa 1599. It tells the story of King Henry V of England, focusing on events immediately before and after the Battle of Agincourt (1415) during the Hundred Years' War. In the First Quarto text, it was titled \"The Cronicle History of Henry the fift\", and \"The Life of Henry the Fifth\" in the First Folio text.\nThe play is the final part of a tetralogy, preceded by \"Richard II, Henry IV, Part 1\", and \"Henry IV, Part 2\". The original audiences would thus have already been familiar with the title character, whom the \"Henry IV\" plays depicted as a wild, undisciplined young man. In \"Henry V\", the young prince has matured. He embarks on an expedition to France and, despite his army being greatly outnumbered, defeats the French at Agincourt.\nCharacters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSynopsis.\nA Chorus (a lone speaker addressing the audience) delivers the Prologue, apologising for the limitations of the theatre and wishing that a muse could inspire the audience's imagination, real royals could be the actors, and the stage could be as large as a kingdom, to do justice to the story of King Henry V (or \"Harry\"). The Chorus encourages the audience to use their \"imaginary forces\" to overcome these limitations: \"Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts ... turning the accomplishment of many years / Into an hour-glass\".\nAct I deals largely with Henry and his decision to invade France, persuaded that, through ancestry, he is the rightful heir to the French throne. The French Dauphin, son of King Charles VI, answers Henry's claims with an insulting gift of tennis balls, meant to symbolise Henry's perceived youth and frivolity.\nThe Chorus reappears at the beginning of each act to advance the story. In Act II, he describes the country's dedication to the war effort: \"Now all the youth of England are on fire... / Now thrive the armorers, and honor's thought / Reigns solely in the breast of every man\". Act II focuses on a plot by the Earl of Cambridge and two comrades to assassinate Henry at Southampton. Henry's clever uncovering of the plot and his ruthless treatment of the conspirators show that he has changed from the earlier plays in which he appeared.\nIn Act III, Henry and his troops besiege the French port of Harfleur after crossing the English Channel. The French king, says the Chorus, \"doth offer him / Katharine his daughter, and with her, to dowry, / Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms\", but Henry is not satisfied. At the siege of Harfleur, the English are beaten back at first, but Henry urges them on with one of Shakespeare's best-known speeches: \"Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more; / Or close the wall up with our English dead\". After a hard-won battle, the English take Harfleur. Montjoy, herald of the French king Charles, delivers a message of Charles's taunts and threats, scorning Henry. Henry tells Montjoy that his forces have been so weakened that he will not yet attack Paris directly, but will instead march up the coast to Calais.\nIn Act IV, the full power of the French army has surrounded Henry at the small town of Agincourt. The night before the battle, knowing he is outnumbered, Henry wanders around the English camp in disguise, trying to comfort his soldiers and determine what they really think of him. He agonises about the moral burden of being king, asking God to \"steel my soldiers' hearts\". Daylight comes, and Henry rallies his nobles with the famous St Crispin's Day Speech: \"we ... shall be remember'd; / We few, we happy few, we band of brothers\". The messenger Montjoy returns to ask if Henry will avoid certain defeat by paying the French a ransom for his men's survival. Henry requests that Montjoy \"bear my former answer back\", thus refusing to surrender.\nShakespeare does not directly describe the Battle of Agincourt. Though the French in one scene complain that \"Tout est perdu\" (\"all is lost\"), the outcome is not clear to Henry until Montjoy reappears and declares that the \"day is yours\". Henry soon discovers it was a deeply lop-sided victory: the French suffered 10,000 casualties, while the English lost only a Duke, an Earl, a knight, a squire, and \"of all other, but five and twenty\". (In Laurence Olivier's 1944 film adaptation, this line is modified to \"of all other men, but five and twenty score\", since historians believe the English toll was approximately 600). Henry praises God for his shocking victory.\nAct V opens some years later, when the war comes to a brief interval of peace, as the English and French negotiate the Treaty of Troyes, and Henry tries to woo the French princess, Katharine. Neither Henry nor Katharine speaks the other's language well, but the humour of their mistakes actually helps Henry achieve his aim. The scene ends with the French king adopting Henry as heir to the throne of France, and the prayer for unity of the French queen \"that English may as French, French Englishmen, receive each other.\"\nThe play concludes with the Chorus foreshadowing Henry's death (within two years) and the tumultuous reign of his son Henry VI of England, \"whose state so many had the managing, that they lost France, and made his England bleed, which oft our stage hath shown\". (Shakespeare here is referring to the fact that he had previously staged the trilogy of plays that focus on these later events: \"Henry VI Part 1\", \"Henry VI Part 2\", and \"Henry VI Part 3\".)\nSubplots.\nAs in many of Shakespeare's history and tragedy plays, a number of minor comic characters appear, contrasting with and sometimes commenting on the main plot. In this case, they are mostly common soldiers in Henry's army, and they include Pistol, Nym, and Bardolph from the \"Henry IV\" plays. In a grim note, Bardolph is executed for looting. The army also includes a Scot, an Irishman, and an Englishman, and Fluellen, a comically stereotyped Welsh soldier. In one scene of extended French dialogue, Princess Katharine tries to learn some basic English words for body parts from her maid. The play also deals briefly with the death of Sir John Falstaff, Henry's estranged friend from the \"Henry IV\" plays, whom Henry had rejected at the end of \"Henry IV, Part 2\".\nSources.\nShakespeare's primary source for \"Henry V\", as for most of his chronicle histories, was Raphael Holinshed's \"Chronicles\"; the publication of the second edition in 1587 provides a \"terminus post quem\" for the play. Edward Hall's \"The Union of the Two Illustrious Families of Lancaster and York\" appears also to have been consulted, and scholars have supposed that Shakespeare was familiar with Samuel Daniel's poem on the civil wars. An earlier play, the \"Famous Victories of Henry V\" is also generally believed to have been a model for the work.\nDate and text.\nOn the basis of an apparent allusion to the Earl of Essex's mission to quell Tyrone's Rebellion, the play is thought to date from early 1599. \"The Chronicle History of Henry the fifth\" was entered into the Register of the Stationers Company on 14 August 1600 by the bookseller Thomas Pavier; the first quarto was published before the end of the year\u2014though by Thomas Millington and John Busby rather than Pavier. Thomas Creede did the printing.\nQ1 of \"Henry V\" is a \"bad quarto\", a shortened version of the play that might be an infringing copy or reported text. A second quarto, a reprint of Q1, was published in 1602 by Pavier; another reprint was issued as Q3 in 1619, with a false date of 1608\u2014part of William Jaggard's False Folio. The superior text was first printed in the First Folio in 1623.\nCriticism and analysis.\nViews on warfare.\nReaders and audiences have interpreted the play's attitude to warfare in several different ways. On the one hand, it seems to celebrate Henry's invasion of France and military prowess. Alternatively, it can be read as a commentary on the moral and personal cost of war. Gathered, Shakespeare presents warfare in all its complexity.\nThe American critic Norman Rabkin described the play as a picture with two simultaneous meanings. Rabkin argues that the play never settles on one viewpoint towards warfare, Henry himself switching his style of speech constantly, talking of \"rape and pillage\" during Harfleur, but of patriotic glory in his St Crispin's Day Speech.\nSome scholars have connected the nationalistic glorification of warfare with contemporary military ventures in Spain and Ireland. The Chorus directly refers to the looked-for military triumphs of the Earl of Essex, in the fifth act. Henry V himself is sometimes seen as an ambivalent representation of the stage machiavel, combining apparent sincerity with a willingness to use deceit and force to attain his ends.\nOther commentators see the play as looking critically at the reason for Henry's violent cause. The noble words of the Chorus and Henry are consistently undermined by the actions of Pistol, Bardolph, and Nym. Pistol talks in a bombastic blank verse that seems to parody Henry's own style of speech. Pistol and his friends, thus, show up the actions of their rulers. Indeed, the presence of the Eastcheap characters from \"Henry IV\" has been said to emphasise the element of adventurer in Henry's character as monarch.\nThe play's ambiguity has led to diverse interpretations in performance. Laurence Olivier's 1944 film, made during the Second World War, emphasises the patriotic side, ignoring the fact that the enemy of the play, the French, were in fact allies in that conflict, while Kenneth Branagh's 1989 film stresses the horrors of war. A 2003 Royal National Theatre production featured Henry as a modern war general, ridiculing the Iraq invasion.\nIn recent years, there has been scholarly debate about whether or not Henry V can be labeled a war criminal. Some denounce the question as anachronistic, arguing that contemporary legal terminology cannot be applied to historical events or figures like those depicted in the play. However, other scholars have supported the proposed viewpoint. For instance, Christopher N. Warren looks to Alberico Gentili's \"De armis Romanis\", along with \"Henry V\" itself, to show how early modern thinkers (including Shakespeare) were themselves using juridical approaches to engage with the past. As a result, Warren argues, the question of whether Henry V was a war criminal is not only legitimate, but also \"historically appropriate\".\nIn a rhetorical display intended to intimidate the Governor of Harfleur into surrendering the city to the English, Henry denies personal responsibility for his soldiers' actions if battle is resumed\u00a0\u2013 \"What rein can hold licentious wickedness / When down the hill he holds his fierce career?\"\u00a0\u2013 and describes in graphic detail the violence they will do to the townsfolk if his demands are not met:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nOn the other hand, Henry is portrayed as a great leader, as he keeps his temper when insulted: \"we are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us\". He also admits to his past mistakes: \"did give ourselves to barbarous licence\" and is shown to have great confidence: \"I will rise there with so full a glory that I will dazzle all the eyes of France\".\nA mock trial of for the crimes associated with the legality of the invasion and the slaughter of prisoners was held in Washington, DC in March 2010, drawing from both historical record and Shakespeare's play. Titled \"The Supreme Court of the Amalgamated Kingdom of England and France\", participating judges were Justices Samuel Alito and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The outcome was originally to be determined by an audience vote, but due to a draw, it came down to a judges' decision. The court was divided on Henry's justification for war, but unanimously found him guilty on the killing of the prisoners after applying \"the evolving standards of the maturing society\". Previously, the fictional Global War Crimes Tribunal ruled that Henry's war was legal, no noncombatant was killed unlawfully, and Henry bore no criminal responsibility for the death of the POWs. The fictional French Civil Liberties Union, who had instigated the tribunal, then attempted to sue in civil court. The judge concluded that he was bound by the GWCT's conclusions of law and also ruled in favour of the English. The Court of Appeals affirmed without opinion, thus leaving the matter for the Supreme Court's determination.\nNational identity.\nThe words \"England\", \"English\", and \"Englishmen\" are used more frequently in \"Henry V\" than in any other play by Shakespeare. According to Michael Neill, this reflects the play's \"deep involvement in that process of national self-definition which saw the emergence of England as Europe's first true nation-state.\" While the Chorus refers to the expectation of natural allegiance to one's native country, the play highlights the contradictions within the idea of \"foreign\" and \"native\" and within English identity itself. The English troops are shown to be a combination of Scottish, Irish, Welsh and English soldiers, whose relations are not always friendly. In Neill's view, the characters Fluellen and Macmorris represent different aspects of the possibility of incorporation into the English nation. Fluellen is hailed by Henry as a fellow countryman (since Henry himself was born in Wales) and proves himself to be really \"English\" under his \"native garb\" in his encounter with Pistol; he reflects the relatively easy absorption of Wales into the English kingdom. Meanwhile, Macmorris's angry response to the mention of the word \"nation\" may reflect contemporary anxieties about the ongoing conquest of Ireland.\nThe issue of national belonging in the play is further complicated by the presence of the French, who are at once contrasted with Henry's subjects and supposed to be integrated with them through Henry's conquest of France. This contradiction is seemingly resolved at the end of the play by Henry's marriage to the French princess Katharine, symbolically uniting the English and the French in the \"one flesh\" of husband and wife. However, according to Neill, Shakespeare makes clear in multiple scenes, including the dialogue between Henry and Katharine, the violent and involuntary nature of this prospective unification of the two countries.\nPerformance history.\nThe Chorus refers to Essex's 1599 campaign in Ireland without any sense that it would end in disaster. The campaign began in late March and was scuttled by late June, strongly suggesting that the play was first performed during that three-month period.\nA tradition, impossible to verify, holds that \"Henry V\" was the first play performed at the new Globe Theatre in the spring of 1599\u2014the Globe would have been the \"wooden O\" mentioned in the Prologue\u2014but Shapiro argues that the Chamberlain's Men were still at The Curtain when the work was first performed, and that Shakespeare himself probably acted the Chorus. In 1600, the first printed text states that the play had been played \"sundry times\". The earliest performance for which an exact date is known, however, occurred on 7 January 1605, at Court at Whitehall Palace.\nSamuel Pepys saw a \"Henry V\" in 1664, but it was written by Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery, not by Shakespeare. Shakespeare's play returned to the stage in 1723, in an adaptation by Aaron Hill.\nThe longest-running production of the play in Broadway history was the staging starring Richard Mansfield in 1900 which ran for 54 performances. Other notable stage performances of \"Henry V\" include Charles Kean (1859), Charles Alexander Calvert (1872), and Walter Hampden (1928).\nMajor revivals in London during the 20th and 21st centuries include:\nIn the Shakespeare's Globe's 2012 Globe to Globe festival, \"Henry V\" was the UK entry, one of 37 and the only one performed in spoken English. Jamie Parker performed the role of Henry.\nOn British television, the play has been performed as:\nIn 2017, the Pop-up Globe, the world's first temporary replica of the second Globe Theatre, based in Auckland, New Zealand, performed 34 \"Henry V\" shows. London-trained Australian actor Chris Huntly-Turner took on the role of Henry, Irish actor Michael Mahony as Chorus, and UK\u2013New Zealand actor Edward Newborn as Pistol/King of France.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nThe first film adaptation, \"Henry V\" (1944), directed by and starring Laurence Olivier, is a colourful and highly stylised version which begins in the Globe Theatre and then gradually shifts to a realistic evocation of the Battle of Agincourt. Olivier's film was made during the Second World War and was intended as a patriotic rallying cry at the time of the invasion of Normandy.\nThe second major film, \"Henry V\" (1989), directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh, attempts to give a more realistic evocation of the period, and lays more emphasis on the horrors of war. It features a mud-spattered and gruesome Battle of Agincourt.\nThere is a 2007 low budget adaptation by Peter Babakitis.\nA recent major film, \"The King (2019)\", starring Timoth\u00e9e Chalamet as Henry V, was adapted from Shakespeare's plays \"Henry IV Part I\", \"Henry IV Part II\", and \"Henry V\".\nTelevision.\nIn 2012, the BBC commissioned a television adaptation of the play as part of \"The Hollow Crown\" series. It was part of a tetralogy that televised the entirety of Shakespeare's Henriad. Produced by Sam Mendes and directed by Thea Sharrock, it starred Tom Hiddleston as Henry V, who had played Prince Hal in The Hollow Crown's adaptations of \"Henry IV, Part I\" and \"Henry IV, Part II\". The BBC scheduled the screening of Shakespeare's history plays as part of the 2012 Cultural Olympiad, a celebration of British culture coinciding with the 2012 Summer Olympics.\nDance.\nIn 2004, post-modern choreographer David Gordon created a dance-theatre version of the play called \"Dancing Henry Five\", which mixed William Walton's music written for the Olivier film, recorded speeches from the film itself and by Christopher Plummer, and commentary written by Gordon. The piece premiered at Danspace Project in New York, where it was compared favorably to a production of \"Henry IV\" (parts 1 and 2) at Lincoln Center. It has been revived three times\u2014in 2005, 2007, and 2011\u2014playing cities across the United States, and received a National Endowment for the Arts American Masterpieces in Dance Award.\nMusic.\n\"Suite from Henry V\" is a 1963 orchestral arrangement of music that composer William Walton wrote for the 1944 Olivier film. The arrangement is by Muir Mathieson, and is in five movements.\n\"Henry V \u2013 A Shakespeare Scenario\" is a 50-minute work for narrator, SATB chorus, boys' choir (optional), and full orchestra. The musical content is taken from Walton's score for the Olivier film, edited by David Lloyd-Jones and arranged by Christopher Palmer. It was first performed at the Royal Festival Hall in London, in May 1990. Performers for this premiere were Christopher Plummer (narrator), the Academy Chorus, Choristers of Westminster Cathedral, and Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields. The conductor was Sir Neville Marriner. A CD of the work with these performers was released by Chandos in 1990.\n\"O For a Muse of Fire\" is a symphonic overture for full orchestra and vocal soloist, written by Darryl Kubian. The work is 12 minutes long, and was premiered by the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra in March 2015. The work is scored for full orchestra, with vocal soloist. The vocal part incorporates selected lines from the text, and the vocal range is adaptable to different voice types. The soloist for the premiere performances with the New Jersey Symphony was former October Project lead singer (and former Sony Classical artist) Mary Fahl.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45085", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45085", "title": "Esperanto library", "text": "Library with an important collection of books in Esperanto\nThe following Esperanto libraries and collections of works in the Esperanto language are worthy of note:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45086", "revid": "21860424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45086", "title": "Biodiversity", "text": "Variety and variability of life forms\nBiodiversity is the variability of life on Earth. It can be measured on various levels, for example, genetic variability, species diversity, ecosystem diversity and phylogenetic diversity. Diversity is not distributed evenly on Earth\u2014it is greater in the tropics as a result of the warm climate and high primary productivity in the region near the equator. Tropical forest ecosystems cover less than one-fifth of Earth's terrestrial area and contain about 50% of the world's species. There are latitudinal gradients in species diversity for both marine and terrestrial taxa.\nSince life began on Earth, six major mass extinctions and several minor events have led to large and sudden drops in biodiversity. The Phanerozoic aeon (the last 540\u00a0million years) marked a rapid growth in biodiversity via the Cambrian explosion. In this period, the majority of multicellular phyla first appeared. The next 400\u00a0million years included repeated, massive biodiversity losses. Those events have been classified as mass extinction events. In the Carboniferous, rainforest collapse may have led to a great loss of plant and animal life. The Permian\u2013Triassic extinction event, 251\u00a0million years ago, was the worst; vertebrate recovery took 30\u00a0million years.\nHuman activities have led to an ongoing biodiversity loss and an accompanying loss of genetic diversity. This process is often referred to as Holocene extinction, or the \"sixth mass extinction\". For example, it was estimated in 2007 that up to 30% of all species will be extinct by 2050. Destroying habitats for farming is a key reason why biodiversity is decreasing today. Climate change also plays a role. This can be seen for example in the effects of climate change on biomes. This anthropogenic extinction may have started toward the end of the Pleistocene, as some studies suggest that the megafaunal extinction event that took place around the end of the last ice age partly resulted from overhunting. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinitions.\nBiologists most often define \"biodiversity\" as the \"totality of genes, species and ecosystems of a region\". An advantage of this definition is that it presents a unified view of the traditional types of biological variety previously identified:\n\"Biodiversity\" is most commonly used to replace the more clearly-defined and long-established terms, species diversity and species richness. However, there is no concrete definition for biodiversity, as its definition continues to be reimagined and redefined. To give a couple of examples, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) defined biodiversity in 2019 as \"the variability that exists among living organisms (both within and between species) and the ecosystems of which they are part.\" The World Health Organization updated its website's definition of biodiversity to be the \"variability among living organisms from all sources.\" Both these definitions, although broad, give a current understanding of what is meant by the term biodiversity.\nNumber of species.\nAccording to estimates by Mora et al. (2011), there are approximately 8.7\u00a0million terrestrial species and 2.2\u00a0million oceanic species. The authors note that these estimates are strongest for eukaryotic organisms and likely represent the lower bound of prokaryotic diversity. Other estimates include:\nSince the rate of extinction has increased, many extant species may become extinct before they are described. Not surprisingly, in the Animalia the most studied groups are birds and mammals, whereas fishes and arthropods are the least studied animal groups.\nCurrent biodiversity loss.\nDuring the last century, decreases in biodiversity have been increasingly observed. It was estimated in 2007 that up to 30% of all species will be extinct by 2050. Of these, about one eighth of known plant species are threatened with extinction. Estimates reach as high as 140,000 species per year (based on Species-area theory). This figure indicates unsustainable ecological practices, because few species emerge each year. The rate of species loss is greater now than at any time in human history, with extinctions occurring at rates hundreds of times higher than background extinction rates. and expected to still grow in the upcoming years. As of 2012, some studies suggest that 25% of all mammal species could be extinct in 20 years.\nIn absolute terms, the planet has lost 58% of its biodiversity since 1970 according to a 2016 study by the World Wildlife Fund. The \"Living Planet Report 2014\" claims that \"the number of mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish across the globe is, on average, about half the size it was 40 years ago\". Of that number, 39% accounts for the terrestrial wildlife gone, 39% for the marine wildlife gone and 76% for the freshwater wildlife gone. Biodiversity took the biggest hit in Latin America, plummeting 83 percent. High-income countries showed a 10% increase in biodiversity, which was canceled out by a loss in low-income countries. This is despite the fact that high-income countries use five times the ecological resources of low-income countries, which was explained as a result of a process whereby wealthy nations are outsourcing resource depletion to poorer nations, which are suffering the greatest ecosystem losses.\nA 2017 study published in \"PLOS One\" found that the biomass of insect life in Germany had declined by three-quarters in the last 25 years. Dave Goulson of Sussex University stated that their study suggested that humans \"appear to be making vast tracts of land inhospitable to most forms of life, and are currently on course for ecological Armageddon. If we lose the insects then everything is going to collapse.\"\nIn 2020 the World Wildlife Fund published a report saying that \"biodiversity is being destroyed at a rate unprecedented in human history\". The report claims that 68% of the population of the examined species were destroyed in the years 1970 \u2013 2016.\nOf 70,000 monitored species, around 48% are experiencing population declines from human activity (in 2023), whereas only 3% have increasing populations.\nRates of decline in biodiversity in the current sixth mass extinction match or exceed rates of loss in the five previous mass extinction events in the fossil record. Biodiversity loss is in fact \"one of the most critical manifestations of the Anthropocene\" (since around the 1950s); the continued decline of biodiversity constitutes \"an unprecedented threat\" to the continued existence of human civilization. The reduction is caused primarily by human impacts, particularly habitat destruction.\nSince the Stone Age, species loss has accelerated above the average basal rate, driven by human activity. Estimates of species losses are at a rate 100\u201310,000 times as fast as is typical in the fossil record.\nLoss of biodiversity results in the loss of natural capital that supplies ecosystem goods and services. Species today are being wiped out at a rate 100 to 1,000 times higher than baseline, and the rate of extinctions is increasing. This process destroys the resilience and adaptability of life on Earth.\nIn 2006, many species were formally classified as rare or endangered or threatened; moreover, scientists have estimated that millions more species are at risk which have not been formally recognized. About 40 percent of the 40,177 species assessed using the IUCN Red List criteria are now listed as threatened with extinction\u2014a total of 16,119. As of late 2022 9251 species were considered part of the IUCN's critically endangered.\nNumerous scientists and the IPBES \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" assert that human population growth and overconsumption are the primary factors in this decline. However, other scientists have criticized this finding and say that loss of habitat caused by \"the growth of commodities for export\" is the main driver. A 2025 study found that human activities are responsible for biodiversity loss across all species and ecosystems.\nSome studies have however pointed out that habitat destruction for the expansion of agriculture and the overexploitation of wildlife are the more significant drivers of contemporary biodiversity loss, not climate change.\nDistribution.\nBiodiversity is not evenly distributed, rather it varies greatly across the globe as well as within regions and seasons. Among other factors, the diversity of all living things (biota) depends on temperature, precipitation, altitude, soils, geography and the interactions between other species. The study of the spatial distribution of organisms, species and ecosystems, is the science of biogeography.\nDiversity consistently measures higher in the tropics and in other localized regions such as the Cape Floristic Region and lower in polar regions generally. Rain forests that have had wet climates for a long time, such as Yasun\u00ed National Park in Ecuador, have particularly high biodiversity.\nThere is local biodiversity, which directly impacts daily life, affecting the availability of fresh water, food choices, and fuel sources for humans. Regional biodiversity includes habitats and ecosystems that synergizes and either overlaps or differs on a regional scale. National biodiversity within a country determines the ability for a country to thrive according to its habitats and ecosystems on a national scale. Also, within a country, endangered species are initially supported on a national level then internationally. Ecotourism may be utilized to support the economy and encourages tourists to continue to visit and support species and ecosystems they visit, while they enjoy the available amenities provided. International biodiversity impacts global livelihood, food systems, and health. Problematic pollution, over consumption, and climate change can devastate international biodiversity. Nature-based solutions are a critical tool for a global resolution. Many species are in danger of becoming extinct and need world leaders to be proactive with the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.\nTerrestrial biodiversity is thought to be up to 25 times greater than ocean biodiversity. Forests harbour most of Earth's terrestrial biodiversity. The conservation of the world's biodiversity is thus utterly dependent on the way in which we interact with and use the world's forests. A new method used in 2011, put the total number of species on Earth at 8.7\u00a0million, of which 2.1\u00a0million were estimated to live in the ocean. However, this estimate seems to under-represent the diversity of microorganisms. Forests provide habitats for 80 percent of amphibian species, 75 percent of bird species and 68 percent of mammal species. About 60 percent of all vascular plants are found in tropical forests. Mangroves provide breeding grounds and nurseries for numerous species of fish and shellfish and help trap sediments that might otherwise adversely affect seagrass beds and coral reefs, which are habitats for many more marine species. Forests span around 4 billion acres (nearly a third of the Earth's land mass) and are home to approximately 80% of the world's biodiversity. About 1 billion hectares are covered by primary forests. Over 700 million hectares of the world's woods are officially protected.\nThe biodiversity of forests varies considerably according to factors such as forest type, geography, climate and soils \u2013 in addition to human use. Most forest habitats in temperate regions support relatively few animal and plant species and species that tend to have large geographical distributions, while the montane forests of Africa, South America and Southeast Asia and lowland forests of Australia, coastal Brazil, the Caribbean islands, Central America and insular Southeast Asia have many species with small geographical distributions. Areas with dense human populations and intense agricultural land use, such as Europe, parts of Bangladesh, China, India and North America, are less intact in terms of their biodiversity. Northern Africa, southern Australia, coastal Brazil, Madagascar and South Africa, are also identified as areas with striking losses in biodiversity intactness. European forests in EU and non-EU nations comprise more than 30% of Europe's land mass (around 227 million hectares), representing an almost 10% growth since 1990.\nLatitudinal gradients.\nGenerally, there is an increase in biodiversity from the poles to the tropics. Thus localities at lower latitudes have more species than localities at higher latitudes. This is often referred to as the latitudinal gradient in species diversity. Several ecological factors may contribute to the gradient, but the ultimate factor behind many of them is the greater mean temperature at the equator compared to that at the poles.\nEven though terrestrial biodiversity declines from the equator to the poles, some studies claim that this characteristic is unverified in aquatic ecosystems, especially in marine ecosystems. The latitudinal distribution of parasites does not appear to follow this rule. Also, in terrestrial ecosystems the soil bacterial diversity has been shown to be highest in temperate climatic zones, and has been attributed to carbon inputs and habitat connectivity.\nIn 2016, an alternative hypothesis (\"the fractal biodiversity\") was proposed to explain the biodiversity latitudinal gradient. In this study, the species pool size and the fractal nature of ecosystems were combined to clarify some general patterns of this gradient. This hypothesis considers temperature, moisture, and net primary production (NPP) as the main variables of an ecosystem niche and as the axis of the ecological hypervolume. In this way, it is possible to build fractal hyper volumes, whose fractal dimension rises to three moving towards the equator.\nBiodiversity Hotspots.\nA biodiversity hotspot is a region with a high level of endemic species that have experienced great habitat loss. The term hotspot was introduced in 1988 by Norman Myers. While hotspots are spread all over the world, the majority are forest areas and most are located in the tropics.\nBrazil's Atlantic Forest is considered one such hotspot, containing roughly 20,000 plant species, 1,350 vertebrates and millions of insects, about half of which occur nowhere else. The island of Madagascar and India are also particularly notable. Colombia is characterized by high biodiversity, with the highest rate of species by area unit worldwide and it has the largest number of endemics (species that are not found naturally anywhere else) of any country. About 10% of the species of the Earth can be found in Colombia, including over 1,900 species of bird, more than in Europe and North America combined, Colombia has 10% of the world's mammals species, 14% of the amphibian species and 18% of the bird species of the world. Madagascar dry deciduous forests and lowland rainforests possess a high ratio of endemism. Since the island separated from mainland Africa 66\u00a0million years ago, many species and ecosystems have evolved independently. Indonesia's 17,000 islands cover and contain 10% of the world's flowering plants, 12% of mammals and 17% of reptiles, amphibians and birds\u2014along with nearly 240\u00a0million people. Many regions of high biodiversity and/or endemism arise from specialized habitats which require unusual adaptations, for example, alpine environments in high mountains, or Northern European peat bogs.\nAccurately measuring differences in biodiversity can be difficult. Selection bias amongst researchers may contribute to biased empirical research for modern estimates of biodiversity. In 1768, Rev. Gilbert White succinctly observed of his Selborne, Hampshire \"\"all nature is so full, that that district produces the most variety which is the most examined.\"\"\nEvolution over geologic timeframes.\nBiodiversity is the result of 3.5\u00a0billion years of evolution. The origin of life has not been established by science, however, some evidence suggests that life may already have been well-established only a few hundred million years after the formation of the Earth. Until approximately 2.5\u00a0billion years ago, all life consisted of microorganisms \u2013 archaea, bacteria, and single-celled protozoans and protists.\nBiodiversity grew fast during the Phanerozoic (the last 540\u00a0million years), especially during the so-called Cambrian explosion\u2014a period during which nearly every phylum of multicellular organisms first appeared. However, recent studies suggest that this diversification had started earlier, at least in the Ediacaran, and that it continued in the Ordovician. Over the next 400\u00a0million years or so, invertebrate diversity showed little overall trend and vertebrate diversity shows an overall exponential trend. This dramatic rise in diversity was marked by periodic, massive losses of diversity classified as mass extinction events. A significant loss occurred in anamniotic limbed vertebrates when rainforests collapsed in the Carboniferous, but amniotes seem to have been little affected by this event; their diversification slowed down later, around the Asselian/Sakmarian boundary, in the early Cisuralian (Early Permian), about 293 Ma ago. The worst was the Permian-Triassic extinction event, 251\u00a0million years ago. Vertebrates took 30\u00a0million years to recover from this event.\nThe most recent major mass extinction event, the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, occurred 66\u00a0million years ago. This period has attracted more attention than others because it resulted in the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, which were represented by many lineages at the end of the Maastrichtian, just before that extinction event. However, many other taxa were affected by this crisis, which affected even marine taxa, such as ammonites, which also became extinct around that time.\nThe biodiversity of the past is called Paleobiodiversity. The fossil record suggests that the last few million years featured the greatest biodiversity in history. However, not all scientists support this view, since there is uncertainty as to how strongly the fossil record is biased by the greater availability and preservation of recent geologic sections. Some scientists believe that corrected for sampling artifacts, modern biodiversity may not be much different from biodiversity 300\u00a0million years ago, whereas others consider the fossil record reasonably reflective of the diversification of life. Estimates of the present global macroscopic species diversity vary from 2\u00a0million to 100\u00a0million, with a best estimate of somewhere near 9\u00a0million, the vast majority arthropods. Diversity appears to increase continually in the absence of natural selection.\nDiversification.\nThe existence of a \"global carrying capacity\", limiting the amount of life that can live at once, is debated, as is the question of whether such a limit would also cap the number of species. While records of life in the sea show a logistic pattern of growth, life on land (insects, plants and tetrapods) shows an exponential rise in diversity. As one author states, \"Tetrapods have not yet invaded 64 percent of potentially habitable modes and it could be that without human influence the ecological and taxonomic diversity of tetrapods would continue to increase exponentially until most or all of the available eco-space is filled.\"\nIt also appears that the diversity continues to increase over time, especially after mass extinctions.\nOn the other hand, changes through the Phanerozoic correlate much better with the hyperbolic model (widely used in population biology, demography and macrosociology, as well as fossil biodiversity) than with exponential and logistic models. The latter models imply that changes in diversity are guided by a first-order positive feedback (more ancestors, more descendants) and/or a negative feedback arising from resource limitation. Hyperbolic model implies a second-order positive feedback. Differences in the strength of the second-order feedback due to different intensities of interspecific competition might explain the faster rediversification of ammonoids in comparison to bivalves after the end-Permian extinction. The hyperbolic pattern of the world population growth arises from a second-order positive feedback between the population size and the rate of technological growth. The hyperbolic character of biodiversity growth can be similarly accounted for by a feedback between diversity and community structure complexity. The similarity between the curves of biodiversity and human population probably comes from the fact that both are derived from the interference of the hyperbolic trend with cyclical and stochastic dynamics.\nMost biologists agree however that the period since human emergence is part of a new mass extinction, named the Holocene extinction event, caused primarily by the impact humans are having on the environment. It has been argued that the present rate of extinction is sufficient to eliminate most species on the planet Earth within 100 years.\nNew species are regularly discovered (on average between 5\u201310,000 new species each year, most of them insects) and many, though discovered, are not yet classified (estimates are that nearly 90% of all arthropods are not yet classified). Most of the terrestrial diversity is found in tropical forests and in general, the land has more species than the ocean; some 8.7\u00a0million species may exist on Earth, of which some 2.1\u00a0million live in the ocean.\nSpecies diversity in geologic time frames.\nIt is estimated that 5 to 50 billion species have existed on the planet. Assuming that there may be a maximum of about 50 million species currently alive, it stands to reason that greater than 99% of the planet's species went extinct prior to the evolution of humans. Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10\u00a0million to 14\u00a0million, of which about 1.2\u00a0million have been documented and over 86% have not yet been described. However, a May 2016 scientific report estimates that 1 trillion species are currently on Earth, with only one-thousandth of one percent described. The total amount of related DNA base pairs on Earth is estimated at 5.0 x 1037 and weighs 50\u00a0billion tonnes. In comparison, the total mass of the biosphere has been estimated to be as much as four trillion tons of carbon. In July 2016, scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of all organisms living on Earth.\nThe age of Earth is about 4.54\u00a0billion years. The earliest undisputed evidence of life dates at least from 3.7\u00a0billion years ago, during the Eoarchean era after a geological crust started to solidify following the earlier molten Hadean eon. There are microbial mat fossils found in 3.48\u00a0billion-year-old sandstone discovered in Western Australia. Other early physical evidence of a biogenic substance is graphite in 3.7\u00a0billion-year-old meta-sedimentary rocks discovered in Western Greenland. More recently, in 2015, \"remains of biotic life\" were found in 4.1\u00a0billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia. According to one of the researchers, \"If life arose relatively quickly on Earth...then it could be common in the universe.\"\nRole and benefits of biodiversity.\nEcosystem services.\nThere have been many claims about biodiversity's effect on the ecosystem services, especially \"provisioning\" and \"regulating services\". Some of those claims have been validated, some are incorrect and some lack enough evidence to draw definitive conclusions.\nEcosystem services have been grouped in three types:\nExperiments with controlled environments have shown that humans cannot easily build ecosystems to support human needs; for example insect pollination cannot be mimicked, though there have been attempts to create artificial pollinators using unmanned aerial vehicles. The economic activity of pollination alone represented between $2.1\u201314.6\u00a0billion in 2003. Other sources have reported somewhat conflicting results and in 1997 Robert Costanza and his colleagues reported the estimated global value of ecosystem services (not captured in traditional markets) at an average of $33\u00a0trillion annually.\nProvisioning services.\nWith regards to provisioning services, greater species diversity has the following benefits:\nRegulating services.\nWith regards to regulating services, greater species diversity has the following benefits:\nGreater species diversity\nAgriculture.\nAgricultural diversity can be divided into two categories: intraspecific diversity, which includes the genetic variation within a single species, like the potato (\"Solanum tuberosum\") that is composed of many different forms and types (e.g. in the U.S. they might compare russet potatoes with new potatoes or purple potatoes, all different, but all part of the same species, \"S. tuberosum\"). The other category of agricultural diversity is called interspecific diversity and refers to the number and types of different species.\nAgricultural diversity can also be divided by whether it is 'planned' diversity or 'associated' diversity. This is a functional classification that we impose and not an intrinsic feature of life or diversity. Planned diversity includes the crops which a farmer has encouraged, planted or raised (e.g. crops, covers, symbionts, and livestock, among others), which can be contrasted with the associated diversity that arrives among the crops, uninvited (e.g. herbivores, weed species and pathogens, among others).\nAssociated biodiversity can be damaging or beneficial. The beneficial associated biodiversity include for instance wild pollinators such as wild bees and syrphid flies that pollinate crops and natural enemies and antagonists to pests and pathogens. Beneficial associated biodiversity occurs abundantly in crop fields and provide multiple ecosystem services such as pest control, nutrient cycling and pollination that support crop production.\nAlthough about 80 percent of humans' food supply comes from just 20 kinds of plants, humans use at least 40,000 species. Earth's surviving biodiversity provides resources for increasing the range of food and other products suitable for human use, although the present extinction rate shrinks that potential.\nHuman health.\nBiodiversity's relevance to human health is becoming an international political issue, as scientific evidence builds on the global health implications of biodiversity loss. This issue is closely linked with the issue of climate change, as many of the anticipated health risks of climate change are associated with changes in biodiversity (e.g. changes in populations and distribution of disease vectors, scarcity of fresh water, impacts on agricultural biodiversity and food resources etc.). This is because the species most likely to disappear are those that buffer against infectious disease transmission, while surviving species tend to be the ones that increase disease transmission, such as that of West Nile Virus, Lyme disease and Hantavirus, according to a study done co-authored by Felicia Keesing, an ecologist at Bard College and Drew Harvell, associate director for Environment of the Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future (ACSF) at Cornell University.\nSome of the health issues influenced by biodiversity include dietary health and nutrition security, infectious disease, medical science and medicinal resources, social and psychological health. Biodiversity is also known to have an important role in reducing disaster risk, including rising sea levels. For example, wetland ecosystems along coastal communities serve as excellent water filtration systems, storage, and ultimately create a buffer region between the ocean and mainland neighborhoods in order to prevent water reaching these communities under climate change pressures or storm surges. Other examples of diverse species or organisms are present around the world, offering their resourceful utilities to provide protection of human survival.\nBiodiversity provides critical support for drug discovery and the availability of medicinal resources. A significant proportion of drugs are derived, directly or indirectly, from biological sources: at least 50% of the pharmaceutical compounds on the US market are derived from plants, animals and microorganisms, while about 80% of the world population depends on medicines from nature (used in either modern or traditional medical practice) for primary healthcare. Only a tiny fraction of wild species has been investigated for medical potential.\nMarine ecosystems are particularly important, especially their chemical and physical properties that have paved the way for numerous pharmaceutical achievements; the immense diversity of marine organisms have led to scientific discoveries including medical treatments to cancer, viral bacteria, AIDS, etc. This process of bioprospecting can increase biodiversity loss, as well as violating the laws of the communities and states from which the resources are taken.\nBusiness and industry.\nAccording to the Boston Consulting Group, in 2021, the economic value that biodiversity has on society comes down to four definable terms: regulation, culture, habitat, and provisioning. To sum these up in a relatively short manner, biodiversity helps maintain habitat and animal functions that provide considerable amounts of resources that benefit the economy.\nBiodiversity's economic resources are worth at around $150 trillion annually which is roughly twice the world's GDP. The loss of biodiversity is actually harming the GDP of the world by costing an estimated $5 trillion annually.\nBusiness supply chains rely heavily on ecosystems remaining relatively maintained and nurtured. A disruption to these supply chains would negatively impact many businesses that would end up costing them more than what they are gaining.\nCultural and aesthetic value.\nPhilosophically it could be argued that biodiversity has intrinsic aesthetic and spiritual value to mankind \"in and of itself\". This idea can be used as a counterweight to the notion that tropical forests and other ecological realms are only worthy of conservation because of the services they provide.\nBiodiversity also affords many non-material benefits including spiritual and aesthetic values, knowledge systems and education.\nMeasuring biodiversity.\nAnalytical limits.\nLess than 1% of all species that have been described have been studied beyond noting their existence. The vast majority of Earth's species are microbial. Contemporary biodiversity physics is \"firmly fixated on the visible [macroscopic] world\". For example, microbial life is metabolically and environmentally more diverse than multicellular life (see e.g., extremophile). \"On the tree of life, based on analyses of small-subunit ribosomal RNA, visible life consists of barely noticeable twigs. The inverse relationship of size and population recurs higher on the evolutionary ladder\u2014to a first approximation, all multicellular species on Earth are insects\". Insect extinction rates are high\u2014supporting the Holocene extinction hypothesis.\nBiodiversity changes (other than losses).\nNatural seasonal variations.\nBiodiversity naturally varies due to seasonal shifts. Spring's arrival enhances biodiversity as numerous species breed and feed, while winter's onset temporarily reduces it as some insects perish and migrating animals leave. Additionally, the seasonal fluctuation in plant and invertebrate populations influences biodiversity.\nIntroduced and invasive species.\nBarriers such as large rivers, seas, oceans, mountains and deserts encourage diversity by enabling independent evolution on either side of the barrier, via the process of allopatric speciation. The term invasive species is applied to species that breach the natural barriers that would normally keep them constrained. Without barriers, such species occupy new territory, often supplanting native species by occupying their niches, or by using resources that would normally sustain native species.\nSpecies are increasingly being moved by humans (on purpose and accidentally). Some studies say that diverse ecosystems are more resilient and resist invasive plants and animals. Many studies cite effects of invasive species on natives, but not extinctions.\nInvasive species seem to increase local (alpha diversity) diversity, which decreases turnover of diversity (beta diversity). Overall gamma diversity may be lowered because species are going extinct because of other causes, but even some of the most insidious invaders (e.g.: Dutch elm disease, emerald ash borer, chestnut blight in North America) have not caused their host species to become extinct. Extirpation, population decline and homogenization of regional biodiversity are much more common. Human activities have frequently been the cause of invasive species circumventing their barriers, by introducing them for food and other purposes. Human activities therefore allow species to migrate to new areas (and thus become invasive) occurred on time scales much shorter than historically have been required for a species to extend its range.\nAt present, several countries have already imported so many exotic species, particularly agricultural and ornamental plants, that their indigenous fauna/flora may be outnumbered. For example, the introduction of kudzu from Southeast Asia to Canada and the United States has threatened biodiversity in certain areas. Another example are pines, which have invaded forests, shrublands and grasslands in the southern hemisphere.\nHybridization and genetic pollution.\nEndemic species can be threatened with extinction through the process of genetic pollution, i.e. uncontrolled hybridization, introgression and genetic swamping. Genetic pollution leads to homogenization or replacement of local genomes as a result of either a numerical and/or fitness advantage of an introduced species.\nHybridization and introgression are side-effects of introduction and invasion. These phenomena can be especially detrimental to rare species that come into contact with more abundant ones. The abundant species can interbreed with the rare species, swamping its gene pool. This problem is not always apparent from morphological (outward appearance) observations alone. Some degree of gene flow is normal adaptation and not all gene and genotype constellations can be preserved. However, hybridization with or without introgression may, nevertheless, threaten a rare species' existence.\nConservation.\nConservation biology matured in the mid-20th century as ecologists, naturalists and other scientists began to research and address issues pertaining to global biodiversity declines.\nThe conservation ethic advocates management of natural resources for the purpose of sustaining biodiversity in species, ecosystems, the evolutionary process and human culture and society.\nConservation biology is reforming around strategic plans to protect biodiversity. Preserving global biodiversity is a priority in strategic conservation plans that are designed to engage public policy and concerns affecting local, regional and global scales of communities, ecosystems and cultures. Action plans identify ways of sustaining human well-being, employing natural capital, macroeconomic policies including economic incentives, and ecosystem services.\nIn the EU Directive 1999/22/EC zoos are described as having a role in the preservation of the biodiversity of wildlife animals by conducting research or participation in breeding programs.\nProtection and restoration techniques.\nRemoval of exotic species will allow the species that they have negatively impacted to recover their ecological niches. Exotic species that have become pests can be identified taxonomically (e.g.,\u00a0with Digital Automated Identification SYstem (DAISY), using the barcode of life). Removal is practical only given large groups of individuals due to the economic cost.\nAs sustainable populations of the remaining native species in an area become assured, \"missing\" species that are candidates for reintroduction can be identified using databases such as the \"Encyclopedia of Life\" and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility.\nProtected areas.\nProtected areas, including forest reserves and biosphere reserves, serve many functions including for affording protection to wild animals and their habitat. Protected areas have been set up all over the world with the specific aim of protecting and conserving plants and animals. Some scientists have called on the global community to designate as protected areas of 30 percent of the planet by 2030, and 50 percent by 2050, in order to mitigate biodiversity loss from anthropogenic causes. The target of protecting 30% of the area of the planet by the year 2030 (30 by 30) was adopted by almost 200 countries in the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference. At the moment of adoption (December 2022) 17% of land territory and 10% of ocean territory were protected. In a study published 4 September 2020 in Science Advances researchers mapped out regions that can help meet critical conservation and climate goals.\nProtected areas safeguard nature and cultural resources and contribute to livelihoods, particularly at local level. There are over 238 563 designated protected areas worldwide, equivalent to 14.9 percent of the earth's land surface, varying in their extension, level of protection, and type of management (IUCN, 2018).\nThe benefits of protected areas extend beyond their immediate environment and time. In addition to conserving nature, protected areas are crucial for securing the long-term delivery of ecosystem services. They provide numerous benefits including the conservation of genetic resources for food and agriculture, the provision of medicine and health benefits, the provision of water, recreation and tourism, and for acting as a buffer against disaster. Increasingly, there is acknowledgement of the wider socioeconomic values of these natural ecosystems and of the ecosystem services they can provide.\nNational parks and wildlife sanctuaries.\nA national park is a large natural or near natural area set aside to protect large-scale ecological processes, which also provide a foundation for environmentally and culturally compatible, spiritual, scientific, educational, recreational and visitor opportunities. These areas are selected by governments or private organizations to protect natural biodiversity along with its underlying ecological structure and supporting environmental processes, and to promote education and recreation. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and its World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA), has defined \"National Park\" as its Category II type of protected areas. \nWildlife sanctuaries are areas of either shelter for animals who are unable to live in the wild on their own, or they are temporary rehabilitation centers for wildlife to improve in their overall health and wellbeing.\nBoth of these serve as places in which biodiversity can be preserved rather than harmed. According to an article published in the National Park Service website, national parks aim their resources at maintaining animal and habitat integrity through conservation and preservation of their ecosystems. This along with educating the general public on wildlife functions, the aim for an increase in biodiversity is one of many goals trying to be focused on through national parks.\nForest protected areas.\nForest protected areas are a subset of all protected areas in which a significant portion of the area is forest. This may be the whole or only a part of the protected area. Globally, 18 percent of the world's forest area, or more than 700 million hectares, fall within legally established protected areas such as national parks, conservation areas and game reserves.\nThere is an estimated 726 million ha of forest in protected areas worldwide. Of the six major world regions, South America has the highest share of forests in protected areas, 31 percent. The forests play a vital role in harboring more than 45,000 floral and 81,000 faunal species of which 5150 floral and 1837 faunal species are endemic. In addition, there are 60,065 different tree species in the world. Plant and animal species confined to a specific geographical area are called endemic species.\nIn forest reserves, rights to activities like hunting and grazing are sometimes given to communities living on the fringes of the forest, who sustain their livelihood partially or wholly from forest resources or products.\nApproximately 50 million hectares (or 24%) of European forest land is protected for biodiversity and landscape protection. Forests allocated for soil, water, and other ecosystem services encompass around 72 million hectares (32% of European forest area).\nRole of society.\nTransformative change.\nIn 2019, a summary for policymakers of the largest, most comprehensive study to date of biodiversity and ecosystem services, the \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\", was published by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). It stated that \"the state of nature has deteriorated at an unprecedented and accelerating rate\". To fix the problem, humanity will need a transformative change, including sustainable agriculture, reductions in consumption and waste, fishing quotas and collaborative water management.\nThe concept of nature-positive is playing a role in mainstreaming the goals of the Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF) for biodiversity. The aim of mainstreaming is to embed biodiversity considerations into public and private practice to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity on global and local levels. The concept of nature-positive refers to the societal goal to halt and reverse biodiversity loss, measured from a baseline of 2020 levels, and to achieve full so-called \"nature recovery\" by 2050.\nCitizen science.\nCitizen science, also known as public participation in scientific research, has been widely used in environmental sciences and is particularly popular in a biodiversity-related context. It has been used to enable scientists to involve the general public in biodiversity research, thereby enabling the scientists to collect data that they would otherwise not have been able to obtain.\nVolunteer observers have made significant contributions to on-the-ground knowledge about biodiversity, and recent improvements in technology have helped increase the flow and quality of occurrences from citizen sources. A 2016 study published in Biological Conservation registers the massive contributions that citizen scientists already make to data mediated by the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). Despite some limitations of the dataset-level analysis, it is clear that nearly half of all occurrence records shared through the GBIF network come from datasets with significant volunteer contributions. Recording and sharing observations are enabled by several global-scale platforms, including iNaturalist and eBird.\nLegal status.\nInternational.\nGlobal agreements such as the Convention on Biological Diversity, give \"sovereign national rights over biological resources\" (not property). The agreements commit countries to \"conserve biodiversity\", \"develop resources for sustainability\" and \"share the benefits\" resulting from their use. Biodiverse countries that allow bioprospecting or collection of natural products, expect a share of the benefits rather than allowing the individual or institution that discovers/exploits the resource to capture them privately. Bioprospecting can become a type of biopiracy when such principles are not respected.\nSovereignty principles can rely upon what is better known as Access and Benefit Sharing Agreements (ABAs). The Convention on Biodiversity implies informed consent between the source country and the collector, to establish which resource will be used and for what and to settle on a fair agreement on benefit sharing.\nOn the 19 of December 2022, during the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference every country on earth, with the exception of the United States and the Holy See, signed onto the agreement which includes protecting 30% of land and oceans by 2030 (30 by 30) and 22 other targets intended to reduce biodiversity loss. The agreement includes also recovering 30% of earth degraded ecosystems and increasing funding for biodiversity issues.\nEuropean Union.\nIn May 2020, the European Union published its Biodiversity Strategy for 2030. The biodiversity strategy is an essential part of the climate change mitigation strategy of the European Union. From the 25% of the European budget that will go to fight climate change, large part will go to restore biodiversity and nature based solutions.\nThe EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 include the next targets:\nApproximately half of the global GDP depend on nature. In Europe many parts of the economy that generate trillions of euros per year depend on nature. The benefits of Natura 2000 alone in Europe are \u20ac200 \u2013 \u20ac300\u00a0billion per year.\nNational level laws.\nBiodiversity is taken into account in some political and judicial decisions:\nUniform approval for use of biodiversity as a legal standard has not been achieved, however. Bosselman argues that biodiversity should not be used as a legal standard, claiming that the remaining areas of scientific uncertainty cause unacceptable administrative waste and increase litigation without promoting preservation goals.\nIndia passed the Biological Diversity Act in 2002 for the conservation of biological diversity in India. The Act also provides mechanisms for equitable sharing of benefits from the use of traditional biological resources and knowledge.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45087", "revid": "5098269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45087", "title": "Castroreale", "text": "Castroreale (Sicilian: Castruriali) is a village in the Metropolitan City of Messina, Sicily, southern Italy. It is one of I Borghi pi\u00f9 belli d'Italia (\"The most beautiful villages of Italy\").\nIt has around 2,702 inhabitants but over 80 churches, with some houses dating to the 13th century. It is from Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto and from Messina.\nIt has a tower, last remain of a castle, built by Frederick II of Aragon in 1324. The name Castroreale comes from Latin, and means \"royal fortress\".\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "45089", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45089", "title": "Karuta", "text": "Japanese playing cards\n are Japanese playing cards. Playing cards were introduced to Japan by Portuguese traders during the mid-16th century. The earliest indigenous \"karuta\" were made in the town of Miike in Chikugo Province at around the end of the 16th century. The Miike karuta Memorial Hall located in \u014cmuta, Fukuoka, is the only municipal museum in Japan dedicated specifically to the history of \"karuta\".\n\"Karuta\" packs are classified into two groups, those that are descended from Portuguese-suited playing cards and those from \"e-awase\". \"E-awase\" originally derived from \"kai-awase\", which was played with shells but were converted to card format during the early 17th century. The basic idea of any \"e-awase karuta\" game is to be able to quickly determine which card out of an array of cards is required and then to grab the card before it is grabbed by an opponent. It is often played by children at elementary school and junior high-school level during class, as an educational exercise.\n16th century Portuguese playing cards (Nanban karuta).\nPortuguese-suited playing cards, introduced to Japan by Portuguese sailors during the 16th century \"nanban\" trade, are known in Japanese as . They were used for trick-taking games. They had the four Latin suits of cups, coins, clubs, and swords, each suit having cards for 1 through 9 and three face cards (female knave/maid, knight, and king) for a total of 48 cards per card set. These features were inherited by various Japanese-made derivatives. The Portuguese cards at the time had card backs that were folded around the edges of the cards, a feature that remained standard in most karuta variants from the 17th century to the modern day.\nPortuguese-derived karuta.\nTensh\u014d karuta.\nThe first kind of Japanese-made playing cards were \"Tensh\u014d karuta\", named after the Tensh\u014d period (1573\u20131592). They were local imitations of the Portuguese playing cards, featuring the same deck structure and often very similar artwork. The first Tensh\u014d karuta were made in the town of Miike, and are also known as .\nIn 1633, the Tokugawa shogunate banned Tensh\u014d karuta, forcing Japanese manufacturers to radically redesign their cards. As a result of Japan's isolationist \"Sakoku\" policy, karuta would develop separately from the rest of the world.\nMekuri karuta and komatsufuda.\nIn order to evade the proscription of Portuguese-derived cards, makers turned the cards into very abstract designs known as . By the mid-20th century, all \"mekuri karuta\" fell into oblivion with the exception of which is used to play Kakkuri, a game similar to Poch, found in Yafune, Fukui prefecture.\nUnsun karuta.\nThe \"Unsun karuta\" () deck developed in the late 17th century. It has five suits of 15 ranks each for a total of 75 cards. Six of the ranks were face cards of female knave, knight, king, \"Un\" (\u3046\u3093), \"Sun\" (\u3059\u3093), and dragon. The Portuguese deck used to have dragons on their aces; the Unsun karuta made the aces and dragons separate cards. The order of the court cards change depending on whether it is the trump suit or not just like in Ombre. The new Guru suit used circular whirls (\"mitsudomoe\") as pips. Unsun karuta is still used in Hitoyoshi, Kumamoto, to play \"hachinin-meri\", a game descended from , a relative of Ombre. This game preserves some very archaic features such as inverted ranking for the pip cards in the three round suits. Inverted ranking is a feature found in Madiao, Khanhoo, T\u1ed5 t\u00f4m, Ganjifa, Tarot, Ombre, and Maw and is believed to have originated in the very earliest card games.\nKabufuda.\n is another derivative of \"mekuri karuta\" but all the suits were made identical. It is used for gambling games such as Oicho-Kabu. They come in decks of 40 cards with designs representing the numbers 1 through 10. There are four cards for each number and the 10 (knave) is the only face card.\nIri no kichi.\n is a local variant of kabufuda where all three face cards from mekurifuda are retained, also featuring a knight and king alongside the knave, for a total of 48 cards. Many decks additionally include an oni joker card. Unlike standard kabufuda cards, modern iri no kichi cards typically remain close to the old face card designs from the Edo period.\nHarifuda and Hikifuda.\nThe gambling game of Tehonbiki can be played with either a or set. \"Harifuda\" contains seven copies of cards numbered one to six in stylized Chinese numerals for a total of 42 cards. The 48-card \"Hikifuda\" or has eight copies of cards with one to six coins, similar to the coins of a \"mekuri karuta\" set. In Tehonbiki, the player tries to guess which number from 1 to 6 the dealer has selected. Some sets may include indicator cards to raise or hedge bets.\nHanafuda.\n are 48-card decks with flower designs originating from the 18th century. Instead of being divided by 4 suits with 12 cards each, a hanafuda deck is divided by 12 suits (months) with 4 cards each. A deck may additionally include one or more joker cards and/or a blank spare card. Hanafuda games are mostly fishing games.\nE-awase karuta.\nUta-garuta.\n is a card game in which 100 \"waka\" poems are written on two sets of 100 cards: one set is , which have the complete poem taken from the , and the other is , which each correspond to a \"yomifuda\" and have only the last few lines of the corresponding poem on them. One person is chosen to be the reader. As the reader reads a \"yomifuda\", the players race to find its associated \"torifuda\" before anybody else does. This game has traditionally been played on New Year's Day since 1904. Competitive karuta has competitions on various levels with the Japan national championship tournament being held every January at Omi shrine (a Shinto shrine) in \u014ctsu, Shiga since 1955.\nA few non-matching games exist that use only the \"yomifuda\". Bouzu Mekuri, is a simple game of chance originating from the Meiji period. Iro Kammuri (Color Crowns) is a 4-player partnership game that is related to Goita. In both games, the poems are irrelevant, and the only parts of the cards that matter are the appearance of the poets such as their clothing, sex, or social status.\nIta-karuta.\n is a variation found in Hokkaido. The \"torifuda\" are made of wood while the \"yomifuda\" remain the same or lack illustrations of the poets. They are used to play a competitive partnership game called \"shimo-no ku karuta\" in which the last half of the poem is read.\nIroha karuta.\n is an easier-to-understand matching game for children, similar to Uta-garuta but with 96 cards. Instead of poems, the cards represent the 47 syllables of the hiragana syllabary and adds for the 48th (since the syllable \"-n\" can never start any word or phrase). It uses the old iroha ordering for the syllables which includes two obsolete syllables, \"wi\" () and \"we\" (). A typical \"torifuda\" features a drawing with a \"kana\" at one corner of the card. Its corresponding \"yomifuda\" features a proverb connected to the picture with the first syllable being the \"kana\" displayed on the \"torifuda\". There are 3 standard Iroha karuta variants: Kamigata, Edo and Owari. Each variant has its own set of proverbs based on the local dialect and culture. The Kamigata or Kyoto version is the oldest but the Edo version is the most widespread, being found all over Japan. The Owari variant existed only during the latter half of the 19th-century before being supplanted by the Edo version.\nObake karuta.\n\"Obake karuta\" is an obsolete variation of \"Iroha karuta\" unique to Tokyo. The cards were created in the Edo period and remained popular through the 1910s or 1920s. Each card in the deck features a hiragana syllable and a creature from Japanese mythology; in fact, \"obake karuta\" means \"ghost cards\" or \"monster cards.\" Success requires knowledge of Japanese mythology and folklore as players attempt to collect cards that match clues read by a referee. The player who accumulates the most cards by the end of the game wins.\n\"Obake karuta\" is an early example of the common Japanese fascination with classifying monsters and creating new ones. The game is one of the earliest attempts by Japanese companies to categorize legendary creatures, label them, define them, and subsequently market them. As such, it is a precursor to the \"Godzilla\" films of the 1950s and later. Even more closely, \"obake karuta\" resembles the \"Yu-Gi-Oh!\" or \"Pok\u00e9mon Trading Card Game\", which also involves collecting cards that represent fabulous creatures. In fact, many Pok\u00e9mon were designed specifically after creatures from Japanese mythology.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45092", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45092", "title": "Henry V", "text": "Henry V may refer to:\nMedia.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "45093", "revid": "200809329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45093", "title": "Uniform distribution (mathematics)", "text": ""}
{"id": "45094", "revid": "46066408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45094", "title": "Marsala wine", "text": "Fortified wine from Sicily, Italy\nMarsala is a fortified wine, dry or sweet, produced in the region surrounding the Italian city of Marsala in Sicily. Marsala first received \"Denominazione di Origine Controllata\" (DOC) status in 1969.\nThe European Union grants Protected designation of origin (PDO) status to Marsala and most other countries limit the use of the term \"Marsala\" to products from the Marsala area.\nWhile unfortified wine is also produced in the Marsala region, it does not qualify for the Marsala DOC.\nHistory.\nMarsala fortified wine was probably first popularized outside Sicily by the Liverpool merchant John Woodhouse. In 1773, he landed at the port of Marsala and discovered the local wine produced in the region, which was aged in wooden casks and tasted similar to Spanish and Portuguese fortified wines then popular in England. Fortified wine in Marsala has always been made using a process called \"in perpetuum\", which is similar to the \"solera\" system used to produce Sherry in Jerez, Spain.\nWoodhouse recognized that the \"in perpetuum\" process raised the alcohol level and alcoholic taste of this wine while also preserving these characteristics during long-distance sea travel. Woodhouse further believed that fortified Marsala would be popular in England. Marsala indeed proved so successful that Woodhouse returned to Sicily and, in 1796, began its mass production and commercialization. In 1806, it was Benjamin Ingham (1784\u20131861), arriving in Sicily from Leeds, who opened new markets for Marsala in Europe and the Americas. Founded by Benjamin Ingham and later run by Joseph Whitaker and William Ingham Whitaker. Joseph and his brother William Ingham Whitaker inherited vast vineyards and his great grandfather Ingham's banking empire.\nIn 1833, the entrepreneur Vincenzo Florio, a Calabrese by birth and Palermitano by adoption, bought up great swathes of land between the two largest established Marsala producers and set to making his own vintage with even more exclusive range of grape. Florio purchased Woodhouse's firm, among others, in the late nineteenth century and consolidated the Marsala wine industry. Florio and Pellegrino remain the leading producers of Marsala today.\nCharacteristics and types.\nMarsala is produced using the Grillo, Inzolia, Catarratto and Damaschino white grape varietals, among others.\nMarsala contains about 15\u201320% alcohol by volume. Different Marsala wines are classified according to their color, sweetness, and duration of their ageing. The three levels of sweetness are \"secco\" (with a maximum of 40 grams of residual sugar per liter), \"semisecco\" (41\u2013100 g/L), and \"sweet\" (over 100 g/L). The color and ageing classifications are as follows:\nMarsala wine was traditionally served as an aperitif between the first and second courses of a meal. Contemporary diners will serve its drier versions chilled with Parmesan (stravecchio), Gorgonzola, Roquefort, and other spicy cheeses, with fruits or pastries, and the sweeter at room temperature as a dessert wine. Marsala is sometimes discussed with another Sicilian wine, \"Passito di Pantelleria\" (Pantelleria Island's raisin wine).\nIn cooking.\nMarsala wine is frequently used in cooking, and is especially prevalent in dishes served in Italian restaurants in the United States.\nDry Marsala wine is used in savory cooking. A typical savory Marsala sauce, for example, involves reducing the wine almost to a syrup with onions or shallots, then adding mushrooms and herbs. One of the most popular Marsala recipes is chicken marsala, in which flour-coated pounded chicken breast halves are braised in a mixture of Marsala, butter, olive oil, mushrooms, and spices. Marsala is also used in some risotto recipes.\nSweet Marsala wine is used to produce rich Italian desserts such as \"zabaione\", tiramisu and shortcake.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45097", "revid": "49473971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45097", "title": "Gryffindor", "text": ""}
{"id": "45100", "revid": "48649018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45100", "title": "Hermione Granger", "text": "Fictional character from the Harry Potter literature series\nHermione Jean Granger ( ) is a fictional character in the \"Harry Potter\" series of novels by J. K. Rowling. She first appeared in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" (1997), as a first-year student on her way to Hogwarts. She becomes friends with Harry Potter and Ron Weasley after they save her from a troll in the girls' bathroom. Hermione often uses her quick wit, deft recall, and encyclopaedic knowledge to help her friends in perilous situations. Rowling has stated that Hermione resembles herself as a young girl, sharing similar insecurity and fear of failure.\nHermione has been immensely popular. The version of the character portrayed by Emma Watson in all eight \"Harry Potter\" films was voted the best female character of all time in a 2016 poll of Hollywood professionals conducted by \"The Hollywood Reporter\". Arabella Stanton portrays her in the upcoming television series.\nCreation and development.\nRowling has described Hermione as a strong female character who is bright, logical, upright and good. Rowling was seen as a \"know-it-all\" in her youth, and she said Hermione is an exaggerated version of her younger self. She added that beneath Hermione's studious exterior, she is insecure and afraid of failure, traits which are inspired by Rowling's own youthful insecurity. According to Rowling, Hermione is the perfect expository character due to her encyclopaedic knowledge of the wizarding world.\nRowling said that Hermione's parents, two Muggle dentists, are somewhat bemused by their \"odd\" daughter, but are proud of her nonetheless. Rowling has called Luna Lovegood the \"anti-Hermione\" due to the differences between them.\nHermione's first name was derived from a character in William Shakespeare's \"The Winter's Tale\", though Rowling has said that the two characters have very little in common. Rowling said that Hermione's parents are the type of people who would give their daughter an unusual name to prove their cleverness. Hermione's original surname was \"Puckle\", but Rowling ultimately felt the name did not suit her.\nAppearances.\nNovels.\n\"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\".\nHermione is introduced in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" (1997) when she meets Harry Potter and Ron Weasley on the Hogwarts Express. After mocking Ron for his inability to perform a spell, she proves her knowledge by declaring that she has memorized all their school textbooks. At Hogwarts, Hermione annoys other students with her vast knowledge, and Harry and Ron consider her arrogant. They heartily dislike her until they rescue her from a troll; she is so thankful that she lies to protect them from punishment, thus winning their friendship. Later, Hermione's knack for logic and her penchant for library research aid the trio in their quest to locate a magical object known as the Philosopher's Stone. On their way to the Stone, Hermione solves a puzzle and defeats the dangerous Devil's Snare plant.\nRowling said she resisted requests by her editor to remove the troll scene. She explained later, \"Hermione [is] so very arrogant and annoying in the early part of \"Philosopher's Stone\" that I really felt it needed something (literally) huge to bring her together with Harry and Ron.\"\n\"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets\" (1998), Hermione develops a liking for Gilderoy Lockhart, the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor. During a confrontation between the Gryffindor and Slytherin Quidditch teams, a brawl nearly ensues after Draco Malfoy calls her a \"Mudblood\", an insulting term for a Muggle-born wizard. Hermione concocts a Polyjuice Potion so she, Harry and Ron can infiltrate the Slytherin dormitory and collect information about the Heir of Slytherin. The boys drink the potion and take on the appearance of Malfoy's friends, but Hermione, having used an improper ingredient in her vial of potion, ends up looking like a cat and cannot join the mission. When a basilisk escapes from the Chamber of Secrets, Hermione successfully identifies it through library research, but is Petrified by its gaze. Though she lies incapacitated in the hospital wing, the information she found aids Harry and Ron in their quest to solve the mystery of the Chamber. Hermione is revived after Harry kills the basilisk, but she is distraught to learn that all end-of-year exams have been cancelled.\n\"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" (1999), Hermione buys a cat named Crookshanks, who takes to chasing Ron's pet rat, Scabbers. Before the start of term, McGonagall secretly gives Hermione a Time-Turner, a device which lets her travel through time to handle her busy class schedule. During the school year, tension arises between Hermione and her two best friends. Harry becomes furious with her because she told McGonagall that he got a Firebolt racing broom, which was then confiscated to be inspected for traces of dark magic. Ron is angry at her because he believes Crookshanks was responsible for Scabbers' disappearance, although Hermione maintains that Crookshanks is not to blame. Later, Hermione uses the Time-Turner to help Harry rescue Sirius Black and the hippogriff Buckbeak.\n\"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\".\nHermione is disturbed by the way house-elves are treated in \"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire\" (2000). She establishes the Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare (SPEW) to lobby for their rights. When students from other schools of magic visit Hogwarts for the Triwizard Tournament, Hermione is asked to the Yule Ball by the Bulgarian Quidditch star Viktor Krum of Durmstrang. She later gets into a heated argument with Ron after he accuses her of \"fraternising with the enemy\". She supports Harry throughout the Triwizard Tournament, helping him prepare for each task. After the second task, Krum asks her to visit him in Bulgaria over the summer, but she politely declines. Near the end of the term, Hermione takes action against Rita Skeeter, a tabloid journalist and unregistered Animagus who published defamatory material about Hermione, Harry, and Hagrid.\n\"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\".\nIn \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\" (2003), Hermione becomes a Gryffindor prefect. Her new friendship with Luna Lovegood has a rocky start after Hermione criticises \"The Quibbler\", a periodical published by Luna's father. When the \"Daily Prophet\" alleges that Harry fabricated the story of Voldemort's return, Hermione defends Harry to fellow students. She also bickers frequently with Ron. After the Ministry of Magic decrees that Hogwarts students will not be taught practical defensive magic, Hermione proposes that Harry should instruct students in defensive spells. Many students are interested in the secret practice group, which they call Dumbledore's Army. Near the end of the novel, Hermione is involved in a battle at the Department of Mysteries. She is seriously injured by the Death Eater Antonin Dolohov, but makes a full recovery.\n\"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\".\nThe new Potions professor Horace Slughorn invites Hermione to join his exclusive \"Slug Club\" in \"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince\" (2005). During tryouts for the Gryffindor Quidditch team, Hermione helps Ron retain his position as keeper by sabotaging his rival, Cormac McLaggen. Hermione's romantic feelings for Ron continue to grow, and she invites him to Slughorn's Christmas party. Ron, however, has become romantically involved with Lavender Brown. Hermione feuds with Ron until he suffers a near-fatal poisoning, which frightens her enough to reconcile with him. After Dumbledore's death, Hermione and Ron both vow to stay by Harry's side regardless of what happens.\n\"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\".\nHermione accompanies Harry and Ron on the quest to destroy Voldemort's remaining Horcruxes in \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\" (2007). Before leaving home, she ensures the safety of her parents by placing a false memory charm on them, which causes them to believe they are Wendell and Monica Wilkins. She prepares for their journey by filling an enchanted purse with things they will need. She also inherits Dumbledore's copy of \"The Tales of Beedle the Bard\", which allows her to discover secrets about the Deathly Hallows. When Hermione and Harry encounter Voldemort and his snake Nagini in Godric's Hollow, Hermione casts a spell which saves her and Harry but which breaks Harry's wand.\nWhen Hermione, Harry and Ron are caught by Snatchers, Hermione temporarily conceals Harry's identity by disfiguring his face with a Stinging Jinx. She tries to pass herself off as a half-blood to avoid persecution, but she and her friends are recognised and taken to Malfoy Manor. Bellatrix Lestrange tortures Hermione with the Cruciatus Curse and demands to know how the trio obtained the Sword of Gryffindor. Hermione, Harry, Ron and the other prisoners being held in Malfoy Manor are eventually rescued by the house-elf Dobby. Later, Hermione impersonates Bellatrix using Polyjuice Potion in order to steal a Horcrux from Gringotts. She, Harry, and Ron fight in the Battle of Hogwarts, during which Hermione destroys the Horcrux with a basilisk fang. Hermione and Ron share their first kiss during the battle.\nIn the novel's epilogue, which is set nineteen years after Voldemort's death, Hermione and Ron are sending their daughter Rose Granger-Weasley off to her first year at Hogwarts. They also have a younger son named Hugo. Although the epilogue does not state that Hermione and Ron are married, news articles published after the release of \"Deathly Hallows\" refer to Hermione as Ron's wife.\nFilm adaptations.\nEmma Watson portrays Hermione in all eight of the \"Harry Potter\" film adaptations. Casting agents for \"Philosopher's Stone\" (2001) found the nine-year-old Watson through her Oxford theatre teacher. She had acted in school plays, but had no film acting experience. Although Watson had to audition a total of eight times before earning the role, J. K. Rowling supported her casting after her first screen test. Prior to casting Watson, the filmmakers considered Hatty Jones for the role. Jones had previous film acting experience in the 1998 film adaptation of the children's book series \"Madeline\".\nWhen filming \"Chamber of Secrets\" (2002), Watson did not believe she was similar to her character. However, she later decided that Hermione is an exceptional role model for girls. In 2007, Watson said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are too many stupid girls in the media. Hermione's not scared to be clever. I think sometimes really smart girls dumb themselves down a bit, and that's bad. When I was nine or ten, I would get really upset when they tried to make me look geeky, but now I absolutely love it. I find it's so much pressure to be beautiful. Hermione doesn't care what she looks like.\nDuring production of \"Order of the Phoenix\" (2007), Watson was uncertain about returning for the next film. She cited the long production schedule, attention from the public and a \"lack of freedom\" as reasons for not reprising her role. She eventually decided to return, saying that she could not bear to see anyone else play Hermione. Steve Kloves, who wrote the screenplay adaptations for seven of the eight films, revealed in a 2003 interview that Hermione is his favourite character. He said, \"There's something about her fierce intellect coupled with a complete lack of understanding of how she affects people ... that I just find charming and irresistible to write.\"\nStage adaption.\n\"Harry Potter and the Cursed Child\" is a play written by Jack Thorne from a story by Thorne, J. K. Rowling and John Tiffany. In the play, which takes place nineteen years after the events of \"Deathly Hallows\", Hermione is the Minister for Magic. She is played by the Eswatini-born actress Noma Dumezweni, known for her performances in \"Linda\", \"A Raisin in the Sun\" and \"A Human Being Died That Night\". Dumezweni described the role as a privilege and a responsibility. The casting of a black actress led to criticism on social media, which Rowling dismissed as racism. She asserted that the novels never explicitly establish Hermione's race or skin colour. Dumezweni called the backlash \"unimaginative\" and said that many actors and actresses are glad she is portraying Hermione because it allows them to see \"a version of themselves\" on stage.\n\"The Independent\" praised Dumezweni's portrayal, writing that she \"did a tremendous job\". Dumezweni received the 2017 Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her performance.\nCharacterisation.\nOutward appearance.\nIn the novels, Hermione is described as having bushy brown hair, brown eyes and large front teeth. In \"Goblet of Fire,\" Madam Pomfrey shrinks her teeth to a smaller size after Draco Malfoy casts a spell on her that made her teeth grow exceptionally long. In the film adaptation of \"Philosopher's Stone\", Emma Watson wore large fake teeth for one scene. She did not wear them for subsequent films because they made it difficult for her to speak.\nPersonality.\nHermione's most prominent features include her prodigious intellect and cleverness. She is levelheaded, book-smart, and very logical. Throughout the series, Hermione uses the skills of a librarian and teacher to gather the information needed to defeat Voldemort. When in doubt, she always turns to the school library. She is often bossy yet unfailingly dutiful and loyal to her friends\u2014a person who can always be counted on. Rowling said that Hermione \"never strays off the path; she always keeps her attention focused on the job that must be done\". Despite Hermione's intelligence and bossy attitude, Rowling says Hermione has \"quite a lot of vulnerability in her personality\", as well as a \"sense of insecurity underneath\", feels, \"utterly inadequate... and to compensate, she tries and strives to be the best at everything at school, projecting a confidence that irritates people.\" During her DADA exam at the end of \"Prisoner of Azkaban\", Hermione reveals that her biggest fear is failure after a Boggart takes the form of Professor McGonagall and tells her that she has failed all her exams.\nAfter the final novel was released, Rowling stated that Hermione's career in the Ministry was to fight for the rights of the oppressed and disenfranchised (such as House-elves or Muggle-borns). Hermione is also very protective of her friends and values them so much that Rowling has suggested that, if Hermione looked in the Mirror of Erised, she would see Harry, Ron, and herself alive and Voldemort defeated. Hermione also learns to ignore what bullies such as Draco Malfoy say to her, often preventing Harry and Ron from retaliating and thinking of some way to outsmart him. She accepts her status as a Muggle-born, and says in \"Deathly Hallows\" that she is \"a Mudblood and proud of it\".\nMagical abilities and skills.\nHermione is portrayed during the novel series as an exceptionally talented witch. Rowling has said that Hermione is a \"borderline genius\". She is the highest-performing student in her year at Hogwarts and is often the first student to master a new spell or charm introduced in her classes. In \"Order of the Phoenix\", she casts a Protean Charm, which is a type of magic usually taught to older students. She is also the first one of her age to be able to cast non-verbal spells. Hermione is a competent duellist \u2013 Rowling has stated that during the first three novels Hermione could have beaten Harry in any magical duel, but by the fourth book Harry has become so good at DADA that he would have defeated Hermione. Hermione does not perform as well in subjects that are not learned through books or formal training, as broom flying does not come as naturally to her in her first year as it does for Harry, and she shows no affinity for Divination, which she drops from her third-year studies. She is also not particularly skilled at Wizard's Chess.\nHermione's Patronus is an otter, which is Rowling's favourite animal.\nReception.\nIn the book \"The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter,\" Eliza T. Dresang discusses Hermione's role in the series and its relation to feminist debates. The chapter begins with an analysis of Hermione's name and the role of previous characters with the same name in mythology and fiction, and the heritage Hermione has inherited from these characters due to her name. Dresang also emphasises Hermione's parallelism with Rowling herself and how, as Hermione has some attributes from Rowling herself, she must be a strong character.\nThe chapter also points out that, despite being born to Muggle parents, Hermione's magical abilities are innate. Her \"compulsion for study\" helps both the character's development, which makes Hermione \"a prime example that information brings power\", and the plot of the series, as her knowledge of the wizard world is often used to \"save the day\". Dresang states that \"Harry and Ron are more dependent on Hermione than she is on them.\" However, she adds that Hermione's \"hysteria and crying happen far too often to be considered a believable part of the development of Hermione's character and are quite out of line with her core role in the book.\"\nIn his review of \"Philosopher's Stone\", Brian Linder of \"IGN\" wrote, \"[F]rom Hermione Granger's perfect introduction to her final scene, Watson is better than I could have possibly imagined. She steals the show.\" In another \"IGN\" article, Linder and Steve Head said that Watson's \"cute and astute portrayal of Hermione has already become a favorite among fans.\" \"The Daily Telegraph\" called her performance admirable. Watson was nominated for five awards for her performance in \"Philosopher's Stone\", winning the Young Artist Award for Leading Young Actress. She was also chosen as one of Entertainment Weekly's Breakout Performers of 2001.\nUGO Networks listed Hermione as one of their best heroes of all time, saying, \"Most of us can probably recall having a classmate like Hermione when we were in grammar school\"\u2014one who \"can at first be a little off-putting, but once you get to know her, she's not a bad chick to have on your side\". \"IGN\" also listed Hermione as their second top \"Harry Potter\" character, praising her character development. In 2016 \"The Hollywood Reporter\" did a poll of Hollywood professionals, including actors, writers and directors, into their favourite female characters of all time; Hermione topped the poll.\nPhilip Nel of Kansas State University notes that \"Rowling, who worked for Amnesty International, evokes her social activism through Hermione's passion for oppressed elves and the formation of her 'Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare'\". Scholars such as Brycchan Carey have praised the books' abolitionist sentiments, viewing Hermione's Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare as a model for younger readers' political engagement.\nHowever, in an analysis for \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\", Rowland Manthrope states that \"seven books on, we still only know her as swottish, sensible Hermione\u2014a caricature, not a character.\"\nIn popular culture.\nHermione features in the \"Harry Bladder\" sketches in \"All That\", where she appears as Herheiny and is played by Lisa Foiles. \"The Wedge\", an Australian sketch comedy, parodies Hermione and Harry in love on a \"Cooking With...\" show before being caught by Snape.\nHermione is the focus of the fan-created web-series, \"Hermione Granger and the Quarter Life Crisis\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45103", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45103", "title": "1605 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "45104", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45104", "title": "Pope Nicholas III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1277 to 1280\n \nPope Nicholas III (; c.\u20091225 \u2013 22 August 1280), born Giovanni Gaetano Orsini, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 25 November 1277 to his death on 22 August 1280.\nHe was a Roman nobleman who had served under eight popes, been made Cardinal-Deacon of \"St. Nicola in Carcere Tulliano\" by Pope Innocent IV (1243\u20131254), protector of the Franciscans by Pope Alexander IV (1254\u20131261), inquisitor-general by Pope Urban IV (1261\u201364), and succeeded Pope John XXI (1276\u20131277) after a six-month vacancy in the Holy See resolved in the papal election of 1277, largely through family influence.\nPersonal life.\nGiovanni Gaetano Orsini, was born in Rome, a member of the prominent Orsini family of Italy, the eldest son of Roman nobleman Matteo Rosso Orsini by his first wife, Perna Caetani. His father was Lord of Vicovaro, Licenza, Cantalupo, Roccagiovine, Galera, Formello, Castel Sant'Angelo di Tivoli, Nettuno, Civitella, Bomarzo, San Polo and Castelfoglia, of Nerola from 1235; Lord of Mugnano, Santangelo and Monterotondo; Senator of Rome 1241\u20131243.\nHis brother Giordano was named Cardinal Deacon of San Eustachio by Nicholas III on 12 March 1278. His brother Gentile became Lord of Mugnano, Penna, Nettuno and Pitigliano. Another brother, Matteo Rosso of Montegiordano, was Senator of Rome (probably) in 1279, War Captain of Todi, and Podest\u00e0 of Siena in 1281. There were five other younger brothers and two sisters.\nThe Orsini family had already produced several popes: Stephen II (752\u2013757), Paul I (757\u2013767) and Celestine III (1191\u20131198).\nHe did not, as some scholars used to think, study at Paris\u2014though his nephew did. His career shows no indication that he was a legal professional or a theologian. He never became a priest, until he became pope in 1277.\nCardinalate.\nGiovanni Gaetano Orsini was one of a dozen men created a cardinal by Pope Innocent IV (Sinibaldo Fieschi) in his first Consistory for the creation of cardinals, on Saturday, May 28, 1244, and was assigned the Deaconry of San Nicola in Carcere. He was a Canon and Prebendary of York, and also of Soissons and Laon. In the summer of 1244, he was one of five cardinals who fled to Genoa with Pope Innocent IV. He was at Lyon, and was present in June and July for the Ecumenical Council of Lyon. Cardinal Orsini and the Curia did not return to Italy until May 1251\u2014after the death of Emperor Frederick II Hohenstaufen. After spending the summer in Genoa, Milan and Brescia, they finally reached Perugia in November 1251, where the Papal Court resided continuously until April 1253.\nThe Curia returned to Rome in mid-October, where Pope and Curia resided continually until the end of April, 1254. In May they went on pilgrimage to Assisi, then visited Anagni, where the Court stayed from June until the second week in October, when they went off in pursuit of Manfred, Hohenstaufen regent of the Kingdom of Sicily. At the beginning of December, the Battle of Foggia took place, and the papal army was routed. Innocent IV died in Naples, where he had taken refuge, on 7 December 1254, and the meeting to elect his successor was therefore held in Naples in the palace in which he had died. Voting began on Friday, 11 December, with ten of the twelve cardinals present, but no candidate received the required votes. But on Saturday, 12 December, Cardinal Rinaldo dei Conti di Segni, the nephew of Pope Gregory IX, who had a reputation of a conciliator, was elected pope. He chose to be called Alexander IV and was crowned on Sunday, December 20, 1254, in the Cathedral of Naples. As for Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini, in his first eleven and a half years as a cardinal, he had only spent six months in the city of Rome. A peripatetic Curia had its disadvantages.\nPope Alexander IV and the Curia continued to live in Naples, until the first week of June 1255 when they returned to Anagni, and it was not until mid-November that the Pope was back in Rome. There the Curia stayed until the end of May, 1256, when it was off to Anagni for the summer, until the beginning of December. The problem was that Rome was in the hands of Senator Brancaleone degli Andalo, Count of Casalecchio, and the Ghibellines since 1252, and Alexander was repeatedly driven out by unruly mobs. Rome was home again until the end of May, 1257, until the summer vacation at Viterbo began. The vacation lasted until the end of October, 1258, when the Court visited Anagni again; they stayed until the beginning of November, 1260. The Pope then was able to reside at the Lateran until the first week of May, 1261, when the Court was off to Viterbo again. Alexander IV died at Viterbo on 25 May 1261. Nineteen months were spent in Rome, out of a total of seventy-eight. Alexander had created no new cardinals, and so the Electoral meeting following his death had only eight participants. The Election was a long-drawn-out one, lasting from 25 May to 29 August 1261. Unable to agree on one of themselves, the Cardinals chose Jacques Pantal\u00e9on, the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, who, since 1255, was Papal Legate with the Crusade in the Holy Land. He became Pope Urban IV, and was crowned at Viterbo on 4 September 1261.\nCardinal Orsini was named General Inquisitor by Urban IV on November 2, 1262, the first known Grand Inquisitor.\nCardinal Orsini attended the first Conclave of 1268\u20131271, and was one of the cardinals who signed the letter of complaint against the authorities and people of Viterbo for their treatment of the cardinals and the Curia. He was one of the six cardinals who were chosen by the rest of the Sacred College on September 1, 1271, to select a compromise candidate for election as pope. He was therefore instrumental in bringing to the papal throne the Archdeacon of Li\u00e8ge, Teobaldo Visconti, who was not a cardinal, and who was not even in Italy, but in the Holy Land on crusade. He traveled with the Curia to France in 1273, and was present at the Ecumenical Council of Lyon. He was not one of the cardinals in the suite of Pope Gregory X when he left Lyon in 1275 to return to Rome, nor was he at Arezzo where the Pope died on 10 January 1276, before reaching the city. He did not attend the first conclave which began on 20 January 1276, and concluded the next day with the election of Peter of Tarantaise, who became Pope Innocent V. Pope Innocent V (Peter of Tarantaise) died in Rome at the Lateran, on 22 June 22, 1276.\nThe second Conclave of 1276 began, therefore, according to the rules set down by Pope Gregory X, on July 2. Thirteen cardinals were present, including Giovanni Gaetano Orsini. King Charles I of Sicily acted as the Governor of the Conclave, in which position he is said to have been rigorous, but understandably partisan in favor of the French faction. Cardinal Ottobuono Fieschi of Genoa was elected on July 11 and chose the name Pope Adrian V. He lived only thirty-nine days longer, dying at Viterbo, where he had gone to meet King Rudolf and avoid the summer heat of Rome. According to Bernardus Guidonis, he was never ordained priest, consecrated bishop or crowned pope (\"nondum promotus in sacerdotem nec coronatus nec consecratus\"). His one memorable act was to suspend the Constitution of Gregory X \"Ubi periculum\" which regulated conclaves. He intended, on the advice of his cardinals, to improve Gregory's regulations. Cardinal Orsini was present at the discussion and decision. Shortly after his accession, moreover, Pope Adrian V had wanted King Charles I of Sicily to come to Viterbo to carry out the usual fealty, and sent the Suburbicarian Bishop of Sabina (Bertrand de Saint Martin); Cardinal Giovanni (Orsini), Cardinal Deacon of St. Nicola in Carcere Tulliano; and Cardinal Giacomo (Savelli), Cardinal Deacon of Santa Maria in Cosmedin, to effect his wishes. Charles arrived in Viterbo from Rome on July 24. Unfortunately, Pope Adrian died, on August 18, leaving his negotiations with King Charles unfinished.\nThe third Conclave of 1276 began at the beginning of September in Viterbo, where Adrian V had died. The opening ceremonies, which should have taken place on August 29, had to be delayed for several days because of the riotous behavior of the people of Viterbo. Since Pope Adrian had created no new cardinals, the number of cardinals was twelve; Cardinal Simon de Brion was still in France, serving as Papal Legate. Once the tumults had been put down, however, the cardinals did their business quickly. On September 8, 1276, the senior Cardinal-Bishop, Peter Julian of Lisbon, was elected on the first ballot. He chose to be called John XXI, and on September 20 he was crowned at the Cathedral of San Lorenzo in Viterbo by Cardinal Giovanni Caetano Orsini. Since John XXI was already a bishop, there was no ordination or consecration necessary. He was the fourth pope of 1276. On 18 October, Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini was appointed Archpriest of St. Peter's, in place of Cardinal Riccardo Annibaldi, who had recently died, and who may have been too ill to participate in the Conclave or the Coronation.\nPope Adrian V's suspension of the regulations of Gregory X, however imperfect they may have been, was under attack. Some critics even claimed that the cardinals who vouched for the truth of the suspension, including Cardinal Peter Julian, were liars, or that the revocation was uncanonical. These were probably the same troublemakers in the Curia who had instigated the disturbances that delayed the Conclave. John XXI immediately struck back, on 30 September 1276, making it perfectly clear that the suspension had taken place and that it was valid. Ptolemy of Lucca states that the issue of this bull of revocation by John XXI was made at the suggestion of Cardinal Giovanni Caetano Orsini. The negotiations which Cardinal Giovanni Caetano had been engaged in with King Charles I were brought to a completion, and Charles swore his oath of fealty to Pope John on 7 October 1276. It appeared that his reign was going to be a successful one, when one day in mid-May 1277, while the Pope was in a new room which he had just had built in the Episcopal Palace in Viterbo, suddenly the roof caved in. There was nothing suspicious about this, since the palace had been under construction since 1268 and was still being worked on. The Pope was severely injured from the falling stones and timber. He lingered in pain for several days (three, or six), and died on 20 May 1277, exactly eight months after his coronation. He had named no cardinals.\nYet another Conclave took place in Viterbo, therefore, with seven cardinals in attendance. Cardinal Simon de Brion was still in France as papal legate. But this was not an easy conclave. Three of the electors belonged to the Angevin faction, and three opposed it. The only surviving Cardinal-Bishop, the Benedictine Bertrand de Saint Martin, wavered back and forth, providing little leadership. The Conclave therefore went on for more than five and a half months. Finally, on the Feast of S. Catherine, 25 November 1277, Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini was elected. He chose the name Nicholas III. The new pope set out immediately for Rome. He was ordained a priest on December 18, consecrated a bishop on December 19, and crowned on the Feast of S. Stephen, 26 December. His election portended serious difficulties, for he was not a candidate of King Charles of Sicily. Quite the contrary, he believed that King Charles had entirely too much influence in church affairs and in the operation of the Papal States.\nActivities as pope.\nPolitics.\nThe lands under direct papal rule were threatened by surrounding powers. In the second quarter of the 13th century, they were threatened by the expansionist policies of the Emperor Frederick II, who aimed to unite his inheritance in the south (Sicily and southern Italy) with his acquisition of the Holy Roman Empire in northern Italy. He spent a great deal of time and energy attempting to gain control over Lombardy and Tuscany, which brought him into direct conflict with the Papacy. Frederick was repeatedly excommunicated by one pope after another. In order to drive off the Hohenstaufen, the Papacy contrived a deal with the brother of Louis IX of France, Charles of Anjou, Count of Provence, who was invited to Italy to assume the crown of Sicily and be a counterweight against the Empire. He was too successful, however, and the Papacy found itself in the deadly embrace of the Angevins. Nicholas' prime goal was to loosen Charles I's grip on the Papacy, Rome, and the lands of the Church.\nNicholas' pontificate, though brief, was marked by several important events. He greatly strengthened the papal position in Italy. On 1 October 1273, Rudolph I of Habsburg, the godson of Frederick II, had been elected King of Germany and King of the Romans. Pope Gregory X had recognized him as King, after some hard negotiation, but the imperial title and coronation were withheld. Pope Nicholas was willing to negotiate, but he refused to crown Rudolf as Emperor until Rudolph had acknowledged all the claims of the Church, including many that were quite dubious. The concordat with Rudolph I of Habsburg was concluded in May 1278. In it the city of Bologna, the Romagna, and the exarchate of Ravenna were guaranteed to the papacy. According to the chronographer Bartholomew of Lucca (Ptolemy of Lucca), he discussed with Rudolph, in general terms at least, the splitting the Holy Roman Empire into four separate kingdoms \u2013 Lombardy, Burgundy, Tuscia and Germany \u2013 where Rudolph's kingdom would be made hereditary and he himself would be recognized as Holy Roman Emperor.\nNicholas III was even able to persuade King Charles I of Naples and Sicily to give up his position as Roman Senator in 1278, at the conclusion of ten years of tenure, as well as the position of Papal Vicar for Tuscany. In July 1278, Nicholas III issued an epoch-making constitution for the government of Rome, \"Fundamenta militantis\" which forbade foreigners from taking civil office. It depends for its justification not only on the biblical phrase, \"Tu es Petrus, et super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam\" (\"Matthew\" 16:18), but also on the forged Donations of Constantine.\nEcclesiastical.\nNicholas' father had been a personal friend of Francis of Assisi, and he himself had to focus much of his attention on the Franciscan order. More than 165 of his bulls and letters address the subject. Most importantly, he issued the papal bull \"Exiit qui seminat\" on 14 August 1279, to settle the strife within the order between the parties of strict and relaxed observance.\nHe repaired the Lateran Palace and the Vatican at enormous cost, and erected a beautiful country house at Soriano nel Cimino near Viterbo, where he died of a cardiovascular event (sources differ on whether it was a heart attack or a stroke).\nNepotism.\nNicholas III, though a man of learning noted for his strength of character, was known for his excessive nepotism. He elevated three of his closest relatives to the cardinalate and gave others important positions. This nepotism was lampooned both by Dante and in contemporary cartoons, depicting him in his fine robes with three \"little bears\" (\"orsetti\", a pun on the family name) hanging on below.\nCardinals.\nSee : Cardinals created by Nicholas III\nDeath.\nPope Nicholas III was stricken ill quite unexpectedly. The Curia was residing at the time in the city of Viterbo. Pope Nicholas was at his country retreat at Castro Soriano. According to the \"Chronicon Parmense\" he was suddenly deprived of consciousness and movement (\"privatus subito omni sensu et motu\"). Bartholomeus (Ptolemy) of Lucca says, \"subito factus apoplecticus, sine loquela moritur\" ('suddenly stricken with apoplexy, he died without speaking'). Nicholas was unable to make his confession, and died at his palace at Castro Soriano, in the diocese of Viterbo, on 22 August 1280. He had been pope for two years, eight months, and twenty-eight days. His remains were taken to Rome, where he was buried in the Vatican Basilica, in the Chapel of S. Nicholas. There was an alternative story circulating, as was frequently the case in the sudden deaths of medieval and renaissance popes\u2014that the pope had been poisoned.\nPortrayal in \"The Inferno\".\nDante, in \"The Inferno\" (of the \"Divine Comedy\"), talks briefly to Nicholas III, who was condemned to spend eternity in the Third Bolgia of the Eighth Circle of Hell, reserved for those who committed simony, the ecclesiastical crime of paying for offices or positions in the hierarchy of a church.\nIn Dante's story, the simoniacs are placed head-first in holes, flames burning on the soles of their feet (Canto XIX). Nicholas was the chief sinner in these pits, which is demonstrated by the height of the flames on his feet. At first he mistakes Dante for Pope Boniface VIII. When the confusion is cleared up, Nicholas informs Dante that he foresees the damnation (for simony) not only of Boniface VIII, but also Clement V, an even more corrupt pope.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "45105", "revid": "43729757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45105", "title": "Agrigento", "text": "Agrigento (; or ) is a city on the southern coast of the autonomous island region of Sicily in Italy, capital of the province of Agrigento. As of 2025, with a population of 55,227, it is also the largest city in the province, 10th-largest in Sicily and 115th-largest in Italy.\nFounded around 582 BC by Greek colonists from Gela, Agrigento, then known as Akragas, was one of the leading cities during the golden age of Ancient Greece. The city flourished under Theron's leadership in the 5th century BC, marked by ambitious public works and the construction of renowned temples.\nDespite periods of dormancy during the Punic Wars, Agrigento emerged as one of Sicily's largest cities in the Republican era. During the Principate, Agrigento's strategic port and diverse economic ventures, including sulfur mining, trade and agriculture, sustained its importance throughout the high and late Empire. Economic prosperity persisted in the 3rd to 4th centuries AD, but excavations show decline in activity after the 7th century.\nAgrigento is also the place of birth to several notable personalities, among which it is worth to mention Empedocles (5th century BC), the Ancient Greek pre-Socratic philosopher, who was a citizen of ancient \"Akragas\", and Luigi Pirandello (1867\u20131936), dramatist and Nobel Prize winner for literature,who was born at contrada \"u C\u00e0vusu\" in Agrigento.\nAgrigento, included among the UNESCO world heritage sites in 1997, was named Italian capital of culture for 2025.\nHistory.\nAkragas was founded on a plateau overlooking the sea, with two nearby rivers, the Hypsas and the Acragas, after which the settlement was originally named. A ridge, which offered a degree of natural fortification, links a hill to the north called Colle di Girgenti with another, called Rupe Atenea, to the east. According to Thucydides, it was founded around 582\u2013580\u00a0BC by Greek colonists from Gela in eastern Sicily, with further colonists from Crete and Rhodes. The founders () of the new city were Aristonous and Pystilus. It was the last of the major Greek colonies in Sicily to be founded.\nArchaic period.\nThe territory under Akragas's control expanded to comprise the whole area between the Platani and the Salso, and reached deep into the Sicilian interior. Greek literary sources connect this expansion with military campaigns, but archaeological evidence indicates that this was a much longer-term process which reached its peak only in the early fifth century BC. Most other Greek settlements in Sicily experienced similar territorial expansion in this period. Excavations at a range of sites in this region inhabited by the indigenous Sican people, such as Monte Sabbucina, Gibil-Gabil, Vasallaggi, San Angelo Muxano, and Mussomeli, show signs of the adoption of Greek culture. It is disputed how much of this expansion was carried out by violence and how much by commerce and acculturation. The territorial expansion provided land for the Greek settlers to farm, native slaves to work these farms, and control of the overland route from Acragas to the city of Himera on the northern coast of Sicily. This was the main land route from the Straits of Sicily to the Tyrrhenian Sea and Acragas' control of it was a key factor in its economic prosperity in the sixth and fifth centuries BC, which became proverbial. Famously, Plato, upon seeing the living standard of the inhabitants, was said to have remarked that \"they build like they intend to live forever, yet eat like this is their last day.\" Perhaps as a result of this wealth, Acragas was one of the first communities in Sicily to begin minting its own coinage, around 520 BC.\nAround 570 BC, the city came under the control of Phalaris, a semi-legendary figure, who was remembered as the archetypal tyrant, said to have killed his enemies by burning them alive inside a bronze bull. In the ancient literary sources, he is linked with the military campaigns of territorial expansion, but this is probably anachronistic. He ruled until around 550 BC. The political history of Acragas in the second half of the sixth century is unknown, except for the names of two leaders, Alcamenes and Alcander. Acragas also expanded westwards over the course of the sixth century BC, leading to a rivalry with Selinus, the next Greek city to the west. The Selinuntines founded the city of Heraclea Minoa at the mouth of the Platani river, halfway between the two settlements, in the mid-sixth century BC, but the Acragantines conquered it around 500 BC.\nEmmenid period.\nTheron, a member of the Emmenid family, made himself tyrant of Acragas around 488 BC. He formed an alliance with Gelon, tyrant of Gela and Syracuse. Around 483 BC, Theron invaded and conquered Himera, Acragas' neighbour to the north. The tyrant of Himera, Terillus joined his son-in-law, Anaxilas of Rhegium, and the Selinuntines in calling on the Carthaginians to come and restore Terillus to power. The Carthaginians did invade in 480 BC, the first of the Greco-Punic Wars, but they were defeated by the combined forces of Theron and Gelon at the Battle of Himera. As a result, Acragas was affirmed in its control of the central portion of Sicily, an area of around 3,500\u00a0km2. A number of enormous construction projects were carried out in the Valle dei Templi at this time, including the Temple of Olympian Zeus, which was one of the largest Greek temples ever built, and the construction of a massive Kolymbethra reservoir. According to Diodorus Siculus, they were built in commemoration of the Battle of Himera, using the prisoners captured in the war as slave labour. Archaeological evidence indicates that the boom in monumental construction actually began before the battle, but continued in the period after it. A major reconstruction of the city walls on a monumental scale also took place in this period. Theron sent teams to compete in the Olympic games and other Panhellenic competitions in mainland Greece. Several poems by Pindar and Simonides commemorated victories by Theron and other Acragantines, which provide insights into Acragantine identity and ideology at this time. Greek literary sources generally praise Theron as a good tyrant, but accuse his son Thrasydaeus, who succeeded him in 472 BC, of violence and oppression. Shortly after Theron's death, Hiero I of Syracuse (brother and successor of Gelon) invaded Acragas and overthrew Thrasydaeus. The literary sources say that Acragas then became a democracy, but in practice it seems to have been dominated by the civic aristocracy.\nClassical and Hellenistic periods.\nThe period after the fall of the Emmenids is not well-known. An oligarchic group called \"the thousand\" was in power for a few years in the mid-fifth century BC, but was overthrown \u2013 the literary tradition gives the philosopher Empedocles a decisive role in this revolution, but some modern scholars have doubted this. In 451 BC, Ducetius, leader of a Sicel state opposed to the expansion of Syracuse and other Greeks into the interior of Sicily, invaded Acragantine territory and conquered an outpost called Motyum. The Syracusans defeated and captured Ducetius in 450, but subsequently allowed him to go into exile. Outraged by this comparatively light punishment, the Acragantines went to war with Syracuse. They were defeated in a battle on the Salso river, which left Syracuse the pre-eminent power in eastern Sicily. The defeat was serious enough that Acragas ceased to mint coinage for a number of years.\nAncient sources considered Acragas to be a very large city at this time. Diodorus Siculus says that the population was 200,000 people, of which 20,000 were citizens. Diogenes Laertius put the population at an incredible 800,000. Some modern scholars have accepted Diodorus' numbers, but they seem to be far too high. Jos de Waele suggests a population of 16,000\u201318,000 citizens, while Franco de Angelis estimates a total population of around 30,000-40,000.\nWhen Athens undertook the Sicilian Expedition against Syracuse from 415 to 413 BC, Acragas remained neutral. However, it was sacked by the Carthaginians in 406\u00a0BC. Acragas never fully recovered its former status, though it revived following the invasion of Timoleon in the late fourth century onwards and large-scale construction took place in the Hellenistic period. During the early 3rd century BC, a tyrant called Phintias declared himself king in Akragas, also controlling a variety of other cities. His kingdom was however not long-lived.\nRoman period.\nThe city was disputed between the Romans and the Carthaginians during the First Punic War. The Romans laid siege to the city in 262\u00a0BC and captured it after defeating a Carthaginian relief force in 261\u00a0BC and sold the population into slavery. Although the Carthaginians recaptured the city in 255\u00a0BC the final peace settlement gave Punic Sicily and with it Akragas to Rome. It suffered badly during the Second Punic War (218\u2013201\u00a0BC) when both Rome and Carthage fought to control it. The Romans eventually captured Akragas in 210\u00a0BC and renamed it \"Agrigentum\", although it remained a largely Greek-speaking community for centuries thereafter. It became prosperous again under Roman rule. In the 2nd century BC, Scipio Africanus Minor bestowed upon the city a statue of Apollo by Myron, housed in the Temple of Asclepius as a symbol of their alliance during the Third Punic War.\nCicero noted Agrigentum as a civitas decumana and socius, highlighting its loyal service in the Third Punic War. He ranked Agrigentum among Sicily's largest cities, emphasizing its pivotal port and role in Roman governance, including hosting the governor's assize circuit. Additionally, he mentioned a sizable population of Roman citizens coexisting harmoniously with the Greek populace, likely engaged in commerce linked to the port.\nAn inscription shows that the city was promoted to the status of colonia by Septimius Severus and renamed \"Colonia Septimia Augusta Agrigentorum.\"\nA resilient Christian community endured into late antiquity, although archaeological evidence suggests a decline in activity after the 7th century, possibly due to disrupted trade routes following the Arab conquest of Carthage in AD 698.\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the city successively passed into the hands of the Vandalic Kingdom, the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Italy, and then the Byzantine Empire. During this period the inhabitants of Agrigentum largely abandoned the lower parts of the city and moved to the former acropolis, at the top of the hill. The reasons for this move are unclear but were probably related to the destructive coastal raids of the Saracens and other peoples around this time. In 828\u00a0AD the Saracens captured the diminished remnant of the city; the Arabic form of its name became () or ().\nFollowing the Norman conquest of Sicily, the city changed its name to the Norman version \"Girgenti\". In 1087, Norman Count Roger I established a Latin bishopric in the city. Normans built the Castello di Agrigento to control the area. The population declined during much of the medieval period but revived somewhat after the 18th century.\nJewish history.\nThe first record of Jews mentioned in Agrigento is when, under the pontificate of Gregory the Great, several Jews in Agrigento were converted to Christianity. The community is mentioned in the Cairo Geniza circa 1060. The Jewish presence in Agrigento did not survive the expulsion of the Jews in 1492, as at the time the territory was under Spanish rule.\nModern period.\nIn 1860, as in the rest of Sicily, the inhabitants supported the arrival of Giuseppe Garibaldi during the Expedition of the Thousand (one of the most dramatic events of the Unification of Italy) which marked the end of Bourbon rule. In 1927, Benito Mussolini through the \"Decree Law n. 159, 12 July 1927\", introduced the current Italianized version of the Latin name. The decision remains controversial as a symbol of Fascism and the eradication of local history. Following the suggestion of Andrea Camilleri, a Sicilian writer of Agrigentine origin, the historic city centre was renamed to the Sicilian name \"Girgenti\" in 2016. The city suffered a number of destructive bombing raids during World War II.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2025, Agrigento has a population of 55,227, of whom 49.0% are male and 51.0% are female. Minors make up 14.5% of the population, and seniors make up 24.7%, compared to the Italian average of 14.9% and 24.7% respectively.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population is 3,925, equal to 6.7% of the population. The 5 largest foreign nationalities are Moroccans (504), Senegalese (441), Romanians (370), Germans (300) and Tunisians (249).\nEconomy.\nAgrigento is a major tourist centre due to its archaeological legacy. It also serves as an agricultural centre for the surrounding region. Sulphur and potash were mined locally from Minoan times until the 1970s, and were exported worldwide from the nearby harbour of Porto Empedocle (named after the philosopher Empedocles, who lived in ancient Akragas). In 2010, the unemployment rate in Agrigento was 19.2%, almost twice the national average.\nInfrastructure and transport.\nRailways.\nIn Agrigento there are three railway stations: the Agrigento Centrale station, the Agrigento Bassa station and the Tempio Vulcano station, managed by RFI. The tourist trains, organized by the FS Italiane Foundation, which run along the Temple Tourist Railway, touch all three stations: this service is active mainly in the summer months and connects the capital with the city of Porto Empedocle and the archaeological park. The ordinary railway service, however, involves only the Agrigento Centrale and Agrigento Bassa stations.\nIn December 2023, the new railway connection between the city of temples and the \"Falcone e Borsellino\" airport in Palermo was inaugurated. The Trenitalia regional train begins on Monday 11 December with its first service and, at the request of the Sicilian Region, 4 new daily services are operational which connect Agrigento to the Palermo airport in approximately 2 hours and 30 minutes.\nMain sights.\nAncient Akragas covers a huge area\u2014much of which is still unexcavated today\u2014but is exemplified by the famous \"Valle dei Templi\" (\"Valley of the Temples\", a misnomer, as it is a ridge, rather than a valley). This comprises a large sacred area on the south side of the ancient city where seven monumental Greek temples in the Doric style were constructed during the 6th and 5th centuries BC. Now excavated and partially restored, they constitute some of the largest and best-preserved ancient Greek buildings outside of Greece itself. They are listed as a World Heritage Site.\nThe best-preserved of the temples are two very similar buildings traditionally attributed to the goddesses Hera and Concordia (though there is no evidence for this). The latter temple is remarkably intact, due to its having been converted into a Christian church in 597\u00a0AD. Both were constructed to a peripteral hexastyle design. The area around the Temple of Concordia was later re-used by early Christians as a catacomb, with tombs hewn out of the rocky cliffs and outcrops.\nSport.\nASD Akragas is the local association football club. \nFortitudo Agrigento is the local professional basketball club.\nFounded in 1969, Polisportiva Amazzoni Agrigento played in the women's volleyball Serie A1 in the 90s, before eventually folding in 2005.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nAgrigento is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
