{"id": "48713", "revid": "50803751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48713", "title": "St John's College, Cambridge", "text": "College of the University of Cambridge, in England\nSt John's College, formally the College of St John the Evangelist in the University of Cambridge, is a constituent college of the University of Cambridge, founded by the Tudor matriarch Lady Margaret Beaufort. In constitutional terms, the college is a charitable corporation established by a charter dated 9 April 1511. The aims of the college, as specified by its statutes, are the promotion of education, religion, learning and research. It is one of the largest Oxbridge colleges in terms of student numbers. For 2022, St John's was ranked 6th of 29 colleges in the Tompkins Table (the annual league table of Cambridge colleges) with over 35 per cent of its students earning first-class honours. It is the second wealthiest college in Oxford and Cambridge, after its neighbour Trinity College, Cambridge.\nMembers of the college include the winners of twelve Nobel Prizes, seven prime ministers, twelve archbishops of various countries, at least two princes and three saints. The Romantic poet William Wordsworth studied at St John's, as did William Wilberforce and Thomas Clarkson, two abolitionists who led the movement that brought slavery to an end in the British Empire. Prince William was affiliated with the college while undertaking a university-run course in estate management in 2014.\nSt John's is well known for its choir, its members' success in a variety of inter-collegiate sporting competitions and its annual May Ball. The Cambridge Apostles and the Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club were founded by members of the college. The Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race tradition began with a St John's student and the college boat club, Lady Margaret Boat Club, is the oldest in the university. In 2011, the college celebrated its quincentenary, an event marked by a visit of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.\nHistory.\nThe site was originally occupied by the Hospital of St John the Evangelist, probably founded around 1200. The hospital infirmary was located where the east end of the current chapel now stands. By 1470 Thomas Rotherham, Chancellor of the university, extended to the hospital the privileges of membership of the university. This led to St John's House, as it was then known, being conferred the status of a college. By the early 16th century the hospital was dilapidated and suffering from a lack of funds. Lady Margaret Beaufort, having endowed Christ's College, sought to found a new college, and chose the hospital site at the suggestion of John Fisher, her chaplain and Bishop of Rochester. However, Lady Margaret died without having mentioned the foundation of St John's in her will, and it was largely the work of Fisher that ensured that the college was founded. He had to obtain the approval of King Henry VIII of England, the Pope through the intermediary Polydore Vergil, and the Bishop of Ely to suppress the religious hospital (which by then held only a Master and three Augustinian brethren) and convert it to a college.\nThe college received its charter on 9 April 1511. Further complications arose in obtaining money from the estate of Lady Margaret to pay for the foundation, and it was not until 22 October 1512 that a codicil was obtained in the court of the Archbishop of Canterbury. In November 1512 the Court of Chancery allowed Lady Margaret's executors to pay for the foundation of the college from her estates. When the executors took over they found most of the old hospital buildings beyond repair, but they repaired the chapel and incorporated it into the new college. A kitchen and hall were added, and an imposing gate tower was constructed for the College Treasury. The doors were to be closed each day at dusk, sealing the monastic community from the outside world.\nOver the following five hundred years, the college expanded westwards towards the River Cam and now has twelve courts, the most of any Oxford or Cambridge College. The first three courts are arranged in enfilade.\nThe college has retained its relationship with Shrewsbury School since 1578 when the headmaster Thomas Ashton assisted in drawing up ordinances to govern the school. Under these rulings, the borough bailiffs (mayors after 1638) had the power to appoint masters, with Ashton's old college, St John's, having an academic veto. Since then, the appointment of Johnian academics to the governing body, and the historic awards of 'closed' Shrewsbury Exhibitions, have continued. A former Master of St John's, Chris Dobson, was an \"ex officio\" governor of the school from 2007. \nSt John's College first admitted women in October 1981, when K. M. Wheeler was admitted to the fellowship, along with nine female graduate students. The first women undergraduates arrived a year later.\nBuildings and grounds.\nGreat Gate.\nSt John's Great Gate follows the contemporary pattern employed previously at Christ's College and Queens' College. The gatehouse is crenellated and adorned with the arms of the foundress Lady Margaret Beaufort. Above these are displayed her ensigns, the Red Rose of Lancaster and Portcullis. The college arms are flanked by heraldic beasts known as yales, mythical creatures with elephants' tails, antelopes' bodies, goats' heads, and swivelling horns. Above them is a tabernacle containing a socle figure of St John the Evangelist, an Eagle at his feet and a symbolic, poisoned chalice in his hands. The fan vaulting above is contemporary with the tower and may have been designed by William Swayne, a master mason of King's College Chapel.\nFirst Court.\nFirst Court is entered via the Great Gate and is highly architecturally varied. First Court was converted from the hospital on the foundation of the college, and constructed between 1511 and 1520. Though it has since been gradually changed, the front (east) range is still much as it appeared when first erected in the 16th century. The south range was refaced between 1772 and 1776 in the Georgian style by the local architect, James Essex, as part of an abortive attempt to modernise the entire court in the same fashion. The most dramatic alteration to the original, Tudor court, however, remains the Victorian amendment of the north range, which involved the demolition of the original medieval chapel and the construction of a new, far larger set of buildings in the 1860s. These included the chapel, designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott, which includes in its interior some pieces saved from the original chapel. It is the third tallest building in Cambridge. The alteration of the north range necessitated the restructuring of the connective sections of First Court; another bay window was added to enlarge the college's hall, and a new building was constructed to the north of Great Gate. Parts of the First Court were used as a prison in 1643 during the English Civil War. In April 2011, Queen Elizabeth II visited St John's College to inaugurate a new pathway in First Court, which passes close to the ruins of the Old Chapel.\nDining hall.\nThe college's hall has a fine hammerbeam roof, painted in black and gold and decorated with the armorial devices of its benefactors. The hall is lined to cill level with linenfold panelling which dates from 1528 to 1529 and has a five-bay screen, surmounted by the Royal Arms. Above is a hexagonal louvre, dating to 1703. The room was extended from five to eight bays according to designs by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1863. It has two bay windows, containing heraldic glass dating from the 15th to 19th centuries. In 1564, Queen Elizabeth rode into the college's Hall on horseback, during a state visit to Cambridge.\nSecond Court.\nSecond Court, built from 1598 to 1602, has been described as 'the finest Tudor court in England'. Built atop the demolished foundations of an earlier, far smaller court, Second Court was begun in 1598 to the plans of Ralph Symons of Westminster, and Gilbert Wigge of Cambridge. Their original architectural drawings are housed in the college's library and are the oldest surviving plans for an Oxford or Cambridge college building. It was financed by the Countess of Shrewsbury, whose arms and statue stand above the court's western gatehouse. The court's Oriel windows are perhaps its most striking feature, though the dominating Shrewsbury Tower to the west is the most imposing. This gatehouse, built as a mirror image of the college's Great Gate, contains a statue of the benefactress Mary Talbot, Countess of Shrewsbury, added in 1671. Behind the Oriel window of the north range lies the Long Gallery, a promenading room that was, before its segmentation, 148 feet long. In this room, the treaty between England and France was signed that established the marriage of King Charles I of England to Queen Henrietta Maria. In the 1940s, parts of the D-day landings were planned there. Second Court is also home to the college's 'triple set', K6.\nLibrary.\nThe Old Library was built in 1624, largely with funds donated by John Williams, Bishop of Lincoln. Hearing of the college's urgent need for greater library space, Williams donated \u00a31,200 anonymously, later revealing his identity and donating a total of \u00a32,011 towards the library's total cost of \u00a33,000. The library's bay window overlooks the River Cam and bears the letters \"ILCS\" on it, standing for \"Iohannes Lincolniensis Custos Sigilli\", or \"John of Lincoln, Keeper of the Seal\". The original intention of the college had been to construct an elegant classical building supported by pillared porticos, but Bishop Williams insisted on a more traditional design. Thus, though the college lays claim to too few examples of neo-classical design, the library stands as one of the earliest examples of English neo-Gothic architecture.\nThird Court.\nThird Court is entered through Shrewsbury Tower, which from 1765 to 1859 housed an observatory. Each of its ranges was built in a different style. Following the completion of the college library in 1624, the final sides of the Third Court were added between 1669 and 1672, after the college had recovered from the trauma of the English Civil War. The additions included a fine set of Dutch-gabled buildings backing onto the River Cam and a 'window-with-nothing-behind-it' that was designed to solve the problem of connecting the windowed library with the remainder of the court.\nKitchen or Wren Bridge.\nThis was the first stone bridge erected at St John's College, continuing from Kitchen Lane. The crossing lies south of the Bridge of Sighs and was a replacement for a wooden bridge that had stood on the site since the foundation's early days as a hospital. Though Sir Christopher Wren submitted designs for the bridge, it was eventually built on a different site by a local mason, Robert Grumbold, who also built Trinity College Library. As with the Library, Grumbold's work was based on Wren's designs, and the bridge has become known as \"the Wren Bridge\".\nKitchen Court.\nThis tiny court, formed within the walls of the old Kitchen Lane, is used as an outdoor dining area.\nBridge of Sighs.\nThough it bears little resemblance to its namesake in Venice, the bridge connecting Third Court to New Court, originally known as New Bridge, is now commonly known as the Bridge of Sighs. It is one of the most photographed buildings in Cambridge and was described by the visiting Queen Victoria as \"so pretty and picturesque\". It is a single-span bridge of stone with a highly decorative Neo-Gothic covered footwalk over with traceried openings. There is a three-bay arcade at the east end of the bridge. The architect was Henry Hutchinson.\nNew Court.\nThe 19th-century neo-Gothic New Court, probably one of the best-known buildings in Cambridge, was the first major building to be built by the college on the west side of the river. Designed by Thomas Rickman and Henry Hutchinson, New Court was constructed between 1826 and 1831 to accommodate the college's rapidly increasing numbers of students. Despite the college's original intention to get the architects to build another copy of the Second Court, plans were accepted for a fashionably romantic building in the 'Gothic' style. It is also likely that the decision to utilise the neo-Gothic style was made to emulate and compete with the neo-Gothic screen of King's College, designed by William Wilkins and already two years under construction at the time of John's commission. It is a three-sided court of tall Gothic Revival buildings, closed on the fourth side by an open, seven-bayed cross-vaulted cloister and gateway. It is four storeys high, has battlements and is pinnacled. The main portal features a fan vault with a large octagonal pendant, which resembles that of the ceiling found in Bishop Alcock's late 15th-century chapel in Ely Cathedral. The interior of the main building retains many of its original features including ribbed plaster ceilings. Its prominent location (particularly when glimpsed from the river) and flamboyant, tiered design have led it to be nicknamed \"The Wedding Cake\".\nChapel.\nThe Chapel of St John's College is entered by the northwest corner of First Court. It was constructed between 1866 and 1869 to replace the smaller mediaeval chapel which dated back to the 13th century. When in 1861 the college's administration decided that a new building was needed, Sir George Gilbert Scott was selected as the architect. He had recently finished work on the chapel at Exeter College, Oxford, and went about constructing the chapel of St John's College along similar lines, drawing inspiration from Sainte-Chapelle in Paris.\nThe benefactor Henry Hoare offered a downpayment of \u00a33000 to finance the chapel's construction, in addition to which he promised to pay \u00a31000 a year if a tower were added to Scott's original plans, which had included only a small fl\u00e8che. Work began, but Hoare's death from a railway accident left the college \u00a33000 short of his expected benefaction. The tower was completed, replete with louvres but left without bells; it is based on Pershore Abbey. The tower is high.\nThe chapel's antechamber contains statues of Lady Margaret Beaufort and John Fisher. Inside the building is a stone-vaulted ante-chapel, at the end of which hangs a 'Deposition of the Cross' by Anton Rafael Mengs, completed around 1777. The misericords and panelling date from 1516, and were salvaged from the old chapel. The chapel contains some 15th-century glass, but most was cast by Clayton and Bell, Hardman, and Wailes, in around 1869. Freestanding statues and plaques commemorate college benefactors such as James Wood, Master 1815\u201339, as well as alumni including William Wilberforce, Thomas Clarkson and William Gilbert. The college tower can be climbed and is accessed via a small door on First Court. However, this access was closed in 2016 for the duration that important structural repairs were carried out to the tower Pinnacles and roof.\nThe chapel is surrounded on three sides by large tabernacles which form part of the external buttresses. Each contains a statue of a prominent college alumnus, alumna or benefactor. The people commemorated are, beginning with the buttress next to the transept on the south side:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;* Sir William Cecil, Lord Burghley\nMaster's Lodge and garden.\nSt John's Master's Lodge is located in a grassy clearing to the north of Third Court. It was built at the same time as the new chapel was being constructed and has Tudor fittings, wainscot, portraits and other relics from the demolished north wing of First Court. It has a large garden, and in the winter its westmost rooms have excellent views of the college's old library, the River Cam, and the Bridge of Sighs. The architect was Sir George Gilbert Scott.\nSchool of Pythagoras.\nTo the west of the Cripps Building lies the School of Pythagoras. Built around 1200, it predates the college by 300 years and is both the oldest secular building in Cambridge and the oldest building continuously in use by a university in Britain. The building now serves as the location for the College Archives. Next to the School of Pythagoras lies Merton Hall. From 1266 until 1959 both the School of Pythagoras and Merton Hall were the property of Merton College, Oxford. Merton Court is the college's eleventh and westernmost court.\nBuildings and courts since 1900.\nLocated to the west of the chapel tower lies Chapel Court, which was constructed together with North Court and Forecourt in the 1930s to account for an increase in student numbers. North Court is located just north of Chapel Court and Forecourt is situated to the east, facing St John's Street. The latter is used partly as a car park for fellows and leads to what is now the principal porters' lodge and entrance to the college. All three courts were designed by the architect Edward Maufe.\nFurther increases in student numbers following the Second World War prompted the college to increase the number of accommodation buildings. The Cripps Building was built in the late 1960s to satisfy this demand. It is located just behind New Court and forms two courts (Upper &amp; Lower River Court). Designed by architects Philip Powell and Hidalgo Moya, the building is Grade II* listed having received an award from the British Architectural Institution. It is considered an exemplar of late 20th-century architectural style and is named after its main benefactor, Humphrey Cripps. In 2014, the building went through an extensive refurbishment programme, which saw renovated accommodation and structural repairs, including the cleaning of the Portland stone from which the building was made.\nIn 1987 the construction of the Fisher Building was completed. Named after Cardinal John Fisher, the building contains teaching rooms, conference facilities, and a student-run college cinema. It was designed by the architect Peter Boston.\nLocated opposite the college's Great Gate is All Saints' Yard. The complex is formed from the buildings of the so-called \"Triangle Site\", a collection of structures owned by the college. An extensive renovation project finished in Michaelmas Term 2012 had a budget of approximately \u00a39.75 million. The centrepiece of the Yard is Corfield Court, named after the project's chief benefactor, Charles Corfield. The site can be entered through one of two card-activated gates or through the School of Divinity. The School of Divinity is the largest building on the site and was built between 1878 and 1879 by Basil Champneys for the University of Cambridge's divinity faculty on land leased by St John's College. Control of the building reverted to St John's when the faculty of divinity moved to a new building on the Sidgwick site in 2000.\nCollege choirs.\nThe Choir of St John's College has a tradition of religious music and has sung the daily services in the College Chapel since the 1670s. The services follow the cathedral tradition of the Church of England, with Evensong being sung during Term six days a week and Sung Eucharist on Sunday mornings. Since 2023 the choir has been directed by Christopher Gray, who was formerly the choirmaster and organist at Truro Cathedral. The boys and girls of the choir are educated and board at St John's College School. During university vacations, the choir carries out engagements elsewhere. Recent tours have taken it to places including the Netherlands, the US and Japan.\nThe choir has an extensive discography of nearly 100 commercial releases dating back to the 1950s when it was signed to the Decca/Argo label under George Guest. The Choir has since had successful recording contracts with Hyperion Records and Chandos Records, resulting in many critical accolades including a \"Gramophone\" Editor's Choice selection for 2015's collection \"The Call\". In 2016 the choir signed to Signum Records on its St John's College imprint. The first recording of this venture was a collection of music by the contemporary composer Jonathan Harvey released in May 2016 to a number two position in the UK specialist classical charts. The imprint will also release non-choral recordings by current and former members of the college.\nIn October 2021, it was announced that girls and women would join the Choir of St John's College, making it the first choir of an Oxford or Cambridge college to combine \"the voices of males and females in both adults and children\".\nThe choral scholars and lay clerks of the choir also form their close harmony group, The Gents of St John's. Their repertoire spans the 15th century through to the modern day, and concert tours have taken them to Europe, the US and Japan. They provide a mixture of classical \"a cappella\" music and folksongs, as well as covers of recent chart hits and light-hearted entertainment, and host an annual Christmas concert and garden party.\nThe college also had a mixed-voice adult choir, St John's Voices, which was founded in 2013 to allow female members of the college to take part in the college's choral tradition. It comprised around 30 members and premiered 3 works. In March 2024, St John's Voices received written notice from the College of their disbandment by June 2024. This decision by the College was met with widespread controversy, as soprano undergraduates at the College would be unable to sing in a College Choir. This sparked a campaign by members of St John's Voices against the disbandment, with an open letter stating that the decision was \"regressive\" and that the admission of female singers into the Choir of St John's College had been \"weaponised against the very existence of another ensemble, supposedly in the name of broadening opportunities\". The open letter received national media attention from The Guardian, The Daily Telegraph and The Independent, with notable supporters including former Archbishop of Canterbury and Master of Magdalene College Rowan Williams, music director of the London Symphony Orchestra Sir Simon Rattle, mezzo-soprano Dame Sarah Connolly, and composer John Rutter.\nTraditions and legends.\nShield and arms.\nSt John's College and Christ's College, Cambridge both bear the arms of Lady Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Derby, mother of Henry VII. These arms are recorded in the College of Arms as being borne by right, and are described as \"Quarterly: 1 and 4 azure three fleurs-de-lis gold (France, Modern); 2 and 3 gules three lions passant gardant or (England); all within a border compony silver and azure\". In addition, both foundations use the Beaufort crest, \"an eagle displayed arising out of a coronet of roses and fleurs-de-lis all gold\", but their title to this is more doubtful. When displayed in their full achievement, the arms are flanked by mythical yales.\nMotto.\nThe college motto is the Old French \"souvent me souvient\" of Lady Margaret Beaufort. It is inscribed over gates, lintels and within tympana throughout the college, functioning as a triple pun. It means \"often I remember\", \"think of me often\" and, when spoken (exploiting the homonym \"souvent me sous vient\"), \"I often pass beneath it\" (referring to the inscriptions). St John's shares its motto with Christ's College, Cambridge and Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, which also honour Lady Margaret Beaufort.\nPrayer.\nThe College Prayer is spoken at the end of chapel services. It alludes to the gospel of John in which it is presumed the author mentions himself anonymously as the disciple Jesus loved:\"Bless, O Lord, the work of this College, which is called by the name of thy beloved disciple; and grant that love of the brethren and all sound learning may ever grow and prosper here, to thy honour and glory, and to the good of thy people, who, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, livest and reignest, one God, world without end. Amen.\"\nGrace.\nThe college grace is customarily said before and after dinner in the hall. The reading of grace before dinner (\"ante prandium\") is usually the duty of a scholar of the college; grace after dinner (\"post prandium\") is said by the president or the senior fellow dining. The graces used in St John's have been in continuous use for some centuries and it is known that the \"ante prandium\" is based upon mediaeval monastic models. The grace is said shortly after the fellows enter the hall, signalled by the sounding of a gong, and accompanied by the ringing of the college's Grace Bell. The \"ante prandium\" is read after the fellows have entered, and the \"post prandium\" after they have finished dining:\nRivalry with Trinity.\nSt John's remains a great rival of Trinity College, which is its main competitor in sports and academia. The rivalry can be traced to Henry VIII founding Trinity after having ordered the execution of John Fisher, whose efforts had ensured the foundation of St John's. Over the years, numerous anecdotes and myths have arisen, involving students and fellows of both colleges. The rivalry is often cited as the reason why the older courts of Trinity have no \"J\" staircases, despite including other letters in alphabetical order (it should be mentioned that a far more likely reason is the absence of the letter \"J\" in the Latin alphabet). There are also two small muzzle-loading cannons on Trinity's bowling green pointing in the direction of John's, though this orientation may be coincidental. Similarly, the eagle on top of the entrance to St John's New Court is said to have been sculptured so that it shuns even the sight of its neighbouring rival. Generally, however, the colleges maintain a cordial relationship with one other; compatriotism led to the splitting of the atomic nucleus in 1932 by Ernest Walton (Trinity) and John Cockcroft (St John's), for which they jointly received the 1951 Nobel Prize in Physics.\nNew Court's clock tower.\nNew Court's central cupola has four blank clock faces. These are subject to various apocryphal explanations. One legend maintains that a statute limiting the number of chiming clocks in Cambridge rendered the addition of a mechanism illegal. No such limitation is known to exist. More likely explanations include Hutchinson's fear that the installation of a clockface would spoil the building's symmetry and that the college's financial situation in the early 19th century made completion impossible.\nOther legends explaining the absence of clockfaces claim that St John's and its neighbour, Trinity were engaged in a race to build the final (or tallest) clocktower in Cambridge. Supposedly, whichever was finished first (or was tallest) would be permitted to house the 'final' chiming clock in Cambridge. Trinity's Tower was finished first (or, in another version of the same story, was made taller overnight by the addition of a wooden cupola), and its clock was allowed to remain. In truth, the completion of the New Court and Trinity's Clock (which is in King Edward's Tower) was separated by nearly two centuries. Trinity's famous double-striking clock was installed in the 17th century by its then-Master, Richard Bentley, a former student of St John's, who dictated that the clock chime once for Trinity, and once for his alma mater, St John's.\nConsumption of swan.\nSupposedly, Fellows of St John's are the only people outside the royal family in the United Kingdom allowed to eat unmarked mute swans. The Crown (the British monarch) retains the right to ownership of all unmarked mute swans in open water, but the King only exercises his ownership on certain stretches of the Thames and its surrounding tributaries. The ownership of swans in the Thames is shared equally among the Crown, the Vintners' Company and the Dyers' Company, who were granted rights of ownership by the Crown in the 15th century.\nGhosts.\nAccording to popular legend, St John's is inhabited by some ghosts. In 1706, four fellows \"exorcised\" some ghosts from a house opposite the college by threatening to fire their pistols at the positions the moans and groans were coming from. The second court is supposedly haunted by the ghost of the former undergraduate and master, James Wood. Wood was so poor that he could not afford to light his room, and would often do his work in the well-lit stairway.\nStudent life.\nThe buildings of St John's College include the chapel, the Hall, the old library, a more contemporary \"new\" library, a bar, and common rooms for fellows, graduates and undergraduates. There are also extensive gardens, lawns, a neighbouring sports ground, a College School and a boat house. On-site accommodation is provided for all undergraduate and graduate students. This is generally spacious, and many undergraduate rooms comprise \"sets\" of living and sleeping rooms, where two students share a suite of two bedrooms, a kitchen and a bathroom. Members of the college can choose to dine either in the Hall, where silver service three-course meals are served six evenings per week or in the buttery, where food can be purchased from a cafeteria-style buffet.\nThe college maintains an extensive library, which supplements the university libraries. Most undergraduate supervisions are carried out in the college, though for some specialist subjects undergraduates may be sent to tutors in other colleges.\nThe college has two official combination rooms for junior members, which represent the interests of students in college and are responsible for the social aspects of college life. Undergraduates are members of the Junior Combination Room (JCR). Graduate students have a membership to the JCR, but also belong to the Samuel Butler Room (SBR), which is the Middle Combination Room (MCR) of St John's College.\nThe fleet of punts is kept in a purpose-built punt pool behind the Cripps Building. Punt boats are available for use by all members of the college as well as alumni.\nSt John's tends to be ranked near the middle of the Tompkins Table of undergraduate degree results, with an average position of 12.8 since 1997.\nSamuel Butler Room Society.\nThe Samuel Butler Room Society (SBR) is the Middle Combination Room (MCR) of St John's College. The Society traces its foundation to 1960 when graduate student members submitted an application to the College Council for official separation from the Junior Combination Room (JCR). The name of the Society refers to the physical rooms which are used by members of the Society. The rooms were named after the noted Johnian author and polymath Samuel Butler. The membership of the Society comprises all members of the college who are registered graduate students of the college and affiliated students of the college.\nSports.\nThe college has a sporting history, enjoying success in most of the major sports on offer in Cambridge. The college has a cardio gym and a weights gym on-site and has pristine pitches right behind the college.\nThe college's hockey club is one of the biggest student sports clubs in the college, with over 50 active members as of 2024. It has had strong success including winning the Division One League title every year from 2019 to 2024. St John's is the only Cambridge college to have more than one mixed hockey team, with four teams, although this is enabled due to a fusion with Newnham College. \nThe Red Boys, St John's College Rugby Club, won the Division One League title for nine years in a row, before losing to Jesus in 2010\u201311, and the Cuppers trophy for 6 years in a row from 2006 to 2011, making it one of the most successful collegiate sports teams in Cambridge's history. The Redboys occupy eighteen out of the twenty-four plates on the current Division One League Shield and thirteen out of the seventeen names on the Cuppers trophy. Since 2014, the club has taken home four Cuppers trophies (most recently in 2023 wherein they went undefeated and won the league title), three Division One League Shields, and the inaugural Sevens Shield in 2016\u201317. In the 2016\u201317 season, the Redboys went undefeated.\nSt John's regularly produces a strong contingent of university players but also ensures new players develop and get game time swiftly. The rugby club has produced several notable alumni including former RFU executive Francis Baron, former Newcastle, England and Lions fly-half and former RFU Director of Elite Rugby Rob Andrew, and \"Battlestar Galactica\" actor Jamie Bamber.\nThe college rowing club, the Lady Margaret Boat Club (LMBC), is the oldest in the university and was founded in 1825. Despite many rumours concerning the name of the club, it was merely the most successful of the many boat clubs established in the college in the 19th century. Similarly, the traditional rival of the LMBC, the Boat Club of Trinity College, is known as \"First and Third\" because of its formation from two original clubs.\nScholarships and prizes.\nEvery year the college awards scholarships to a handful of graduate students under the Benefactors' and Scholarships Scheme. The most generous of all the early benefactors of St John's College was Roger Lupton (died 1540), Provost of Eton and chaplain to Henry VIII. Lupton had amassed immense wealth through a lifetime of royal service and ecclesiastical pluralism and his scholarships exist today as the Lupton and Hebblethwaite Exhibitions. Other scholarships include the Craik Scholarship, the J.C. Hall Scholarship, the Luisa Aldobrandini Studentship Competition, the Paskin Scholarship and the Pelling Scholarship. Competition for these scholarships is very fierce as students from any country reading for any graduate degree\u2014not only members of the college\u2014can apply.\nThere is also the Adams Prize in mathematics, named after the mathematician (and alumnus of St John's) John Couch Adams for his discovery of Neptune \u2013 it is an annual competition and can be awarded to any mathematician resident in the UK, with an age limit of under 40. The college is also associated with the Dr Manmohan Singh Scholarship, first awarded in 2008.\nStudents at the college wishing to practise law can apply for a McMahon Law Studentship to cover the expense of further study or obtaining professional qualifications.\nEvery year, students who excel academically and contribute to the life of the college can be nominated for the prestigious Larmor awards. The Awards are named after Sir Joseph Larmor, a former student at St John's. Winners of the prize receive a unique handcrafted piece of silverware and a financial prize. Recent award winners include the actor Jonah Hauer-King and the violinist Julia Hwang.\nMay Ball.\nSt John's hosts a large and typically spectacular May Ball, which is traditionally held on the Tuesday of May Week. In recent years, tickets have only been available to Johnians and their guests. Highlights include an extravagant fireworks display and a variety of musical acts which in recent years have included Rudimental, Gorgon City and Katy B. The May Ball is organised by the committee, usually composed of 20 students from the college, with roles ranging from Head of Food, Drink, Security, Scene, Creative, Logistics, Employment, and the executive committee with a President, Vice-President and Junior Treasurer. The Ball prizes itself in being the largest student party in Oxbridge. The first ball took place in 1888 and has since been considered one of the most lavish end-of-year university parties. The theme is kept a secret until the night itself.\nPeople associated with the college.\n\"See also \", \".\nNotable Johnians include former academics, Nobel laureates, poets, writers, Heads of State and politicians. Over 1000 former members of St John's College appear in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography.\nPrime Ministers: Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham (briefly admitted), Prime Minister of Great Britain, 1765\u201366 and 1782, F. J. Robinson, 1st Viscount Goderich, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1827\u201328, George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1852\u201355, Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, 1855\u201358 &amp; 1859\u201365, Alfred Domett, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 1862\u201363, Sir Francis Bell, Prime Minister of New Zealand, 1925, Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India, 2004\u201314.\nNobel Prize winners:\nCopley Medallists: John Frederick William Herschel (1821), John Frederick William Herschel (1847), John Couch Adams (1848), James Joseph Sylvester (1880), George Howard Darwin (1911), Joseph Larmor (1921), Charles Algernon Parsons (1928), Arthur Schuster (1931), Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac (1952), Harold Jeffreys (1960), Nevill Francis Mott (1972), William Valance Douglas Hodge (1974), Frederick Sanger (1977), Rudolf Ernst Peierls (1986), Abdus Salam (1990), Roger Penrose (2008), David Roxbee Cox (2010)\nSt John's and the abolition of the British slave trade.\nSeveral of St John's graduates were involved in the efforts to abolish the British Slave Trade that culminated in the Slave Trade Act 1807. In particular, Thomas Clarkson, William Wilberforce, Thomas Gisborne and Thomas Babington were active in the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade and other abolitionist efforts.\nAs part of the commemoration of the bicentenary of the 1807 Act, and as a representative of one of the Ivy League universities offering an American historical perspective on the Triangular Trade, President Ruth J. Simmons of Brown University (herself a descendant of American slaves) gave a public lecture at St John's College entitled \"Hidden in Plain Sight: Slavery and Justice in Rhode Island\" on 16 February 2007. St John's College hosted some of the events relating to the commemoration, including an academic conference and a Gospel Mass in the College Chapel with the London Adventist Chorale.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48716", "revid": "4164944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48716", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for Drama", "text": "American award for distinguished plays\nThe Pulitzer Prize for Drama is one of the seven American Pulitzer Prizes that are annually awarded for Letters, Drama, and Music. It is one of the original Pulitzers, for the program was inaugurated in 1917 with seven prizes, four of which were awarded that year. (No Drama prize was given, however, so that one was inaugurated in 1918, in a sense.) It recognizes a theatrical work staged in the U.S. during the preceding calendar year.\nJoseph Pulitzer stipulated that the Pulitzer Prize for Drama should be awarded, \u201c\u2026\u201cAnnually, for the original American play, performed in New York, which shall best represent the educational value and power of the stage in raising the standard of good morals, good taste, and good manners.\" The original prize was $1,000\".\" \nUntil 2007, eligibility for the Drama Prize ran from March 1 to March 2 to reflect the Broadway \"season\" rather than the calendar year that governed most other Pulitzer Prizes. \nThe drama jury, which consists of one academic and four critics, attends plays in New York and in regional theaters. The Pulitzer board can overrule the jury's choice; in 1986, the board's opposition to the jury's choice of \"\" resulted in no award being given. \nIn 1955 Joseph Pulitzer, Jr. pressured the prize jury into presenting the Prize to \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\", which the jury considered the weakest of the five shortlisted nominees (\"amateurishly constructed... from the stylistic points of view annoyingly pretentious\"), instead of Clifford Odets' \"The Flowering Peach\" or Maxwell Anderson's \"The Bad Seed\". Edward Albee's \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" was selected for the 1963 Pulitzer Prize for Drama by that award's committee. However, the committee's selection was overruled by the award's advisory board, the trustees of Columbia University, because of the play's then-controversial use of profanity and sexual themes. Had Albee been awarded, he would be tied with Eugene O'Neill for the most Pulitzer Prizes for Drama (four).\nAwards and nominations.\nIn its first 106 years to 2022, the Drama Pulitzer was awarded 91 times; none were given in 15 years and it was never split.\nThe most recipients of the prize in one year was five, when Michael Bennett, James Kirkwood, Jr., Nicholas Dante, Marvin Hamlisch, and Edward Kleban shared the 1976 prize for the musical \"A Chorus Line\".\nNotes.\n\u2020 marks winners of the Tony Award for Best Play.\n\u2260 marks nominees of the Tony Award for Best Play or the Tony Award for Best Musical\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMusicals.\nTen musicals have won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama, roughly one per decade from the 1930s to the 2020s\u00b9. They are: George and Ira Gershwin's \"Of Thee I Sing\" (1932), Rodgers and Hammerstein's \"South Pacific\" (1950), Bock &amp; Harnick's \"Fiorello!\" (1960), Frank Loesser's \"How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying\" (1962), Marvin Hamlisch, Edward Kleban, James Kirkwood, Jr., and Nicholas Dante's \"A Chorus Line\" (1976), Stephen Sondheim's and James Lapine's \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1985), Jonathan Larson's \"Rent\" (1996), Brian Yorkey and Tom Kitt's \"Next to Normal\" (2010), Lin-Manuel Miranda's \"Hamilton\" (2016), and Michael R. Jackson's \"A Strange Loop\" (2020). Though it did not win for Drama, \"Oklahoma!\" was awarded a special Pulitzer Prize in 1944.\nOf note, \"South Pacific\" won the 1950 Pulitzer for Drama but its source material, James Michener's \"Tales of the South Pacific\", also won the 1948 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. Similarly, non-musical \"All the Way Home\" by Tad Mosel won the 1961 Pulitzer and was based on James Agee's 1957 Pulitzer winning novel \"A Death in the Family\".\n\"Sunday in the Park with George\" and \"Next to Normal\" are the only musicals that won the Pulitzer Prize and did not also win the Tony Award for Best Musical; the latter won the authors Tonys for Best Original Score and Best Orchestrations. \"Of Thee I Sing\" opened before the Tony Awards existed.\nThe award goes to the playwright, although production of the play is also taken into account. In the case of a musical being awarded the prize, the composer, lyricist and book writer are generally the recipients. An exception to this was the first Pulitzer ever awarded to a musical: when \"Of Thee I Sing\" won in 1932, book authors George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind, as well as lyricist Ira Gershwin, were cited as the winners, while composer George Gershwin's contribution was overlooked by the committee. The reason given was that the Pulitzer Prize for Drama is a \"dramatic\" award, and not a \"musical\" one. However, by 1950 the Pulitzer committee included composer Richard Rodgers as a recipient when \"South Pacific\" won the award, in recognition of music as an integral and important part of the theatrical experience.\nAdditionally, since 1983, when the identity of finalists was first disclosed, five musicals have been finalists for the Pulitzer Prize for Drama. They are: Lee Breuer and Bob Telson's \"The Gospel at Colonus\" (1985); Lin-Manuel Miranda and Quiara Alegr\u00eda Hudes' \"In the Heights\" (2009); Jeanine Tesori and Lisa Kron's \"Fun Home\" (2014); Taylor Mac's \"A 24-Decade History of Popular Music\" (2017); and David Henry Hwang and Jeanine Tesori's \"Soft Power\" (2020).\n\u00b9All listed dates are Prize years. Generally, the musical in question opened in New York during either the preceding calendar year or the preceding Broadway season.\nMultiple wins and nominations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLynn Nottage is the only female playwright to win the prize twice. She and August Wilson are the only playwrights of color to accomplish this feat.\nJon Robin Baitz, Gina Gionfriddo, John Guare, A.R. Gurney, Richard Greenberg, Tina Howe, Stephen Karam, Sarah Ruhl and Jeanine Tesori have each been named finalists twice without winning. David Henry Hwang is the only person to have been named a finalist thrice without winning. Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeanine Tesori are the only people to be named as a finalist twice for writing/composing a musical, with Miranda winning in 2016.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48717", "revid": "410440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48717", "title": "Pulitzer Prize for Telegraphic Reporting - International", "text": ""}
{"id": "48719", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48719", "title": "Montr\u00e9al", "text": ""}
{"id": "48720", "revid": "38393977", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48720", "title": "Speech therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "48726", "revid": "50615928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48726", "title": "Occupational therapist", "text": "Health care profession\nOccupational therapists (OTs) are health care professionals specializing in occupational therapy and occupational science. OTs and occupational therapy assistants (OTAs) use scientific bases and a holistic perspective to promote a person's ability to fulfill their daily routines and roles. OTs have training in the physical, psychological, and social aspects of human functioning deriving from an education grounded in anatomical and physiological concepts, and psychological perspectives. They enable individuals across the lifespan by optimizing their abilities to perform activities that are meaningful to them (\"occupations\"). Human occupations include activities of daily living, work/vocation, play, education, leisure, rest and sleep, and social participation.\nOTs work in a variety of fields, including pediatrics, orthopedics, neurology, low vision therapy, pelvic floor therapy, hand therapy, physical rehabilitation, mental health, assistive technology, oncological rehabilitation, and geriatrics. OTs are employed in healthcare settings such as hospitals, nursing homes, residential care facilities, home health agencies, outpatient rehabilitation centers, etc. OTs are also employed by school systems, and as consultants by businesses to address employee work-related safety and productivity. Many OTs are also self-employed and own independent practices. In the United States, OTs are also employed as commissioned officers in the Army, Navy and Air force branches of the military. In the US Army, OTs are part of the Army Medical Specialist Corps. OTs are also a part of the United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, one of eight uniformed services of the United States.\nOccupational therapy interventions are aimed to restore/ improve functional abilities, and/or alleviate/ eliminate limitations or disabilities through compensatory/adaptive methods/and or drug use. OTs, thus, evaluate and address both the individual's capacities and his/ her environment (physical and psycho-social) in order to help the individual optimize their function and fulfill their occupational roles. They often recommend adaptive equipment/ assistive technology products and provide training in its use to help mitigate limitations and enhance safety.\nPreparation and qualifications.\nTo practice as an occupational therapist, the individual trained in the United States:\nPlaces of work.\nEmployment may include hospitals, clinics, day and community-based rehabilitation centers, home care programs, special schools, industry, and private enterprise. Many occupational therapists work in private practice and as educators and consultants. Occupational therapist practitioners (OTPs) also work in community outreach, after school programs, community centers, and anywhere meaningful life activities occur. Occupational therapists meet clients in natural settings where real life activities and routines occur.\nRole.\nOccupational therapists are skilled healthcare professionals who promote participation, health, and well-being through meaningful engagement in everyday activities. One of their main goals is to help their patients function effectively in their roles and routines in everyday life.\nOccupational therapy practitioners work with clients of all ages in diverse practice areas, some of which include rehabilitation after illness/injury, pediatrics, mental health, geriatrics, assistive technology, health and wellness, pain management, work/industry, and community accessibility.\nOccupational therapists may promote client participation and independence in life by strengthening client factors and performance skills such as physical, cognitive, and perceptual abilities. OTs may also help clients achieve their desired outcomes by facilitating their use of adaptive strategies, adaptive equipment, and/or environmental modifications.\nOccupational therapists focus on providing a client-centered, holistic approach to each patient, using therapeutic interventions geared toward the person, occupation, and environment. Occupational therapists bring attention to a person's unique identity, abilities, strengths, interests, and environment to provide strategies and techniques that will allow clients to live life to the fullest. Occupational therapists foster promotion of self-esteem, self-efficacy, and a sense of achievement through doing, being, and belonging in a client's choice of activities, roles, routines, contexts, and environments. Occupational therapists can also provide prevention and education regarding physical, mental, and social-emotional aspects of health and wellness within the realm of prevention, promotion, and intervention.\nOccupational therapists are often involved in multidisciplinary teams that may include health care practitioners such as physicians, nurses, physiotherapists, speech and language therapists, rehabilitation psychologists, and social workers. Building effective partnerships with other professionals in the interest of quality service provision to clients are essential to valuable practice. Collaboration with members of the client's team enriches interdisciplinary communication and ensures the best outcomes for clients. The client and their family and caregivers remain the central focus and driving force of the team.\nWork-related therapy.\nSome occupational therapists treat individuals whose ability to function in a work environment has been impaired. These practitioners arrange employment, evaluate the work environment, plan work activities, and assess the client's progress. Therapists also may collaborate with the client and the employer to modify the work environment so that the work can be successfully completed.\nPediatric practice.\nPediatric occupational therapists support their communities by providing services to infants, toddlers, children, youth, and their families across a variety of settings that might include schools, clinics, and homes. They do this by implementing intervention that is driven by science and backed by evidence. A child's life is made up of \"occupations\". These \"occupations\", or daily activities, include play, learning, and socializing. The role of the pediatric occupational therapist is to support the child in any environment in which the child is not able to carry out the desired occupations. The most common areas of practice for a pediatric occupational therapist include: neonatal intensive care units (NICU), early intervention, schools, and outpatient services. Areas of emerging practice include primary care and community-based.\nNeonatal intensive care units (NICU).\nFrom the beginning of life, occupational therapists might work with infants who are medically fragile in NICU of medical centers. An occupational therapist might address areas such as feeding/nutrition, positioning, development, sensory processing and integration, and sleep.\nEarly intervention.\nAn occupational therapist may work with children in early intervention, from birth to three years old. The role of the occupational therapist is to support the child's needs by collaborating with the caregivers/parents. The goal of the occupational therapist in early intervention is to support the achievement of developmental milestones. They do this by providing intervention and education in the context of play and daily living. Therapeutic intervention may include feeding/nutrition, physical development, play skill development, social/emotional development. In early intervention, a strong emphasis is placed on parent/caregiver education. The reason Occupational Therapists are vital to the NICU, is due to the vulnerability of premature infants. NICU-based therapists teach the skills the infant needs to live optimally. However, they do this while simultaneously understanding the medical interventions occurring, and how these medical needs need to be worked around during a therapy session. Infants who received more therapy displayed better neurological behaviors. Occupational Therapists mainly focus on positioning the child, including equipment and how to promote optimal development.\nSchools.\nOnce a child is over the age of three and meets eligibility for special education services, the child may receive occupational therapy services through an Individualized Education Program (IEP). In the school setting, the goal of occupational therapy is to support the implementation of the IEP. The occupational therapist might do this by providing direct or indirect services. Direct services might include individual or group services. Indirect services might include consultation with their school team, creating modifications and/or accommodations for the classroom, and/or providing training to the school team.\nOutpatient services.\nOccupational therapists might also work with children in an outpatient clinic. When serving children in an outpatient clinic, services typically have to meet the criteria for medical necessity. Occupational therapists continue to focus on \"occupations\"; however, the \"occupations\" typically are related to medically necessary occupations such as safety and health.\nPrimary care.\nPrimary care for occupational therapists is an emerging area of practice. Traditionally a primary care office included physician, physician assistant, nurse, or nurse practitioner. In this model, the physician is limited to diagnosing and medical management. The field of occupational therapy is advocating for occupational therapists to become a part of primary care teams. In regard to children, an occupational therapist could contribute by providing early parent training, developmental screenings, tips for wellness and prevention.\nCommunity-based.\nAnother emerging area of practice for occupational therapy is promoting health and wellness through community-based programming. Occupational therapist can do this by coaching and consulting in the community. It is implemented through not just the OTs but through the community stakeholders and those with disabilities themselves.\nOTs work in community-based rehabilitation projects as trainers and educators to help teach community members while facilitating them and developing programs.\nSome examples include backpack awareness, promoting physical activity in families, creating inclusive community environments such as churches and health facilities, advocacy at government levels, conducting rallies, etc.\nHuman displacement.\nThis refers to forced movement of communities by environmental or social factors which causes loss of occupational activities. This is caused by a number of factors including natural disaster, famine, armed conflict or developmental and economic changes. Occupational therapists work with these displaced persons in order to help rebuild roles, routines, self-efficacy, so that occupational imbalance, injustice, or deprivation does not occur. Occupational therapists work through community-based programs that are client-centered and culturally sensitive.\nWith older people.\nOccupational therapy is very beneficial to the older population. Therapists help older people lead more productive, active, and independent lives through a variety of methods, including the use of adaptive equipment. Occupational therapists work with older people in many varied environments, such as in their homes in the community, in hospital, and in residential care facilities to name a few. In the home environment, occupational therapists may work with the individuals to assess for hazards and to identify environmental factors that contribute to falls. Occupational therapists are often instrumental in assessing for appropriate wheelchairs for older people who may need them. In addition, therapists with specialized training in driver rehabilitation assess an individual's ability to drive using both clinical and on-the-road tests. The evaluations allow the therapist to make recommendations for adaptive equipment, training to prolong driving independence, and alternative transport options.\nMental health.\nDuring World War II, occupational therapy began to play a far bigger role in the treatment of soldiers in psychiatric hospitals run by or for the British military. Therapists found that engagement in occupation (usually crafts such as woodwork, sign writing, carpentry, etc.) was an effective intervention for increasing self-regulation and mental well-being in people with physical disabilities such as loss of limb and mental illness. In the decades since, occupational therapy has continued to advance and services in mental health now aim to promote positive mental health, prevent mental health problems, and help manage mental health challenges by providing client-centered care. According to the World Federation of Occupational Therapists (2019, p. 2), occupational therapists recognize that good mental health enables people to realize their potential, cope with life's normal stresses, work productively, and contribute to their communities\". Occupational therapists acknowledge the unique identities of each individual and their lived experiences and values choice and autonomy with one's recovery journey to promote participation in meaningful occupations of everyday life. Occupational therapists address the needs of clients in all phases of mental health recovery and in all settings, ranging from acute inpatient mental health settings to community mental health settings. Occupational therapists also work with clients on a large continuum of mental health challenges, including clients with substance-use disorders, mental illness, eating disorders, stress-related challenges, trauma, and adverse experiences. Skilled interventions with clients may include:\nWith terminally-ill patients.\nOccupational therapy (OT) practitioners help patients with terminal illnesses and conditions by assisting them with their needs related to end-of-life support. All of the areas of a patient's life including work, play and leisure are widely affected. An occupational therapist provides various treatment modalities to help such individuals to restore or maintain their deteriorating performance components by using their remaining capabilities to give them a sense of self-importance and a measure of self-confidence. The World Federation of Occupational Therapy (WFOT) recognizes the important role OT practitioners have in end-of-life care. In working with patients who have severe health conditions, disabilities and terminal illnesses, the OT clinician will help these individuals engage in meaningful, everyday occupations, as well as exercise the right to well-being and the best quality of life despite the unavoidable conclusion to their lifecycle. An OT practitioner understands the transactional relationship that exists between the individual, environment, and occupation; so that life enhancing, ongoing performance in quality of life activities are promoted. The WFOT recognizes an optimistic presence for OT in end-of-life care with an ongoing need for advocacy and support.\nWith people experiencing chronic pain.\nOccupational therapists often work within interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary teams (professionals such as physical therapists, nurses and physicians) to help individuals with chronic pain develop active self-management strategies. An area of specific concern to occupational therapists is the usage of a patient's time but it is also common for occupational therapists to help people return to work, and to return to leisure and family activities. Occupational therapists may use a variety of interventions including biofeedback, relaxation, goal setting, problem solving, planning, and can use those tools within both group and individual settings. Therapists may work within a clinic setting, or in the community including the workplace, school, home and health care centers. Occupational therapists may assess occupational performance before and after intervention, as a measure of effectiveness and reduction in disability.\nModels.\nOccupational therapists can work from a variety of models, both broad and discrete. Top-down approaches are considered more broad and focus on the occupation itself while taking into consideration the many contextual factors (environmental, social, cultural, etc.), in comparison to bottom-up approaches which are more narrow or discrete. These models include the Person-Environment-Occupation (PEO), Person-Environment-Occupation-Performance (PEOP), Canadian Model of Occupational Performance and Engagement (CMOP-E), Model of Human Occupation (MOHO), and Ecology of Human Performance (EHP).\nAssessment.\nIn order for an individual or group to receive occupational therapy services they must first be referred by themselves, another health care provider, or through their support system (family, friends) to receive an occupational therapy evaluation. As part of the service delivery process, the evaluation consists of the initial occupational profile followed by an analysis of occupational performance. Occupational therapy evaluations and occupational therapy assessments are important in determining an individual's skill set or deficiency. Through the occupational profile, which is a structured interview of the client, an occupational therapist can identify the client's self-perceived strengths and limitations in participating in daily occupations and help create an individualized treatment plan that addresses the occupations that are meaningful and necessary to the client. As part of the occupational profile, an occupational therapist also seeks to identify physical and social supports and barriers to participation. Occupational therapists often gather additional information by communicating with the client's support system, which may include a child's parents/guardians, a student's teacher, an adult's spouse/siblings/friends, or a senior's caretaker. The analysis of occupational performance may be gathered through standardized assessments, clinical observations of the client performing a set of tasks and activities, and analysis of the physical or social environment and context in which the client performs the occupations. Occupational therapist utilize skilled observation simultaneously with evaluation of motor and process skills and the effect on the ability of an individual to perform complex or instrumental and personal activities of daily living (ADLs). Occupational therapists are trained in the administration of standardized assessments across the lifespan from infancy to old age, although some standardized assessments require an occupational therapist to gain additional certifications to administer.\nExamples of the types of assessments or skill areas occupational therapy practitioners assess include:\nThrough the initial evaluation process, occupational therapists work with the client to establish an individualized treatment plan. Data is collected and recorded throughout the treatment process to be utilized to assess progress and guide ongoing client-centered intervention. This data is also frequently utilized for reimbursement of services. At the conclusion of therapy services, an occupational therapist will complete an outcome assessment which may include a re-evaluation.\nAssessment may also be more broad such as assessing the accessibility of public spaces for all individuals. Occupational therapists can provide recommendations for building design to allow for access for all. Occupational therapists are also skilled at completing home safety assessments and altering the environment or providing accommodations for ways to complete occupations in the home and for increased safety of clients and caregivers. Occupational therapists can also complete driving assessments to determine the required accommodations in the car or the ability of an individual to safely drive. Furthermore, occupational therapists can work with whole organizations to assess their workspaces to ensure that the work demands and physical set up are conducive to safe working habits to prevent workplace injuries.\nHand therapy.\nOccupational therapy also plays a major role in the rehabilitation and recovery of patients who have hand injuries, as well as upper and lower extremity injuries. Occupational therapists play a significant role in collaborating with Hand/Orthopedic Surgeons, a patient's employers and/or case managers in providing the best client-centered rehabilitation program. Occupational therapists treat conditions ranging from soft tissue injuries such as tennis elbow to neuropathies such as carpal tunnel syndrome. An Array of Upper Limb assessments are utilized to provide a treatment care plan that is effective and appropriate for each person and their injury. Treatment modalities such as orthosis/splints, soft braces and education are examples of the common treatment tools that an occupational therapist will use during treatment. Hand therapy is a specialized field of occupational therapy and therapists that work in this area are highly skilled and knowledgeable in upper limb anatomy.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48727", "revid": "41995454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48727", "title": "Corpus Juris Civilis", "text": "Collection of legal works codified by Justinian I of Byzantium\nThe Corpus Juris (or Iuris) Civilis (\"Body of Civil Law\") is the modern name for a collection of fundamental works in jurisprudence, enacted from 529 to 534 by order of Byzantine Emperor Justinian I. It is also sometimes referred to metonymically after one of its parts, the Code of Justinian.\nThe work as planned had three parts: the \"Code\" (\"Codex\") is a compilation, by selection and extraction, of imperial enactments to date; the \"Digest\" or \"Pandects\" (the Latin title contains both \"Digesta\" and \"Pandectae\") is an encyclopedia composed of mostly brief extracts from the writings of Roman jurists; and the \"Institutes\" (\"Institutiones\") is a student textbook, mainly introducing the \"Code\", although it has important conceptual elements that are less developed in the \"Code\" or the \"Digest\". All three parts, even the textbook, were given force of law. They were intended to be, together, the sole source of law; reference to any other source, including the original texts from which the \"Code\" and the \"Digest\" had been taken, was forbidden. Nonetheless, Justinian found himself having to enact further laws; today these are counted as a fourth part of the Corpus, the \"Novellae Constitutiones\" (\"Novels\", literally \"New Laws\").\nThe work was directed by Tribonian, an official in Justinian's court in Constantinople. His team was authorized to edit what they included. How far they made amendments is not recorded and, in the main, cannot be known because most of the originals have not survived. The text was composed and distributed almost entirely in Latin, which was still the official language of the government of the Eastern Roman Empire in 529\u2013534, whereas the prevalent language of merchants, farmers, seamen, and other citizens was Greek. By the early 7th century, Greek had largely replaced Latin as the dominant language of the empire.\nThe \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" was revised into Greek, when that became the predominant language of the Eastern Roman Empire, and continued to form the basis of the empire's laws, the \"Basilika\" (Greek: \u03c4\u1f70 \u03b2\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac, 'imperial laws'), through the 15th century. The \"Basilika\" in turn served as the basis for local legal codes in the Balkans during the following Ottoman period and later formed the basis of the legal code of Modern Greece. In Western Europe, the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\", or its successor texts like the \"Basilika\", did not get well established originally and was only recovered in the Middle Ages, being \"received\" or imitated as private law. Its public law content was quarried for arguments by both secular and ecclesiastical authorities. This recovered Roman law, in turn, became the foundation of law in all civil law jurisdictions. The provisions of the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" also influenced the canon law of the Catholic Church: it was said that \"ecclesia vivit lege romana\" \u2013 the church lives by Roman law. Its influence on common law legal systems has been much smaller, although some basic concepts from the Corpus have survived through Norman law \u2013 such as the contrast, especially in the \"Institutes\", between \"law\" (statute) and custom. The Corpus continues to have a major influence on public international law. Its four parts thus constitute the foundation documents of the Western legal tradition.\nCompilation process.\nJustinian acceded to the imperial throne in Constantinople in 527. Six months after his accession, in order to reduce the great number of imperial constitutions and thus also the number of court proceedings, Justinian arranged for the creation of a new collection of imperial constitutions (\"Codex Iustinianus\"). The commission in charge of the compilation process was explicitly authorized to leave out or change text and to delete what was obsolete or contradictory. Soon, in 529, the Codex was completed and was conferred the force of law in the whole empire, replacing all earlier constitutions and the \"Codex Theodosianus\".\nA little more than a year after the enactment of the first edition of the Code, Justinian appointed a commission headed by Tribonian to compile the traditional jurists' law in a new, shortened and contemporary codification: the 'Digest or Pandects'. The traditional collection of jurists' law, Justinian believed, was so extensive that it had become unmanageable, necessitating a new compilation. The commission completed its work within three years, in 533.\nTribonian's commission surveyed the works of classical jurists who were assumed in Justinian's time to have the authority to clarify law () and whose works were still available. In total, there are excerpts from 38 jurists in the Digest.\nThe four parts.\nCodex.\nThe \"Codex Justinianus\", \"Codex Justinianeus\" or \"Codex Justiniani\" (Latin for \"Justinian's Code\") was the first part to be finished, on 7 April 529. It contained in Latin most of the existing imperial \"constitutiones\" (imperial pronouncements having force of law), back to the time of Hadrian. It used both the \"Codex Theodosianus\" and the fourth-century collections embodied in the \"Codex Gregorianus\" and \"Codex Hermogenianus\", which provided the model for division into books that were themselves divided into titles. These works had developed authoritative standing. This first edition is now lost; a second edition was issued in 534 and is the text that has survived. At least the second edition contained some of Justinian's own legislation, including some legislation in Greek. It is not known whether he intended there to be further editions, although he did envisage translation of Latin enactments into Greek.\nLegislation about religion.\nNumerous provisions served to secure the status of Christianity as the state religion of the empire, uniting Church and state, and making anyone who was not connected to the Christian church a non-citizen. The Christianity referred to is Chalcedonian Christianity as defined by the state church, which excluded a variety of other major Christian sects in existence at the time such as the Church of the East and Oriental Orthodoxy.\nLaws against heresy.\nThe very first law in the Codex requires all persons under the jurisdiction of the Empire to hold the Christian faith: \"We desire that all peoples who are governed by the moderation of Our Clemency shall practice that religion which was handed down by the divine Apolstle Peter to the Romans . . .\" This was primarily aimed at heresies such as Nestorianism. This text later became the springboard for discussions of international law, especially the question of just what persons are under the jurisdiction of a given state or legal system.\nLaws against paganism.\nOther laws, while not aimed at pagan belief as such, forbid particular pagan practices. For example, it is provided that all persons present at a pagan sacrifice may be indicted as if for murder.\nDigesta.\nThe \"Digesta\" or \"Pandectae\", completed in 533, is a collection of juristic writings, mostly dating back to the second and third centuries. Fragments were taken out of various legal treatises and opinions and inserted in the Digest. In their original context, the statements of the law contained in these fragments were just private opinions of legal scholars \u2013 although some juristic writings had been privileged by Theodosius II's Law of Citations in 426. The Digest, however, was given full force of law.\nInstitutions.\nAs the \"Digest\" neared completion, Tribonian and two professors, Theophilus and Dorotheus, made a student textbook, called the \"Institutions\" or \"Elements\". As there were four elements, the manual consists of four books. The \"Institutiones\" are largely based on the \"Institutiones\" of Gaius. Two-thirds of the \"Institutiones\" of Justinian consists of literal quotes from Gaius. The new \"Institutiones\" were used as a manual for jurists in training from 21 November 533 and were given the authority of law on 30 December 533 along with the \"Digest\".\nAccording to Charles Donahue the difference between procedural and substantive law entered medieval and modern legal thought from Justinian's \"Institutes\".\nNovellae.\nThe Novellae consisted of new laws that were passed after 534. They were later re-worked into the \"Syntagma\", a practical lawyer's edition, by Athanasios of Emesa during the years 572\u2013577.\nContinuation in the Eastern Empire.\nThe term \"Byzantine Empire\" (or \"Byzantium\") is used today to refer to what remained of the Roman Empire in the Eastern Mediterranean after the Western Empire collapsed. The Eastern Empire continued to use Roman law, and it was as the ruler of this Eastern Empire that Justinian formalized Roman law in his \"Corpus Juris Civilis.\", As the administrative language of the Eastern Roman Empire shifted away from Latin, legal codes based on the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" were enacted in Greek. The best-known are: \nThe \"Basilika\" was a complete adaptation of Justinian's codification. At 60 volumes it proved to be difficult for judges and lawyers to use. There was need for a short and handy version. This was finally made by Constantine Harmenopoulos, a Byzantine judge from Thessaloniki, in 1345. He made a short version of \"Basilika\" in six books, called \"Hexabiblos\". This was widely used throughout the Balkans during the following Ottoman period, and along with the \"Basilika\" was used as the first legal code for the newly independent Greek state in the 1820s. Serbian state, law and culture was built on the foundations of Rome and Byzantium. Therefore, the most important Serbian legal codes: Zakonopravilo (1219) and Du\u0161an's Code (1349 and 1354), transplanted Romano-Byzantine Law included in \"Corpus Juris Civilis\", \"Prohiron\" and \"Basilika\". These Serbian codes were practised until the Serbian Despotate fell to the Turkish Ottoman Empire in 1459. After the liberation from the Turks in the Serbian Revolution, Serbs continued to practise Roman Law by enacting Serbian civil code in 1844. It was a short version of Austrian civil code (called \"Allgemeines b\u00fcrgerliches Gesetzbuch\"), which was made on the basis of \"Corpus Juris Civilis\".\nRecovery in the West.\nJustinian's \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" was distributed in the West and went into effect in those areas regained under Justinian's wars of reconquest (Pragmatic Sanction of 554), including the Exarchate of Ravenna. Accordingly, the \"Institutes\" were made the textbook at the law school in Rome, and later in Ravenna when the school relocated there. However, after the loss of most of these areas, only the Catepanate (southern Italy) maintained a Byzantine legal tradition, but there the \"Corpus\" was superseded by the \"Ecloga\" and \"Basilika\". Only the \"Corpus\"'s provisions regulating the church still had any effect, but the Catholic church's \"de facto\" autonomy and the Great Schism made even that irrelevant. In Western Europe, the \"Corpus\" may have spurred a slew of Romano-Germanic law codes in the successor Germanic kingdoms, but these were heavily based on the older \"Theodosian Code\", not the \"Corpus\".\nHistorians disagree on the precise way the \"Corpus\" was recovered in Northern Italy about 1070. Several factors were likely involved, including disputes between the Holy Roman Empire and the papacy. Aside from the \"Littera Florentina\" (a complete 6th-century copy of the \"Digest\" preserved in Amalfi and later moved to Pisa) and the \"Epitome Codicis\" (c. 1050; incomplete manuscript preserving most of the \"Codex\") there may have been other manuscript sources for the text that began to be taught at Bologna, by Pepo and then by Irnerius. Irnerius' technique was to read a passage aloud, which permitted his students to copy it, then to deliver an excursus explaining and illuminating Justinian's text, in the form of glosses. Irnerius' pupils, the so-called Four Doctors of Bologna, were among the first of the \"glossators\" who established the curriculum of medieval Roman law. The last and most important gloss was authored by Accursius and became known as the . The tradition was carried on by French lawyers, known as the Ultramontani, in the 13th century.\nThe merchant classes of Italian communes required law with a concept of equity, and law that covered situations inherent in urban life better than the primitive Germanic oral traditions. The provenance of the Code appealed to scholars who saw in the Holy Roman Empire a revival of venerable precedents from the classical heritage. The new class of lawyers staffed the bureaucracies that were beginning to be required by the princes of Europe. The University of Bologna, where Justinian's Code was first taught, remained the dominant centre for the study of law through the High Middle Ages.\nA two-volume edition of the Digest was published in Paris in 1549 and 1550, translated by Antonio Agust\u00edn, Bishop of Tarragona, who was well known for other legal works. The full title of the Digest was \"Digestorum seu Pandectarum tomus alter\", and it was published by Carolus Guillardus. Vol. 1 of the Digest has 2934 pages, while vol. 2 has 2754 pages. Referring to Justinian's Code as \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" was only adopted in the 16th century, when it was printed in 1583 by Dionysius Gothofredus under this title. The legal thinking behind the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" served as the backbone of the single largest legal reform of the modern age, the Napoleonic Code, which marked the abolition of feudalism, but reinstated slavery in the French Caribbean. Napoleon, as he waged total war on Europe, wanted to see these principles introduced to the whole of Europe because he saw them as an effective form of rule that created a more equal society and thus creating a more friendly relationship between the ruling class and the rest of the peoples of Europe.\nThe \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" was translated into French, German, Italian, and Spanish in the 19th century. However, no English translation of the entire \"Corpus Juris Civilis \"existed until 1932 when Samuel Parsons Scott published his version \"The Civil Law\". Scott did not base his translation on the best available Latin versions, and his work was severely criticized. Fred. H. Blume used the best-regarded Latin editions for his translations of the Code and of the Novels. A new English translation of the Code, based on Blume's, was published in October 2016. In 2018, the Cambridge University Press also published a new English translation of the Novels, based primarily on the Greek text.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48728", "revid": "50796216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48728", "title": "Social Security (United States)", "text": "American retirement system\nIn the United States, Social Security is the commonly used term for the federal Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) program and is administered by the Social Security Administration (SSA). The Social Security Act was passed in 1935, and the existing version of the Act, as amended, encompasses several social welfare and social insurance programs.\nThe average monthly Social Security benefit for May 2025 was $1,903. This was raised from $1,783 in 2024. The total cost of the Social Security program for 2022 was $1.244 trillion or about 5.2 percent of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). In 2025 there have been proposed budget cuts to social security.\nSocial Security is funded primarily through payroll taxes called the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) or Self Employed Contributions Act (SECA). Wage and salary earnings from covered employment, up to an amount determined by law (see tax rate table), are subject to the Social Security payroll tax. Wage and salary earnings above this amount are not taxed. In 2026, the maximum amount of taxable earnings is $184,500.\nSocial Security is nearly universal, with 94 percent of individuals in paid employment in the United States working in covered employment. However, about 6.6 million state and local government workers in the United States, or 28 percent of all state and local workers, are not covered by Social Security but rather pension plans operated at the state or local level. The amount of money allocated to social security is connected to the number of working class people in the labor force every month.\nSocial Security payroll taxes are collected by the federal Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and are formally entrusted to the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) Trust Fund and the federal Disability Insurance (DI) Trust Fund, the two Social Security Trust Funds. Social Security revenues exceeded expenditures between 1983 and 2009 which increased trust fund balances. The retirement of the large baby-boom generation however, is lowering balances. Without legislative changes, trust fund reserves are projected to be depleted in 2033 for the OASI fund. Should depletion occur, incoming payroll tax and other revenue would be sufficient to pay 77 percent of OASI benefits starting in 2035.\nWith few exceptions, all legal residents working in the United States have an individual Social Security Number.\nHistory.\nSocial Security timeline\nA limited form of the Social Security program began, during President Franklin D. Roosevelt's first term, as a measure to implement \"social insurance\" during the Great Depression of the 1930s. The Act was an attempt to limit unforeseen and unprepared-for dangers in modern life, including old age, disability, poverty, unemployment, and the burdens of widow(er)s with and without children.\nOpponents, however, decried the proposal as socialism. Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins wrote that during a Senate Finance Committee hearing, Senator Thomas Gore (D-OK) asked \"Isn't this Socialism?\" She replied that it was not, but he continued, \"Isn't this a teeny-weeny bit of Socialism?\"\nThe provisions of Social Security have been changing since the 1930s, shifting in response to economic worries as well as coverage for the poor, dependent children, spouses, survivors and the disabled. Poor farms were common in the US before Social Security took effect, then most disappeared by about 1950. By 1950, debates moved away from which occupational groups should be included to get enough taxpayers to fund Social Security to how to provide more benefits. Changes in Social Security have reflected a balance between promoting \"equality\" and efforts to provide \"adequate\" and affordable protection for low wage workers.\nMajor programs.\nThe larger and better known programs under the Social Security Act are:\nThe SSA administers two of these programs (OASDI and SSI).\nBenefits.\nBenefit types.\nThe Social Security program in the United States pays benefits to three broad categories of individuals: retired individuals and some family members, disabled persons and some family members, and survivors. Within these broad categories, the program defines more specific types of beneficiaries. For example, spouses and divorced spouses are distinct categories, with somewhat different eligibility requirements. Survivor benefits include several categories including aged widow(er)s, aged surviving divorced spouses, disabled widow(er)s, disabled surviving divorced spouses, paternal and maternal orphans, and widow(er)s caring for minor or disabled children.\nAs of 2023, there were about 66.8 million individuals receiving Social Security benefits. Individuals receiving Retirement Insurance Benefits constitute the largest group of beneficiaries, with 52.4 million retired workers or family members receiving monthly payments. Social Security Disability Insurance benefits were paid to 7.4 million disabled workers and 1.2 million dependents (children and spouses). About 5.8 million individuals, including 2 million children, received some type of survivor benefit from Social Security.\nSome individuals qualify for more than one type of benefit, but program rules on dual entitlement generally prevent the payment of two full benefits. For example, a person eligible for a retirement benefit and a higher spouse benefit will receive the full retirement benefit and a partial spouse benefit. The dual entitlement rules disproportionately affect women (7 million women in 2022) because historically they have earned less than current or former husbands and this leads to retirement benefits for women that are often lower than the full spouse benefit for which they qualify.\nIn addition, Social Security beneficiaries with low income and limited resources may qualify for additional income through the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. SSI is separate from the Social Security program, but it is administered by SSA. In 2022, 2.5 million Social Security beneficiaries received additional income through SSI.\nSystem financing.\nSocial Security payments to beneficiaries, which totaled $1.23 trillion in 2022, are generally financed by payroll taxes on workers in Social Security covered employment, trust fund reserves, and income taxation of some Social Security benefits. The payroll tax rate totals 12.4 percent of earnings up to the taxable maximum (the rate is 6.2 percent from workers and 6.2 percent from employers and 12.4 percent from the self-employed).\nThe OASI Trust Fund and the DI Trust Fund are legally separate. For employees and employers combined, the OASI payroll taxes are 10.6 percent and the DI payroll taxes are 1.8 percent. In 2022, trust fund reserves for the OASI and DI programs were $2.7 trillion and $118 billion, respectively. Income taxation of some Social Security benefits brought in $47.1 billion for OASI and $1.6 billion for DI in 2022.\nAssessments of system financing often focus on the combined programs together (OASI and DI) and focus on key measures such as trust fund depletion date, actuarial balance over a 75-year period, and comparisons of program costs to U.S. GDP.\nRegarding trust fund depletion, the Social Security Trustees in 2024, based on technical work by the Social Security Administration's actuaries, project the combined OASDI trust fund will be depleted in 2035. In 2021, the Penn Wharton Budget Model (University of Pennsylvania) projected depletion in 2032\u20132034, depending on the shape of the economic recovery in the U.S. following the COVID-19 pandemic.\nWith regard to actuarial balance, the Social Security Trustees estimate a 75-year actuarial deficit of 3.61 percent of payroll. This is approximately the total payroll tax increase that would be necessary to keep the system solvent for 75 years. The figure is designed to illustrate the size of the deficit. Legislation could close the deficit in ways other than raising the payroll tax rate.\nBecause taxable earnings are a fraction of GDP, sometimes the system's finances are put into context by using GDP. Social Security's cost are 5.2 percent of U.S. GDP as of 2023. Program costs will rise to 6.3 percent of GDP by 2076, and then decline to 6.0 percent of GDP by 2097.\nIn the past, legislation has been enacted to prevent trust fund depletion. Should the trust funds be depleted, Social Security would still have revenue coming into the system from payroll taxes. The Social Security trustees estimate that revenue would be sufficient to pay 77 percent of the program's benefits. There has been debate about a trust fund depletion scenario regarding whether monthly benefits would be lowered or whether full amounts would be paid but not on a timely basis.\nThe amount of the monthly Social Security benefit to which a worker is entitled depends upon the earnings record on which they have paid FICA or SECA taxes and upon the age at which the retiree chooses to begin receiving benefits. That said, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in \"Flemming v. Nestor\" (1960) that no one has a contractual right to Social Security benefits.\nMedicare is a separate program from Social Security, although disabled and aged (65 or older) Social Security beneficiaries qualify for Medicare. The financing for Medicare (United States) is also based on payroll taxes, trust fund reserves, and the taxation of some Social Security benefits.\nPrimary Insurance Amount and Monthly Benefit Amount calculations.\nWorkers in Social Security covered employment pay FICA (Federal Insurance Contributions Act) or SECA (Self Employed Contributions Act) taxes and earn quarters of coverage if earnings are above minimum amounts specified in the law. Workers with 40 quarters of coverage (QC) are \"fully insured\" and eligible for retirement benefits. Retirement benefit amounts depend upon the average of the person's highest 35 years of \"adjusted [for inflation]\" or \"indexed [for inflation]\" earnings. A person's payroll-taxable earnings from earlier years are adjusted for economy-wide wage growth, using the national average wage index (AWI), and then averaged. If the worker has fewer than 35 years of covered earnings, these non-contributory years are assigned zero earnings. The sum of the highest 35 years of adjusted or indexed earnings divided by 420 (35 years times 12 months per year) produces a person's Average Indexed Monthly Earnings or AIME.\nThe AIME is then used to calculate the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA). For workers who turn 62 in 2024, the PIA computation formula is:\n(a) 90 percent of the first $1,174 of average indexed monthly earnings, plus\n(b) 32 percent of average indexed monthly earnings between $1,174 and $7,078, plus\n(c) 15 percent of average indexed monthly earnings over $7,078\nFor workers who turn 62 in the future, the 90, 32, and 15 percent factors in the computation formula will remain the same but the dollar amounts in the formula (called bend points) will increase by wage growth in the national economy, as measured by the AWI. Because the AIME and the PIA calculation incorporate the AWI, Social Security benefits are said to be wage indexed. Because wages typically grow faster than prices, the PIAs for workers turning 62 in the future will tend to be higher in real terms but similar relative to average earnings in the economy at the time age 62 is attained.\nMonthly benefit amounts are based on the PIA. Once the PIA is computed, it is indexed for price inflation over time. Thus, Social Security monthly benefit amounts retain their purchasing power throughout a person's retirement years.\nA worker who first starts receiving a retirement benefit at the full retirement age receives a monthly benefit amount equal to 100 percent of the PIA. A worker who claims the retirement benefit before the full retirement age receives a reduced monthly benefit amount and a worker who claims at an age after the full retirement age (up to age 70) receives an increased monthly amount.\nThe 90, 32, and 15 percent factors in the PIA computation lead to higher replacement rates for persons with lower career earnings. For example, a retired individual whose average earnings are below the first bend point can receive a monthly benefit at the full retirement age that equals 90 percent of the person's average monthly earnings before retirement. The table shows replacement rates for workers who turned 62 in 2013.\nThe PIA computation formula for disabled workers parallels that for retired workers except the AIME is based on fewer years to reflect disablement before age 62. The monthly benefit amount of a disabled worker is 100 percent of PIA.\nBenefits for spouses, children, and widow(er)s depend on the PIAs of a spouse or a deceased spouse. Aged spouse and divorced spouse beneficiaries can receive up to 50 percent of the PIA. Survivor benefit rates are higher and aged widow(er)s and aged surviving divorced spouses can receive 100 percent of the PIA.\nFederal, state and local employees who have elected (when they could) NOT to pay FICA taxes are eligible for a reduced FICA benefits and full Medicare coverage if they have more than forty quarters of qualifying Social Security covered work. To minimize the Social Security payments to those who have not contributed to FICA for 35+ years and are eligible for federal, state and local benefits, which are usually more generous, the U.S. Congress passed the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP). The WEP provision does not eliminate all Social Security or Medicare eligibility if the worker has 40 quarters of qualifying income, but calculates the benefit payments by reducing the 90% multiplier in the first PIA bendpoint to 40\u201385% depending on the number of Years of Coverage. Foreign pensions are subject to WEP.\nA special minimum benefit, based on an alternative PIA calculation, is available for some workers with long careers but low earnings. However, it is rarely higher than the regularly computed PIA and thus few workers qualify for the special minimum benefit. 32,000 individuals received the special minimum benefit in 2019.\nThe benefits someone is eligible for are potentially so complicated that potential retirees should consult the Social Security Administration directly for advice. Many questions are addressed and at least partially answered on many online publications and online calculators.\nHow workers can get estimates of benefits.\nThe Social Security Administration (SSA) provides benefit estimates to workers through the Social Security Statement. The Statement can be accessed online by opening an online account with SSA called \"my Social Security\". With that account, workers can also construct \"what if\" scenarios, helping them to understand the effect on monthly benefits if they work additional years or delay the start of retirement benefits. The \"my Social Security\" account also offers other services, allowing individuals to request a replacement Social Security card or check the status of an application.\nA printed copy of the Social Security Statement is mailed to workers age 60 or older.\nIn 2021, SSA began producing \"Retirement Ready\" fact sheets, available online and as part of the online Statement, that tailor retirement planning information to different age groups (young, middle age, and older workers).\nSSA also has a Benefits Calculators web page with several stand-alone online calculators that help individuals estimate their benefits and prepare for retirement. These include benefit calculators for spouses, calculators for persons affected by the Windfall Elimination Provision or the Government Pension Offset and calculators to determine a person's full retirement age or the effect of the earnings test on benefits.\nSSA also provides a life expectancy calculator to help with retirement planning.\nFull retirement age (FRA).\nIf a person first claims a retirement benefit at the full retirement age (FRA), the individual will receive a monthly benefit amount equal to 100 percent of the individual's primary insurance amount (PIA). If first claimed before the FRA, the monthly benefit amount is smaller than 100 percent of PIA and if claimed after the FRA the monthly amount is higher than 100 percent of PIA. Sometimes the full retirement age is referred to as the normal retirement age.\nHistorically, the FRA was age 65. The 1983 Amendments to the Social Security Act gradually increased the FRA and, for individuals born in 1960 or later, the FRA is 67. The early retirement age (age 62) has not changed, but the monthly benefit amount paid at the early retirement age is lower if a person has a higher FRA. For example, when the FRA was age 65, the early retirement benefit was 80 percent of the worker's PIA. For a person with a FRA of 67, the early retirement benefit is 70 percent of PIA.\nIndividuals who first claim retirement benefits after the FRA (and up to age 70) receive delayed retirement credits that increase the monthly benefit amount by 8 percent per year of delayed claiming. For example, if a person has a FRA of 67 and waits until age 70 to claim retirement benefits, the individual's monthly benefit amount will be 124 percent of PIA.\nWhen a retirement beneficiary dies, a widow(er) or surviving divorced spouse is generally eligible for a monthly benefit amount equal to that received by the retirement beneficiary. Thus, a worker who delays retirement increases both the monthly benefit amount of the retirement benefit and, ultimately, the benefit a survivor receives.\nMany press articles, guides, and studies have focused on whether it is optimal to claim benefits at the full retirement age or some other age. The Social Security Administration produces a publication called \"When to Start Receiving Retirement Benefits\" that is designed to help individuals understand the issues involved in deciding when to begin benefits. The Center for Retirement Research at Boston College produced a guide designed to help individuals make informed claiming decisions.\nBetween 1985 and 2015, claiming of retirement benefits at the early retirement age became much less common and claiming at the full retirement age or later more common. In 2019, 1 in 4 individuals claimed at the early retirement age. From 2009 through 2019, the percentage of men claiming retirement benefits after the full retirement age increased from 4.1 percent to 16.2 percent. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing recession and recovery on benefit claiming, however, are not yet known.\nThe full retirement age is relevant for some benefit types other than retirement benefits. For example, aged spouses and aged survivors who claim spouse or survivor benefits before the full retirement age receive reduced spouse or survivor benefits. The increase in the full retirement age from the 1983 Amendments to the Social Security Act was phased in at a slightly different pace for survivor benefits and the full retirement age is 67 for survivors born in 1962 or later. Many aged survivors, however, are well past the full retirement age when the worker dies and thus can receive full survivor benefits immediately upon the worker's death.\nFor some types of Social Security benefits, benefits are not reduced or increased based on the age the benefits are first claimed. For example, a full monthly benefit amount (100 percent of PIA) is paid to disabled workers regardless of the age at which benefits start. At the full retirement age, the Social Security Administration reclassifies disabled workers as retired workers but the individual's monthly benefit amount is not affected.\nDelayed benefits.\nIf a worker delays receiving Social Security retirement benefits until after they reach full retirement age, the benefit will increase by two-thirds of one percent of the PIA per month. After age 70 there are no more increases as a result of delaying benefits. Social Security uses an \"average\" survival rate at your full retirement age to prorate the increase in the amount of benefit increase so that the total benefits are roughly the same whenever a person retires. Women may benefit more than men from this delayed benefit increase since the \"average\" survival rates are based on both men and women and women live approximately three years longer than men. The other consideration is that workers have a limited number of years of \"good\" health left after they reach full retirement age and unless they enjoy their job they may be passing up an opportunity to do something else they may enjoy doing while they are still relatively healthy.\nBenefits while continuing work.\nDue to changing needs or personal preferences, a person may go back to work after retiring. In this case, it is possible to get Social Security retirement or survivors benefits and work at the same time. A worker who is of full retirement age or older may (with spouse) keep all benefits, after taxes, regardless of earnings. But, if this worker or the worker's spouse are younger than full retirement age and receiving benefits and earn \"too much\", the benefits will be reduced. If working under full retirement age for the entire year and receiving benefits, SSA deducts $1 from the worker's benefit payments for every $2 earned above the annual limit of $15,120 (2013). Deductions cease when the benefits have been reduced to zero and the worker will get one more year of income and age credit, slightly increasing future benefits at retirement. For example, if a person was receiving benefits of $1,230/month (the average benefit paid) or $14,760 a year and have an income of $29,520/year above the $15,120 limit ($44,640/year) that person would lose all ($14,760) benefits. If a person made $1,000 more than $15,200/year they would lose $500 in benefits. People got no benefits for the months they worked until the $1 deduction for $2 income \"squeeze\" is satisfied. First social security checks are delayed for several months\u00a0\u2013 the first check may be only a fraction of the \"full\" amount. The benefit deductions change in the year a person reaches full retirement age and are still working\u00a0\u2013 SSA deducts only one dollar in benefits for every three a person earns above $40,080 in 2013 for that year and has no deduction thereafter. The income limits change (presumably for inflation) year by year.\nSpouse's benefits.\nThe spouse or divorced spouse of a retirement beneficiary is eligible for a Social Security spouse benefit if the spouse or divorced spouse is 62 or older. The benefit amount is equal to 50 percent of the retirement beneficiary's Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) if the spouse claims the benefit at the full retirement age or later. If a person is eligible for both a retirement benefit based on the person's own work in Social Security covered employment and a spouse benefit based on a spouse's work in covered employment, SSA will pay a total amount approximately equal to the higher of the two benefits. For example, if at the full retirement age, a spouse claims a retirement benefit of $300 and a spouse benefit of $450, SSA will pay the person a $300 retirement benefit and a $150 partial spouse benefit for a total benefit of $450.\nA spouse is eligible after a one-year duration of marriage requirement is met and a divorced spouse is eligible for spousal benefits if the marriage lasted for at least ten years and the person applying is not currently married. Payment of benefits to a divorced spouse does not reduce the Social Security benefits of the retired worker or family members of the retired worker, such as the worker's current spouse. A divorced person can claim spousal benefits once the former spouse is eligible for retirement benefits, regardless of whether the former spouse has claimed those retirement benefits.\nSpousal benefits are reduced if claimed before the full retirement age. The reduction is 25/36 of 1% per month for the first 36 months and 5/12 of 1% for each additional month earlier than the full retirement age. This typically works out to between 50% and 32.5% of the retirement beneficiary's Primary Insurance Amount. There is no increase for starting spousal benefits \"after\" the full retirement age.\nAlthough Social Security rules are gender-neutral, spousal benefits are disproportionately paid to women. Because of trends in marriage and workforce participation, retirement benefits are projected to become increasingly important for women, but spouse and survivor benefits will remain common.\nBecause spouse benefits are a 50 percent benefit and because divorced individuals do not share resources with a current husband or wife, divorced spouse beneficiaries have poverty rates that are high. About 29 percent of divorced spouse beneficiaries are in poverty compared to only about 5.4 percent of married spouse beneficiaries.\nThere was a Social Security government pension offset that would reduce or eliminate any spousal (or ex-spouse) or widow(er)'s benefits if the spouse or widow(er) is also receiving a government (federal, state, or local) pension from work that did not require paying Social Security taxes. It was repealed by the Social Security Fairness Act of 2023 (H.R. 82), which President Biden signed on January 5, 2025. The basic rule was that Social Security benefits would be reduced by two-thirds of the spouse's or widow(er)'s government pension. If the spouse's or widow(er)'s government pension exceeds 150% of the \"normal\" spousal or widow(er)'s benefit, the spousal benefit was eliminated. For example, a \"normal\" spousal or widow(er)'s benefit of $1,000/month was reduced to $0.00, if the spouse or widow(er) was already drawing a non-FICA taxed government pension of $1,500 or more per month. Pensions from work where Social Security taxes were paid, did not reduce Social Security spousal or widow(er)'s benefits. Pensions received from foreign countries did not cause GPO; however, a foreign pension used to be subject to the WEP.\nWidow(er) benefits.\nIf a worker covered by Social Security dies, a surviving spouse can receive survivors' benefits if a 9-month duration of marriage is met. If a widow(er) waits until Full Retirement Age, they are eligible for 100 percent of their deceased spouse's PIA. If the death of the worker was accidental, the duration of marriage test may be waived. A divorced spouse may qualify if the duration of marriage was at least ten full years and the widow(er) is not currently married, or remarried after attainment of age 60 (50 if disabled and eligible for specific types of benefits prior to the date of marriage).\nA father or mother of any age with a child age 16 or under or a disabled adult child in his or her care may be eligible for benefits. The earliest age for a non-disabled widow(er)'s benefit is age 60. If the worker received retirement benefits prior to death, the benefit amount may not exceed the amount the worker was receiving at the time of death or 82.5% of the PIA of the deceased worker (whichever is more). If the surviving spouse starts benefits before full retirement age, there is an actuarial reduction. If the worker earned delayed retirement credits by waiting to start benefits after their full retirement age, the surviving spouse will have those credits applied to their benefit. If the worker died before the year of attainment of age 62, the earnings will be indexed to the year in which the surviving spouse attained age 60.\nChildren's benefits.\nChildren of a retired, disabled or deceased worker receive benefits as a \"dependent\" or \"survivor\" if they are under the age of 18, or as long as attending primary or secondary school up to age 19 years and 2months; or are over the age of 18 and were disabled before the age of 22.\nThe benefit for a child on a living parent's record, is 50% of the PIA. For a surviving child, the benefit is 75% of the PIA. The benefit amount may be reduced if total benefits on the record exceed the family maximum.\nIn \"Astrue v. Capato\" (2012), the Supreme Court unanimously held that children conceived after a parent's death (by in vitro fertilization procedure) are not entitled to Social Security survivors' benefits if the laws of the state in which the parent's will was signed do not provide for such benefits.\nDisability.\nA worker who has worked long enough and recently enough (based on \"quarters of coverage\" within the recent past) to be covered \"can\" receive disability benefits. These benefits start after five full calendar months of disability, regardless of his or her age. The eligibility formula requires a certain number of credits (based on earnings) to have been earned overall, and a certain number within the ten years immediately preceding the disability, but with more-lenient provisions for younger workers who become disabled before having had a chance to compile a long earnings history.\nThe worker must be unable to continue in his or her previous job and unable to adjust to other work, with age, education, and work experience taken into account; furthermore, the disability must be long-term, lasting twelve months, expected to last twelve months, resulting in death, or expected to result in death. As with the retirement benefit, the amount of the disability benefit payable depends on the worker's age and record of covered earnings.\nSupplemental Security Income (SSI) uses the same disability criteria as the insured social security disability program, but SSI is not based upon insurance coverage. Instead, a system of means-testing is used to determine whether the claimants' income and net worth fall below certain income and asset thresholds.\nSeverely disabled children may qualify for SSI. Standards for child disability are different from those for adults.\nDisability determination at the Social Security Administration has created the largest system of administrative courts in the United States. Depending on the state of residence, a claimant whose initial application for benefits is denied can request \"reconsideration\" or a \"hearing before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ)\". Such hearings sometimes involve participation of an independent vocational expert (VE) or medical expert (ME), as called upon by the ALJ.\nReconsideration involves a re-examination of the evidence and, in some cases, the opportunity for a hearing before a (non-attorney) disability hearing officer. The hearing officer decides the case and provides justification for the finding in writing. If the claimant is denied at the reconsideration stage, (s)he may request a hearing before an ALJ. In some states, SSA has implemented a pilot program that eliminates the reconsideration step and allows claimants to appeal an initial denial directly to an ALJ.\nBecause the number of applications for Social Security disability is large (approximately 650,000 applications per year), the number of hearings requested by claimants often exceeds the capacity of ALJs. The number of hearings requested and availability of ALJs varies geographically across the United States. In some areas of the country, it is possible for a claimant to have a hearing with an ALJ within 90 days of the request. In other areas, waiting times of 18 months are not uncommon.\nAfter the hearing, the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) issues a decision in writing. The decision can be \"Fully Favorable\" (the ALJ finds the claimant disabled as of the date that (s)he alleges in the application through the present), \"Partially Favorable\" (the ALJ finds the claimant disabled at some point, but not as of the date alleged in the application; OR the ALJ finds that the claimant \"was\" disabled but has improved), or \"Unfavorable\" (the ALJ finds that the claimant was not and is not disabled). Claimants can appeal decisions to the Social Security Appeals Council, which is in Virginia. The Appeals Council does not hold hearings; it accepts written briefs. Response time from the Appeals Council can range from twelve weeks to more than three years.\nClaimants who disagree with the Appeals Council decision can appeal the case in federal district court. As in most federal court cases, an unfavorable district court decision can be appealed to the appropriate United States Court of Appeals, and an unfavorable appellate court decision can be appealed to the United States Supreme Court.\nThe SSA has maintained its goal for judges to resolve 500\u2013700 cases per year but ALJs struggle to meet this goal. While 81% of ALJs met this productivity level in 2019, only 18% achieved this case disposition target in 2020. Office of Hearing Operations staffing and work procedure disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have doubtlessly contributed to lower ALJ productivity in 2020.\nThe debate about the social security system in the United States has been ongoing for decades and there is concern about its sustainability.\nCurrent operation.\nJoining and quitting.\nObtaining a Social Security number for a child is voluntary. Further, there is no general legal requirement that individuals join the Social Security program unless they want, or have, to work. Under normal circumstances, FICA taxes or SECA taxes will be collected on all wages. About the only way to avoid paying either FICA or SECA taxes is to join a religion that does not believe in insurance, such as the Amish or a religion whose members have taken a vow of poverty (see IRS publication 517 and 4361). Federal workers employed before 1987 and various state and local workers, including those in some school districts who had their own retirement and disability programs, were given the one-time option of joining Social Security. Many employees and retirement and disability systems opted to keep out of the Social Security system because of the cost and the limited benefits. It was often less expensive to obtain higher retirement and disability benefits by staying in their original retirement and disability plans. Now, only a few of these plans allow new hires to join their existing plans without also joining Social Security. In 2004, the SSA estimated that 96% of all U.S. workers were covered by the system with the remaining 4% mostly a minority of government employees enrolled in public employee pensions and not subject to Social Security taxes due to historical exemptions.\nIt is possible for railroad employees to get \"coordinated\" retirement and disability benefits. The U.S. Railroad Retirement Board (or \"RRB\") is an independent agency in the executive branch of the United States government created in 1935 to administer a social insurance program providing retirement benefits to the country's railroad workers. Railroad retirement TierI payroll taxes are coordinated with social security taxes so that employees and employers pay TierI taxes at the same rate as social security taxes and have the same benefits. In addition, both workers and employers pay TierII taxes (about 6.2% in 2005), which are used to finance railroad retirement and disability benefit payments that are over and above social security levels. TierII benefits are a supplemental retirement and disability benefit system that pays 0.875% times years of service times average highest five years of employment salary, in addition to Social Security benefits.\nFICA taxes are imposed on nearly all workers and self-employed persons. Employers are required to report wages for covered employment to the SSA for processing Forms W-2 and W-3. Some specific wages are not part of the Social Security program (discussed below). Internal Revenue Code provisions section 3101 imposes payroll taxes on individuals and employer matching taxes. Section 3102 mandates that employers deduct these payroll taxes from workers' wages before they are paid. Generally, the payroll tax is imposed on everyone in employment earning \"wages\" as defined in 3121 of the Internal Revenue Code. and also taxes net earnings from self-employment.\nTrust fund.\nSocial Security taxes are paid into the Social Security Trust Fund maintained by the U.S. Treasury (technically, the \"Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund\", as established by \u00a0https://). Current year expenses are paid from current Social Security tax revenues. When revenues exceed expenditures, as they did between 1983 and 2009, the excess is invested in special series, non-marketable U.S. government bonds. Thus, the Social Security Trust Fund indirectly finances the federal government's general purpose deficit spending. In 2007, the cumulative excess of Social Security taxes and interest received over benefits paid stood at $2.2trillion. Some regard the Trust Fund as an accounting construct with no economic significance. Others argue that it has specific legal significance because the Treasury securities it holds are backed by the \"full faith and credit\" of the U.S. government, which has an obligation to repay its debt.\nThe SSA authority to make benefit payments as granted by Congress extends only to its current revenues and existing Trust Fund balance, i.e. redemption of its holdings of Treasury securities. Therefore, Social Security's ability to make full payments once annual benefits exceed revenues depends in part on the federal government's ability to make good on the bonds it has issued to the Social Security trust funds. As with any other federal obligation, the federal government's ability to repay the Social Security Trust Fund is based on its power to tax and borrow and the commitment of the U.S. Congress to meet its obligations.\nIn 2009, the Office of the Chief Actuary of the SSA calculated an unfunded obligation of $15.1trillion for the Social Security program. The unfunded obligation is the difference between the future cost of the Social Security program (based on several demographic assumptions such as mortality, work force participation, immigration, and age expectancy) and total assets in the Trust Fund given the expected contribution rate through the current scheduled payroll tax. This unfunded obligation is expressed in present value dollars and is a part of the Fund's long-range actuarial estimates, not necessarily a certainty of what will occur in the long run. An Actuarial Note to the calculation says \"the term obligation is used in lieu of the term liability, because liability generally indicates a contractual obligation (as in the case of private pensions and insurance) that cannot be altered by the plan sponsor without the agreement of the plan participants.\"\nOffice of Hearings Operations (OHO, formerly ODAR or OHA).\nOn August 8, 2017, Acting Commissioner, Nancy A. Berryhill, informed employees that the Office of Disability Adjudication and Review (\"ODAR\") would be renamed to Office of Hearings Operations (\"OHO\"). The hearing offices had been known as \"ODAR\" since 2006, and the Office of Hearings and Appeals (\"OHA\") before that. OHO administers the ALJ hearings for the SSA. Administrative Law Judges (ALJs) conduct hearings and issue decisions. After an ALJ decision, the Appeals Council considers requests for review of ALJ decisions, and acts as the final level of administrative review for the SSA (the stage at which \"exhaustion\" could occur, a prerequisite for federal court review).\nBenefit payout comparisons.\nSome federal, state, local and education government employees pay no Social Security tax but have their own retirement and disability systems that nearly always pay better retirement and disability benefits than the SSA. These plans typically require vesting (working 5\u201310 years for the same employer before becoming eligible for retirement). But their retirement typically depends on only the average of the best 3\u201310 years salaries times some retirement factor (typically 0.875%\u20133.0%) times years employed. This retirement benefit can be a \"reasonably good\" (75\u201385% of salary) retirement at close to the monthly salary at which they were last employed. For example, if a person joined the University of California retirement system at age 25 and worked for 35 years they could receive 87.5% (2.5% \u00d7 35) of their average highest three year salary with full medical coverage at age 60. Police and firefighters who joined at 25 and worked for 30 years could receive 90% (3.0% \u00d7 30) of their average salary and full medical coverage at age 55. These retirements have cost of living adjustments (COLA) applied each year but are limited to a maximum average income of $350,000/year or less. Spousal survivor benefits are available at 100\u201367% of the primary benefits rate for 8.7% to 6.7% reduction in retirement benefits, respectively. University of California Retirement Plan retirement and disability plan benefits are funded by contributions from both members and the university (typically 5% of salary each) and by the compounded investment earnings of the accumulated totals. These contributions and earnings are held in a trust fund that is invested. The retirement benefits are much more generous than Social Security but are believed to be actuarially sound. The main difference between state and local government sponsored retirement systems and Social Security is that the state and local retirement systems use compounded investments that are usually heavily weighted in stock market securities, which historically have returned more than 7.0%/year on average despite some years with losses. Short term federal government investments may be more secure but pay much lower average percentages. Nearly all other federal, state and local retirement systems work in a similar fashion with different benefit retirement ratios. Some plans are now combined with Social Security and are \"piggy backed\" on top of Social Security benefits. For example, the current Federal Employees Retirement System, which covers the vast majority of federal civil service employees hired after 1986, combines Social Security, a modest defined-benefit pension (1.1% per year of service) and the defined-contribution Thrift Savings Plan.\nThe current Social Security formula used in calculating the benefit level (primary insurance amount or PIA) is progressive vis-\u00e0-vis lower average salaries. Anyone who worked in OASDI covered employment and other retirement would be entitled to both the alternative non-OASDI pension and an Old Age retirement benefit from Social Security. Because of their limited time working in OASDI covered employment the sum of their covered salaries times inflation factor divided by 420 months yields a low adjusted indexed monthly salary over 35 years, AIME. The progressive nature of the PIA formula would in effect allow these workers to also get a slightly higher Social Security Benefit percentage on this low average salary. Congress passed in 1983 the Windfall Elimination Provision to minimize Social Security benefits for these recipients. The basic provision is that the first salary bracket, $0\u2013791/month (2013) has its normal benefit percentage of 90% reduced to 40\u201390%\u00a0\u2013 see Social Security for the exact percentage. The reduction is limited to roughly 50% of what a person would be eligible for if they had always worked under OASDI taxes. The 90% benefit percentage factor is not reduced if a person has 30 or more years of \"substantial\" earnings.\nThe average Social Security payment of $1,230/month ($14,760/year) in 2013 is only slightly above the federal poverty level for a one-person household\u00a0\u2013 $11,420/yr and below the poverty guideline of $15,500/yr for two person households.\nFor this reason, financial advisers often encourage those who have the option to do so to supplement their Social Security contributions with private retirement plans such as an employer-sponsored 401(k) (or 403(b)) plan when they are offered by an employer. 58% of American workers have access to such plans. Many of these employers will match a portion of an employee's savings dollar-for-dollar up to a certain percentage of the employee's salary. Even without employer matches, individual retirement accounts (IRAs) are portable, self-directed, tax-deferred retirement accounts that offer the potential to substantially increase retirement savings compared to savings using no retirement plans. Their limitations include: the financial literacy to tell a \"good\" investment account from a less advantageous one; the savings barrier faced by those who are in low-wage employment or burdened by debt; the requirement of self-discipline to allot from an early age the required percentage of salary into \"good\" investment account(s); and the self\u2013discipline needed to leave it there to earn compound interest until needed after retirement.\nFinancial advisers often suggest that long-term investment horizons should be used, as historically short-term investment losses \"self correct\", and most investments continue to deliver good average investment returns. The IRS has tax penalties for withdrawals from IRAs, 401(k)s, etc. before the age of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;59+1\u20442, and requires mandatory withdrawals once the retiree reaches 73; other restrictions may also apply on the amount of tax-deferred income one can put in the account(s). For people who have access to them, self-directed retirement savings plans have the potential to match or even exceed the benefits earned by federal, state and local government retirement plans.\nInternational agreements.\nPeople sometimes relocate from one country to another, either permanently or on a limited-time basis. This presents challenges to businesses, governments, and individuals seeking to ensure future benefits or having to deal with taxation authorities in multiple countries. To that end, the SSA has signed treaties, often referred to as \"Totalization Agreements\", with other social insurance programs in various foreign countries.\nOverall, these agreements serve two main purposes. First, they eliminate dual Social Security taxation, the situation that occurs when a worker from one country works in another country and is required to pay Social Security taxes to both countries on the same earnings. Second, the agreements help fill gaps in benefit protection for workers who have divided their careers between the United States and another country.\nThe following countries have signed totalization agreements with the SSA (and the date the agreement became effective):&lt;ref name=\"www.ssa.gov/international\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nSocial Security number.\nA side effect of the Social Security program in the United States has been the near-universal adoption of the program's identification number, the Social Security number (SSN), as the \"de facto\" U.S. national identification number. The SSN is issued pursuant to section 205(c)(2) of the Social Security Act, codified as \u00a0https://. The government originally stated that the SSN would not be a means of identification, but currently a multitude of U.S. entities use the SSN as a personal identifier. These include government agencies such as the Internal Revenue Service as well as the military, in addition to private agencies such as banks, colleges and universities, health insurance companies, and employers.\nAlthough the Social Security Act itself does not require a person to have an SSN to live and work in the United States, the U.S. Internal Revenue Code does generally require the use of the SSN by individuals for federal tax purposes:\nThe social security account number issued to an individual for purposes of section 205(c)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act shall, except as shall otherwise be specified under regulations of the Secretary [of the Treasury or his delegate], be used as the identifying number for such individual for purposes of this title.\nImportantly, most parents apply for SSNs for their dependent children in order to include them on their income tax returns as a dependent. Everyone filing a tax return, as taxpayer or spouse, must have an SSN or Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) since the IRS is unable to process returns or post payments for anyone without an SSN or TIN.\nThe Privacy Act of 1974 was in part intended to limit usage of the SSN as a means of identification. Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section7 of the Privacy Act, an uncodified provision, states in part:\n(1) It shall be unlawful for any Federal, State or local government agency to deny to any individual any right, benefit, or privilege provided by law because of such individual's refusal to disclose his social security account number.\nHowever, the Social Security Act provides:\nIt is the policy of the United States that any State (or political subdivision thereof) may, in the administration of any tax, general public assistance, driver's license, or motor vehicle registration law within its jurisdiction, utilize the social security account numbers issued by the Commissioner of Social Security for the purpose of establishing the identification of individuals affected by such law, and may require any individual who is or appears to be so affected to furnish to such State (or political subdivision thereof) or any agency thereof having administrative responsibility for the law involved, the social security account number (or numbers, if he has more than one such number) issued to him by the Commissioner of Social Security.\nFurther, paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of section7 of the Privacy Act provides in part:\n(2) the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection \"shall not apply\" with respect to \u2013\n(A) any disclosure which is \"required by Federal statute\", or\n(B) the disclosure of a social security number to any Federal, State, or local agency maintaining a system of records in existence and operating before January 1, 1975, if such disclosure was required under statute or regulation adopted prior to such date to verify the identity of an individual.\nThe exceptions under section7 of the Privacy Act include the Internal Revenue Code requirement that SSNs be used as taxpayer identification numbers for individuals.\nDemographic and revenue projections.\nIn each year since 1982, OASDI tax receipts, interest payments and other income had exceeded benefit payments and other expenditures, for example by more than $150billion in 2004. However, as the \"baby boomers\" moved out of the work force and into retirement, expenses came to exceed tax receipts and then, exceeded all OASDI trust income, including interest, starting in 2018 (see chart Social Security Revenue and Cost, above). At that point the system began drawing on its trust fund Treasury Notes, and will continue to pay benefits at the then current levels until the Trust Fund is exhausted.\nWhen the costs of the Social Security program started to exceed income in 2018, the trust fund began to empty and, without changes made to the system, will be fully depleted in the future. In a survey of 210 members of the American Economics Association published in November 2006, 85 percent agreed with the statement: \"The gap between Social Security funds and expenditures will become unsustainably large within the next fifty years if current policies remain unchanged.\"\nFurthermore, increased spending for the Social Security program will occur at the same time as increases in demand for Medicare, as a result of the aging of the baby boomers. One projection illustrates the relationship between the two programs:\nFrom 2004 to 2030, the combined spending on Social Security and Medicare is expected to rise from 8% of national income (gross domestic product) to 13%. Two-thirds of the increase occurs in Medicare.\nIn May 2024, the Treasury Department issued the annual trustees report for the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds with depletion date projections for the funds estimated at 2033 and 2098 respectively and by 2035 when combined.\nWays to eliminate the projected shortfall.\nThe Social Security program is predicted to run out of money to pay all prospective benefits at today's level of benefits in 2034. Ways to extend that date are as follows.\nTaxation.\nTax on wages and self-employment income.\nBenefits are funded by taxes imposed on wages of employees and self-employed persons. As explained below, in the case of employment, the employer and employee are each responsible for one half of the Social Security tax associated with the employee, with the employee's half being withheld from the employee's pay check. In the case of self-employed persons (i.e., independent contractors), the self-employed person is responsible for the entire amount of Social Security tax associated with the self-employed person.\nThe portion of taxes collected from the employee for Social Security are referred to as \"trust fund taxes\" and the employer is required to remit them to the government. These taxes take priority over everything, and represent the only debts of a corporation or LLC that can impose personal liability upon its officers or managers. A sole proprietor and officers of a corporation and managers of an LLC can be held personally liable for non-payment of the income tax and social security taxes whether or not actually collected from the employee.\nThe Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) (codified in the Internal Revenue Code) imposes a Social Security withholding tax equal to 6.20% of the gross wage amount, up to but not exceeding the \"Social Security Wage Base\" ($97,500 for 2007; $102,000 for 2008; and $106,800 for 2009, 2010, and 2011). The same 6.20% tax is imposed on employers. For 2011 and 2012, the employee's contribution was temporarily reduced to 4.2%, while the employer's portion remained at 6.2%. In 2024, the Social Security Wage Base (the upper limit on earnings taxed) increased to $168,600. For each calendar year for which the worker is assessed the FICA contribution, the SSA credits those wages as that year's covered wages. The income cutoff is adjusted yearly for inflation and other factors.\nA separate payroll tax of 1.45% of an employee's income is paid directly by the employer, and an additional 1.45% deducted from the employee's paycheck, yielding a total tax rate of 2.90%. There is no maximum limit on this portion of the tax. This portion of the tax is used to fund the Medicare program, which is primarily responsible for providing health benefits to retirees and also pay benefits to those on disability.\nThe changes in Social Security tax rates over time can be accessed on the SSA website.\nThe combined tax rate of these two federal programs is 15.30% (7.65% paid by the employee and 7.65% paid by the employer). In 2011\u20132012 it temporarily dropped to 13.30% (5.65% paid by the employee and 7.65% paid by the employer).\nFor self-employed workers (who technically are not employees and are deemed not to be earning \"wages\" for federal tax purposes), the self-employment tax, imposed by the Self-Employment Contributions Act of 1954, codified as Chapter2 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code, 26\u00a0U.S.C.\u00a0https://\u2013https://, is 15.3% of \"net earnings from self-employment.\" In essence, a self-employed individual pays both the employee and employer share of the tax, although half of the self-employment tax (the \"employer share\") is deductible when calculating the individual's federal income tax.\nIf an employee has overpaid payroll taxes by having more than one job or switching jobs during the year, the excess taxes will be refunded when the employee files an annual federal income tax return. Any excess taxes paid by employers, however, are not refundable to the employers.\nBy Congressional Budget Office (CBO) calculations, the lowest income quintile (0\u201320%) and second quintile (21\u201340%) of households in the U.S. pay an average income tax of \u22129.3% and \u22122.6% and Social Security taxes of 8.3% and 7.9% respectively. By CBO calculations the household incomes in the first quintile and second quintile have an average Total Federal Tax rate of 1.0% and 3.8% respectively.\nWages not subject to tax.\nWorkers are not required to pay Social Security taxes on wages from certain types of work:\nFederal income taxation of benefits.\nOriginally the benefits received by retirees were not taxed as income. Beginning in tax year 1984, with the Reagan-era reforms to repair the system's projected insolvency, retirees with incomes over $25,000 (in the case of married persons filing separately who did not live with the spouse at any time during the year, and for persons filing as \"single\"), or with combined incomes over $32,000 (if married filing jointly) or, in certain cases, any income amount (if married filing separately from the spouse in a year in which the taxpayer lived with the spouse at any time) generally saw part of the retiree benefits subject to federal income tax. In 1984, the portion of the benefits potentially subject to tax was 50%. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1993 set the portion to 85%. Moreover, since the taxable income threshold is not indexed to inflation, the portion of beneficiaries' social security payments subject to income tax has risen significantly in real terms since the threshold was set in 1984.\nCriticism.\nDiscrimination against the poor and the middle class.\nWorkers must pay 12.4 percent, including a 6.2 percent employer contribution, on their wages below the Social Security Wage Base ($168,600 in 2024), but no tax on income in excess of this amount. Therefore, high earners pay a lower percentage of their total income because of the income caps; because of this, and the fact there is no tax on unearned income, social security taxes are often viewed as being regressive. However, benefits are adjusted to be significantly more progressive, even when accounting for differences in life expectancy. According to the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office, for people in the bottom fifth of the earnings distribution, the ratio of benefits to taxes is almost three times as high as it is for those in the top fifth.\nDespite its regressive tax rate, Social Security benefits are calculated using a progressive benefit formula that replaces a much higher percentage of low-income workers' pre-retirement income than that of higher-income workers (although these low-income workers pay a higher percentage of their pre-retirement income). Supporters of the current system also point to numerous studies that show that, relative to high-income workers, Social Security disability and survivor benefits paid on behalf of low-income workers more than offset any retirement benefits that may be lost because of shorter life expectancy (this offset would apply only at a population level). Other research asserts that survivor benefits, allegedly an offset, actually exacerbate the problem because survivor benefits are denied to single individuals, including widow(er)s married fewer than nine months (except in certain situations), divorced widow(er)s married fewer than ten years, and co-habiting or same-sex couples, unless they are legally married in their state of residence. Unmarried individuals and minorities tend to be less wealthy.\nSocial Security's benefit formula provides 90% of average indexed monthly earnings (AIME) below the first \"bend point\" of $791/month, 32% of AIME between the first and second bend points $791 to $4781/month, and 15% of AIME in excess of the second bend point up to the Ceiling cap of $113,700 in 2013. The low income bias of the benefit calculation means that a lower paid worker receives a much higher percentage of his or her salary in benefit payments than higher paid workers. A married low salaried worker can receive over 100% of their salary in benefits after retiring at the full retirement age. High-salaried workers receive 43% or less of their salary in benefits despite having paid into the \"system\" at the same rate (see benefit calculations above). To minimize the impact of Social Security taxes on low salaried workers the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Care Tax Credit were passed by the U.S. Congress, which largely refund the FICA and or SECA payments of low-salaried workers through the income tax system. By Congressional Budget Office (CBO) calculations, the lowest income quintile (0\u201320%) and second quintile (21\u201340%) of households in the U.S., pay an average federal income tax of \u22129.3% and \u22122.6% of income and Social Security taxes of 8.3% and 7.9% of income respectively. By CBO calculations, the household incomes in the first and second quintiles have an average total federal tax rate of 1.0% and 3.8% respectively. However, these groups also have the smallest percentage of American household incomes\u00a0\u2013 the first quintile earns 3.2% of all income, while the second quintile earns 8.4% of all income. Higher-income retirees pay income taxes on 85% of their Social Security benefits and 100% on all other retirement benefits they may have.\nMarital status.\nThe Social Security Act defines the rules for determining marital relationships for SSI recipients. The act requires that if a couple is cohabitating, they should be considered married for purposes of the SSI program. Consequently, if the claimant is found disabled and found to be \"holding out\"; this claimant will be entitled to reduced or no SSI benefits. However, the Social Security Act does not accept that a claimant \"holding out as husband or wife\" should be entitled of Survivor, Retirement or Widow(er)s benefits, when the claimant's \"husband or wife\" dies. SSA rules and regulations about marital status either prohibit (SRDI program) or reduce (SSI program) benefits to indigent claimants.\nPoliticians exempted themselves from the tax.\nCritics of Social Security have said that the politicians who created Social Security exempted themselves from having to pay the Social Security tax. When the federal government created Social Security, all federal employees, including the president and members of Congress, were exempt from having to pay the Social Security tax, and they received no Social Security benefits. This law was changed by the Social Security Amendments of 1983, which brought within the Social Security system all members of Congress, the president and the vice president, federal judges, and certain executive-level political appointees, as well as all federal employees hired in any capacity on or after January 1, 1984. Many state and local government workers, however, are exempt from Social Security taxes because they contribute instead to alternative retirement systems set up by their employers.\nComparison to a Ponzi scheme.\nCritics as early as 2002 have drawn parallels between Social Security and Ponzi schemes, arguing that the sustenance of Social Security is due to continuous contributions over time. One difference between a traditional Ponzi scheme and Social Security, is that while both may have similar \"structures\"\u2014in particular, a sustainability problem when the number of new people paying in is declining\u2014they have differing degrees of transparency. In the case of a traditional Ponzi scheme, the fact that there is no return-generating mechanism other than contributions from new entrants is obscured whereas the Social Security scheme is designed to have payouts openly underwritten by incoming tax revenue and the interest on the Treasury bonds held by or for the Social Security scheme. Private sector Ponzi schemes are also vulnerable to collapse because they cannot force new entrants to contribute, whereas participation in the Social Security program is usually mandatory upon beginning one's first job in the United States. In connection with these and other issues, Robert E. Wright called Social Security a quasi-pyramid scheme\u2014rather than a true Ponzi scheme\u2014in his book, \"Fubarnomics\".\nIn March 2025, Elon Musk called social security a ponzi scheme. E.J. Antoni, President Trump's August 2025 nominee for the Bureau of Labor Statistics has repeatedly referred to Social Security as a \"Ponzi scheme\"; Antoni has advocated for sunsetting the program, saying \"you'll need a generation of people who pay Social Security taxes but never actually receive any of those benefits\". He clarified the point by further stating that \"The people who are going to retire 10, 20, even 30, or certainly 40 years from now\u2014I'm sorry, but the program is not going to be viable at that time\".\nAs demographic shifts, the system becomes harder to sustain without increasing taxes or reducing benefits, or both; similar to the nature of a Pyramid scheme or Ponzi scheme.. \nEstimated net benefits under differing circumstances.\nIn 2004, Urban Institute economists C. Eugene Steuerle and Adam Carasso created a Web-based Social Security benefits calculator. Using this calculator, it is possible to estimate net Social Security benefits (i.e., estimated lifetime benefits minus estimated lifetime FICA taxes paid) for different types of recipients. In the book \"Democrats and Republicans\u00a0\u2013 Rhetoric and Reality,\" Joseph Fried used the calculator to create graphical depictions of the estimated net benefits of men and women who were at different wage levels, single and married (with stay-at-home spouses), and retiring in different years. These graphs vividly show that generalizations about Social Security benefits may be of little predictive value for any given worker, due to the wide disparity of net benefits for people at different income levels and in different demographic groups. For example, the graph below (Figure 168) shows the impact of wage level and retirement date on a male worker. As income goes up, net benefits get smaller\u00a0\u2013 even negative.\nHowever, the impact is much greater for the future retiree (in 2045) than for the current retiree (2005). The male earning $95,000 per year and retiring in 2045 is estimated to lose over $200,000 by participating in the Social Security system.\nIn the next graph (Figure 165), the depicted net benefits are averaged for people turning age 65 anytime during the years 2005 through 2045. (In other words, the disparities shown are not related to retirement.) However, there is an impact of gender and wage level. Because women tend to live longer, they generally collect Social Security benefits for a longer time. As a result, they get a higher net benefit, on average, no matter what the wage level.\nThe next graph (Figure 166), shows estimated net benefits for married men and women at different wage levels. In this scenario, it is assumed that the spouse has little or no earnings and, thus, will be entitled to collect a spousal retirement benefit. According to Fried:\nTwo significant factors are evident: First, every column in Figure 166 depicts a net benefit that is higher than any column in Figure 165. In other words, the average married person (with a stay-at-home spouse) gets a greater benefit per FICA tax dollar paid than does the average single person, no matter what the gender or wage level. Second, there is only limited progressivity among married workers with stay-at-home spouses. Review Figure 166 carefully: The net benefits drop as the wage levels increase from $50,000 to $95,000; however, they increase as the wage levels grow from $5,000 to $50,000. In fact, net benefits are lowest for those earning just $5,000 per year.\nThe last graph shown (Figure 167), is a combination of Figures 165 and 166. In this graph it is clear why generalizations about the value of Social Security benefits are meaningless. At the $95,000 wage level, a married person could be a big winner, getting net benefits of about $165,000. On the other hand, he could lose an estimated $152,000 in net benefits if he remains single. Altogether, there is a \"swing\" of over $300,000 based upon the marriage decision (and the division of earnings between the spouses). In addition, there is a large disparity between the high net benefits of the married person earning $95,000 ($165,152) versus the relatively low net benefits of the man or woman earning $5,000 ($30,025 or $41,890, depending on gender). In other words, the high earner, in this scenario, gets a far greater return on his FICA tax investment than does the low earner.\nIn the book \"How Social Security Picks Your Pocket\" other factors affecting Social Security net benefits are identified: Generally, people who work for more than 35 years get a lower net benefit, all other factors being equal. People who do not live long after retirement age get a much lower net benefit. Finally, people who derive a high percentage of income from non-wage sources get high Social Security net benefits because they appear to be poor, when they are not. The progressive benefit formula for Social Security is blind to the income a worker may have from non-wage sources, such as spousal support, dividends and interest, or rental income.\nCurrent controversies.\nContrast with private pensions.\nAlthough Social Security is sometimes compared to private pensions, the two systems are different in a number of respects. It has been argued that Social Security is an insurance plan as opposed to a retirement plan. Unlike a pension, for example, Social Security pays disability benefits. A private pension fund accumulates the money paid into it, eventually using those reserves to pay pensions to the workers who contributed to the fund; and a private system is not universal.\nSocial Security cannot \"prefund\" by investing in marketable assets such as equities, because federal law prohibits it from investing in assets other than those backed by the U.S. government. As a result, its investments to date have been limited to special non-negotiable securities issued by the U.S. Treasury, although some argue that debt issued by the Federal National Mortgage Association and other quasi-governmental organizations could meet legal standards. Social Security cannot by law invest in private equities, although some other countries (such as Canada) and some states permit their pension funds to invest in private equities. As a universal system, Social Security generally operates as a pipeline, through which current tax receipts from workers are used to pay current benefits to retirees, survivors, and the disabled. When there is an excess of taxes withheld over benefits paid, by law this excess is invested in Treasury securities (not in private equities) as described above.\nTwo broad categories of private pension plans are \"defined benefit pension plans\" and \"defined contribution pension plans.\" Of these two, Social Security is more similar to a defined benefit pension plan. In a defined benefit pension plan, the benefits ultimately received are based on some sort of pre-determined formula (such as one based on years worked and highest salary earned). Defined benefit pension plans generally do not include separate accounts for each participant. By contrast, in a defined contribution pension plan each participant has a specific account with funds put into that account (by the employer or the participant, or both), and the ultimate benefit is based on the amount in that account at the time of retirement. Some have proposed that the Social Security system be modified to provide for the option of individual accounts (in effect, to make the system, at least in part, more like a defined contribution pension plan). Specifically, on February 2, 2005, President George W. Bush made Social Security a prominent theme of his State of the Union Address. He described the Social Security system as \"headed for bankruptcy\", and outlined, in general terms, a proposal based on partial privatization. Critics responded that privatization would require huge new government borrowing to fund benefit payments during the transition years. See Social Security debate (United States).\nBoth \"defined benefit\" and \"defined contribution\" private pension plans are governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), which requires employers to provide minimum levels of funding to support \"defined benefits\" pensions. The purpose is to protect the workers from corporate mismanagement and outright bankruptcy of the plan, although in practice many private pension funds have fallen short in recent years. In terms of financial structure, the current Social Security system is analogous to an underfunded \"defined benefit\" pension (\"underfunded\" meaning not that it is in trouble, but that its savings are not enough to pay future benefits without collecting future tax revenues).\nContrast with insurance.\nBesides the argument over whether the returns on Social Security contributions should or can be compared to returns on private investment instruments, there is the question of whether the contributions are nonetheless analogous to pooled insurance premiums charged by for-profit commercial insurance companies to maintain and generate a return on a \"risk pool of funds\". Like any insurance program, Social Security \"spreads risk\" as the program protects workers and covered family members against loss of income from the wage earner's retirement, disability, or death. For example, a worker who becomes disabled at a young age could receive a large return relative to the amount they contributed in FICA before becoming disabled, since disability benefits can continue for life. As in private insurance plans, everyone in the particular insurance pool is insured against the same risks, but not everyone will benefit to the same extent.\nThe analogy to insurance, however, is limited by the fact that paying FICA taxes creates no legal right to benefits and by the extent to which Social Security is funded by FICA taxes. During 2011 and 2012, for example, FICA tax revenue was insufficient to maintain Social Security's solvency without transfers from general revenues. These transfers added to the general budget deficit like general program spending.\nPrivate retirement savings crisis.\nWhile inflation-adjusted stock market values generally rose from 1978 to 1997, from 1998 through 2007 they were higher than in March 2013. This has caused workers' supplemental retirement plans such as 401(k)s to perform substantially more poorly than expected when current retirees were investing the bulk of their savings in them. In 2010, the median household retirement account balance for workers aged 55 to 64 was $120,000, which will provide only a trivial supplement to Social Security benefits, but about a third of households had no retirement savings. 75% of Americans nearing retirement age had less than $30,000 in their retirement accounts, which \"Forbes\" called \"the greatest retirement crisis in American history.\"\nCourt interpretation of the Act to provide benefits.\nThe United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit has indicated that the Social Security Act has a moral purpose and should be liberally interpreted in favor of claimants when deciding what counted as covered wages for purposes of meeting the quarters of coverage requirement to make a worker eligible for benefits. That court has also stated: \"...[T]he regulations should be liberally applied in favor of beneficiaries\" when deciding a case in favor of a felon who had his disability payments retroactively terminated upon incarceration. According to the court, that the Social Security Act \"should be liberally construed in favor of those seeking its benefits can not be doubted.\" \"The hope behind this statute is to save men and women from the rigors of the poor house as well as from the haunting fear that such a lot awaits them when journey's end is near.\"\nConstitutionality.\nThe constitutionality of Social Security is intricately linked to the evolving nature of U.S. Supreme Court jurisprudence on federal power (the 20th century saw a dramatic increase in allowed congressional action). When Social Security was first passed, there were significant questions over its constitutionality as the Court had found another pension scheme, the original Railroad Retirement Act, to violate the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment. Some, such as University of Chicago law professor Richard Epstein and Harvard University professor Robert Nozick, have argued that Social Security should be unconstitutional.\nIn the 1937, U.S. Supreme Court case of \"Helvering v. Davis\", the Court examined the constitutionality of Social Security when George Davis of the Edison Electric Illuminating Company of Boston sued in connection with the Social Security tax. The U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts first upheld the tax. The District Court judgment was reversed by the Circuit Court of Appeals. Commissioner Guy Helvering of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (now the Internal Revenue Service) took the case to the U.S. Supreme Court, and the Court upheld the validity of the tax.\nDuring the 1930s, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt was in the midst of promoting the passage of a large number of social welfare programs under the New Deal and the U.S. Supreme Court struck down many of those programs (such as the Railroad Retirement Act and the National Recovery Act) as unconstitutional. Modified versions of the affected programs were afterwards approved by the Court, including Social Security.\nWhen \"Helvering v. Davis\" was argued before the Court, the larger issue of constitutionality of the old-age insurance portion of Social Security was not decided. The case was limited to whether the payroll tax was a suitable use of Congress's taxing power. Despite this, no serious challenges regarding the system's constitutionality are now being litigated, and Congress's spending power may be more coextensive, as shown in cases like \"South Dakota v. Dole\" during the Reagan Administration.\nSocial Security number holders with no death date.\nIn 2025, President Donald Trump asserted that the Social Security Administration (SSA) was providing benefits to millions of people between the ages of 110 and 360 years. The SSA does have people in their system who are older than 100 and do not have a recorded death date. An audit report produced by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) in 2023 addresses this issue and states, \u201cat the time of our review, although the Census Bureau estimated approximately 86,000 individuals residing in the United States were age 100 or older, SSA\u2019s Numident included approximately 18.9 million numberholders who were born in 1920 or earlier but had no death information on their Numident record\u201d. The OIG recommended that the SSA input correct death dates to \u201cenhance Government-wide improper payment prevention and detection\u201d. The audit report includes the SSA\u2019s response to the findings of the OIG and states that the SSA was aware of the missing death dates, but that \u201cthe records identified by OIG involve non-beneficiaries and do not involve improper payments. Correcting records for nonbeneficiaries would divert resources from work necessary to administer and manage our programs, which we cannot afford\u201d. The SSA\u2019s estimated cost to correct the issue was between $5.5 and $9.7 million. The potential for fraudulent use of these records was in part nullified in September 2015 when the Social Security Administration implemented an automated system where entitlement to benefits is automatically terminated if individuals are listed as 115 years or older. Therefore, while the SSA does have millions of people over 115 who do not have death dates in the SSA system, their eligibility for benefits have been automatically terminated and they cannot receive social security payments.\nFraud and abuse.\nA 2024 report by the Inspector General of the Social Security Administration found that less than one percent of total social security benefits dispersed over the period 2015\u20132022 were improper payments.\nSocial Security Number theft.\nBecause Social Security Numbers (SSNs) have become useful in identity theft and other forms of crime, various schemes have been perpetrated to acquire valid SSNs and related identity information.\nIn February 2006, the Social Security Administration (SSA) received several reports of an email message being circulated addressed to \"Dear Social Security Number And Card owner\" and purporting to be from the SSA. The message informs the reader \"that someone illegally is using your Social Security number and assuming your identity\" and directs the reader to a website designed to look like the SSA Internet website.\n\"I am outraged that someone would target an unsuspecting public in this manner,\" said Commissioner Jo Anne B. Barnhart. \"I have asked the Inspector General to use all the resources at his command to find and prosecute whoever is perpetrating this fraud.\"\nOnce directed to the phony website, the individual is reportedly asked to confirm his or her identity with \"Social Security and bank information\". Specific information about the individual's credit card number, expiration date and PIN is then requested. \"Whether on our online website or by phone, Social Security will never ask you for your credit card information or your PIN,\" Commissioner Jo Anne B. Barnhart reported.\nSSA Inspector General O'Carroll recommended people always take precautions when giving out personal information. \"You should never provide your Social Security number or other personal information over the Internet or by telephone unless you are extremely confident of the source to whom you are providing the information,\" O'Carroll said.\nIn August 2024, a class-action lawsuit was filed against National Public Data, claiming that the company permitted hackers to steal sensitive private information, including Social Security Numbers, covering millions of individuals. The theft was alleged to have occurred in April 2024. The stolen data contains records for people in the US, UK, and Canada.\nFraud in the acquisition and use of benefits.\nGiven the vast size of the program, fraud sometimes occurs. The SSA has its own investigatory unit to combat and prevent fraud, the Cooperative Disability Investigations Unit (CDIU). The Cooperative Disability Investigations (CDI) Program continues to be one of the most successful initiatives, contributing to the integrity of SSA's disability programs. In addition, when investigating fraud in other SSA programs, the Social Security Administration may request investigatory assistance from other law enforcement agencies including the Office of the Inspector General as well as state and local authorities.\nRestrictions on potentially deceptive communications.\nBecause of the importance of Social Security to millions of Americans, many direct-mail marketers packaged their mailings to resemble official communications from the SSA, hoping recipients would be more likely to open them. In response, Congress amended the Social Security Act in 1988 to prohibit the private use of the phrase \"Social Security\" and several related terms in any way that would convey a false impression of approval from the SSA. The constitutionality of this law (\u00a0https://) was upheld in \"United Seniors Association, Inc. v. Social Security Administration\", 423 F.3d 397 (4th Cir. 2005), cert den 547 U.S. 1162; 126 S.Ct. 2346 (2006) (text at Findlaw).\nPublic economics.\nCurrent recipients.\nThe 2011 annual report by the program's Board of Trustees noted the following: in 2010, 54 million people were receiving Social Security benefits, while 157 million people were paying into the fund; of those receiving benefits, 44 million were receiving retirement benefits and 10 million disability benefits. In 2011, there will be 56 million beneficiaries and 158 million workers paying in. In 2010, total income was $781.1billion and expenditures were $712.5billion, which meant a total net increase in assets of $68.6billion.\nAssets in 2010 were $2.6trillion, an amount that is expected to be adequate to cover the next ten years. In 2023, total income and interest earned on assets were projected to no longer cover expenditures for Social Security, as demographic shifts burden the system. By 2035, the ratio of potential retirees to working age persons will be 37 percent\u00a0\u2013 there will be less than three potential income earners for every retiree in the population. At that rate the Social Security Trust Fund would be exhausted by 2036. In 2024, the estimated year in which funds would be exhausted was 2035.\nSaving behavior.\nSocial Security affects the saving behavior of the people in three different ways. The wealth substitution effect occurs when a person saving for retirement recognizes that the Social Security system will take care of him and decreases his expectations about how much he needs to personally save. The retirement effect occurs when a taxpayer saves more each year in an effort to reduce the total number of years he must work to accumulate enough savings before retirement. The bequest effect occurs when a taxpayer recognizes a decrease in resources stemming from the Social Security tax and compensates by increasing personal savings to cover future expected costs of having children.\nReducing cost of living adjustment (COLA).\nAt present, a retiree's benefit is annually adjusted for inflation to reflect changes in the consumer price index. Some economists argue that the consumer price index overestimates price increases in the economy and therefore is not a suitable metric for adjusting benefits, while others argue that the CPI underestimates the effect of inflation on what retired people actually need to buy to live.\nThe current cost of living adjustment is based on the consumer price index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). The Bureau of Labor Statistics routinely checks the prices of 211 different categories of consumption items in 38 geographical areas to compute 8,018 item-area indices. Many other indices are computed as weighted averages of these base indices. CPI-W is based on a market basket of goods and services consumed by urban wage earners and clerical workers. The weights for that index are updated in January of every even-numbered year. \nPeople who say the CPI-W overestimates inflation recommend updating the weights each month; this produces the Chained Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (C-CPI-U). People who say the C-CPI-U [or the unchained CPI for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U)] disadvantages the elderly, point out that seniors consume more medical care than younger people, and that the costs of medical care have been rising faster than inflation in other parts of the economy. According to this view, the costs of the things the elderly buy have been rising faster than the market basket averaged to obtain CPI-W, CPI-U or C-CPI-U. Some have recommended fixing this by using a CPI for the Elderly (CPI-E).\nIn 2003, economics researchers Hobijn and Lagakos estimated that the Social Security trust fund would run out of money in 40 years using CPI-W and in 35 years using CPI-E.\nConsumption.\nAccording to a 2016 study in the \"American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics\", the Social Security benefit increases from 1952 to 1991 have a \"large, immediate, and significant positive response of consumption\".\nHealth outcomes.\nAccording to a 2021 study, the expansion of old-age assistance under the 1935 Social Security Act reduced mortality among the elderly by 30\u201339%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48732", "revid": "32005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48732", "title": "Pyramid scheme", "text": "Type of unsustainable business model\nA pyramid scheme is a business model which, rather than earning money (or providing returns on investments) by sale of legitimate products to an end consumer, mainly earns money by recruiting new members with the promise of payments (or services). As the number of members multiplies, recruiting quickly becomes increasingly difficult until it is impossible, and therefore most of the newer recruits do not make a profit. As such, pyramid schemes are unsustainable. The unsustainable nature of pyramid schemes has led to most countries outlawing them as a form of fraud.\nPyramid schemes have existed since at least the mid-to-late 19th century in different guises. Some multi-level marketing plans have been classified as pyramid schemes.\nConcept and basic models.\nIn a pyramid scheme, an organization compels individuals who wish to join to make a payment. In exchange, the organization promises its new members a share of the money taken from every additional member that they recruit. The directors of the organization (those at the top of the pyramid) also receive a share of these payments. For the directors, the scheme is potentially lucrative\u2014whether or not they do any work, the organization's membership has a strong incentive to continue recruiting and funneling money to the top of the pyramid.\nSuch organizations seldom involve sales of products or services with value. Without creating any goods or services, the only revenue streams for the scheme are recruiting more members or soliciting more money from current members. The behavior of pyramid schemes follows the mathematics concerning exponential growth quite closely. Each level of the pyramid is much larger than the one before it. For a pyramid scheme to make money for everyone who enrolls in it, it would have to expand indefinitely. When the scheme inevitably runs out of new recruits, lacking other sources of revenue, it collapses. Since the biggest terms in this geometric sequence are at the end, most people will be in the lower levels of the pyramid; accordingly, the bottom layer of the pyramid contains the most people. The people working for pyramid schemes try to promote the actual company instead of the product they are selling. Eventually, all of the people at the lower levels of the pyramid do not make any money; only the people at the top turn a profit.\nPeople in the upper layers of the pyramid typically profit, while those in the lower layers typically lose money. Since most of the members in the scheme are at the bottom, most participants will not make any money. In particular, when the scheme collapses, most members will be in the bottom layers and thus will not have any opportunity to profit from the scheme; still, they will have already paid to join. Therefore, a pyramid scheme is characterized by a few people (including the creators of the scheme) making large amounts of money, while subsequent members lose money. For this reason, they are considered scams.\nThe \"eight ball\" model.\nMany pyramids are more sophisticated than the simple model. These recognize that recruiting a large number of others into a scheme can be difficult, so a seemingly simpler model is used. In this model each person must recruit two others, but the ease of achieving this is offset because the depth required to recoup any money also increases. The scheme requires a person to recruit two others, who must each recruit two others, and so on.\nPrior instances of this scheme have been called the \"Airplane Game\" and the four tiers labelled as \"captain\", \"co-pilot\", \"crew\", and \"passenger\" to denote a person's level. Another instance was called the \"Original Dinner Party\" which labeled the tiers as \"dessert\", \"main course\", \"side salad\", and \"appetizer\". A person on the \"dessert\" course is the one at the top of the tree. Another variant, \"Treasure Traders\", variously used gemology terms such as \"polishers\", \"stone cutters\", etc. One version called the Abundance Fractal uses the four elements as the names of tiers: \"Fire\", \"Air\", \"Earth\", and \"Water\". A more recent variation known as the Living Workshop takes the names of plants, calling the tiers \"seed\", \"sapling\", \"blossom\", and \"lotus\".\nSuch schemes may try to downplay their pyramid nature by referring to themselves as \"gifting circles\" with money being \"gifted\". Others focus on sharing circles or educational themes around \"abundance\" to divert attention away from the unsustainable structure. Popular schemes such as \"Women Empowering Women\" do exactly this.\nWhichever euphemism is used, there are 15 total people in four tiers (1 + 2 + 4 + 8) in the scheme\u2014with the Airplane Game as the example, the person at the top of this tree is the \"captain\", the two below are \"co-pilots\", the four below are \"crew\", and the bottom eight joiners are the \"passengers\".\nThe eight passengers must each pay (or \"gift\") a sum (e.g., $5,000) to join the scheme. This sum (e.g., $40,000) goes to the captain, who leaves, with everyone remaining moving up one tier. There are now two new captains so the group splits in two with each group requiring eight new passengers. A person who joins the scheme as a passenger will not see a return until they advance through the crew and co-pilot tiers and exit the scheme as a captain. Therefore, the participants in the bottom three tiers of the pyramid lose their money if the scheme collapses.\nIf a person is using this model as a scam, the confidence trickster would take the majority of the money. They would do this by filling in the first three tiers (with one, two, and four people) with phony names, ensuring they get the first seven payouts, at eight times the buy-in sum, without paying anything themselves. So if the buy-in were $5,000, they would receive $40,000, paid for by the first eight investors. They would continue to buy in underneath the real investors, and promote and prolong the scheme for as long as possible to allow them to skim even more from it before it collapses.\nAlthough the \"captain\" is the person at the top of the tree, having received the payment from the eight paying passengers, once they leave the scheme they are able to re-enter the pyramid as a \"passenger\" and hopefully recruit enough to reach captain again, thereby earning a second payout.\nBlessing Loom.\nSimilar to the eight ball model, the Blessing Loom tricks potential investors by claiming to turn $100 into $800. This scheme has a circular structure, as increases in new recruits pushes individuals closer to the center of the circle, hence the \"Loom\" in the name. Each participant needs to recruit two people without providing them with any service or product. The scam often resurfaces online across the globe, under different aliases such as \"loom circle\" or \"fractal mandala\". The Blessing Loom scheme has been ruled as illegal in multiple US cities.\nFranchise fraud.\nFranchise fraud is defined by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation as a pyramid scheme. The FBI website states:\nPyramid schemes\u2014also referred to as franchise fraud or chain referral schemes\u2014are marketing and investment frauds in which an individual is offered a distributorship or franchise to market a particular product. The real profit is earned, not by the sale of the product, but by the sale of new distributorships. Emphasis on selling franchises rather than the product eventually leads to a point where the supply of potential investors is exhausted and the pyramid collapses.\nMatrix schemes.\nMatrix schemes use the same fraudulent, unsustainable system as a pyramid; here, the participants pay to join a waiting list for a desirable product, which only a fraction of them can ever receive. Since matrix schemes follow the same laws of geometric progression as pyramids, they are subsequently as doomed to collapse.\nSuch schemes operate as a queue, where the person at head of the queue receives an item such as a television, games console, digital camcorder, etc. when a certain number of new people join the end of the queue. For example, ten joiners may be required for the person at the front to receive their item and leave the queue. Each joiner is required to buy an expensive but potentially worthless item, such as an e-book, for their position in the queue. The scheme organizer profits because the income from joiners far exceeds the cost of sending out the item to the person at the front. Organizers can further profit by starting a scheme with a queue with shill names that must be cleared out before genuine people get to the front. The scheme collapses when no more people are willing to join the queue.\nSchemes may not reveal, or may attempt to exaggerate, a prospective joiner's queue position, a condition that essentially means the scheme is a lottery. Some countries have ruled that matrix schemes are illegal on that basis.\nRelation to Ponzi schemes.\nWhile often confused with each other, pyramid schemes and Ponzi schemes are different. Pyramid schemes are based on network marketing, where each person in the pyramid is tasked with bringing in their own subordinates and in turn profiting from their sales or recruitments. This fails because it essentially requires an infinite number of people to join the company. In a Ponzi scheme, participants are promised returns on \"investments\", supposedly into stocks or goods, but which are actually paid for by new investors, while a central leading figure takes a portion as profit.\nConnection to multi-level marketing.\nSome multi-level marketing (MLM) companies operate as pyramid schemes and consumers often confuse legitimate multi-level marketing with pyramid schemes.\nAccording to the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) legitimate MLM businesses are distinguished from pyramid schemes by participants making money primarily from product sales, rather than recruitment:\nNot all multi-level marketing plans are legitimate. If the money you make is based on your sales to the public, it may be a legitimate multilevel marketing plan. If the money you make is based on the number of people you recruit and your sales to them, it's probably not. It could be a pyramid scheme.\nIn contrast, pyramid schemes \"may purport to sell a product\", but often \"simply use the product to hide their pyramid structure\". While some people call MLMs in general \"pyramid selling\", others use the term to denote an illegal pyramid scheme masquerading as a MLM.\nThe U.S. Federal Trade Commission warns against becoming involved \"in plans where the money you make is based primarily on the number of distributors you recruit and your sales to them, rather than on your sales to people outside the plan who intend to use the products.\"\nSome commentators contend that MLMs in general are nothing more than legalized pyramid schemes. Local laws may vary, and they take different actions toward pyramid schemes, but multi-level-marketing is often legal. Multi-level marketing lobbying groups have pressured US government regulators to maintain the legal status of such schemes.\nLegality.\nPyramid schemes are illegal in many countries or regions including Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, China, Colombia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, the Maldives, Mexico, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,\nPeru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, South Africa, Singapore, Spain, Ethiopia, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States.\nNotable cases.\nThe 1997 Albanian civil unrest was partially motivated by the collapse of Ponzi schemes; however, they were widely referred to as pyramid schemes due to their prevalence in Albanian society.\nIn 2003, the United States Federal Trade Commission (FTC) disclosed what it called an Internet-based \"pyramid scam.\" Its complaint states that customers would pay a registration fee to join a program that called itself an \"internet mall\" and purchase a package of goods and services such as internet mail, and that the company offered \"significant commissions\" to consumers who purchased and resold the package. The FTC alleged that the company's program was instead and in reality a pyramid scheme that did not disclose that most consumers' money would be kept, and that it gave affiliates material that allowed them to scam others.\nWinCapita was a scheme run by Finnish criminals that involved about \u20ac100\u00a0million. The scheme started in 2005.\nIn early 2006, Ireland was hit by a wave of schemes with major activity in Cork and Galway. Participants were asked to contribute \u20ac20,000 each to a \"Liberty\" scheme which followed the classic eight-ball model. Payments were made in Munich, Germany, to skirt Irish tax laws concerning gifts. Spin-off schemes called \"Speedball\" and \"People in Profit\" prompted a number of violent incidents and calls were made by politicians to tighten existing legislation. Ireland has launched a website to better educate consumers to pyramid schemes and other scams.\nOn 12 November 2008, riots broke out in the municipalities of Pasto, Tumaco, Popay\u00e1n and Santander de Quilichao, Colombia, after the collapse of several pyramid schemes. Thousands of victims had invested their money in pyramids that promised them extraordinary interest rates. The lack of regulatory laws allowed those pyramids to grow excessively for several years. Finally, after the riots, the Colombian government was forced to declare the country in a state of economic emergency to seize and stop those schemes. Several of the pyramid's managers were arrested, and prosecuted for the crime of \"illegal massive money reception.\"\nThe \"Kyiv Post\" reported on 26 November 2008 that American citizen Robert Fletcher (Robert T. Fletcher III; aka \"Rob\") was arrested by the SBU (Ukraine State Police) after being accused by Ukrainian investors of running a Ponzi scheme and associated pyramid scam netting US$20\u00a0million. (The \"Kyiv Post\" also reported that some estimates were as high as US$150\u00a0million.)\nIn the United Kingdom in 2008 and 2009, a \u00a321\u00a0million pyramid scheme named 'Give and Take' involved at least 10,000 victims in the south-west of England and South Wales. Leaders of the scheme were prosecuted and served time in jail before being ordered to pay \u00a3500,000 in compensation and costs in 2015. The cost of bringing the prosecution was in excess of \u00a31.4\u00a0million.\nA number of authorities around the world declared TVI Express to be a pyramid scheme in 2010 and 2011, including the Australian Competition &amp; Consumer Commission, the Bank of Namibia, and the Central Bank of Lesotho. TVI Express, operated by Tarun Trikha from India, has apparently recruited hundreds of thousands of \"investors\", very few of whom, it is reported, have recouped any of their investment.\nBurnLounge, Inc. was a multi-level marketing digital music store founded in 2004 and based in New York City. By 2006 the company reported 30,000 members using the site to sell music through its network. In 2007, the Federal Trade Commission sued the company for being an illegal pyramid scheme. The company lost the suit in 2012, and lost appeal in June 2014. In June 2015, the FTC began returning $1.9\u00a0million to people who had lost money in the scheme.\nIn August 2015, the United States FTC filed a lawsuit against Vemma Nutrition Company, an Arizona-based dietary supplement Multi-Level Marketing firm, accused of operating an illegal pyramid scheme. In December 2016, Vemma agreed to a $238\u00a0million settlement with the FTC, which banned the company from \"pyramid scheme practices\" including recruitment-focused business ventures, deceptive income claims, and unsubstantiated health claims.\nIn March 2017, Ufun Store, registered as an online business for its members as a direct-sales company, was declared to be operating a pyramid scheme in Thailand. The Criminal Court handed down prison terms totaling 12,265 to 12,267 years to 22 people convicted over the scheme, which conned about 120,000 people out of more than 20\u00a0billion baht.\nThe Airplane Game scheme resurfaced in 2020 as a savings club by the name of the Blessing Loom, Blessing Circle, Sending Flower, Gifting Flower, and so on. It is also misrepresented as a Sou-Sou, a legitimate savings club model where the number of people paying into the pot is fixed and each person gets a payout regularly. This is distinct from the pyramid scheme variation making use of the hierarchical flower model, where new members are continually recruited into the group by people at the edges of the flower. This re-imagining of the old Airplane/8-ball model is making a resurgence on social media platforms such as Instagram and Zoom.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48733", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48733", "title": "Ragnar Lodbrok", "text": "Legendary king of Denmark and Sweden\nRagnar Lodbrok (Old Norse: \"Ragnarr lo\u00f0br\u00f3k\", lit.\u2009'Ragnar hairy-breeches'), according to legends, was a Viking hero and a Swedish and Danish king.\nHe is known from Old Norse poetry of the Viking Age, Icelandic sagas, and near-contemporary chronicles. According to traditional literature, Ragnar distinguished himself by conducting many raids against the British Isles and the Carolingian Empire during the 9th century. He also appears in Norse legends, and according to the legendary sagas \"Tale of Ragnar's Sons\" and a \"Saga about Certain Ancient Kings\", Ragnar Lodbrok's father has been given as the legendary king of the Swedes, Sigurd Ring.\nAccounts.\nIcelandic sagas.\nAccording to the \"Tale of Ragnar Lodbrok\", \"Tale of Ragnar's Sons\", \"Heimskringla\", \"Hervarar saga ok Hei\u00f0reks\", \"S\u00f6gubrot af nokkrum fornkonungum\", and many other Icelandic sources, Ragnar was the son of the king of Sweden Sigurd Ring. Nearly all of the sagas agree that the Danish king Randver was Sigurd's father, with the \"Hervarar saga\" citing his wife as \u00c5sa, the daughter of King Harald of the Red Moustache from Norway. The accounts further tell that Randver was a grandson of the legendary Scandinavian king Ivar Vidfamne by his daughter Aud (whom the \"Hervarar saga\" calls Alfhild). After the death of King Ivar Vidfamne, Aud's eldest son by the Danish king Hr\u0153rekr Ringslinger, Harald, conquered all of his grandfather's territory and became known as Harald Wartooth. Harald's nephew Sigurd Ring became the chief king of Sweden after Randver's death (Denmark according to the \"Hervarar saga\"), presumably as the subking of Harald. Sigurd and Harald fought the Battle of the Br\u00e1vellir (Br\u00e5valla) on the plains of \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland, where Harald and many of his men died. Sigurd then ruled Sweden and Denmark (being sometimes identified with a Danish king Sigfred who ruled from about 770 until his death prior to 804). He sired a son with the princess Alfhild of the petty kingdom of \u00c1lfheimr, Ragnar Lodbrok, who succeeded him. Eysteinn Beli, who according to the \"Hervarar Saga\" was Harald Wartooth's son, ruled Sweden sometime after Sigurd until he was slain by the sons of Ragnar and Aslaug.\nIn their accounts of his reign, the \"fornaldars\u01ebgur\" (Legendary sagas, or sagas of Scandinavian prehistory), tell more about Ragnar's marriages than about feats of warfare. In the https://, Ragnar is introduced by introducing his alleged father who was Sigurd Ring that according to the Saga, ruled over Denmark. In the Saga, Ragnar is Introduced as a big man, handsome and well-provided with wisdom. He was good to his men and cruel to his enemies. Ragnar's first account in the saga was to assemble an army, a fleet of ships, becoming a great warrior and slaying a dragon in the Norse lands of G\u00f6taland.\nAccording to the \"S\u00f6gubrot\", \"he was the biggest and fairest of men that human eyes have seen, and he was like his mother in appearance and took after her kin\". He first killed a giant snake that guarded the abode of the Geatish jarl Herrau\u00f0's daughter Thora Borgarhjort, thereby winning her as his wife. The unusual protective clothes that Ragnar wore when attacking the serpent earned him the nickname Lodbrok. His sons with Thora were Erik and Agnar. After Thora died, he discovered Kr\u00e1ka, a woman of outstanding beauty and wisdom living with a poor peasant couple in Norway, and married her. This marriage resulted in the sons Ivar the Boneless, Bj\u00f6rn Ironside, Hvitserk, Ragnvald, and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye. Kr\u00e1ka was later revealed to actually be Aslaug, a secret daughter of the renowned hero Sigurd Fafnesbane. As the sons grew up to become renowned warriors, Ragnar, not wishing to be outdone, resolved to conquer England with merely two ships. He was, however, defeated by superior Northumbrian forces and was thrown into a snake pit to die. The \"Saga of Ragnar Lodbrok\", \"Tale of Ragnar's Sons\", and \"Heimskringla\" all tell of the Great Heathen Army that invaded England at around 866, led by the sons of Ragnar Lodbrok to wreak revenge against King \u00c6lla of Northumbria who is told to have captured and executed Ragnar.\nDanish sources.\nThe (c.\u20091138) mentions Lodbrok (Lothpardus) as a father to the utterly cruel Norse King Ywar (rex crudelissimus Normannorum Ywar) and his brothers, Inguar (a double of Ywar), Ubbi, Byorn and Ulf, who rule the northern peoples. They call on the various Danish petty kings to help them ruin the realm of the Franks. Ywar successfully attacks the kingdoms of Britain, though not as an act of revenge as in the Icelandic sagas. The chronicle of Sven Aggesen (c.\u20091190) is the first Danish text that mentions the full name, Regnerus Lothbrogh. His son Sigurd invades Denmark and kills its king, whose daughter he marries as he takes over the throne. Their son in turn is Knut, ancestor of the later Danish kings.\nNeither of these sources mentions Ragnar Lodbrok as a Danish ruler. The first to do so is Saxo Grammaticus in his work (c.\u20091200). This work mixes Norse legend with data about Danish history derived from the chronicle of Adam of Bremen (c.\u20091075). Here Ragnar's father Sigurd Ring is a Norwegian prince married to a Danish princess, and different from the victor of Br\u00e1vellir (who had flourished about thirteen generations earlier). Sigurd Ring and his cousin and rival Ring (that is, Sigfred and Anulo of recorded history, d. 812) are both killed in battle, whereupon Ragnar is elevated to the Danish kingship (identified by Saxo with Ragnfred, d. 814). His first deed is the defeat of the Swedish king Fr\u00f6, who has killed Ragnar's grandfather. Ragnar is assisted in this by a ferocious shield-maiden named Ladgerda (Lagertha), whom Ragnar forces to marry him after killing a bear and a great hound to win her hand. In this marriage, he sires the son Fridleif and two daughters. Ragnar later repudiates his marriage to Ladgerda and marries Thora Borgarhjort, a daughter of the Swedish king Herrau\u00f0r, after killing two venomous giant snakes that guard Thora's residence. His sons with Thora are Radbard, Dunvat, Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye, Bj\u00f6rn Ironside, Agnar and Ivar the Boneless. From a non-marital relationship with an unnamed woman (described only as the daughter of a man named Esbj\u00f8rn), Ragnar fathered Ubbe. Another, final marriage to Svanlaug (possibly another name for Aslaug) produces another three sons: Ragnvald, Eric Weatherhat and Hvitserk.\nThe sons were installed as sub-kings in various conquered territories. Ragnar led a Viking expedition to England and killed its king, Hama, before killing the earls of Scotland and installing Sigurd Snake-in-the Eye and Radbard as governors. Norway was also subjugated, and Fridleif was made ruler there and in Orkney. Later on, Ragnar with three sons invaded Sweden where a new king called S\u00f6rle had appeared and withheld the heritage of Thora's sons. S\u00f6rle and his army were massacred, and Bj\u00f6rn Ironside was installed on the throne. Sometime later Bj\u00f6rn was put in charge of Norway, while Ragnar appointed another son, Eric Weatherhat, as ruler in Sweden; he was subsequently killed by a certain Eysteinn. One of the sons, Ubbe, revolted against his father at the instigation of his maternal grandfather Esbj\u00f8rn, and could only be defeated and captured with utmost effort. Saxo moreover tells of repeated expeditions to the British Isles, one of which cost the lives of Dunvat and Radbard. \u00c6lla, son of Hama, with the help of allies known collectively as the \"Galli\" \u2013 possibly a group of Norse-Gaels (who were known in Old Irish as \"Gall-Go\u00eddil\"), expelled Ragnar's sub-ruler Ivar the Boneless from England and remained a persistent enemy. Finally, the Scythians were forced to accept Hvitserk as their ruler. In the end, Hvitserk was treacherously captured by the Hellespontian prince Daxon and burnt alive with his own admission. Hearing this, Ragnar led an expedition to Kievan Rus' and captured Daxon who was spared and exiled.\nUnlike the Icelandic sources, Saxo's account of Ragnar Lodbrok's reign is largely a catalog of successful Viking invasions over an enormous geographical area. Among the seaborne expeditions was one against the Bjarmians and Finns (Saami) in the Arctic north. The Bjarmian use of magic spells caused foul weather and the sudden death of many Danish invaders, and the Finnish archers on skis turned out to be a formidable foe. Eventually, these two tribes were put to flight, and the Bjarmian king was slain. The historical king Harald Klak is by Saxo (based on a passage in Adam's chronicle) made into another persistent enemy of Ragnar, who several times incited the Jutes and Scanians to rebel, but was regularly defeated. After the last victory over Harald, Ragnar learned that King \u00c6lla had massacred Ragnar's men on Ireland. Incensed, he attacked the English king with his fleet but was captured and thrown to his death in the snake pit \u2013 the fate ascribed by tradition to the early Burgundian king Gunnar, as recounted in the Icelandic sagas. In spite of all his praise for Ragnar Lodbrok, Saxo also considers his fate as God's rightful vengeance for the contempt he had shown the Christian religion.\nPoetic and epigraphic sources.\nWhile the narrative Norse sources date from the 12th and 13th centuries, there are also many older poems that mention him and his kin. The \"Ragnarsdr\u00e1pa\", ostensibly composed by Bragi Boddason in the 9th century, praises a Ragnar, son of Sigurd, for a richly decorated shield that the poet has received. The shield depicts the assault on J\u00f6rmunrek, the Hja\u00f0ningav\u00edg tale, the ploughing of Gefjon, and Thor's struggle with the Midgard Serpent. Recent scholarship has suggested that the poem is in fact from c. 1000 and celebrates the Norse reconquest of England. The four tales depicted on the shield would then symbolize four aspects of the Lodbrok saga (the initial defeat of the sons of Lodbrok in England due to recklessness, Ivar the Boneless's deceitful approach to King \u00c6lla, Ivar's cunning snatching of land from \u00c6lla, Ragnar's struggle against the giant serpent in order to win Thora). The \"Knutsdrapa\" of Sigvat Thordarson (c. 1038) mentions the death of \u00c6lla at the hands of Ivar in York, who \"carved the eagle on \u00c6lla's back\". From this, the story of the atrocious revenge of Lodbrok's sons already seems to be present. The reference to a \"blood eagle\" punishment has, however, been much debated by modern scholars. Another lay, \"Krakumal\", put in the mouth of the dying Ragnar in the snake pit, recounts the exploits of Ragnar and mentions battles over a wide geographical area, several relating to the British Isles. The poem's name, \"Kr\u00e1ka's lay\", alludes to Ragnar's wife's Kr\u00e1ka, though modern philologists commonly date it to the 12th century in its present form.\nThe poem the \"Lay of Kraka\" or \"Krakumal\" tells the last words of Ragnar Lothbrok during his execution by King Aellla of the Kingdom of Northumbria. In the poem Ragnar makes its usual mentions of different Norse divinities and magical elements such as Valhalla as in the end of the poem Ragnar says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere is one runic inscription mentioning Lodbrok, carved on the prehistorical tumulus of Maeshowe on Orkney in the early 12th century. It reads: \"This howe was built a long time before Lodbrok's. Her sons, they were bold; scarcely ever were there such tall men of their hands\". The expression \"her sons\" has given rise to the theory that Lodbrok was originally thought of as a woman, mother of the historically known sons.\nFrankish accounts of a 9th-century Viking leader.\nThe Siege of Paris and the Sack of Paris of 845 were the culmination of a Viking invasion of the kingdom of the West Franks. The Viking forces were led by a Norse chieftain named \"Reginherus\", or Ragnar. This Ragnar has often been tentatively identified with the legendary saga figure Ragnar Lodbrok, but the accuracy of this is disputed by historians. Ragnar Lodbrok is also sometimes identified with a Ragnar who was awarded land in Torhout, Flanders, by Charles the Bald in about 841 but eventually lost the land as well as the favour of the King. Ragnar's Vikings raided Rouen on their way up the Seine in 845 and in response to the invasion, determined not to let the royal Abbey of Saint-Denis (near Paris) be destroyed, Charles assembled an army which he divided into two parts, one for each side of the river. Ragnar attacked and defeated one of the divisions of the smaller Frankish army, took 111 of their men as prisoners and hanged them on an island on the Seine to honour the Norse god Odin, as well as to incite terror in the remaining Frankish forces. Ragnar's fleet made it back to his overlord, the Danish King Horik I, but Ragnar soon died from a violent illness that also spread in Denmark.\nLater continental accounts.\nAmong the oldest texts to mention the name Lodbrok is the Norman history of William of Jumi\u00e8ges from c. 1070. According to William, the Danish kings of old had the custom to expel the younger sons from the kingdom to have them out of the way. It was during the time this practice was in fashion that King Lodbrok succeeded his unnamed father on the Danish throne. After gaining power, he honoured the said custom and ordered his junior son Bj\u00f6rn Ironside to leave his realm. Bj\u00f6rn thus left Denmark with a considerable fleet and started to ravage in West Francia and later the Mediterranean. Roughly contemporary with William is Adam of Bremen whose history of the Archbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen contains many traditions about Viking Age Scandinavia. In a passage referring to the Viking raids of the late 9th century, he mentions the Danish or Norse pirates Horich, Orwig, Gotafrid, Rudolf, and Inguar (Ivar). This Ivar is, in particular, seen as a cruel persecutor of Christians, and a son of Lodbrok (Inguar, filius Lodparchi).\nAnglo-Saxon and Irish accounts of the father of Ivar and Halfdan.\nAccording to the contemporary \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" and Asser's \"Life of Alfred\", in 878 the \"brother of Hingwar and Healfden\", with a naval fleet, a contingent of the Great Heathen Army invaded Devon in England and fought the Battle of Cynwit. There the Vikings lost, their king slain and many dead, with few escaping to their ships. After the battle the Saxons took great plunder, and among other things the banner called \"Raven\". The early 12th century \"Annals of St Neots\" further state that \"they say that the three sisters of Hingwar and Hubba, daughters of Lodebroch (Lodbrok), wove that flag and got it ready in one day. They say, moreover, that in every battle, wherever the flag went before them, if they were to gain the victory, a live crow would appear flying on the middle of the flag; but if they were doomed to be defeated, it would hang down motionless, and this was often proved to be so.\" This is among the earlier references to the legendary hero Ragnar Lodbrok.\nThe Irish from the 12th century, with information deriving from earlier annals, mentions king Halfdan (d. 877) under the name \"mac Ragnaill\". The form Ragnall may refer to either Ragnvald or Ragnar and the entry is a strong indication that the name of Ivar's and Halfdan's father was really Ragnar or a similar name. The early 11th century \"Three Fragments\" contains a passage that gives a semi-legendary background to the capture of York by the Vikings in 866. The two younger sons of Halfdan, King of Lochlann, expelled the eldest son, Ragnall, who sailed to the Orkney islands with his three sons and settled there. Two of the sons later raided the English and Franks, proceeding to plunder in the Mediterranean. One of them learned from a vision that Ragnall had fought a battle where the third son had been slain and in which he himself had most likely perished. The two Viking sons then returned home with a lot of dark-skinned captives. It has been hypothesized that this is an Irish version of \"Ragnar Lodbrok's saga\", the Mediterranean expedition being a historical event taking place in 859-61.\nMythical accounts of Ragnar.\n\"The Saga of Ragnar Lothbrok\".\nIn the \"Saga of Ragnar Lothbrok\" () This Icelandic saga, composed in the 13th century, is one of the most detailed sources about Ragnar's life and exploits. It describes Ragnar's rise to fame, his marriages (including to the shieldmaiden Lagertha and the noblewoman Thora Borgarhjort), and his legendary deeds.\nThe saga highlights Ragnar's divine connections, particularly his descent from Odin, framing him as a semi-mythical hero blessed with the qualities associated with the Allfather, such as wisdom, courage, and poetic speech. The first account of Ragnar in the saga is the tale of Ragnar killing a dragon, showing the close relation between Ragnar and legendary/magical deeds.\nWhen the Saga accounts Ragnar's death the story also tells \"So Ragnar was let down into a serpent-pit, and he sat there a long time while none of the snakes would bite him. And some people said, 'This is a great man; no weapons would bite him today, and now the serpents will not bite him.'\"\n\"Tale of Ragnar's Sons\".\nThe \"Tale of Ragnar's Sons\" () is a short tale that complements the \"Saga of Ragnar Lothbrok\" and focuses on the exploits of Ragnar's sons most notably Ivar the Boneless, Bjorn Ironside, Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye, and Hvitserk.\nThe sons are portrayed as avenging their father's death and continuing his legacy. Their divine lineage through Ragnar and their heroic deeds further enhance Ragnar's legendary status.\n\"Gesta Danorum\" by Saxo Grammaticus.\nThe \"Gesta Danorum\", written in Latin in the 12th century, this work by the Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus provides one of the earliest accounts of Ragnar and his feats. Saxo portrays Ragnar as a Danish king and warrior, blending historical and mythical elements. While Saxo does not explicitly emphasize Ragnar's descent from Odin, the narrative incorporates divine and heroic motifs that align with Norse tradition.\nNorse skaldic poetry.\nPoetic references to Ragnar or figures resembling him appear in Norse skaldic poetry and eddic poems, often linking heroes to divine ancestry as a way of enhancing their heroic status. In the \"Kr\u00e1kum\u00e1l,\" many of the poem's stanzas have Ragnar making claims about Valhalla, Odin and the Valkyrs, showing how Ragnar was closely related with Norse Mythology.\nRagnar's sons.\nThe Great Heathen Army is said to have been led by the sons of Ragnar Lodbrok, to wreak revenge against King \u00c6lla of Northumbria who had previously executed Ragnar by casting him into a pit full of venomous snakes. Among the organizers were at least some of the brothers: Ivar the Boneless, Ubba, Halfdan, Bj\u00f6rn Ironside, Hvitserk, and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye, all of whom are known as historical figures, save the slightly more dubious Hvitserk. Ivar the Boneless was the leader of the Great Heathen Army from 865 to 870, but he disappears from English historical accounts after 870. The Anglo-Saxon chronicler \u00c6thelweard records Ivar's death as 870. Halfdan Ragnarsson became the leader of the Great Heathen Army in about 870 and he led it in an invasion of Wessex. A great number of Viking warriors arrived from Scandinavia, as part of the Great Summer Army, led by King Bagsecg of Denmark, bolstering the ranks of Halfdan's army.\nAccording to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", the Danes battled the West Saxons nine times, including the Battle of Ashdown on 8 January 871, where Bagsecg was killed. Halfdan accepted a truce from the future Alfred the Great, newly crowned king of Wessex. After Bagsecg's death, Halfdan was the only remaining king of the invading host. He may also have been a King of part of Denmark (Jutland?), since a co-ruler Halfdan is mentioned in Frankish sources in 873. According to late sagas Bj\u00f6rn Ironside became King of Sweden and Uppsala, although this presents chronological inconsistencies. Bj\u00f6rn had two sons, Erik and Refil Bj\u00f6rnsson. His son Erik became the next king of Sweden, and was succeeded in turn by Erik Refilsson, the son of Refil. Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye is perhaps the same person as Sigfred, brother of Halfdan, who was king in Denmark together with Halfdan in 873. According to the sagas Sigurd became King of Zealand, Sk\u00e5ne and the lesser Danish Isles. Sigfred-Sigurd possibly succeeded his brother Halfdan as King of entire Denmark in about 877, and may be the Viking king Sigfred who was killed in West Francia in 887.\nRagnar's historical relevance.\nConquest and raids.\nRagnar Lodbrok is famously associated with several daring raids, including the Siege of Paris in 845 CE and expeditions in England. These raids encapsulate the Viking era's maritime prowess and opportunistic expansion. In the \"https://\" the saga tells the different exploits and raids made by Ragnar as well as in the Annals of St. Bertin the author talks about the chieftain Reginherus or Ragnar's exploits and raiding in medieval Frankia.\nSymbol of Viking ambition.\nThe legends of Ragnar Lodbrok emphasize the Norse pursuit of glory, honor, and wealth. The stories of Ragnar's courage and cunning, including his use of a fleet of ships to breach Paris, reflect the strategic brilliance attributed to Viking leaders.\nConnection to historical figures.\nRagnar is linked to historically attested figures such as his supposed sons Ivar the Boneless, Bj\u00f6rn Ironside, and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye. These sons are known for their roles in Viking invasions of England, as explained in both the \"https://\" and the \"Tale of Ragnar's Sons,\" including the establishment of the Danelaw.\nMythical origins and death.\nThe Sagas portray Ragnar as descended from Odin, tying him to the divine and emphasizing his extraordinary qualities. His death, allegedly in a pit of venomous snakes ordered by King Ella of Northumbria, is portrayed as a moment of stoic heroism, enhancing his mythic status.\nLiterary influence.\nRagnar's story is preserved in medieval texts such as \"https://\" and Saxo Grammaticus's \"Gesta Danorum\". These works helped to shape and form the myth and the legends of the Viking hero and inspired later historical and literary traditions.\nInspiration for national identity.\nIn Scandinavian history, Ragnar Lodbrok and similar legendary figures have served as symbols of national pride and resilience, particularly during periods of cultural revival.\nRagnar's role on warrior aristocracy.\nRagnar Lodbrok's legendary status as a Viking chieftain and hero exemplifies the warrior aristocracy that defined Viking society during the early medieval period. The warrior aristocracy was a class of elite warriors who wielded political power, wealth, and influence based on their martial prowess, leadership, and ability to secure loyalty through plunder and patronage. In the poem \"H\u00e1vam\u00e1l\", many different rules are highlighted to show what a good Norse warrior ought to be. Ragnar's life is easily comparable to the different rules highlighted in the \"H\u00e1vam\u00e1l\". Ragnar's role within this societal structure highlights the values and dynamics of Viking leadership.\nWarlord and chieftain.\nRagnar is depicted as a charismatic and strategic leader who led numerous successful raids across Europe, including England and Francia. These exploits elevated his status as a powerful chieftain and warlord within the Viking hierarchy. His ability to gather and command loyal warriors was central to his influence, as a successful Viking leader depended on retaining a retinue of well-armed and motivated followers.\nPursuit of wealth and glory.\nIn Viking society, wealth and fame were essential to a leader's prestige. In the Norse poem \"H\u00e1vam\u00e1l\" many of the stanzas tell about the relevance of wealth, fame and glory. In one of the stanzas from the \"H\u00e1vam\u00e1l\", the poem says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRagnar's legendary exploits, such as his siege of Paris in 845 CE, illustrate his role in securing riches and reputation for himself and his men. The warrior aristocracy was sustained through the acquisition of plunder and tribute, and Ragnar's reputed success in these endeavors exemplify the ideals of Viking leadership.\nKinship and legacy.\nRagnar's role as a progenitor of a line of prominent Viking leaders, such as his legendary sons Ivar the Boneless, Bjorn Ironside, and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye, help explain the importance of kinship ties in maintaining aristocratic power. His sons' significant roles in Viking conquests and the establishment of the Danelaw reflect how Ragnar's legacy reinforced the continuity of aristocratic dominance.\nRole in Viking expansion.\nRagnar's exploits exemplify the broader ambitions of the Viking warrior aristocracy, which sought to expand their influence through exploration, trade, and conquest. His legendary journeys to England and beyond reflect the aristocracy's role in driving Viking expansion and shaping early medieval Europe.\nSources and historical accuracy.\nWhereas Ragnar's sons Ivar the Boneless, Halfdan Ragnarsson, Bj\u00f6rn Ironside, Ubba and Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye are historical figures, opinion regarding their father is divided. Contemporary academia regards most of the stories about him to be fiction. According to Hilda Ellis Davidson, writing in 1979, \"Certain scholars in recent years have come to accept at least part of Ragnar's story as based on historical fact.\"\nThe most significant medieval sources that mention Ragnar include:\nIn her commentary on Saxo's , Davidson notes that Saxo's coverage of Ragnar's legend in book IX of the appears to be an attempt to consolidate many of the confusing and contradictory events and stories known to the chronicler into the reign of one king, Ragnar. That is why many acts ascribed to Ragnar in the can be associated, through other sources, with various figures, some of whom are more historically tenable.\nThe candidates scholars like to associate with the \"historical Ragnar\" include:\nAttempts to reliably associate the legendary Ragnar with one or several of those men have failed because of the difficulty in reconciling the various accounts and their chronology. But the tradition of a Viking hero named Ragnar (or similar) who wreaked havoc in mid-9th-century Europe and who fathered many famous sons is remarkably persistent, and some aspects of it are strengthened by relatively reliable sources, such as Irish historical tradition and, indirectly, the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\".\nIn literature and media.\nRagnar Lodbrok features prominently in the following works:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48738", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48738", "title": "Russian Revolution of 1905", "text": "Political and social unrest in the Russian Empire\nThe Russian Revolution of 1905, also known as the First Russian Revolution, was a revolution in the Russian Empire which began on 22 January 1905 and led to the establishment of a constitutional monarchy under the Russian Constitution of 1906, the country's first. The revolution was characterized by mass political and social unrest including worker strikes, peasant revolts, and military mutinies directed against Tsar Nicholas II and the autocracy, who were forced to establish the State Duma legislative assembly and grant certain rights, though both were later undermined.\nIn the years leading up to the revolution, impoverished peasants had become increasingly angered by repression from their landlords and the continuation of semi-feudal relations. Further discontent grew due to mounting Russian losses in the Russo-Japanese War, poor conditions for workers, and urban unemployment. On 22 January\u00a0[O.S. 9 January]\u00a01905, known as \"Bloody Sunday,\" a peaceful procession of workers, led by Georgy Gapon, was fired on by guards outside the tsar's Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg. Widespread demonstrations and traditional strikes spread all over the empire and were brutally repressed by the tsar's troops. In June, sailors on the battleship \"Potemkin\" undertook a mutiny, and in October, a strike by railway workers turned into a general strike in Saint Petersburg and Moscow. The striking urban workers established councils, including the inaugural St. Petersburg Soviet of Workers' Deputies, in order to debate their course of action. The influence of revolutionary parties, in particular the Socialist Revolutionary Party and Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, quickly escalated. At the same time, the reactionary pro-monarchist Black Hundreds began attacks on intellectuals, revolutionaries, and the Jewish population.\nIn response, the tsar issued the \"October Manifesto,\" a pledge to create a legislative assembly, halt censorship and violations of freedom of association, and expand the right to vote. The constitution, drafted by Sergei Witte and enacted on 6 May [O.S. 23 April] 1906, did not bring an end to the turmoil, as anti-monarchist revolutionaries continued to rally for a constituent assembly. The movement for reform fragmented into conservative Octobrist and liberal Kadet factions, and the left split into moderates content with the reforms and those who desired a full overthrow of the tsar. The revolution slowly fizzled out in the face of harsh repression as troops returned after the end of the Russo-Japanese War in September 1905. Despite popular participation, the Duma was unable to issue laws of its own and often came into conflict with the tsar, who in July 1906 dissolved the first Duma and appointed Pyotr Stolypin as prime minister, who set about restoring autocratic rule. In June 1907, the second Duma was dissolved and an electoral reform which favored the propertied classes was decreed.\nMany historians contend that the Revolution of 1905 set the stage for the Russian Revolution of 1917, which saw the monarchy abolished, the tsar executed, and a socialist state established. Calls for the peasantry and workers to take power by force were present in the 1905 revolution, but many of the revolutionaries who were in a potential position to lead were either in exile or in prison while it took place. Vladimir Lenin later famously described the Revolution of 1905 as the \"dress rehearsal\" without which the \"victory of the October Revolution in 1917 would have been impossible.\"\nCauses.\nBecause the Russian economy was tied to European finances, the contraction of Western money markets in 1899\u20131900 plunged Russian industry into a deep and prolonged crisis; it outlasted the dip in European industrial production. This setback aggravated social unrest during the five years preceding the Revolution of 1905.\nThe Tsarist government did recognise some of these problems, albeit shortsightedly. The Minister of the Interior Vyacheslav von Plehve had said in 1903 that, after the agrarian problem, the most serious issues plaguing the country were those of the Jews, the schools, and the workers, in that order.\nAny residual popular loyalty to Tsar Nicholas II was lost on 22 January 1905, when his soldiers fired upon a crowd of protesting workers, led by Georgy Gapon, who were marching to present a petition at the Winter Palace.\nAgrarian problem.\nEvery year, thousands of nobles in debt mortgaged their estates to the noble land bank or sold them to municipalities, merchants, or peasants. By the time of the revolution, the nobility had sold off one-third of its land and mortgaged another third. The peasants had been freed by the emancipation reform of 1861, but their lives were generally quite limited. The government hoped to develop the peasants as a politically conservative, land-holding class by enacting laws to enable them to buy land from nobility by paying small installments over many decades.\nSuch land, known as \"allotment land\", would not be owned by individual peasants but by the community of peasants; individual peasants would have rights to strips of land to be assigned to them under the open field system. A peasant could not sell or mortgage this land, so in practice he could not renounce his rights to his land, and he would be required to pay his share of redemption dues to the village commune. This plan was intended to prevent peasants from becoming part of the proletariat. However, the peasants were not given enough land to provide for their needs: \nTheir earnings were often so small that they could neither buy the food they needed nor keep up the payment of taxes and redemption dues they owed the government for their land allotments. By 1903 their total arrears in payments of taxes and dues was 118 million rubles.\nThe situation worsened as masses of hungry peasants roamed the countryside looking for work and sometimes walked hundreds of kilometers to find it. Desperate peasants proved capable of violence. \"In the provinces of Kharkov and Poltava in 1902, thousands of them, ignoring restraints and authority, burst out in a rebellious fury that led to extensive destruction of property and looting of noble homes before troops could be brought to subdue and punish them.\"\nThese violent outbreaks caught the attention of the government, so it created many committees to investigate the causes. The committees concluded that no part of the countryside was prosperous; some parts, especially the fertile areas known as the \"black-soil region\", were in decline. Although cultivated acreage had increased in the last half century, the increase had not been proportionate to the growth of the peasant population, which had doubled. \"There was general agreement at the turn of the century that Russia faced a grave and intensifying agrarian crisis due mainly to rural overpopulation with an annual excess of fifteen to eighteen live births over deaths per 1,000 inhabitants.\" The investigations revealed many difficulties but the committees could not find solutions that were both sensible and \"acceptable\" to the government.\nNationality problem.\nRussia was a multi-ethnic empire. Nineteenth-century Russians saw cultures and religions in a clear hierarchy. Non-Russian cultures were tolerated in the empire but were not necessarily respected. Culturally, Europe was favored over Asia, as was Orthodox Christianity over other religions.\nFor generations, Russian Jews had been considered a special problem. Jews constituted only about 4% of the population but were concentrated in the western borderlands. Like other minorities in Russia, the Jews lived \"miserable and circumscribed lives, forbidden to settle or acquire land outside the cities and towns, legally limited in attendance at secondary school and higher schools, virtually barred from legal professions, denied the right to vote for municipal councilors, and excluded from services in the Navy or the Guards\".\nThe government's treatment of Jews, although considered a separate issue, was similar to its policies in dealing with all national and religious minorities. Historian Theodore Weeks notes: \"Russian administrators, who never succeeded in coming up with a legal definition of 'Pole', despite the decades of restrictions on that ethnic group, regularly spoke of individuals 'of Polish descent' or, alternatively, 'of Russian descent', making identity a function of birth.\" This policy only succeeded in producing or aggravating feelings of disloyalty. There was growing impatience with their inferior status and resentment against \"Russification\". Russification is cultural assimilation definable as \"a process culminating in the disappearance of a given group as a recognizably distinct element within a larger society\".\nBesides the imposition of a uniform Russian culture throughout the empire, the government's pursuit of Russification, especially during the second half of the nineteenth century, had political motives. After the emancipation of the serfs in 1861, the Russian state was compelled to take into account public opinion, but the government failed to gain the public's support. Another motive for Russification policies was the Polish uprising of 1863. Unlike other minority nationalities, the Poles, in the eyes of the Tsar, were a direct threat to the empire's stability. After the rebellion was crushed, the government implemented policies to reduce Polish cultural influences. In the 1870s the government began to distrust German elements on the western border. The Russian government felt that the unification of Germany would upset the power balance among the great powers of Europe and that Germany would use its strength against Russia. The government thought that the borders would be defended better if the borderland were more \"Russian\" in character. The culmination of cultural diversity created a cumbersome nationality problem that plagued the Russian government in the years leading up to the revolution.\nLabour problem.\nThe economic situation in Russia before the revolution presented a grim picture. The government had experimented with \"laissez-faire\" capitalist policies, but this strategy largely failed to gain traction within the Russian economy until the 1890s. Meanwhile, \"agricultural productivity stagnated, while international prices for grain dropped, and Russia's foreign debt and need for imports grew. War and military preparations continued to consume government revenues. At the same time, the peasant taxpayers' ability to pay was strained to the utmost, leading to widespread famine in 1891.\"\nIn the 1890s, under Finance Minister Sergei Witte, a crash governmental program was proposed to promote industrialization. His policies included heavy government expenditures for railroad building and operations, subsidies and supporting services for private industrialists, high protective tariffs for Russian industries (especially heavy industry), an increase in exports, currency stabilization, and encouragement of foreign investments. His plan was successful and during the 1890s \"Russian industrial growth averaged 8 percent per year. Railroad mileage grew from a very substantial base by 40 percent between 1892 and 1902.\" Ironically, Witte's success in implementing this program helped spur the 1905 revolution and eventually the 1917 revolution because it exacerbated social tensions. \"Besides dangerously concentrating a proletariat, a professional and a rebellious student body in centers of political power, industrialization infuriated both these new forces and the traditional rural classes.\" The government policy of financing industrialization through taxing peasants forced millions of peasants to work in towns. The \"peasant worker\" saw his labor in the factory as the means to consolidate his family's economic position in the village and played a role in determining the social consciousness of the urban proletariat. The new concentrations and flows of peasants spread urban ideas to the countryside, breaking down isolation of peasants on communes.\nIndustrial workers began to feel dissatisfaction with the Tsarist government despite the protective labour laws the government decreed. Some of those laws included the prohibition of children under 12 from working, with the exception of night work in glass factories. Employment of children aged 12 to 15 was prohibited on Sundays and holidays. Workers had to be paid in cash at least once a month, and limits were placed on the size and bases of fines for tardy workers. Employers were prohibited from charging workers for the cost of lighting of the shops and plants. Despite these labour protections, the workers believed that the laws were not enough to free them from unfair and inhumane practices. At the start of the 20th century, Russian industrial workers worked on average 11-hours per day (10 hours on Saturday), factory conditions were perceived as grueling and often unsafe, and attempts at independent unions were often not accepted. Many workers were forced to work beyond the maximum of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;11+1\u20442 hours per day. Others were still subject to arbitrary and excessive fines for tardiness, mistakes in their work, or absence. Russian industrial workers were also the lowest-wage workers in Europe. Although the cost of living in Russia was low, \"the average worker's 16 rubles per month could not buy the equal of what the French worker's 110 francs would buy for him.\" Furthermore, the same labour laws prohibited the organisation of trade unions and strikes. Dissatisfaction turned into despair for many impoverished workers, which made them more sympathetic to radical ideas. These discontented, radicalized workers became key to the revolution by participating in illegal strikes and revolutionary protests.\nThe government responded by arresting labour agitators and enacting more \"paternalistic\" legislation. Introduced in 1900 by Sergei Zubatov, head of the Moscow security department, \"police socialism\" planned to have workers form workers' societies with police approval to \"provide healthful, fraternal activities and opportunities for cooperative self-help together with 'protection' against influences that might have inimical effect on loyalty to job or country\". Some of these groups organised in Moscow, Odessa, Kiev, Nikolaev, and Kharkov, but these groups and the idea of police socialism failed.\nFrom 1900 to 1903, the period of industrial depression caused many firm bankruptcies and a reduction in the employment rate. Employees were restive: they would join legal organisations but turn the organisations toward an end that the organisations' sponsors did not intend. Workers used legitimate means to organise strikes or to draw support for striking workers outside these groups. A strike that began in 1902 by workers in the railroad shops in Vladikavkaz and Rostov-on-Don created such a response that by the next summer, 225,000 in various industries in southern Russia and Transcaucasia were on strike. These were not the first illegal strikes in the country's history but their aims, and the political awareness and support among workers and non-workers, made them more troubling to the government than earlier strikes. The government responded by closing all legal organisations by the end of 1903.\nRadicalization of students.\nThe Minister of the Interior, Plehve, designated schools as a pressing problem for the government, but he did not realize it was only a symptom of antigovernment feelings among the educated class. Students of universities, other schools of higher learning, and occasionally of secondary schools and theological seminaries were part of this group.\nStudent radicalism began around the time Tsar Alexander II came to power. Alexander abolished serfdom and enacted fundamental reforms in the legal and administrative structure of the Russian empire, which were revolutionary for their time. He lifted many restrictions on universities and abolished obligatory uniforms and military discipline. This ushered in a new freedom in the content and reading lists of academic courses. In turn, that created student subcultures, as youth were willing to live in poverty in order to receive an education. As universities expanded, there was a rapid growth of newspapers, journals, and an organisation of public lectures and professional societies. The 1860s was a time when the emergence of a new public sphere was created in social life and professional groups. This created the idea of their right to have an independent opinion.\nThe government was alarmed by these communities, and in 1861 tightened restrictions on admission and prohibited student organisations; these restrictions resulted in the first ever student demonstration, held in St. Petersburg, which led to a two-year closure of the university. The consequent conflict with the state was an important factor in the chronic student protests over subsequent decades. The atmosphere of the early 1860s gave rise to political engagement by students outside universities that became a tenet of student radicalism by the 1870s. Student radicals described \"the special duty and mission of the student as such to spread the new word of liberty. Students were called upon to extend their freedoms into society, to repay the privilege of learning by serving the people, and to become in Nikolai Ogarev's phrase 'apostles of knowledge'.\" During the next two decades, universities produced a significant share of Russia's revolutionaries. Prosecution records from the 1860s and 1870s show that more than half of all political offences were committed by students despite being a minute proportion of the population. \"The tactics of the left-wing students proved to be remarkably effective, far beyond what any of the students would have dreamed. Sensing that neither the university administrations nor the government possessed the will or authority to enforce regulations, radicals simply went ahead with their plans to turn the schools into centres of political activity for students and non-students alike.\"\nThey took up problems that were unrelated to their \"proper employment\", and displayed defiance and radicalism by boycotting examinations, rioting, arranging marches in sympathy with strikers and political prisoners, circulating petitions, and writing anti-government propaganda.\nThis disturbed the government, but it believed the cause was lack of training in patriotism and religion. Therefore, the curriculum was \"toughened up\" to emphasize classical language and mathematics in secondary schools, but defiance continued. Expulsion, exile, and forced military service also did not stop students. \"In fact, when the official decision to overhaul the whole educational system was finally made, in 1904, and to that end Vladimir Glazov, head of General Staff Academy, was selected as Minister of Education, the students had grown bolder and more resistant than ever.\"\nRise of the opposition.\nThe events of 1905 came after progressive and academic agitation for more political democracy and limits to Imperial rule in Russia, and an increase in strikes by workers against employers for radical economic demands and union recognition, (especially in southern Russia). As an example, Trotsky who would assume a central role in the 1905 revolution, would write several proclamations urging for improved economic conditions, political rights and the use of strike action against the Imperial regime on behalf of workers.\nMany socialists view this as a period when the rising revolutionary movement was met with rising reactionary movements. As Rosa Luxemburg stated in 1906 in \"The Mass Strike\", when collective strike activity was met with what is perceived as repression from an autocratic state, economic and political demands grew into and reinforced each other.\nRussian progressives formed the Union of Zemstvo Constitutionalists in 1903 and the Union of Liberation in 1904, which called for a constitutional monarchy. Russian socialists formed two major groups: the Socialist Revolutionary Party (founded in 1902), which followed the Russian populist tradition, and the Marxist Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (founded in 1898).\nIn late 1904 liberals started a series of banquets (modeled on the \"campagne des banquets\" leading up to the French Revolution of 1848), nominally celebrating the 40th anniversary of the liberal court statutes, but actually an attempt to circumvent laws against political gatherings. The banquets resulted in calls for political reforms and a constitution. In November 1904 a Zemsky Congress ()\u2014a gathering of zemstvo delegates representing all levels of Russian society\u2014called for a constitution, civil liberties and a parliament. On 13 December\u00a0[O.S. 30 November]\u00a01904, the Moscow City Duma passed a resolution demanding the establishment of an elected national legislature, full freedom of the press, and freedom of religion. Similar resolutions and appeals from other city dumas and zemstvo councils followed.\nEmperor Nicholas II made a move to meet many of these demands, appointing liberal Pyotr Dmitrievich Sviatopolk-Mirsky as Minister of the Interior after the July 1904 assassination of Vyacheslav von Plehve. On 25 December\u00a0[O.S. 12 December]\u00a01904, the Emperor issued a manifesto promising the broadening of the zemstvo system and more authority for local municipal councils, insurance for industrial workers, the emancipation of Inorodtsy and the abolition of censorship. The crucial demand\u2014that for a representative national legislature\u2014was missing in the manifesto.\nWorker strikes in the Caucasus broke out in March 1902. Strikes on the railways, originating from pay disputes, took on other issues and drew in other industries, culminating in a general strike at Rostov-on-Don in November 1902.\nDaily meetings of 15,000 to 20,000 heard openly revolutionary appeals for the first time, before a massacre defeated the strikes. But reaction to the massacres brought political demands to purely economic ones. Luxemburg described the situation in 1903 by saying: \"the whole of South Russia in May, June and July was aflame\",\nincluding Baku (where separate wage struggles culminated in a citywide general strike) and Tiflis, where commercial workers gained a reduction in the working day, and were joined by factory workers. In 1904, massive strike waves broke out in Odessa in the spring, in Kiev in July, and in Baku in December. This all set the stage for the strikes in St. Petersburg in December 1904 to January 1905 seen as the first step in the 1905 revolution.\nAnother contributing factor behind the revolution was the Bloody Sunday massacre of protesters that took place in January 1905 in St. Petersburg sparked a spate of civil unrest in the Russian Empire. Lenin urged Bolsheviks to take a greater role in the events, encouraging violent insurrection. In doing so, he adopted SR slogans regarding \"armed insurrection\", \"mass terror\", and \"the expropriation of gentry land\", resulting in Menshevik accusations that he had deviated from orthodox Marxism. In turn, he insisted that the Bolsheviks split completely with the Mensheviks; many Bolsheviks refused, and both groups attended the Third RSDLP Congress, held in London in April 1905 at the Brotherhood Church. Lenin presented many of his ideas in the pamphlet \"Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution\", published in August 1905. Here, he predicted that Russia's liberal bourgeoisie would be sated by a transition to constitutional monarchy and thus betray the revolution; instead he argued that the proletariat would have to build an alliance with the peasantry to overthrow the Tsarist regime and establish the \"provisional revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry.\"\nStart of the revolution.\nIn December 1904, a strike occurred at the Putilov plant (a railway and artillery supplier) in St. Petersburg. Sympathy strikes in other parts of the city raised the number of strikers to 150,000 workers in 382 factories. By 21 January\u00a0[O.S. 8 January]\u00a01905, the city had no electricity and newspaper distribution was halted. All public areas were declared closed.\nControversial Orthodox priest Georgy Gapon, who headed a police-sponsored workers' association, led a huge workers' procession to the Winter Palace to deliver a petition to the Tsar on Sunday, 22 January\u00a0[O.S. 9 January]\u00a01905. The troops guarding the Palace were ordered to tell the demonstrators not to pass a certain point, according to Sergei Witte, and at some point, troops opened fire on the demonstrators, causing between 200 (according to Witte) and 1,000 deaths. The event became known as Bloody Sunday, and is considered by many scholars as the start of the active phase of the revolution.\nThe events in St. Petersburg provoked public indignation and a series of massive strikes that spread quickly throughout the industrial centers of the Russian Empire. Polish socialists\u2014both the PPS and the SDKPiL\u2014called for a general strike. By the end of January 1905, over 400,000 workers in Russian Poland were on strike (see Revolution in the Kingdom of Poland (1905\u20131907)). Half of European Russia's industrial workers went on strike in 1905, and 93.2% in Poland. There were also strikes in Finland and the Baltic coast. In Riga, 130 protesters were killed on 26 January\u00a0[O.S. 13 January]\u00a01905, and in Warsaw a few days later over 100 strikers were shot on the streets. By February, there were strikes in the Caucasus, and by April, in the Urals and beyond. In March, all higher academic institutions were forcibly closed for the remainder of the year, adding radical students to the striking workers. A strike by railway workers on 21 October\u00a0[O.S. 8 October]\u00a01905 quickly developed into a general strike in Saint Petersburg and Moscow. This prompted the setting up of the short-lived Saint Petersburg Soviet of Workers' Delegates, an admixture of Bolsheviks and Mensheviks headed by Khrustalev-Nossar and despite the Iskra split would see the likes of Julius Martov and Georgi Plekhanov spar with Lenin. Leon Trotsky, who felt a strong connection to the Bolsheviki, had not given up a compromise but spearheaded strike action in over 200 factories. By 26 October\u00a0[O.S. 13 October]\u00a01905, over 2 million workers were on strike and there were almost no active railways in all of Russia. Growing inter-ethnic confrontation throughout the Caucasus resulted in Armenian\u2013Tatar massacres, heavily damaging the cities and the Baku oilfields.\nWith the unsuccessful and bloody Russo-Japanese War (1904\u20131905) there was unrest in army reserve units. On 2 January 1905, Port Arthur was lost; in February 1905, the Russian army was defeated at Mukden, losing almost 80,000 men. On 27\u201328 May 1905, the Russian Baltic Fleet was defeated at Tsushima. Witte was dispatched to make peace, negotiating the Treaty of Portsmouth (signed 5 September\u00a0[O.S. 23 August]\u00a01905). In 1905, there were naval mutinies at Sevastopol (see Sevastopol Uprising), Vladivostok, and Kronstadt, peaking in June with the mutiny aboard the battleship \"Potemkin\". The mutineers eventually surrendered the battleship to Romanian authorities on 8 July in exchange for asylum, then the Romanians returned her to Imperial Russian authorities on the following day. Some sources claim over 2,000 sailors died in the suppression. The mutinies were disorganised and quickly crushed. Despite these mutinies, the armed forces largely remained loyal, if dissatisfied\u2014and were widely used by the government to control the 1905 unrest.\nNationalist groups had been angered by the Russification undertaken since Alexander II. The Poles, Finns, and the Baltic provinces all sought autonomy, and also freedom to use their national languages and promote their own culture. Muslim groups were also active, founding the Union of the Muslims of Russia in August 1905. Certain groups took the opportunity to settle differences with each other rather than the government. Some nationalists undertook anti-Jewish pogroms, possibly with government aid, and in total over 3,000 Jews were killed.\nThe number of prisoners throughout the Russian Empire, which had peaked at 116,376 in 1893, fell by over a third to a record low of 75,009 in January 1905, chiefly because of several mass amnesties granted by the Tsar; the historian S G Wheatcroft has wondered what role these released criminals played in the 1905\u201306 social unrest.\nGovernment response.\nOn 12 January 1905, the Tsar appointed Dmitri Feodorovich Trepov as governor in St Petersburg and dismissed the Minister of the Interior, Pyotr Sviatopolk-Mirsky, on 18 February\u00a0[O.S. 5 February]\u00a01905. He appointed a government commission \"to enquire without delay into the causes of discontent among the workers in the city of St Petersburg and its suburbs\" in view of the strike movement. The commission was headed by Senator Nikolay Shidlovsky, a member of the State Council, and included officials, chiefs of government factories, and private factory owners. It was also meant to have included workers' delegates elected according to a two-stage system. Elections of the workers delegates were, however, blocked by the socialists who wanted to divert the workers from the elections to the armed struggle. On 5 March\u00a0[O.S. 20 February]\u00a01905, the commission was dissolved without having started work. Following the assassination of his uncle, the Grand Duke Sergei Aleksandrovich, on 17 February\u00a0[O.S. 4 February]\u00a01905, the Tsar made new concessions. On 2 March\u00a0[O.S. 18 February]\u00a01905 he published the \"Bulygin Rescript\", which promised the formation of a consultative assembly, religious tolerance, freedom of speech (in the form of language rights for the Polish minority) and a reduction in the peasants' redemption payments. On 24 and 25 May\u00a0[O.S. 11 and 12 May]\u00a01905, about 300 Zemstvo and municipal representatives held three meetings in Moscow, which passed a resolution, asking for popular representation at the national level. On 6 June\u00a0[O.S. 24 May]\u00a01905, Nicholas II had received a Zemstvo deputation. Responding to speeches by Prince Sergei Nikolaevich Trubetskoy and Mr Fyodrov, the Tsar confirmed his promise to convene an assembly of people's representatives.\nHeight of the revolution.\nTsar Nicholas II agreed on 2 March\u00a0[O.S. 18 February] to the creation of a State Duma of the Russian Empire but with consultative powers only. When its slight powers and limits on the electorate were revealed, unrest redoubled. The Saint Petersburg Soviet was formed and called for a general strike in October, refusal to pay taxes, and the en masse withdrawal of bank deposits.\nIn June and July 1905, there were many peasant uprisings in which peasants seized land and tools. Disturbances in the Russian-controlled Congress Poland culminated in June 1905 in the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a insurrection. Surprisingly, only one landlord was recorded as killed. Far more violence was inflicted on peasants outside the commune: 50 deaths were recorded. Anti-tsarist protests displaced onto Jewish communities in the October 1905 Kishinev pogrom.\nThe October Manifesto, written by Sergei Witte and Alexis Obolenskii, was presented to the Tsar on 14 October\u00a0[O.S. 1 October]. It closely followed the demands of the Zemstvo Congress in September, granting basic civil rights, allowing the formation of political parties, extending the franchise towards universal suffrage, and establishing the Duma as the central legislative body.\nThe Tsar waited and argued for three days, but finally signed the manifesto on 30 October\u00a0[O.S. 17 October]\u00a01905, citing his desire to avoid a massacre and his realisation that there was insufficient military force available to pursue alternative options. He regretted signing the document, saying that he felt \"sick with shame at this betrayal of the dynasty\u00a0... the betrayal was complete\".\nWhen the manifesto was proclaimed, there were spontaneous demonstrations of support in all the major cities. The strikes in Saint Petersburg and elsewhere officially ended or quickly collapsed. A political amnesty was also offered. The concessions came hand-in-hand with renewed, and brutal, action against the unrest. There was also a backlash from the conservative elements of society, with right-wing attacks on strikers, left-wingers, and Jews.\nWhile the Russian liberals were satisfied by the October Manifesto and prepared for upcoming Duma elections, radical socialists and revolutionaries denounced the elections and called for an armed uprising to destroy the Empire.\nSome of the November uprising of 1905 in Sevastopol, headed by retired naval Lieutenant Pyotr Schmidt, was directed against the government, while some was undirected. It included terrorism, worker strikes, peasant unrest and military mutinies, and was only suppressed after a fierce battle. The Trans-Baikal railroad fell into the hands of striker committees and demobilised soldiers returning from Manchuria after the Russo\u2013Japanese War. The Tsar had to send a special detachment of loyal troops along the Trans-Siberian Railway to restore order.\nBetween 5 and 7 December\u00a0[O.S. 22 and 24 November], there was a general strike by Russian workers. The government sent troops on 7 December, and a bitter street-by-street fight began. A week later, the Semyonovsky Regiment was deployed, and used artillery to break up demonstrations and to shell workers' districts. On 18 December\u00a0[O.S. 5 December], with around a thousand people dead and parts of the city in ruins, the workers surrendered. After a final spasm in Moscow, the uprisings ended in December 1905. According to figures presented in the Duma by Professor Maksim Kovalevsky, by April 1906, more than 14,000 people had been executed and 75,000 imprisoned. Historian Brian Taylor states the number of deaths in the 1905 revolution was in the \"thousands\" and notes one source that puts the figure at over 13,000 deaths.\nResults.\nFollowing the Revolution of 1905, the Tsar made last attempts to save his regime, and offered reforms similar to most rulers when pressured by a revolutionary movement. The military remained loyal throughout the Revolution of 1905, as shown by their shooting of revolutionaries when ordered by the Tsar, making overthrow difficult. These reforms were outlined in a precursor to the Constitution of 1906 known as the October Manifesto which created the Imperial Duma. The Russian Constitution of 1906, also known as the Fundamental Laws, set up a multiparty system and a limited constitutional monarchy. The revolutionaries were quelled and satisfied with the reforms, but it was not enough to prevent the 1917 revolution that would later topple the Tsar's regime.\nCreation of Duma and appointment of Stolypin.\nThere had been earlier attempts in establishing a Russian Duma before the October Manifesto, but these attempts faced dogged resistance. One attempt in July 1905, called the Bulygin Duma, tried to reduce the assembly into a consultative body. It also proposed limiting voting rights to those with a higher property qualification, excluding industrial workers. Both sides\u2014the opposition and the conservatives\u2014were not pleased with the results. Another attempt in August 1905 was almost successful, but that too died when Nicholas insisted on the Duma's functions be relegated to an advisory position. The October Manifesto, aside from granting the population the freedom of speech and assembly, proclaimed that no law would be passed without examination and approval by the Imperial Duma. The Manifesto also extended the suffrage to universal proportions, allowing for greater participation in the Duma, though the electoral law on 11 December still excluded women. Nevertheless, the tsar retained the power of veto.\nPropositions for restrictions to the Duma's legislative powers remained persistent. A decree on 20 February 1906 transformed the State Council, the advisory body, into a second chamber with legislative powers \"equal to those of the Duma\". Not only did this transformation violate the Manifesto, but the Council became a buffer zone between the tsar and Duma, slowing whatever progress the latter could achieve. Even three days before the Duma's first session, on 24 April 1906, the Fundamental Laws further limited the assembly's movement by giving the tsar the sole power to appoint/dismiss ministers. Adding insult was the indication that the Tsar alone had control over many facets of political reins\u2014all without the Duma's expressed permission. The trap seemed perfectly set for the unsuspecting Duma: by the time the assembly convened on 27 April, it quickly found itself unable to do much without violating the Fundamental Laws. Defeated and frustrated, the majority of the assembly voted no confidence and handed in their resignations after a few weeks on 13 May.\nThe attacks on the Duma were not confined to its legislative powers. By the time the Duma opened, it was missing crucial support from its populace, thanks in no small part to the government's return to Pre-Manifesto levels of suppression. The Soviets were forced to lay low for a long time, while the zemstvos turned against the Duma when the issue of land appropriation came up. The issue of land appropriation was the most contentious of the Duma's appeals. The Duma proposed that the government distribute its treasury, \"monastic and imperial lands\", and seize private estates as well. The Duma, in fact, was preparing to alienate some of its more affluent supporters, a decision that left the assembly without the necessary political power to be efficient.\nNicholas II remained wary of having to share power with reform-minded bureaucrats. When the pendulum in 1906 elections swung to the left, Nicholas immediately ordered the Duma's dissolution just after 73 days. Hoping to further squeeze the life out of the assembly, he appointed a tougher prime minister in Petr Stolypin as the liberal Witte's replacement. Much to Nicholas's chagrin, Stolypin attempted to bring about acts of reform (land reform), while retaining measures favorable to the regime (stepping up the number of executions of revolutionaries). After the revolution subsided, he was able to bring economic growth back to Russia's industries, a period which lasted until 1914. But Stolypin's efforts did nothing to prevent the collapse of the monarchy, nor seemed to satisfy the conservatives. Stolypin died from a bullet wound, fired by a revolutionary, Dmitry Bogrov, on 5 September 1911.\nOctober Manifesto.\nEven after Bloody Sunday and defeat in the Russo-Japanese War, Nicholas II had been slow to offer a meaningful solution to the social and political crisis. At this point, he became more concerned with his personal affairs such as the illness of his son, whose struggle with haemophilia was overseen by Rasputin. Nicholas also refused to believe that the population was demanding changes in the autocratic regime, seeing \"public opinion\" as mainly the \"intelligentsia\" and believing himself to be the patronly 'father figure' to the Russian people. Sergei Witte, the minister of Russia, frustratedly argued with the Tsar that an immediate implementation of reforms was needed to retain order in the country. It was only after the Revolution started picking up steam that Nicholas was forced to make concessions by writing the October Manifesto.\nIssued on 17 October 1905, the Manifesto stated that the government would grant the population reforms such as the right to vote and to convene in assemblies. Its main provisions were:\nDespite what seemed to be a moment for celebration for Russia's population and the reformists, the Manifesto was rife with problems. Aside from the absence of the word \"constitution\", one issue with the manifesto was its timing. By October 1905, Nicholas was already dealing with a revolution. Another problem surfaced in the conscience of Nicholas himself: Witte said in 1911 that the manifesto was written only to get the pressure off the monarch's back, that it was not a \"voluntary act\". In fact, the writers hoped that the Manifesto would sow discord into \"the camp of the autocracy's enemies\" and bring order back to Russia.\nOne immediate effect it did have, for a while, was the start of the Days of Freedom, a six-week period from 17 October to early December. This period witnessed an unprecedented level of freedom on all publications\u2014revolutionary papers, brochures, etc.\u2014even though the tsar officially retained the power to censor provocative material. This opportunity allowed the press to address the tsar, and government officials, in a harsh, critical tone previously unheard of. The freedom of speech also opened the floodgates for meetings and organised political parties. In Moscow alone, over 400 meetings took place in the first four weeks. Some of the political parties that came out of these meetings were the Constitutional Democrats (Kadets), Social Democrats, Socialist Revolutionaries, Octobrists, and the far-rightist Union of the Russian People.\nAmong all the groups that benefited most from the Days of Freedoms were the labour unions. In fact, the Days of Freedom witnessed unionisation in the history of the Russian Empire at its apex. At least 67 unions were established in Moscow, as well as 58 in St. Petersburg; the majority of both combined were formed in November 1905 alone. For the Soviets, it was a watershed period of time: nearly 50 of the unions in St. Petersburg came under Soviet control, while in Moscow, the Soviets had around 80,000 members. This large sector of power allowed the Soviets enough clout to form their own militias. In St. Petersburg alone, the Soviets claimed around 6,000 armed members with the purpose of protecting the meetings.\nPerhaps empowered in their newfound window of opportunity, the St. Petersburg Soviets, along with other socialist parties, called for armed struggles against the Tsarist government, a war call that no doubt alarmed the government. Not only were the workers motivated, but the Days of Freedom also had an earthquake-like effect on the peasant collective as well. Seeing an opening in the autocracy's waning authority thanks to the Manifesto, the peasants, with a political organisation, took to the streets in revolt. In response, the government exerted its forces in campaigns to subdue and repress both the peasants and the workers. Consequences were now in full force: with a pretext in their hands, the government spent the month of December 1905 regaining the level of authority once lost to Bloody Sunday.\nIronically, the writers of the October Manifesto were caught off guard by the surge in revolts. One of the main reasons for writing the October Manifesto bordered on the government's \"fear of the revolutionary movement\". In fact, many officials believed this fear was practically the sole reason for the Manifesto's creation in the first place. Among those more scared was Dmitri Feodorovich Trepov, governor general of St. Petersburg and deputy minister of the interior. Trepov urged Nicholas II to stick to the principles in the Manifesto, for \"every retreat\u00a0... would be hazardous to the dynasty\".\nRussian Constitution of 1906.\nThe Russian Constitution of 1906 was published on the eve of the convocation of the First Duma. The new Fundamental Law was enacted to institute promises of the October Manifesto as well as add new reforms. The Tsar was confirmed as absolute leader, with complete control of the executive, foreign policy, church, and the armed forces. The structure of the Duma was changed, becoming a lower chamber below the Council of Ministers, and was half-elected, half-appointed by the Tsar. Legislations had to be approved by the Duma, the council, and the Tsar to become law. The Fundamental State Laws were the \"culmination of the whole sequence of events set in motion in October 1905 and which consolidated the new \"status quo\"\". The introduction of The Russian Constitution of 1906 was not simply an institution of the October Manifesto. The introduction of the constitution states (and thus emphasizes) the following:\nThe Constitution did not mention any of the provisions of the October Manifesto. While it did enact the provisions laid out previously, its sole purpose seems again to be the propaganda for the monarchy and to simply not fall back on prior promises. The provisions and the new constitutional monarchy did not satisfy Russians and Lenin. The Constitution lasted until the fall of the empire in 1917.\nRise of political violence.\nThe years 1906 and 1907 saw a decline of mass movements, strikes and protests, and a rise of overt political violence. Combat groups such as the SR Combat Organization carried out many assassinations targeting civil servants and police, and robberies. Between 1906 and 1909, revolutionaries killed 7,293 people, of whom 2,640 were officials, and wounded 8,061. Notable victims included:\nRepression.\nThe years of revolution were marked by a dramatic rise in the numbers of death sentences and executions. Different figures on the number of executions were compared by Senator Nikolai Tagantsev, and are listed in the table.\nThese numbers reflect only executions of civilians, and do not include a large number of summary executions by punitive army detachments and executions of military mutineers. Peter Kropotkin, an anarchist, noted that official statistics excluded executions conducted during punitive expeditions, especially in Siberia, Caucasus and the Baltic provinces. By 1906 some 4,509 political prisoners were incarcerated in Russian Poland, 20 percent of the empire's total.\nIvanovo Soviet.\nIvanovo Voznesensk was known as the 'Russian Manchester' for its textile mills. In 1905, its local revolutionaries were overwhelmingly Bolshevik. It was the first Bolshevik branch in which workers outnumbered intellectuals.\nPoland.\nThe 1905\u20131907 revolution was at the time the largest wave of strikes and widest emancipatory movement Poland had ever seen, and it would remain so until the 1970s and 1980s. In 1905, 93.2% of Congress Poland's industrial workers went on strike. The first phase of the revolution consisted primarily of mass strikes, rallies, demonstrations\u2014later this evolved into street skirmishes with the police and army as well as bomb assassinations and robberies of transports carrying money to tsarist financial institutions.\nOne of the major events of that period was the insurrection in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a in June 1905, but unrest happened in many other areas too. Warsaw was also an active centre of resistance, particularly in terms of strikes, whereas further south the \"Republika Ostrowiecka\" and \"Republika Zag\u0142\u0119biowska\" were proclaimed (tsarist control was later restored in these areas when martial law was introduced). Until November 1905, Poland was at the vanguard of the revolutionary movement in the Russian Empire despite the vast military numbers thrown against it; even when the upheaval began its downfall, larger strikes happened more often in Poland than they did in other parts of the Empire in the years 1906\u20131907.\nDue to its reach, violence, radicalism, and effects, some Polish historians even consider the events of the 1905 revolution in Poland a fourth Polish uprising against the Russian Empire. Rosa Luxemburg described Poland as \"one of the most explosive centres of the revolutionary movement\" which \"in 1905 marched at the head of the Russian Revolution\".\nFinland.\nIn the Grand Duchy of Finland, the Social Democrats organised the general strike of 1905 (30 October\u00a0\u2013 6 November\u00a0[O.S. 17\u201324 October]). The Red Guards were formed, led by captain Johan Kock. During the general strike, the \"Red Declaration\", written by Finnish politician and journalist Yrj\u00f6 M\u00e4kelin, was published in \"Tampere,\" demanding dissolution of the Senate of Finland, universal suffrage, political freedoms, and abolition of censorship. Leo Mechelin, leader of the constitutionalists, crafted the \"November Manifesto\": the revolution resulted in the abolition of the Diet of Finland and of the four Estates, and to the creation of the modern Parliament of Finland. It also resulted in a temporary halt to the Russification policy that Russia had started in 1899.\nOn 30 July\u00a0[O.S. 17 July]\u00a01906, Russian artillerymen and military engineers rose in revolt in the fortress of Sveaborg (later called Suomenlinna), Helsinki. The Finnish Red Guards supported the Sveaborg Rebellion with a general strike, but the mutiny was quelled within 60 hours by loyal troops and ships of the Baltic Fleet.\nEstonia.\nIn the Governorate of Estonia, Estonians called for freedom of the press and assembly, for universal suffrage, and for national autonomy. On 29 October\u00a0[O.S. 16 October], the Russian army opened fire in a meeting on a street market in Tallinn in which about 8 000\u201310 000 people participated, killing 94 and injuring over 200. The October Manifesto was supported in Estonia and the Estonian flag was displayed publicly for the first time. Jaan T\u00f5nisson used the new political freedoms to widen the rights of Estonians by establishing the first Estonian political party \u2013 \"National Progress Party\".\nAnother, more radical political organisation, the \"Estonian Social Democratic Workers' Union\" was founded as well. The moderate supporters of T\u00f5nisson and the more radical supporters of Jaan Teemant could not agree about how to continue with the revolution, and only agreed that both wanted to limit the rights of Baltic Germans and to end Russification. The radical views were publicly welcomed and in December 1905, martial law was declared in Tallinn. A total of 160 manors were looted, resulting in ca. 400 workers and peasants being killed by the army. Estonian gains from the revolution were minimal, but the tense stability that prevailed between 1905 and 1917 allowed Estonians to advance the aspiration of national statehood.\nLatvia.\nFollowing the shooting of demonstrators in St. Petersburg, a wide-scale general strike began in Riga. On 26 January\u00a0[O.S. 13 January], Russian army troops opened fire on demonstrators killing 73 and injuring 200 people. During the middle of 1905, the focus of revolutionary events moved to the countryside with mass meetings and demonstrations. 470 new parish administrative bodies were elected in 94% of the parishes in Latvia. The Congress of Parish Representatives was held in Riga in November. In autumn 1905, armed conflict between the Baltic German nobility and the Latvian peasants began in the rural areas of Livonia and Courland. In Courland, the peasants seized or surrounded several towns. In Livonia, the fighters controlled the R\u016bjiena-P\u00e4rnu railway line. Martial law was declared in Courland in August 1905, and in Livonia in late November. Special punitive expeditions were dispatched in mid-December to suppress the movement. They executed 1170 people without trial or investigation and burned 300 peasant homes. Thousands were exiled to Siberia. Many Latvian intellectuals only escaped by fleeing to Western Europe or US. In 1906, the revolutionary movement gradually subsided.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48740", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48740", "title": "Henri Poincar\u00e9", "text": "French mathematician, physicist and engineer (1854\u20131912)\nJules Henri Poincar\u00e9 (, ; ; 29 April 1854\u00a0\u2013 17 July 1912) was a French mathematician, theoretical physicist, engineer, and philosopher of science. He is often described as a polymath, and in mathematics as \"The Last Universalist\", since he excelled in all fields of the discipline as it existed during his lifetime. He has further been called \"the Gauss of modern mathematics\". Due to his success in science, along with his influence and philosophy, he has further been called \"the philosopher par excellence of modern science\".\nAs a mathematician and physicist, he made many original fundamental contributions to pure and applied mathematics, mathematical physics, and celestial mechanics. In his research on the three-body problem, Poincar\u00e9 became the first person to discover a chaotic deterministic system which laid the foundations of modern chaos theory. Poincar\u00e9 is regarded as the creator of the field of algebraic topology, and is further credited with introducing automorphic forms. He also made important contributions to algebraic geometry, number theory, complex analysis and Lie theory. He famously introduced the concept of the Poincar\u00e9 recurrence theorem, which states that a state will eventually return arbitrarily close to its initial state after a sufficiently long time, which has far-reaching consequences. Early in the 20th century he formulated the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, which became, over time, one of the famous unsolved problems in mathematics. It was eventually solved in 2002\u20132003 by Grigori Perelman. Poincar\u00e9 popularized the use of non-Euclidean geometry in mathematics as well.\nPoincar\u00e9 made clear the importance of paying attention to the invariance of laws of physics under different transformations, and was the first to present the Lorentz transformations in their modern symmetrical form. Poincar\u00e9 discovered the remaining relativistic velocity transformations and recorded them in a letter to Hendrik Lorentz in 1905. Thus he obtained perfect invariance of all of Maxwell's equations, an important step in the formulation of the theory of special relativity, for which he is also credited with laying down the foundations, further writing foundational papers in 1905. He first proposed gravitational waves (\"ondes gravifiques\") emanating from a body and propagating at the speed of light as being required by the Lorentz transformations, doing so in 1905. In 1912, he wrote an influential paper which provided a mathematical argument for quantum mechanics. Poincar\u00e9 also laid the seeds of the discovery of radioactivity through his interest and study of X-rays, which influenced physicist Henri Becquerel, who then discovered the phenomena. The Poincar\u00e9 group used in physics and mathematics was named after him, after he introduced the notion of the group.\nPoincar\u00e9 was considered the dominant figure in mathematics and theoretical physics during his time, and was the most respected mathematician of his time, being described as \"the living brain of the rational sciences\" by mathematician Paul Painlev\u00e9. Philosopher Karl Popper regarded Poincar\u00e9 as the greatest philosopher of science of all time, with Poincar\u00e9 also originating the conventionalist view in science. Poincar\u00e9 was a public intellectual in his time, and personally, he believed in political equality for all, while wary of the influence of anti-intellectual positions that the Catholic Church held at the time. He served as the president of the French Academy of Sciences (1906), the president of Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 astronomique de France (1901\u20131903), and twice the president of Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 math\u00e9matique de France (1886, 1900).\nLife.\nPoincar\u00e9 was born on 29 April 1854 in Cit\u00e9 Ducale neighborhood, Nancy, Meurthe-et-Moselle, into an influential French family. His father L\u00e9on Poincar\u00e9 (1828\u20131892) was a professor of medicine at the University of Nancy. His younger sister Aline married the spiritual philosopher \u00c9mile Boutroux. Another notable member of Henri's family was his cousin, Raymond Poincar\u00e9, a fellow member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise, who was President of France from 1913 to 1920, and three-time Prime Minister of France between 1913 and 1929.\nEducation.\nDuring his childhood he was seriously ill for a time with diphtheria and received special instruction from his mother, Eug\u00e9nie Launois (1830\u20131897).\nIn 1862, Henri entered the Lyc\u00e9e in Nancy (now renamed the Lyc\u00e9e Henri-Poincar\u00e9 in his honour, along with Henri Poincar\u00e9 University, also in Nancy). He spent eleven years at the Lyc\u00e9e and during this time he proved to be one of the top students in every topic he studied. He excelled in written composition. His mathematics teacher described him as a \"monster of mathematics\" and he won first prizes in the concours g\u00e9n\u00e9ral, a competition between the top pupils from all the Lyc\u00e9es across France. His poorest subjects were music and physical education, where he was described as \"average at best\". Poor eyesight and a tendency towards absentmindedness may explain these difficulties. He graduated from the Lyc\u00e9e in 1871 with a baccalaur\u00e9at in both letters and sciences.\nDuring the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, he served alongside his father in the Ambulance Corps.\nPoincar\u00e9 entered the \u00c9cole Polytechnique as the top qualifier in 1873 and graduated in 1875. There he studied mathematics as a student of Charles Hermite, continuing to excel and publishing his first paper (\"D\u00e9monstration nouvelle des propri\u00e9t\u00e9s de l'indicatrice d'une surface\") in 1874. From November 1875 to June 1878 he studied at the \u00c9cole des Mines, while continuing the study of mathematics in addition to the mining engineering syllabus, and received the degree of ordinary mining engineer in March 1879.\nAs a graduate of the \u00c9cole des Mines, he joined the Corps des Mines as an inspector for the Vesoul region in northeast France. He was on the scene of a mining disaster at Magny in August 1879 in which 18 miners died. He carried out the official investigation into the accident.\nAt the same time, Poincar\u00e9 was preparing for his Doctorate in Science in mathematics under the supervision of Charles Hermite. His doctoral thesis was in the field of differential equations. It was named \"Sur les propri\u00e9t\u00e9s des fonctions d\u00e9finies par les \u00e9quations aux diff\u00e9rences partielles\". Poincar\u00e9 devised a new way of studying the properties of these equations. He not only faced the question of determining the integral of such equations, but also was the first person to study their general geometric properties. He realised that they could be used to model the behaviour of multiple bodies in free motion within the Solar System. He graduated from the University of Paris in 1879.\nFirst scientific achievements.\nAfter receiving his degree, Poincar\u00e9 began teaching as junior lecturer in mathematics at the University of Caen in Normandy (in December 1879). At the same time he published his first major article concerning the treatment of a class of automorphic functions.\nThere, in Caen, he met his future wife, Louise Poulain d'Andecy (1857\u20131934), granddaughter of Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and great-granddaughter of \u00c9tienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and on 20 April 1881, they married. Together they had four children: Jeanne (born 1887), Yvonne (born 1889), Henriette (born 1891), and L\u00e9on (born 1893).\nPoincar\u00e9 immediately established himself among the greatest mathematicians of Europe, attracting the attention of many prominent mathematicians. In 1881 Poincar\u00e9 was invited to take a teaching position at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Paris; he accepted the invitation. During the years 1883 to 1897, he taught mathematical analysis in the \u00c9cole Polytechnique.\nIn 1881\u20131882, Poincar\u00e9 created a new branch of mathematics: qualitative theory of differential equations. He showed how it is possible to derive the most important information about the behavior of a family of solutions without having to solve the equation (since this may not always be possible). He successfully used this approach to problems in celestial mechanics and mathematical physics.\nCareer.\nHe never fully abandoned his career in the mining administration to mathematics. He worked at the Ministry of Public Services as an engineer in charge of northern railway development from 1881 to 1885. He eventually became chief engineer of the Corps des Mines in 1893 and inspector general in 1910.\nBeginning in 1881 and for the rest of his career, he taught at the University of Paris (the Sorbonne). He was initially appointed as the \"ma\u00eetre de conf\u00e9rences d'analyse\" (associate professor of analysis). Eventually, he held the chairs of Physical and Experimental Mechanics, Mathematical Physics and Theory of Probability, and Celestial Mechanics and Astronomy.\nIn 1887, at the young age of 32, Poincar\u00e9 was elected to the French Academy of Sciences he became its president in 1906, to honorary membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, in 1892, and was elected to the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise on 5 March 1908.\nIn 1887, he won Oscar II, King of Sweden's mathematical competition for a resolution of the three-body problem concerning the free motion of multiple orbiting bodies. (See three-body problem section below.)\nIn 1893, Poincar\u00e9 joined the French Bureau des Longitudes, which engaged him in the synchronisation of time around the world. In 1897 Poincar\u00e9 backed an unsuccessful proposal for the decimalisation of circular measure, and hence time and longitude. It was this post which led him to consider the question of establishing international time zones and the synchronisation of time between bodies in relative motion. (See work on relativity section below.)\nIn 1904, he intervened in the trials of Alfred Dreyfus, attacking the spurious scientific claims regarding evidence brought against Dreyfus.\nPoincar\u00e9 was the President of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Astronomique de France (SAF), the French astronomical society, from 1901 to 1903.\nStudents.\nPoincar\u00e9 had two notable doctoral students at the University of Paris, Louis Bachelier (1900) and Dimitrie Pompeiu (1905).\nDeath.\nIn 1912, Poincar\u00e9 underwent surgery for a prostate problem and subsequently died from an embolism on 17 July 1912, in Paris. He was 58 years of age. He is buried in the Poincar\u00e9 family vault in the Cemetery of Montparnasse, Paris, in section 16, close to the Rue \u00c9mile-Richard.\nA former French Minister of Education, Claude All\u00e8gre, proposed in 2004 that Poincar\u00e9 be reburied in the Panth\u00e9on in Paris, which is reserved for French citizens of the highest honour.\nWork.\nSummary.\nPoincar\u00e9 made many contributions to different fields of pure and applied mathematics such as: celestial mechanics, fluid mechanics, optics, electricity, telegraphy, capillarity, elasticity, thermodynamics, potential theory, Quantum mechanics, theory of relativity and physical cosmology.\nAmong the specific topics he contributed to are the following:\nThree-body problem.\nThe problem of finding the general solution to the motion of more than two orbiting bodies in the Solar System had eluded mathematicians since Newton's time. This was known originally as the three-body problem and later the \"n\"-body problem, where \"n\" is any number of more than two orbiting bodies. The \"n\"-body solution was considered very important and challenging at the close of the 19th century. Indeed, in 1887, in honour of his 60th birthday, Oscar II, King of Sweden, advised by G\u00f6sta Mittag-Leffler, established a prize for anyone who could find the solution to the problem. The announcement was quite specific:\nGiven a system of arbitrarily many mass points that attract each according to Newton's law, under the assumption that no two points ever collide, try to find a representation of the coordinates of each point as a series in a variable that is some known function of time and for all of whose values the series converges uniformly.\nIn case the problem could not be solved, any other important contribution to classical mechanics would then be considered to be prizeworthy. The prize was finally awarded to Poincar\u00e9, even though he did not solve the original problem. One of the judges, the distinguished Karl Weierstrass, said, \"This work cannot indeed be considered as furnishing the complete solution of the question proposed, but that it is nevertheless of such importance that its publication will inaugurate a new era in the history of celestial mechanics.\" (The first version of his contribution even contained a serious error; for details see the article by Diacu and the book by Barrow-Green). The version finally printed contained many important ideas which led to the theory of chaos. The problem as stated originally was finally solved by Karl F. Sundman for \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a03 in 1912 and was generalised to the case of \"n\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a03 bodies by Qiudong Wang in the 1990s. The series solutions have very slow convergence. It would take millions of terms to determine the motion of the particles for even very short intervals of time, so they are unusable in numerical work.\nWork on relativity.\nLocal time.\nPoincar\u00e9's work at the Bureau des Longitudes on establishing international time zones led him to consider how clocks at rest on the Earth, which would be moving at different speeds relative to absolute space (or the \"luminiferous aether\"), could be synchronised. At the same time Dutch theorist Hendrik Lorentz was developing Maxwell's theory into a theory of the motion of charged particles (\"electrons\" or \"ions\"), and their interaction with radiation. In 1895 Lorentz had introduced an auxiliary quantity (without physical interpretation) called \"local time\" formula_1 and introduced the hypothesis of length contraction to explain the failure of optical and electrical experiments to detect motion relative to the aether (see Michelson\u2013Morley experiment). Poincar\u00e9 was a constant interpreter (and sometimes friendly critic) of Lorentz's theory. Poincar\u00e9 as a philosopher was interested in the \"deeper meaning\". Thus he interpreted Lorentz's theory and in so doing he came up with many insights that are now associated with special relativity. In (1898), Poincar\u00e9 said, \"A little reflection is sufficient to understand that all these affirmations have by themselves no meaning. They can have one only as the result of a convention.\" He also argued that scientists have to set the constancy of the speed of light as a postulate to give physical theories the simplest form.\nBased on these assumptions he discussed in 1900 Lorentz's \"wonderful invention\" of local time and remarked that it arose when moving clocks are synchronised by exchanging light signals assumed to travel with the same speed in both directions in a moving frame.\nPrinciple of relativity and Lorentz transformations.\nIn 1881 Poincar\u00e9 described hyperbolic geometry in terms of the hyperboloid model, formulating transformations leaving invariant the Lorentz interval formula_2, which makes them mathematically equivalent to the Lorentz transformations in 2+1 dimensions. In addition, Poincar\u00e9's other models of hyperbolic geometry (Poincar\u00e9 disk model, Poincar\u00e9 half-plane model) as well as the Beltrami\u2013Klein model can be related to the relativistic velocity space (see Gyrovector space).\nIn 1892 Poincar\u00e9 developed a mathematical theory of light including polarization. His vision of the action of polarizers and retarders, acting on a sphere representing polarized states, is called the Poincar\u00e9 sphere. It was shown that the Poincar\u00e9 sphere possesses an underlying Lorentzian symmetry, by which it can be used as a geometrical representation of Lorentz transformations and velocity additions.\nHe discussed the \"principle of relative motion\" in two papers in 1900 and named it the principle of relativity in 1904, according to which no physical experiment can discriminate between a state of uniform motion and a state of rest.\nIn 1905 Poincar\u00e9 wrote to Lorentz about Lorentz's paper of 1904, which Poincar\u00e9 described as a \"paper of supreme importance\". In this letter he pointed out an error Lorentz had made when he had applied his transformation to one of Maxwell's equations, that for charge-occupied space, and also questioned the time dilation factor given by Lorentz. In a second letter to Lorentz, Poincar\u00e9 gave his own reason why Lorentz's time dilation factor was indeed correct after all\u2014it was necessary to make the Lorentz transformation form a group\u2014and he gave what is now known as the relativistic velocity-addition law. Poincar\u00e9 later delivered a paper at the meeting of the Academy of Sciences in Paris on 5 June 1905 in which these issues were addressed. In the published version of that he wrote:\nThe essential point, established by Lorentz, is that the equations of the electromagnetic field are not altered by a certain transformation (which I will call by the name of Lorentz) of the form:\nformula_3\nand showed that the arbitrary function formula_4 must be unity for all formula_5 (Lorentz had set formula_6 by a different argument) to make the transformations form a group. In an enlarged version of the paper that appeared in 1906 Poincar\u00e9 pointed out that the combination formula_7 is invariant. He noted that a Lorentz transformation is merely a rotation in four-dimensional space about the origin by introducing formula_8 as a fourth imaginary coordinate, and he used an early form of four-vectors. Poincar\u00e9 expressed a lack of interest in a four-dimensional reformulation of his new mechanics in 1907, because in his opinion the translation of physics into the language of four-dimensional geometry would entail too much effort for limited profit. So it was Hermann Minkowski who worked out the consequences of this notion in 1907.\nMass\u2013energy relation.\nLike others before, Poincar\u00e9 (1900) discovered a relation between mass and electromagnetic energy. While studying the conflict between the action/reaction principle and Lorentz ether theory, he tried to determine whether the center of gravity still moves with a uniform velocity when electromagnetic fields are included. He noticed that the action/reaction principle does not hold for matter alone, but that the electromagnetic field has its own momentum. Poincar\u00e9 concluded that the electromagnetic field energy of an electromagnetic wave behaves like a fictitious fluid (\"fluide fictif\") with a mass density of \"E\"/\"c\"2. If the center of mass frame is defined by both the mass of matter \"and\" the mass of the fictitious fluid, and if the fictitious fluid is indestructible\u2014it's neither created or destroyed\u2014then the motion of the center of mass frame remains uniform. But electromagnetic energy can be converted into other forms of energy. So Poincar\u00e9 assumed that there exists a non-electric energy fluid at each point of space, into which electromagnetic energy can be transformed and which also carries a mass proportional to the energy. In this way, the motion of the center of mass remains uniform. Poincar\u00e9 said that one should not be too surprised by these assumptions, since they are only mathematical fictions.\nHowever, Poincar\u00e9's resolution led to a paradox when changing frames: if a Hertzian oscillator radiates in a certain direction, it will suffer a recoil from the inertia of the fictitious fluid. Poincar\u00e9 performed a Lorentz boost (to order \"v\"/\"c\") to the frame of the moving source. He noted that energy conservation holds in both frames, but that the law of conservation of momentum is violated. This would allow perpetual motion, a notion which he abhorred. The laws of nature would have to be different in the frames of reference, and the relativity principle would not hold. Therefore, he argued that also in this case there has to be another compensating mechanism in the ether.\nPoincar\u00e9 himself came back to this topic in his St. Louis lecture (1904). He rejected the possibility that energy carries mass and criticized his own solution to compensate the above-mentioned problems:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The apparatus will recoil as if it were a cannon and the projected energy a ball, and that contradicts the principle of Newton, since our present projectile has no mass; it is not matter, it is energy. [..] Shall we say that the space which separates the oscillator from the receiver and which the disturbance must traverse in passing from one to the other, is not empty, but is filled not only with ether, but with air, or even in inter-planetary space with some subtile, yet ponderable fluid; that this matter receives the shock, as does the receiver, at the moment the energy reaches it, and recoils, when the disturbance leaves it? That would save Newton's principle, but it is not true. If the energy during its propagation remained always attached to some material substratum, this matter would carry the light along with it and Fizeau has shown, at least for the air, that there is nothing of the kind. Michelson and Morley have since confirmed this. We might also suppose that the motions of matter proper were exactly compensated by those of the ether; but that would lead us to the same considerations as those made a moment ago. The principle, if thus interpreted, could explain anything, since whatever the visible motions we could imagine hypothetical motions to compensate them. But if it can explain anything, it will allow us to foretell nothing; it will not allow us to choose between the various possible hypotheses, since it explains everything in advance. It therefore becomes useless.\nIn the above quote he refers to the Hertz assumption of total aether entrainment that was falsified by the Fizeau experiment but that experiment does indeed show that light is partially \"carried along\" with a substance. Finally in 1908 he revisits the problem and ends with abandoning the principle of reaction altogether in favor of supporting a solution based in the inertia of aether itself.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But we have seen above that Fizeau's experiment does not permit of our retaining the theory of Hertz; it is necessary therefore to adopt the theory of Lorentz, and consequently to renounce the principle of reaction.\nHe also discussed two other unexplained effects: (1) non-conservation of mass implied by Lorentz's variable mass formula_9, Abraham's theory of variable mass and Kaufmann's experiments on the mass of fast moving electrons and (2) the non-conservation of energy in the radium experiments of Marie Curie.\nIt was Albert Einstein's concept of mass\u2013energy equivalence (1905) that a body losing energy as radiation or heat was losing mass of amount \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"E\"/\"c\"2 that resolved Poincar\u00e9's paradox, without using any compensating mechanism within the ether. The Hertzian oscillator loses mass in the emission process, and momentum is conserved in any frame. However, concerning Poincar\u00e9's solution of the Center of Gravity problem, Einstein noted that Poincar\u00e9's formulation and his own from 1906 were mathematically equivalent.\nGravitational waves.\nIn 1905 Poincar\u00e9 first proposed gravitational waves (\"ondes gravifiques\") emanating from a body and propagating at the speed of light. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has become important to examine this hypothesis more closely and in particular to ask in what ways it would require us to modify the laws of gravitation. That is what I have tried to determine; at first I was led to assume that the propagation of gravitation is not instantaneous, but happens with the speed of light.\nPoincar\u00e9 and Einstein.\nEinstein's first paper on relativity was published three months after Poincar\u00e9's short paper, but before Poincar\u00e9's longer version. Einstein relied on the principle of relativity to derive the Lorentz transformations and used a similar clock synchronisation procedure (Einstein synchronisation) to the one that Poincar\u00e9 (1900) had described, but Einstein's paper was remarkable in that it contained no references at all. Poincar\u00e9 never acknowledged Einstein's work on special relativity. However, Einstein expressed sympathy with Poincar\u00e9's outlook obliquely in a letter to Hans Vaihinger on 3 May 1919, when Einstein considered Vaihinger's general outlook to be close to his own and Poincar\u00e9's to be close to Vaihinger's. In public, Einstein acknowledged Poincar\u00e9 posthumously in the text of a lecture in 1921 titled \"\"Geometrie und Erfahrung\" (Geometry and Experience)\" in connection with non-Euclidean geometry, but not in connection with special relativity. A few years before his death, Einstein commented on Poincar\u00e9 as being one of the pioneers of relativity, saying \"Lorentz had already recognized that the transformation named after him is essential for the analysis of Maxwell's equations, and Poincar\u00e9 deepened this insight still further ...\".\nAssessments on Poincar\u00e9 and relativity.\nPoincar\u00e9's work in the development of special relativity is well recognised, though most historians stress that despite many similarities with Einstein's work, the two had very different research agendas and interpretations of the work. Poincar\u00e9 developed a similar physical interpretation of local time and noticed the connection to signal velocity, but contrary to Einstein he continued to use the ether-concept in his papers and argued that clocks at rest in the ether show the \"true\" time, and moving clocks show the local time. So Poincar\u00e9 tried to keep the relativity principle in accordance with classical concepts, while Einstein developed a mathematically equivalent kinematics based on the new physical concepts of the relativity of space and time.\nWhile this is the view of most historians, a minority go much further, such as E. T. Whittaker, who held that Poincar\u00e9 and Lorentz were the true discoverers of relativity.\nAlgebra and number theory.\nPoincar\u00e9 introduced group theory to physics, and was the first to study the group of Lorentz transformations. He also made major contributions to the theory of discrete groups and their representations.\nTopology.\nThe subject is clearly defined by Felix Klein in his \"Erlangen Program\" (1872): the geometry invariants of arbitrary continuous transformation, a kind of geometry. The term \"topology\" was introduced, as suggested by Johann Benedict Listing, instead of previously used \"Analysis situs\". Some important concepts were introduced by Enrico Betti and Bernhard Riemann. But the foundation of this science, for a space of any dimension, was created by Poincar\u00e9. His first article on this topic appeared in 1894.\nHis research in geometry led to the abstract topological definition of homotopy and homology. He also first introduced the basic concepts and invariants of combinatorial topology, such as Betti numbers and the fundamental group. Poincar\u00e9 proved a formula relating the number of edges, vertices and faces of \"n\"-dimensional polyhedron (the Euler\u2013Poincar\u00e9 theorem) and gave the first precise formulation of the intuitive notion of dimension.\nAstronomy and celestial mechanics.\nPoincar\u00e9 published two now classical monographs, \"New Methods of Celestial Mechanics\" (1892\u20131899) and \"Lectures on Celestial Mechanics\" (1905\u20131910). In them, he successfully applied the results of their research to the problem of the motion of three bodies and studied in detail the behavior of solutions (frequency, stability, asymptotic, and so on). They introduced the small parameter method, fixed points, integral invariants, variational equations, the convergence of the asymptotic expansions. Generalizing a theory of Bruns (1887), Poincar\u00e9 showed that the three-body problem is not integrable. In other words, the general solution of the three-body problem can not be expressed in terms of algebraic and transcendental functions through unambiguous coordinates and velocities of the bodies. His work in this area was the first major achievement in celestial mechanics since Isaac Newton.\nThese monographs include an idea of Poincar\u00e9, which later became the basis for mathematical \"chaos theory\" (see, in particular, the Poincar\u00e9 recurrence theorem) and the general theory of dynamical systems. Poincar\u00e9 authored important works on astronomy for the equilibrium figures of a gravitating rotating fluid. He introduced the important concept of bifurcation points and proved the existence of equilibrium figures such as the non-ellipsoids, including ring-shaped and pear-shaped figures, and their stability. For this discovery, Poincar\u00e9 received the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1900).\nDifferential equations and mathematical physics.\nAfter defending his doctoral thesis on the study of singular points of the system of differential equations, Poincar\u00e9 wrote a series of memoirs under the title \"On curves defined by differential equations\" (1881\u20131882). In these articles, he built a new branch of mathematics, called \"qualitative theory of differential equations\". Poincar\u00e9 showed that even if the differential equation can not be solved in terms of known functions, yet from the very form of the equation, a wealth of information about the properties and behavior of the solutions can be found. In particular, Poincar\u00e9 investigated the nature of the trajectories of the integral curves in the plane, gave a classification of singular points (saddle, focus, center, node), introduced the concept of a limit cycle and the loop index, and showed that the number of limit cycles is always finite, except for some special cases. Poincar\u00e9 also developed a general theory of integral invariants and solutions of the variational equations. For the finite-difference equations, he created a new direction \u2013 the asymptotic analysis of the solutions. He applied all these achievements to study practical problems of mathematical physics and celestial mechanics, and the methods used were the basis of its topological works.\nCharacter.\nPoincar\u00e9's work habits have been compared to a bee flying from flower to flower. Poincar\u00e9 was interested in the way his mind worked; he studied his habits and gave a talk about his observations in 1908 at the Institute of General Psychology in Paris. He linked his way of thinking to how he made several discoveries.\nThe mathematician Darboux claimed he was \"un intuitif\" (an intuitive), arguing that this is demonstrated by the fact that he worked so often by visual representation. Jacques Hadamard wrote that Poincar\u00e9's research demonstrated marvelous clarity and Poincar\u00e9 himself wrote that he believed that logic was not a way to invent but a way to structure ideas and that logic limits ideas.\nToulouse's characterisation.\nPoincar\u00e9's mental organisation was interesting not only to Poincar\u00e9 himself but also to \u00c9douard Toulouse, a psychologist of the Psychology Laboratory of the School of Higher Studies in Paris. Toulouse wrote a book entitled \"Henri Poincar\u00e9\" (1910). In it, he discussed Poincar\u00e9's regular schedule:\nThese abilities were offset to some extent by his shortcomings:\nIn addition, Toulouse stated that most mathematicians worked from principles already established while Poincar\u00e9 started from basic principles each time.\nHis method of thinking is well summarised as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Habitu\u00e9 \u00e0 n\u00e9gliger les d\u00e9tails et \u00e0 ne regarder que les cimes, il passait de l'une \u00e0 l'autre avec une promptitude surprenante et les faits qu'il d\u00e9couvrait se groupant d'eux-m\u00eames autour de leur centre \u00e9taient instantan\u00e9ment et automatiquement class\u00e9s dans sa m\u00e9moire\" (accustomed to neglecting details and to looking only at mountain tops, he went from one peak to another with surprising rapidity, and the facts he discovered, clustering around their center, were instantly and automatically pigeonholed in his memory).\u2014\u200a\nLegacy.\nPoincar\u00e9 is credited with laying the foundations of special relativity, with some arguing that he should be credited with its creation. He is said to have \"dominated the mathematics and the theoretical physics of his time\", and that \"he was without a doubt the most admired mathematician while he was alive, and he remains today one of the world's most emblematic scientific figures.\" Poincar\u00e9 is regarded as a \"universal specialist\", as he refined celestial mechanics, he progressed nearly all parts of mathematics of his time, including creating new subjects, is a father of special relativity, participated in all the great debates of his time in physics, was a major actor in the great epistemological debates of his day in relation to philosophy of science, and Poincar\u00e9 was the one who investigated the 1879 Magny shaft firedamp explosion as an engineer. Due to the breadth of his research, Poincar\u00e9 was the only member to be elected to every section of the French Academy of Sciences of the time, those being geometry, mechanics, physics, astronomy and navigation.\nPhysicist Henri Becquerel nominated Poincar\u00e9 for a Nobel Prize in 1904, as Becquerel took note that \"Poincar\u00e9's mathematical and philosophical genius surveyed all of physics and was among those that contributed most to human progress by giving researchers a solid basis for their journeys into the unknown.\" After his death, he was praised by many intellectual figures of his time, as the author Marie Bonaparte wrote to his widowed wife Louise that \"He was \u2013 as you know better than anyone \u2013 not only the greatest thinker, the most powerful genius of our time \u2013 but also a deep and incomparable heart; and having been close to him remains the precious memory of a whole life.\"\nMathematician E.T. Bell titled Poincar\u00e9 as \"The Last Universalist\", and noted his prowess in many fields, stating that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Poincar\u00e9 was the last man to take practically all mathematics, both pure and applied, as his province ... few mathematicians have had the breadth of philosophical vision that Poincar\u00e9 had and none is his superior in the gift of clear exposition.\nWhen philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell was asked who was the greatest man that France had produced in modern times, he instantly replied \"Poincar\u00e9\". Bell noted that if Poincar\u00e9 had been as strong in practical science as he was in theoretical, he might have \"made a fourth with the incomparable three, Archimedes, Newton, and Gauss.\"\nBell further noted his powerful memory, one that was even superior to Leonhard Euler's, stating that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His principal diversion was reading, where his unusual talents first showed up. A book once read - at incredible speed - became a permanent possession, and he could always state the page and line where a particular thing occurred. He retained this powerful memory all his life. This rare faculty, which Poincar\u00e9 shared with Euler who had it in a lesser degree, might be called visual or spatial memory. In temporal memory - the ability to recall with uncanny precision a sequence of events long passed \u2014 he was also unusually strong.\nBell notes the terrible eyesight of Poincar\u00e9, he almost completely remembered formulas and theorems by ear, and \"unable to see the board distinctly when he became a student of advanced mathematics, he sat back and listened, following and remembering perfectly without taking notes - an easy feat for him, but one incomprehensible to most mathematicians.\"\nHonours.\nAwards\nNamed after him\nHenri Poincar\u00e9 did not receive the Nobel Prize in Physics, but he had influential advocates like Henri Becquerel or committee member G\u00f6sta Mittag-Leffler. The nomination archive reveals that Poincar\u00e9 received a total of 51 nominations between 1904 and 1912, the year of his death. Of the 58 nominations for the 1910 Nobel Prize, 34 named Poincar\u00e9. Nominators included Nobel laureates Hendrik Lorentz and Pieter Zeeman (both of 1902), Marie Curie (of 1903), Albert Michelson (of 1907), Gabriel Lippmann (of 1908) and Guglielmo Marconi (of 1909).\nThe fact that renowned theoretical physicists like Poincar\u00e9, Boltzmann or Gibbs were not awarded the Nobel Prize is seen as evidence that the Nobel committee had more regard for experimentation than theory. In Poincar\u00e9's case, several of those who nominated him pointed out that the greatest problem was to name a specific discovery, invention, or technique.\nPhilosophy.\nPoincar\u00e9 had philosophical views opposite to those of Bertrand Russell and Gottlob Frege, who believed that mathematics was a branch of logic. Poincar\u00e9 strongly disagreed, claiming that intuition was the life of mathematics. Poincar\u00e9 gives an interesting point of view in his 1902 book \"Science and Hypothesis\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For a superficial observer, scientific truth is beyond the possibility of doubt; the logic of science is infallible, and if the scientists are sometimes mistaken, this is only from their mistaking its rule.\nPoincar\u00e9 believed that arithmetic is synthetic. He argued that Peano's axioms cannot be proven non-circularly with the principle of induction (Murzi, 1998), therefore concluding that arithmetic is \"a priori\" synthetic and not analytic. Poincar\u00e9 then went on to say that mathematics cannot be deduced from logic since it is not analytic. His views were similar to those of Immanuel Kant (Kolak, 2001, Folina 1992). He strongly opposed Cantorian set theory, objecting to its use of impredicative definitions.\nHowever, Poincar\u00e9 did not share Kantian views in all branches of philosophy and mathematics. For example, in geometry, Poincar\u00e9 believed that the structure of non-Euclidean space can be known analytically. Poincar\u00e9 held that convention plays an important role in physics. His view (and some later, more extreme versions of it) came to be known as \"conventionalism\". Poincar\u00e9 believed that Newton's first law was not empirical but is a conventional framework assumption for mechanics (Gargani, 2012). He also believed that the geometry of physical space is conventional. He considered examples in which either the geometry of the physical fields or gradients of temperature can be changed, either describing a space as non-Euclidean measured by rigid rulers, or as a Euclidean space where the rulers are expanded or shrunk by a variable heat distribution. However, Poincar\u00e9 thought that we were so accustomed to Euclidean geometry that we would prefer to change the physical laws to save Euclidean geometry rather than shift to non-Euclidean physical geometry.\nFree will.\nPoincar\u00e9's famous lectures before the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de Psychologie in Paris (published as \"Science and Hypothesis\", \"The Value of Science\", and \"Science and Method\") were cited by Jacques Hadamard as the source for the idea that creativity and invention consist of two mental stages, first random combinations of possible solutions to a problem, followed by a critical evaluation.\nAlthough he most often spoke of a deterministic universe, Poincar\u00e9 said that the subconscious generation of new possibilities involves chance.\nIt is certain that the combinations which present themselves to the mind in a kind of sudden illumination after a somewhat prolonged period of unconscious work are generally useful and fruitful combinations... all the combinations are formed as a result of the automatic action of the subliminal ego, but those only which are interesting find their way into the field of consciousness... A few only are harmonious, and consequently at once useful and beautiful, and they will be capable of affecting the geometrician's special sensibility I have been speaking of; which, once aroused, will direct our attention upon them, and will thus give them the opportunity of becoming conscious... In the subliminal ego, on the contrary, there reigns what I would call liberty, if one could give this name to the mere absence of discipline and to disorder born of chance.\nPoincar\u00e9's two stages\u2014random combinations followed by selection\u2014became the basis for Daniel Dennett's two-stage model of free will.\nBibliography.\nPoincar\u00e9's writings in English translation.\nPopular writings on the philosophy of science:\nOn algebraic topology:\nOn celestial mechanics:\nOn the philosophy of mathematics:\nOther:\nExhaustive bibliography of English translations:\nSee also.\nConcepts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTheorems.\nHere is a list of theorems proved by Poincar\u00e9:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48741", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48741", "title": "Internet Humor", "text": ""}
{"id": "48742", "revid": "16372547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48742", "title": "Russel Crowe", "text": ""}
{"id": "48743", "revid": "49552034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48743", "title": "List of phobias", "text": "List of fear of different things or objects\nThe English suffixes -phobia, -phobic, -phobe (from Greek \u03c6\u03cc\u03b2\u03bf\u03c2 \"phobos\", \"fear\") occur in technical usage in psychiatry to construct words that describe irrational, abnormal, unwarranted, persistent, or disabling fear as a mental disorder (e.g., agoraphobia), in chemistry to describe chemical aversions (e.g., hydrophobic), in biology to describe organisms that dislike certain conditions (e.g., acidophobia), and in medicine to describe hypersensitivity to a stimulus, usually sensory (e.g., photophobia). In common usage, they also form words that describe dislike or hatred of a particular thing or subject (e.g., homophobia). The suffix is antonymic to -phil-.\nFor more information on the psychiatric side, including how psychiatry groups phobias such as agoraphobia, social phobia, or simple phobia, see phobia. The following lists include words ending in \"-phobia\", and include fears that have acquired names. In some cases, the naming of phobias has become a word game, a notable example being a 1998 humorous article published by BBC News. In some cases, a word ending in \"-phobia\" may have an antonym with the suffix \"-phil-\", e.g., Germanophobe/Germanophile.\nMany \"-phobia\" lists circulate on the Internet, with words collected from indiscriminate sources, often copying each other. Also, a number of psychiatric websites exist that at the first glance cover a huge number of phobias, but in fact use a standard text to fit any phobia and reuse it for all unusual phobias by merely changing the name. Sometimes it leads to bizarre results, such as suggestions to cure \"prostitute phobia\". Such practice is known as content spamming and is used to attract search engines.\nAn article published in 1897 in the \"American Journal of Psychology\" noted, \"the absurd tendency to give Greek names to objects feared (which, as Arndt says, would give us such terms as klopsophobia \u2013 fear of thieves and triakaidekaphobia [\"sic\"] \u2013 fear of the number 13\u00a0...)\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPsychological conditions.\nSpecialists may prefer to avoid the suffix \"-phobia\" and use more descriptive terms such as personality disorders, anxiety disorders, and avoidant personality disorder. Terms should strictly have a Greek prefix, although many are irregularly formed with Latin or even English prefixes. Many use inaccurate or imprecise prefixes, such as aerophobia (fear of air) for fear of flying.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCultural prejudices and discrimination.\nEthnic/national/religious prejudices and discrimination.\nThe suffix \"-phobia\" is used to coin terms that denote a particular anti-ethnic or anti-demographic sentiment, such as Americanophobia, Europhobia, Francophobia, Hispanophobia, and Indophobia. Often a synonym with the prefix \"anti-\" already exists (e.g. Polonophobia vs. anti-Polonism). Anti-religious sentiments are expressed in terms such as Christianophobia and Islamophobia.\n\"-phobia\" in the natural sciences.\nIn the natural sciences, words with the suffix \"-phobia/-phobic\" generally describe a predisposition for avoidance or exclusion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48745", "revid": "41865877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48745", "title": "400s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 409 BC \u2013 400 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48747", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48747", "title": "Banking", "text": ""}
{"id": "48748", "revid": "1319921997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48748", "title": "Phil Austin", "text": "American comedian and writer (1941\u20132015)\nPhilip Baine Austin (April 6, 1941 \u2013 June 18, 2015) was an American comedian and writer, best known as a member of the Firesign Theatre.\nEarly life and education.\nAustin was born in Denver, Colorado, and later grew up in Fresno, California, attending Fresno High School. His mother was a drama teacher which influenced his upbringing as an actor. He attended Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine, because it was nearly the most distant point in the continental United States from Fresno. He also attended Fresno State College and UCLA, but did not graduate from any of them. He was in the UCLA Drama Department at the same time as another dropout, Ray Manzarek of The Doors.\nCareer.\nRadio.\nIn Los Angeles in the late 1960s, he was one of the first apprentices for the Center Theatre Group and worked on the staff of KPFK radio in Los Angeles. At KPFK he worked with other staffers David Ossman and Peter Bergman who hosted Radio Free Oz on that station. Along with Bergman's friend Phil Proctor, they formed The Firesign Theatre.\nStarting as live radio actors, the group would go on to record a series of surrealistic comedy albums that were a hit amongst an underground audience. Austin played the group's best-known creation, private investigator Nick Danger. Other prominent roles were as (Happy) Harry Cox, the narrator of \"Everything You Know Is Wrong\" and Bebop Loco/Lobo on \"Give Me Immortality or Give Me Death\". He had also served as the troupe's musician and record producer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It was those comments, the off-mic things, that made Phil so funny. He was the most surreal writer of all of us.\"\nShort story writer.\nHis collection of short stories, \"Tales of the Old Detective and Other Big Fat Lies\", is published by Audio Editions. Two of his stories appear in the third volume of \"Mirth of a Nation\".\nRecord albums.\nAustin also wrote a solo work, \"Roller Maidens From Outer Space\", and directed (and acted in) \"Eat Or Be Eaten\".\nStage versions of \"Don't Crush That Dwarf, Hand Me the Pliers\"; \"The Further Adventures of Nick Danger, Third Eye\"; \"Waiting for the Electrician or Someone Like Him\"; and \"Temporarily Humboldt County\" are published by Broadway Play Publishing Inc.\nDeath.\nAustin died at his home in Fox Island, Washington, on June 18, 2015, at the age of 74. The cause of death was originally given as cardiac arrest, but this was later changed to an aneurysm. When he died, his wife Oona mentioned that Austin also had been diagnosed with cancer months before.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48749", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48749", "title": "Year in Review 6th century BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "48751", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48751", "title": "Firesign Theatre", "text": ""}
{"id": "48752", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48752", "title": "Year in Review 7th century BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "48753", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48753", "title": "Year in Review 5th century BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "48755", "revid": "50872917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48755", "title": "Neo-fascism", "text": "Post\u2013World War II ideology\nNeo-fascism is a post-World War II far-right ideology which includes significant elements of fascism. Neo-fascism usually includes ultranationalism, ultraconservatism, racial supremacy, right-wing populism, authoritarianism, nativism, xenophobia, and anti-immigration sentiment, as well as opposition to social democracy, parliamentarianism, Marxism, communism, socialism, liberalism, neoliberalism, and liberal democracy. \nHistory.\nAccording to Jean-Yves Camus and Nicolas Lebourg, neo-fascism emerged in 1942 after Nazi Germany invaded the USSR and decided to reorient its propaganda on a Europeanist ground. Europe then became both the myth and the utopia of the neo-fascists, who abandoned previous theories of racial inequalities within the white race to share a common euro-nationalist stance after World War II, embodied in Oswald Mosley's Europe a Nation policy. The following chronology can therefore be delineated: an ideological gestation before 1919; the historical experience of fascism between 1919 and 1942, unfolded in several phases; and finally neo-fascism from 1942 onward.\nDrawing inspiration from the Italian Social Republic, institutional neo-fascism took the form of the Italian Social Movement (MSI). It became one of the chief reference points for the European far-right until the late 1980s, and \"the best (and only) example of a Neofascist party\", in the words of political scientist Cas Mudde. At the initiative of the MSI, the European Social Movement was established in 1951 as a pan-European organization of like-minded neo-fascist groups and figures such as the Francoist Falange, Maurice Bard\u00e8che, Per Engdahl, and Oswald Mosley. Other organizations like Jeune Nation called in the late 1950s for an extra-parliamentarian insurrection against the regime in what amounts to a remnant of pre-war fascist strategies. The main driving force of neo-fascist movements was what they saw as the defense of a Western civilization from the rise of both communism and the Third World, in some cases the loss of the colonial empire.\nIn 1961, Bard\u00e8che redefined the nature of fascism in a book deemed influential in the European far-right at large entitled (\"What Is Fascism?\"). He argued that previous fascists had essentially made two mistakes in that they focused their efforts on the methods rather than the original \"idea\"; and they wrongly believed that fascist society could be achieved via the nation-state as opposed to the construction of Europe. According to him, fascism could survive the 20th century in a new metapolitical guise if its theorists succeed in building inventive methods adapted to the changes of their times; the aim being the promotion of the core politico-cultural fascist project rather than vain attempts to revive doomed regimes: In addition, Bard\u00e8che wrote: \"The single party, the secret police, the public displays of Caesarism, even the presence of a F\u00fchrer are not necessarily attributes of fascism. ... The famous fascist methods are constantly revised and will continue to be revised. More important than the mechanism is the idea which fascism has created for itself of man and freedom. ... With another name, another face, and with nothing which betrays the projection from the past, with the form of a child we do not recognize and the head of a young Medusa, the Order of Sparta will be reborn: and paradoxically it will, without doubt, be the last bastion of Freedom and the sweetness of living.\"\nIn the spirit of Bard\u00e8che's strategy of disguise through framework change, the MSI had developed a policy of \"inserimento\" (insertion, entryism), which relied on gaining political acceptance via the cooperation with other parties within the democratic system. In the political context of the Cold War, anti-communism began to replace anti-fascism as the dominant trend in liberal democracies. In Italy, the MSI became a support group in parliament for the Christian Democratic government in the late 1950s\u2013early 1960s, but was forced back into \"political ghetto\" after anti-fascist protests and violent street clashes occurred between radical leftist and far-right groups, leading to the demise of the short-lived fascist-backed Tambroni Cabinet in July 1960.\nThe psychologist David Pav\u00f3n-Cu\u00e9llar, of the Universidad Michoacana de San Nicol\u00e1s de Hidalgo, has argued that the emergence of neoliberalism in the late-twentieth century prompted neoliberalist politicians to utilize neo-fascism as a means to remove all limits to capital (including labor laws, social rights and tariffs). According to Pav\u00f3n-Cu\u00e9llar, this is done by employing the aestheticization of politics and by using the narcissism of small differences to find a target for hate, maintain a social hierarchy instead of protecting all individuals.\nCauses and description.\nA number of historians and political scientists have pointed out that the situations in a number of European countries in the 1980s and 1990s, in particular France, Germany and Italy, were in some significant ways analogous to the conditions in Europe in the period between World War I and World War II that gave rise to fascism in its many national guises. Constant economic crises including high unemployment, a resurgence of nationalism, an increase in ethnic conflicts, and the geo-political weakness of national regimes were all present, and while not an exact one-to-one correspondence, circumstances were similar enough to promote the beginning of neo-fascism as a new fascist movement. Because intense nationalism is almost always a part of neo-fascism, the parties which make up this movement are not pan-European, but are specific to each country they arise in; other than this, the neo-fascist parties and other groups have many ideological traits in common.\nWhile certainly fascistic in nature, it is claimed by some that there are differences between neo-fascism and what can be called \"historical fascism\", or the kind of neo-fascism which came about in the immediate aftermath of World War II. Some historians claim that contemporary neo-fascist parties are not anti-democratic because they operate within their country's political system. Whether that is a significant difference between neo-fascism and historical fascism is doubted by other scholars, who point out that Hitler worked within the existing political system of the Weimar Republic to obtain power, although it took an anti-democratic but constitutional process in the form of presidential appointment rather than election through the Reichstag. Others point to the current neo-fascists not being totalitarian in nature, but the organization of their parties along the lines of the \"F\u00fchrerprinzip\" would seem to indicate otherwise. Historian Stanley G. Payne claims that the differences in current circumstance to that of the interwar years, and the strengthening of democracy in European countries since the end of the war prevents a general return of historical fascism, and causes true neo-fascist groups to be small and remain on the fringe. For Payne, groups like the National Front in France are not neo-fascists in nature, but are merely \"right radical parties\" that will, in the course of time, moderate their positions in order to achieve electoral victory.\nThe problem of immigrants, both legal and illegal or irregular, whether called \"foreigners\", \"foreign workers\", \"economic refugees\", \"ethnic minorities\", \"asylum seekers\", or \"aliens\", is a core neo-fascist issue, intimately tied to their nativism, ultranationalism, and xenophobia, but the specifics differ somewhat from country to country due to prevailing circumstances. In general, the anti-immigrant impetus is strong when the economy is weak or unemployment is high, and people fear that outsiders are taking their jobs. Because of this, neo-fascist parties have more electoral traction during hard economic times. Again, this mirrors the situation in the interwar years, when, for instance, Germany suffered from incredible hyperinflation and many people had their life savings swept away. In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, some neo-fascist groups likewise argued for a Third Position as an alternative to market capitalism.\nIn contemporary Europe, mainstream political parties see the electoral advantage the neo-fascist and far-right parties get from their strong emphasis on the supposed problem of the outsider, and are then tempted to co-opt the issue by moving somewhat to the right on the immigrant issue, hoping to slough off some voters from the hard right. In the absence in post-war Europe of a strong socialist movement, this has the tendency to move the political centre to the right overall.\nWhile both historical fascism and contemporary neo-fascism are xenophobic, nativist and anti-immigrant, neo-fascist leaders are careful not to present these views in so strong a manner as to draw obvious parallels to historical events. Both Jean-Marie Le Pen of France's National Front and J\u00f6rg Haider's Freedom Party of Austria, in the words of historian Tony Judt, \"revealed [their] prejudices only indirectly\". Jews would not be castigated as a group, but a person would be specifically named as a danger who just happened to be a Jew. The public presentation of their leaders is one principal difference between the neo-fascists and historical fascists: their programs have been \"finely honed and 'modernized'\" to appeal to the electorate, a \"far-right ideology with a democratic veneer\". Modern neo-fascists do not appear in \"jackboots and brownshirts\", but in suits and ties. The choice is deliberate, as the leaders of the various groups work to differentiate themselves from the brutish leaders of historical fascism and also to hide whatever bloodlines and connections tie the current leaders to the historical fascist movements. When these become public, as they did in the case of Haider, it can lead to their decline and fall.\nInternational networks.\nIn 1951, the New European Order (NEO) neo-fascist European-wide alliance was set up to promote pan-European nationalism. It was a more radical splinter group of the European Social Movement. The NEO had its origins in the 1951 Malm\u00f6 conference, when a group of rebels led by Ren\u00e9 Binet and Maurice Bard\u00e8che refused to join the European Social Movement as they felt that it did not go far enough in terms of racialism and anti-communism. As a result, Binet joined with Gaston-Armand Amaudruz in a second meeting that same year in Z\u00fcrich to set up a second group pledged to wage war on communists and non-white people.\nSeveral Cold War regimes and international neo-fascist movements collaborated in operations such as assassinations and false flag bombings. Stefano Delle Chiaie, who was involved in Italy's Years of Lead, took part in Operation Condor; organizing the 1976 assassination attempt on Chilean Christian Democrat Bernardo Leighton. Vincenzo Vinciguerra escaped to Franquist Spain with the help of the SISMI, following the 1972 Peteano attack, for which he was sentenced to life. Along with Delle Chiaie, Vinciguerra testified in Rome in December 1995 before judge Mar\u00eda Servini de Cubr\u00eda, stating that Enrique Arancibia Clavel (a former Chilean secret police agent prosecuted for crimes against humanity in 2004) and US expatriate DINA agent Michael Townley were directly involved in General Carlos Prats' assassination. Michael Townley was sentenced in Italy to 15 years of prison for having served as intermediary between the DINA and the Italian neo-fascists.\nThe regimes of Francoist Spain, Augusto Pinochet's Chile and Alfredo Stroessner's Paraguay participated together in Operation Condor, which targeted political opponents worldwide. During the Cold War, these international operations gave rise to some cooperation between various neo-fascist elements engaged in a \"Crusade against Communism\". Anti-Fidel Castro terrorist Luis Posada Carriles was condemned for the Cubana Flight 455 bombing on 6 October 1976. According to the \"Miami Herald\", this bombing was decided on at the same meeting during which it was decided to target Chilean former minister Orlando Letelier, who was assassinated on 21 September 1976. Carriles wrote in his autobiography that \"we the Cubans didn't oppose ourselves to an isolated tyranny, nor to a particular system of our fatherland, but that we had in front of us a colossal enemy, whose main head was in Moscow, with its tentacles dangerously extended on all the planet.\"\nThe March 2015 International Russian Conservative Forum organized by pro-Putin Rodina-party has been described as a neo-Fascist event by multiple sources. The event was attended by fringe groups like Nordic Resistance Movement from Scandinavia but also by more mainstream MEPs from Golden Dawn and National Democratic Party of Germany. In addition to Rodina, Russian Imperial Movement and Rusich Group were also in attendance. The event was attended by several notable American white supremacists including Jared Taylor and Brandon Russell.\nEurope.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, neo-fascism is often connected to the 1930s and 1940s fascist and pro-Nazi Patriotic People's Movement (IKL), its youth movement Blues-and-Blacks and its predecessor Lapua Movement. Post-war fascist groups such as Patriotic People's Movement (1993), Patriotic Popular Front, Patriotic National Movement, Blue-and-Black Movement and many others consciously copy the style of the movement and look up to its leaders as inspiration. A Finns Party councillor and police officer in Sein\u00e4joki caused small scandal wearing the fascist blue-and-black uniform.\nSuomen Sisu has been identified as neo-fascist and members of Suomen Sisu have given statements understood as condoning fascism such as Juho Eerola saying \"a lot can be learned\" from Mussolini. Members of Suomen Sisu have risen to prominent positions: Jussi Halla-aho is Speaker of the Parliament and Olli Immonen is the General Secretary of the Finns Party.\nNeo-fascist \"Awakening\" conference is held annually in Finland, attracting some hundreds of white supremacists from around the globe. The event has been attended by fascists from around the world; Jared Taylor of American Renaissance, Kevin MacDonald, representatives of the National Corps and others.\nFrance.\nIn France, the far-right National Rally party is of neo-fascist origin and is frequently accused of promoting anti-semitism and xenophobia. The party was founded in 1972 to unify the French nationalist movement by Holocaust denier Jean-Marie Le Pen, who was its leader until his resignation in 2011. Jean-Marie Le Pen's daughter, Marine Le Pen, has also been the party's leader and Marine Le Pen's niece, Marion Mar\u00e9chal has repeated anti-Islam rhetoric such as \"We know what we are and we know what we are not. We are not an Islamic nation.\" Pierre Bousquet, a co-founder, was in the Nazi Waffen-SS during World War II.\nGermany.\nSince German reunification there has been an increase of support for fascism in Germany, primarily led by the National Democratic Party of Germany and Alternative for Germany. Both parties support the concept of ethnic nationalism such as the deportations of German citizens who belong to certain ethnicities.\nGreece.\nAfter the onset of the Great Recession and economic crisis in Greece, a movement known as the Golden Dawn, widely considered a neo-Nazi party, soared in support out of obscurity and won seats in Greece's parliament, espousing a staunch hostility towards minorities, illegal immigrants and refugees. In 2013, after the murder of an anti-fascist musician by a person with links to Golden Dawn, the Greek government ordered the arrest of Golden Dawn's leader Nikolaos Michaloliakos and other Golden Dawn members on charges related to being associated with a criminal organization. Golden Dawn after emerging as a major political was engaged in numerous murder and criminal trials, such as the murder of Pavlos Fyssas. Following years long legal investigation sentenced its leaders to prison.\nIn October, 2020, the court declared Golden Dawn to be a criminal organization, convicting 68 members of various crimes including murder. However, far-right politics continue to be strong in Greece, such as Ilias Kasidiaris' National Party \u2013 Greeks, an Ultranationalist party. In 2021, Greek neo-Nazi youth attacked a rival group at a school in Greece. Following the collapse of Golden Dawn, various neo-Fascist political parties emerged including the Spartans.\nItaly.\nItaly was broadly divided into two political blocs following World War II: the Christian Democrats, who remained in power until the 1990s, and the Italian Communist Party (PCI), which was very strong immediately after the war and achieved a large consensus during the 1970s. With the beginning of the Cold War, the American and British governments turned a blind eye to the refusal of Italian authorities to honor requested extraditions of Italian war criminals to Yugoslavia, which they feared would benefit the PCI. With no event such as the Nuremberg trials taking place for Italian war crimes, the collective memory of the crimes committed by Italian fascists was excluded from public media, from textbooks in Italian schools, and even from the academic discourse on the Western side of the Iron Curtain throughout the Cold War. The PCI was expelled from power in May 1947, a month before the Paris Conference on the Marshall Plan, along with the French Communist Party (PCF).\nIn 1946, a group of Italian fascist soldiers founded the Italian Social Movement (MSI) to continue advocating the ideas of Benito Mussolini. The leader of the MSI was Giorgio Almirante, who remained at the head of the party until his death in 1988. Despite attempts in the 1970s towards a \"historic compromise\" between the PCI and the DC, the PCI did not have a role in executive power until the 1980s. In December 1970, Junio Valerio Borghese attempted, along with Stefano Delle Chiaie, the \"Borghese Coup\" which was supposed to install a neo-fascist regime. Neo-fascist groups took part in various false flag terrorist attacks, starting with the December 1969 Piazza Fontana massacre, for which Vincenzo Vinciguerra was convicted, and they are usually considered to have stopped with the 1980 Bologna railway bombing.\nIn 1987, the reins of the MSI party were taken by Gianfranco Fini, under whom in 1995 it was dissolved and transformed into the National Alliance (AN). The party led by Fini distanced itself from Mussolini and fascism and made efforts to improve its relations with the Jewish community, becoming a conservative right-wing party until its merger with Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia into the centre-right party The People of Freedom in 2009. Neo-fascist parties in Italy include the Tricolour Flame (\"Fiamma Tricolore\"), the New Force (\"Forza Nuova\"), the National Social Front (\"Fronte Sociale Nazionale\"), and CasaPound. The national-conservative Brothers of Italy (FdI), main heirs of MSI and AN, has been described as neo-fascist by several academics, and it has some neo-fascist factions within their internal organization. The results of the 2022 Italian general election, in which FdI became the first party, have been variously described as Italy's first far-right-led government in the republican era and its most right-wing government since World War II. The Russia-Ukraine war has divided the Italian far right, including neo-fascists, into three clusters: the pro-Western and Atlanticist extreme right (e.g. \"CasaPound\"), nostalgic and pro-Putin neo-fascism (New Force), and an ideologically evolving collection of National Bolshevik and Eurasianist militants. Recent studies have studied the geopolitical role of Italian neofascism with some groups participating with CIA-backing in the Strategy of Tension during the Cold War where terrorists actions were aimed to keep Italy in NATO and prevent the Communist Party from coming to power \nPortugal.\nAfter the fall of authoritarianism in Portugal after the Carnation Revolution of 1974, several neo-fascist groups arose such as the New Order (Portugal) which was created in 1978. A report by the European Parliament defined the ideology of the New Order as revolutionary fascist and hyper-nationalist. The group also had connections to Fuerza Nueva in Spain. The New Order was disbanded in 1982, however its activities continued to as late as 1985.\nRomania.\nIn Romania, the ultra-nationalist movement which allied itself with the Axis powers and German National Socialism was the Iron Guard, also known as the Legion of the Archangel Michael. There are some modern political organisations which consider themselves heirs of Legionarism, this includes Noua Dreapt\u0103 and the Everything For the Country Party, founded by former Iron Guard members. The latter organisation was outlawed in 2015. Aside, from these Romanian organisations, the Sixty-Four Counties Youth Movement representing ultra-nationalism from the Hungarian minority is also present, especially in Transylvania. Other nationalistic and irredentist groups such as the Greater Romania Party do not originate from Legionarism, but in fact grew out of national communist tendencies from the era of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu (the party was founded by his \"court poet\" Corneliu Vadim Tudor).\nThe Romanian Hearth Union (UVR), which had around 4 million supporters in 1992, has been described as neofascist. Its political branch was the Romanian National Unity Party, but had also ties to the Social Democracy Party of Romania (PDSR), Greater Romania Party (PRM) and the Democratic Agrarian Party of Romania (PDAR). One of the founders of the UVR was the Romanian President Ion Iliescu, who was still its member in 2005.\nRussia.\nIn 1990, Vladimir Zhirinovsky founded the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia. Its leader opposes democratic values, human rights, a multiparty system, and the rule of law. Encyclopedia Britannica considers Zhirinovsky to be a neo-fascist. Zhirinovsky endorsed the forcible re-occupation of Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, and suggested nuclear waste should be dumped there. During the First Chechen War in the mid-1990s, he advocated hitting some Chechen villages with tactical nuclear weapons.\nThe Russian National Unity was a paramilitary organization which was founded by Alexander Barkashov in 1990. It used a left-pointed swastika and emphasizes the \"primary importance\" of Russian blood. Concerning Adolf Hitler, the organizations's leader Barkashov declared: \"I consider [Hitler] a great hero of the German nation and of all white races. He succeeded in inspiring the entire nation to fight against degradation and the washing away of national values.\" Before it was banned in 1999, and breakup in late 2000, the group estimated to have had approximately 20,000 to 25,000 members. Alexander Barkashov along with other members of the Russian National Unity have engaged in religious activities and pro-Russian activism in the Russian-Ukrainian War.\nSerbia.\nA neo-fascist organization in Serbia was Obraz, which was banned on 12 June 2012 by the Constitutional Court of Serbia.\nEarlier, on 18 June 1990, Vojislav \u0160e\u0161elj organized the Serbian Chetnik Movement (S\u010cP) though it was not permitted official registration due to its obvious Chetnik identification. On 23 February 1991, it merged with the National Radical Party (NRS), establishing the Serbian Radical Party (SRS) with \u0160e\u0161elj as president and Tomislav Nikoli\u0107 as vice president. It was a Chetnik party, oriented towards neo-fascism with a striving for the territorial expansion of Serbia.\nSlovakia.\nKotleba \u2013 People's Party Our Slovakia is a far-right political party with views that are considered extremist and fascist. The Party's leader, Marian Kotleba, is a former neo-Nazi, who once wore a uniform modelled on that of the Hlinka Guard, the militia of the 1939\u201345 Nazi-sponsored Slovak State. He opposes Romani people, immigrants, the Slovak National Uprising, NATO, the United States, and the European Union. The party also endorses the clerical fascist war criminal and former Slovak President Jozef Tiso.\nIn 2003, Kotleba founded the far-right political party Slovak Community (Slovak: \"Slovensk\u00e1 Pospolitos\u0165\"). In 2007, the Slovak interior ministry banned the party from running and campaigning in elections. In spite of this ban, Kotleba's party got 8.04% of votes in the Slovak 2016 parliamentary elections. As of December 2022, voter support has dropped significantly to about 3.1%, under the 5% threshold required to enter parliament.\nTurkey.\nGrey Wolves is a Turkish ultranationalist and neo-fascist youth organization. It is the \"unofficial militant arm\" of the Nationalist Movement Party. The Grey Wolves have been accused of terrorism. According to Turkish authorities, the organization carried out 694 murders during the late-1970s political violence in Turkey, between 1974 and 1980.\nThe nationalist political party MHP founded by Alparslan T\u00fcrke\u015f is also sometimes described as neo-fascist.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe British National Party (BNP) is a nationalist party in the United Kingdom which espoused the ideology of fascism and anti-immigration. In the 2009 European elections, it gained two members of the European Parliament (MEPs), including former party leader Nick Griffin. Other British organisations described as fascist or neo-fascist include the National Front, Combat 18, the English Defence League, and Britain First.\nAmericas.\nArgentina.\nIn Argentina, a notable advocate of neo-fascism was president Mar\u00eda Estela Mart\u00ednez de Per\u00f3n, who applied anti-communist policies under the fascist police organization Triple A and economic market opening policies. Per\u00f3n made a direct apology to fascism by performing the Roman salute in an appearance on the national radio network. The National Reorganization Process has been described by some scholars as a fascist dictatorship.\nBrazil.\nThe Brazilian government of Jair Bolsonaro is cited as the rising point of neo-fascism in South America in the 21st century, based on the denial of science, bellicose rhetoric and authoritarian measures that withdraw rights from the population linked to a strongly neoliberal economic policy. As a result of factors such as opposition to Workers' Party, fear and reaction to the 2013 protests, as well as the 2008 financial crisis and 2014 Brazilian economic crisis, Jair Bolsonaro emerged as a viable option, not because of a well-defined strategic project, but almost accidentally. In this way, the multiplicity of groups that make up the Bolsonarism, the different wings (military, ideological, religious, capital, etc.) present pragmatic disagreements, strategies, objectives and distinct methods. The core of this Brazilian neo-fascism converged its interests and rhetoric with Pentecostal religious fundamentalism and both allied themselves with military sectors and liberal think tanks, so that within bolsonarism there is a power bloc made up of non-fascist conservatives and far-right neo-fascists; although still without the support of the broad and fanatical mass movement which was the basis of European fascism.\nUnited States.\nGroups which are identified as neo-fascist in the United States generally include neo-Nazi organizations and movements such as the Proud Boys, the National Alliance, and the American Nazi Party. The Institute for Historical Review publishes negationist historical papers which are often antisemitic. The alt-right\u2014a loosely connected coalition of individuals and organizations which advocates a wide range of far-right ideas, from neo-reactionism to white nationalism\u2014is often included under the umbrella term \"neo-fascist\" because alt-right individuals and organizations advocate a radical form of authoritarian ultranationalism.\nOceania.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nBrenton Harrison Tarrant, the Australian perpetrator of the Christchurch mosque shootings at Al Noor Mosque and Linwood Islamic Centre in Christchurch, New Zealand, was an admitted fascist who followed eco-fascism and admired Oswald Mosley. Mosley was the leader of the British fascist organization called the British Union of Fascists (BUF) in the 1930s, and he is quoted in the shooter's manifesto \"The Great Replacement\" (named after the French far-right theory of the same name).\nAfrica.\nSouth Africa.\nThe Economic Freedom Fighters are a self-described pan-Africanist political party founded in 2013 by the expelled former African National Congress Youth League (ANCYL) President Julius Malema, and his allies. Malema and the party have frequently courted controversy for engaging in anti-White and anti-Indian racism. In November 2019, the Professor of International Relations at University of the Witwatersrand, Vishwas Satgar, defined them as a manifestation of a new phenomenon, 'Black Neofascism'.\nAsia.\nIndonesia.\nAdolf Hitler's propaganda which advocated the hegemony of \"Greater Germany\" inspired similar ideas of \"Indonesia Mulia\" (esteemed Indonesia) and \"Indonesia Raya\" (great Indonesia) in the former Dutch colony. The first fascist party was the Partai Fasis Indonesia (PFI). Sukarno admired Nazi Germany under Hitler and its vision of happiness for all: \"It's in the Third Reich that the Germans will see Germany at the apex above other nations in this world,\" he said in 1963. He stated that Hitler was 'extraordinarily clever' in 'depicting his ideals': he spoke about Hitler's rhetorical skills, but denied any association with Nazism as an ideology, saying that Indonesian nationalism was not as narrow as Nazi nationalism.\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, various fascist movements exist. Notably, Kahanism gained influence as the conflict between Israel and Palestine continues to persist. The kahanist party Otzma Yehudit (\"Jewish Power\") has widely been described as fascist. Noted Israeli sociologist Eva Illouz has described the party leader of Otzma Yehudit, Itamar Ben-Gvir, as representative of Jewish fascism. Ben-Gvir once kept a portrait of the Israeli terrorist and mass murderer Baruch Goldstein in his living room, sparking outrage. In 1980, the Journal of Palestine Studies published an article describing the rise of fascist movements in Israel and support from governmental institutions.\nJapan.\nAfter World War II, neo-fascism and ultra-nationalism were ostracized from mainstream politics in Germany, while in Japan, they were partially related to major right-wing conservative politics. Since 2006, all prime ministers of Japan's LDP have been members of far-right ultranationalist Nippon Kaigi.\nMongolia.\nWith Mongolia located between the larger nations Russia and China, ethnic insecurities have driven many Mongolians to neo-fascism, expressing nationalism centered around Genghis Khan and Adolf Hitler. Groups advocating these ideologies include Blue Mongolia, Dayar Mongol, and Mongolian National Union.\nPakistan.\nPakistan's Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan is considered fascist by some analysts because of its engagement in Islamic extremism.\nTaiwan.\nThe National Socialism Association (NSA) is a neo-fascist political organization founded in Taiwan in September 2006 by Hsu Na-chi (\u8a31\u5a1c\u7426), a 22-year-old female political science graduate of Soochow University. The NSA views Adolf Hitler as its leader and often uses the slogan \"Long live Hitler\". This has brought them condemnation from the Simon Wiesenthal Center, an international Jewish human rights centre.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "48756", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48756", "title": "Battle of Lesnaya", "text": "1708 battle of the Great Northern War\nThe Battle of Lesnaya was fought on 9 October during the Swedish invasion of Russia in the Great Northern War. Russia was the sole remaining enemy of Sweden following the dissolution of the anti-Swedish coalition in 1706. Peter I of Russia led a flying corps ( ]), supported by two additional divisions, to destroy a convoy under general Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt that was heading for the Swedish main army in Ukraine with reinforcements and supplies. Peter caught up with the convoy at the village of Lesnaya (Lyasnaya) in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, present-day Belarus.\nThe Swedes were attacked in the rear at 11:00 as they were crossing the stream of Lesnyanka, at Lesnaya, heading for Propoysk (Slawharad) on the river Sozh behind which Charles XII's army was expected. The initial phase of the battle was fought over a forest clearing a distance from Lesnaya, where a Swedish outpost attempted to stall the attack. The Swedes were pushed back to the village after some hours, where Lewenhaupt ordered a general assembly. The following phase saw Russian attempts to capture the Lesnyanka bridge, to cut him off from the road to Propoysk. Reinforcements arrived successively on both sides during the battle, which continued until 19:00 when the approach of night and a sudden snowfall compelled the Russians to disengage.\nLewenhaupt decided to continue the march in the night, but thousands of troops were either too exhausted to keep up the pace or got lost in the dark. The bulk of his forces arrived at Propoysk the next day, where most wagons were abandoned or destroyed in fear of a Russian pursuit. His army crossed the Sozh over the following days. Peter, who refrained from a general pursuit, sent only smaller units to round up Swedish stragglers along the road to Propoysk, which was taken by storm. Lewenhaupt rendezvoused with Charles at Rukova on 23 October with about half of his forces remaining. The next year, Peter defeated the Swedes at Poltava and forced them to surrender at Perevolochna, resulting in the formation of a new anti-Swedish coalition.\nBackground.\nIn 1700, Sweden and its ally Holstein-Gottorp were attacked by a coalition of Saxony, Russia, and Denmark\u2013Norway. Saxony, under Augustus II, who also ruled the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, invaded Swedish Livonia and besieged Riga early in the year. Meanwhile, Frederick IV of Denmark invaded Holstein-Gottorp and laid siege to T\u00f6nning, but was quickly defeated following a Swedish landing at Humleb\u00e6k under Charles XII of Sweden. Subsequently, Peter I of Russia swept into Swedish Ingria and besieged the city of Narva.\nCharles dealt the Russians a crushing blow at Narva, resulting in their withdrawal out of Ingria. The Saxons and their allies were beaten at the battle of D\u00fcna near Riga in 1701, which paved the way for a Swedish invasion of the Commonwealth to have Augustus removed from the Polish throne. In 1704, following the defeats at Klisz\u00f3w, Krak\u00f3w, Pultusk and Toru\u0144, Augustus was replaced on the throne by the Swedish-installed Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski, who made peace with Sweden the next year. By this time, the Russians had captured several Swedish possessions in their Baltic Dominions, among others, the fortresses of N\u00f6teborg, Nyenskans, Dorpat and Narva.\nIn 1705, the Commonwealth became the theatre of a major confrontation as the Russians intervened in force to restore Augustus on the throne. Following the battles of Gemauerthof, Warsaw, Grodno and Fraustadt, the Swedes were able to clear most of Poland from enemies and invade Saxony, forcing Augustus into an unfavourable peace in 1706. With Russia being the last remaining major threat, the Swedes launched an invasion in 1708. After some time of campaigning, Charles called upon reinforcements from Swedish Livonia where the general and governor of Riga, Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt, was the acting Commander-in-chief.\nPrelude.\nAssembling the convoy.\nOn 5 March 1708, Lewenhaupt received orders from Charles XII to assemble a convoy with as much men as possible without leaving Swedish Livonia exposed. For further planning, he visited the king's winter quarters at Radashkovichy from 4 April to 17 May, arriving at Riga seven days later. The convoy would rendezvous with Charles at Mogilev in the first weeks of August, but its assembling was complicated by the war-torn and crop-failing region. When royal orders arrived on 13 June to start campaigning, it was nowhere ready to leave. Charles struck camp three days later, while Lewenhaupt ordered his troops in Livonia and Courland to move no sooner than 6 July. Some 6,000 men were concurrently being raised to act as a reserve in Livonia by late summer.\nLewenhaupt's convoy included, apart from three-months' worth of provisions for its own troops, about six-weeks' worth of ammunition and other materiel for the main army. It could potentially feed their combined armies for two to four weeks in an emergency, which was inadequate for a joint invasion deep into Russia. Hence, it is suggested that its role was more independent; perhaps to secure the route along the Daugava (D\u00fcna), to pave the way for more supplies and reserves to reach the envisioned Swedish winter quarters at Smolensk. The convoy included anything from 10,914 to 13,000 soldiers, of which 1,950\u20134,950 were used to drive the wagons and cattle. Konovaltjuk and Lyth estimates that it had at least 4,500 wagons, some 13,000\u201318,000 livestock, 16,500\u201318,000 draught horses, 7,000 riding horses and 1,000 pack horses, as well as 4,100\u20137,100 civilian coachmen and officers' servants.\nOn the march.\nReports soon arrived of a Russian force under Rudolph Felix Bauer that was ravaging Swedish Livonia. This compelled Lewenhaupt, who was reluctant of leaving an enemy in his rear, to stall the marching pace in expectance of a counter-order from Charles. Once having reached at least into Lithuania, Lewenhaupt was informed that Bauer had withdrawn. Subsequently, he received confirmation of previous orders, to continue over Berezino in the Vitebsk region to the operating base at Mogilev. The convoy marched from Anyk\u0161\u010diai on 11 August, whereas Lewenhaupt's column stayed at Dawhinava from 26 August to 10 September for repairs and supplies; continuous torrential rain, which turned the roads into mud and flooded the streams, was especially damaging to the wagons. The convoy crossed the Berezina at Berezino, before halting at Chereya from 18 to 25 September where Lewenhaupt learnt that the Russians had recently burned Mogilev.\nFollowing the Battle of Holowczyn, Charles quit Mogilev on 15 August and commenced a demonstrative march southeast to draw the enemy's attention away from the convoy whilst collecting supplies. He turned north at Cherikov, reaching Tatarsk (in the Smolensk Oblast) on 21 September where he stopped to await Lewenhaupt. On 25 September, as supplies were running dangerously low and with no words heard from the general, Charles deviated from his plans of attacking Moscow via Smolensk. Instead, he marched south to establish a base of operation in Severia to exploit its rich granary; incorrect reports falsely informed him that the convoy had already crossed the Dnieper river at Mogilev, thus being relatively safe. In reality, it was still about west of the Dnieper and from him at the time.\nPeter left Boris Sheremetev in command of the main army to shadow Charles, while he assembled an army, including a flying corps, to intercept the convoy at the Dnieper. Lewenhaupt reached Talachyn on 26 September and Vorontsevichi the following day, where he received instructions from Charles to rendezvous at Starodub in Severia. Reports informed him that Russian forces were gathering about east of the river. He beat the Tsar to the Dnieper at Shklov, of which crossing between 2 and 3 October has been considered a \"military masterpiece\" in retrospect. But with the Swedish main army gone east over the next major natural barrier, the Sozh river, the convoy was left isolated between the two rivers. The Russians made contact with it in the following days as it had turned south, now heading for Propoysk (Slawharad) on the Sozh via Belitsa and the marshy Dolgii Mokh. The Swedes had to march in defencive formation as the number of shadowing Russians steadily grew.\nBelitsa and Dolgii Mokh.\nSome 4,000 Russian dragoons along with irregular light cavalry under Gebhard von Pflug approached the Swedish rear at Belitsa on 7 October. The road network forced the convoy into a single column, resulting in bottlenecks. Lewenhaupt prepared an ambush for them with 60\u201370% of his army drawn up in battle formation. The Russians, discouraged from attacking, were driven off when 4,000 Swedish cavalry counter-attacked, killing 40 Russians and capturing three to eleven, to only four wounded Swedes. The Swedish vanguard reached the small village of Lesnaya (Lyasnaya), about south of Belitsa, that same day and began setting up camp for the army.\nEarly on 8 October, the Russians launched a two-front attack on the Swedish rear as it was crossing the Rasta at Dolgii Mokh; von Pflug with up to 5,000 men confronted Berndt Otto Stackelberg from the west, who was protecting the crossing with two or three regiments of infantry, while Mikhail Golitsyn and Alexander Menshikov sought to ford the stream further up north with several thousand men. Lewenhaupt arrived in time with a contingent to block them. The two sides exchanged musket- and cannon fire from 12:00 to 16:00 before the Russians gave up their efforts.\nThe whole convoy arrived at Lesnaya later that night, situated a day's march from Propoysk \u2013 behind which both Lewenhaupt and the Tsar expected it to reach the protection of the Swedish main army. But Peter's flying corps was closing in from the north, and two Russian divisions under Nikolai Grigorovitj von Werden and Bauer approached from the northeast and east, respectively. A small detachment was also sent to block the Swedes at Propoysk in the south.\nBattlefield.\nTo the immediate south of Lesnaya was the unwadable and swampy Lesnyanka stream, running parallel to the village in a northeast to southwest direction; its bridge in the western outskirts led the Swedish convoy south through the forest, on the road to Propoysk at a distance of . The Lesnaya-field, a 1,400 square metre large open plain, surrounded the village from the east, north and west, ending with forests in all three directions. A further 200 metres northwest, through the southern forest curtain, a clearing appeared \u2013 also referred to as the Middlefield \u2013 over which the highway leading to Lesnaya went. At the southern end of the forest clearing a crossroads was formed with a road coming from the southwest over the Krivl bridge. To the west of the clearing was the northern forest curtain and the road leading to Lopatichi. Apart from the open fields and forest clearings, the battlefield was dominated by bogs, swamp streams and wild forests, with minimal differences in elevation.\nOpposing forces.\nSwedish army.\nGeneral Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt commanded the Swedish army with major General Stackelberg assisting. According to Lewenhaupt, the army consisted of 10,914 men at the beginning of the campaign, of which 2,900 were employed to guard and drive the wagons. At the day of battle, a vanguard of 700 men was sent towards Propoysk, with 2,806 more crossing the Lesnyanka to follow them; this was done in response to reports of a Russian detachment at Propoysk. Hence, only 4,508 effectives remained at the north side of the stream to receive the initial Russian onslaught. Some 970 men employed at the baggage that still remained at Lesnaya were quickly recalled to the lines, as were the 2,806 sent towards Propoysk, increasing the effectives north of the Lesnyanka to 8,284 throughout the action.\nOther estimates include that of lieutenant Friedrich Christoph von Weihe of the Uppland reserve regiment, who puts the Swedish force available for the campaign at 6,800 infantry and 4,650 cavalry, and ensign Robert Petre of the H\u00e4lsinge Regiment, with 8,000 and 4,950, respectively; Petre states that there were only 4,300 Swedes available for battle in the beginning, with the rest marching for Propoysk. Modern estimates by Eggenberger, Uddgren, Dorrell and Ulfhielm puts the Swedish army at 11,000, 12,000 (with 9,000 available for battle), 12,500 (with at least 9,700 at Lesnaya), and 13,000 men (with 8,700 at Lesnaya), respectively. It had six 8-pounder cannons and 10 or 11 4-pounder cannons and a few hand mortars at its disposition, and included both allotted and reserve regiments, and a few militias.\nAccording to the official Russian accounts, based on the testimonies of Swedish prisoners captured on 6 October, the Swedish convoy had a strength of 16,000 men, of whom 13,000 had fought at Lesnaya from the beginning and 3,000 at Propoysk. In his later accounts, Lewenhaupt ascribed this data to one of his captured adjutant generals, Lode or Knorring, but stated that it was at the time outdated by four months, and included non-participating units as well as sick soldiers and non-combatants. According to Friedrich Christoph Schlosser, the Swedish army consisted of 10,000 men.\nRussian army.\nTsar Peter commanded the Russian army, which consisted of three formations. The flying corps was the largest with 13,000 regular troops and an estimated 2,000\u20134,000 light cavalry of Cossacks and Kalmyks. It included eight generals, which was a notably high number for its size. Two additional divisions were on the march; the most imminent one under General Bauer with 4,976 dragoons and 500\u20131,000 light cavalry, and another under General von Werden with 6,191 infantry. The Russians had at least 30 cannons with 60 six-pounder mortars at their disposal. Before arriving at the battle, Bauer detached 900 or more dragoons with accompanying light cavalry to Propoysk, while von Werden failed to arrive before it was over. Hence, no more than 17,000 regulars and 2,000\u20134,000 light cavalry would fight at Lesnaya. Excluding the light cavalry, the army commanded against Lewenhaupt included Russia's best troops, with the guard regiments of Peter, Sheremetev and Menshikov.\nAccording to Alexander Gordon, a Scottish-born Russian general who fought in the campaign at the time and later wrote a biography about the Tsar, the flying corps and Bauer's division consisted of 20,000 and 8,000 men, respectively. Based on the reports from captured Russians on 7 October at Belitsa, Peter followed the convoy with 20,000 cavalry, 12,000 infantry and four cannons. The following Swedish proclamation depicts 6,000 Swedes fighting against 40,000 Russians for most of the battle. Gustaf Adlerfelt, the court historian of Charles XII, stated that the 6,000 Swedes who fought on the actual battlefield defended themselves against at least five times as many Russians. Swedish historian Ulfhielm estimates that the flying corps had 16,600 men, and Bauer's division 3,000 men.\nBattle.\nRather than concentrating his troops at Lesnaya on 9 October, Lewenhaupt decided to continue the march in accordance with Charles XII's instructions to avoid a main battle. Bad weather had prevented a thoroughly reconnaissance of the Russian dispositions. Peter formed up his flying corps on the Lopatichi-field. To attack the Swedish rear as it was crossing the bridge, he first had to secure the road going over the forest clearing. That morning, he was informed that von Werden's division was force-marching to Chavusy, from Lesnaya, and would not arrive that day. But Bauer's division had reached Berezovka and was expected to arrive in the afternoon. Peter split his flying corps into two columns; the eastern (left) one marched at the clearing from the northwest with 7,040 regulars under Aleksandr Menshikov, while Peter officially commanded the western (right) one \u2013 in reality, Golitsyn was the commander and Peter his assistant \u2013 with 5,910 regulars, which made a wide flanking manoeuvre to seize the crossroads from the southwest via the Krivl bridge. The left column traversed of road and the right of dense forest.\nBauer detached over 900 dragoons and some light cavalry under Fastman to Propoysk, to prevent the Swedes from crossing the Sozh. Bridges in the area had been partially destroyed and trees felled along the road to slow them down. A firefight broke out between this unit and a 700-man strong Swedish vanguard, which put a halt to the convoy at near 11:00. Lacking intelligence, the vanguard decided to await Lewenhaupt's orders before taking action. Light cavalry also started to harass the wagon train at this time. Lewenhaupt sent near 3,000 more troops over the bridge to protect the wagon train and ordered his front to hold position. More than half of his troops and wagons were thus on their way to Propoysk as the battle commenced. The others remained near Lesnaya, except for three battalions of 900 men under Lieutenant Colonel Freijbourg who functioned as an outpost at the forest clearing, facing the flying corps.\nForest clearing.\nAt around 10:00, the first salvos could be heard from the forest clearing as the outpost discovered the forward element of Menshikov's column. Freijbourg seized the initiative and launched a Carolean-style attack within the next hour which brought the Russians, who were in the process of forming up, into confusion. The sounds of combat alerted the Swedish army further south. Following this success, Freijbourg's battered detachment was forced back into the southern forest curtain where five fresh Swedish battalions arrived under Stackelberg, beating back a Russian pursuit. Six more battalions were on their way from Lesnaya, while near 1,000 men serving at the wagons still north of the stream were recalled to their companies.\nBy 11:00, the front of Peter's western column had reached the crossroads from the southwest after having crossed the Krivl bridge. Stackelberg shifted focus to this new threat and drove it back to the forest it came from, but where the terrain proved more difficult for the aggressive Swedish style. The inability of Peter's column to win ground prevented it from crossing the bridge in force. The Russian guards managed to halt the Swedish advance, after which the fighting began surging back and forth. Four Russian cannons were temporarily captured. Stackelberg, whose right flank got under pressure from Menshikov column while his left was simultaneously being circumvented by Peter's column, withdrew into the southern forest curtain where the fighting resumed. The forest clearing and the crossroads were then in Russian hands. Around 12:00, 1,400 Swedes of the near 3,000 previously sent towards Propoysk returned to Lesnaya, where a general assembly had been ordered.\nAs Lewenhaupt formed up his cavalry northeast of Lesnaya to support Stackelberg, several Russian squadrons that went around Stackelberg's position to the east suddenly appeared on the Lesnaya-field. After some success, having reached as far as Lesnaya, the Russian dragoons were driven back into the forest by a Swedish cavalry attack, which was stopped by musket- and canister shots therein. Deprived of cavalry-support and seemingly hemmed in at the forest curtain by the two Russian columns, whose troops could now form up en masse, Stackelberg ordered a withdrawal to the Lesnaya-field at around 13:00 \u2013 against the wishes of Lewenhaupt. The six Swedish battalions which had yet to arrive also retreated. A Swedish battalion got isolated and was nearly annihilated as a result, and the four captured Russian cannons were retaken.\nLesnaya.\nAfter having won the forest curtain, the Russians prepared for an attack on Lesnaya and the bridge, to cut Lewenhaupt off from Propoysk. Lewenhaupt organised a battle order under the cover of his artillery to retake the forest, or in the least to prevent the Russians from reaching the Lesnaya-field. The attack was repulsed, allowing the Russians to deploy their artillery at the forest edge. After several more attacks, the Swedes withdrew to a distance of about 550 metres from the forest, losing several cannons in the process. They formed up in one thin line protecting the wagons and the bridge, while the Russians formed up in two lines with additional units in-between. The Russians focused their attacks on the right and centre, but were thrown back into the forest by Swedish counterattacks. Russian reserves, and light cavalry exploiting any openings in the Swedish formation, would in turn force the Swedes back to their starting positions. At little past 15:00, having moved his artillery closer to the centre, Peter ordered his army to stand-down in anticipation of Bauer's imminent arrival.\nBoth sides, exhausted by the day's intense combat and separated by only 150\u2013200 metres, sank down on the field and rested. During this interlude, in which only three Russian cannons sounded off, the ranks distributed food, water and ammunition, issued orders and deployed reinforcements in preparation for the final confrontation. A Russian general, Friedrich von Hessen-Darmstadt, was shot and mortally wounded as he rode back and forth between the armies in a provocative manner. The hour-long pause concluded some time between 16:00 and 17:00, with the arrival of Bauer's division of 4,000 Russian dragoons. The Swedish artillery opened fire on Bauer's dragoons, who were forming up in five or six lines on the Russian left. This provoked an attack, pulling the bulk of the Russian forces with it. The Swedes, formed up in a tight crescent with their flanks anchored to the Lesnyanka, were able to closely coordinate their infantry, cavalry and artillery. Concerted Russian attacks, mainly focused against the bridge, were received with musket- and canister shot to great effect and hit in the rear by Swedish cavalry when repulsed. But additional Russian lines enabled their fleeing troops to rally and attack anew. Bauer was shot in the face in the fighting and was carried off the battlefield.\nAt 17:00, with 800\u2013900 Swedish infantry arriving as reinforcements, Lewenhaupt launched a major counterattack against the Russian right flank. The attack broke down with heavy losses against the continuous Russian fire, causing a split in the Swedish line; the bulk withdrew towards Lesnaya, east of the bridge, and the outermost left flank towards the forest west of it. At around 18:00, as the bridge was on the verge of being lost, Lewenhaupt's last reserve of 584\u2013700 dragoons arrived from across the stream and drove the nearby Russians back. Confused fighting followed until 19:00, when the approach of night and a sudden snowfall disorganised the combatants; the Swedes in particular suffered with the wind in their faces. Peter ordered a withdrawal to the forest curtain at 19:30 under the cover of his artillery, which kept firing throughout the night. The Swedes remained in their formations for several hours in case of a night attack.\nAftermath.\nAt midnight, Lewenhaupt, who was wounded to an arm and both legs, began withdrawing his army across the Lesnyanka under the cover of darkness to continue the march. Reports of 10,000 imminent Russian reinforcements, gained from a captured officer whom referred to von Werden's division, heavily contributed to this decision. The army, reportedly 6,000 men, marched across first, except for some 1,000 who formed a square near the bridge in case of a Russian attack and to collect stragglers. As the train began moving after them, some wagons broke down and blocked the path so that the remaining baggage and possibly also a few cannons had to be abandoned.\nPropoysk.\nOnce across, the Swedish army continued on towards Propoysk. Many stragglers, who either looted the wagons that were abandoned in the fast marching pace or who got lost in the dark, became easy prey for the pursuing light cavalry.\nAt his arrival, Lewenhaupt discovered that Propoysk and its bridge had been burned by Fastman's troops, who were preventing the Swedes from crossing the Sozh. Fearing a general Russian pursuit, he formed his troops for battle; Petre claims that 3,451 infantry and 3,052 cavalry were mustered in condition to fight. Subsequently, with fears of becoming trapped and with no suitable bridge-material, Lewenhaupt decided to march south to find a suitable crossing elsewhere. Most livestock and wagons were either killed, destroyed or abandoned, and their horses used to transport the combatants. Some 1,000\u20131,500 wounded and sick were left at Propoysk as they were deemed too weak to follow the pace Lewenhaupt intended.\nAt daybreak, Peter discovered the abandoned Swedish positions at Lesnaya and sent a dragoon detachment under Pflug in pursuit. Many drunk or wounded Swedish soldiers were killed or captured along the road, as was their artillery. When Pflug arrived at Propoysk at 16:00, he discovered the remaining Swedish troops whose numbers had allegedly swollen to 3,000 men with the addition of stragglers. The Swedes responded to the Russian demands to surrender with musket fire, after which the town was taken by storm in an hour of fighting. About 2,000 survivors made it over the river and began marching back to the Swedish Baltic provinces. Towards the evening, von Werden's infantry division arrived at Lesnaya and could participate in the pursuit. The Swedish army was, however, allowed to withdraw relatively unmolested as the Russians were mostly content with rounding up stragglers.\nContinued march.\nOn 11 October, Lewenhaupt found a crossing at Glinki, which was used over the two following days. Order had now been restored in his army, which made good speed to rendezvous with Charles XII near Russian-controlled Starodub in Severia. On 20 October, several thousand Russians from Sheremetev's army attacked Lewenhaupt's rearguard at Lyshchichi, killing 30 and wounding 50 more before being repulsed. Later that day, Lewenhaupt unexpectedly stumbled upon one of Charles' detachments at Truchanovo under major General Lagercrona. On 23 October, his troops reached Charles at Rukova, with 6,000\u20136,700 men remaining and but few of the wagons. Some 800\u20131,500 Swedes turned up in Mitau and Riga a few months later. The most battered units in Lewenhaupt's army were incorporated into regiments of the Swedish main army.\nCharles failed to secure Severia for a base of operation against Moscow, and marched further south into Ukraine to feed the army. With the convoy destroyed, ammunition, gunpowder and materiel had to be obtained from the Cossack hetman, Ivan Mazepa, whose capital of Baturyn held large supplies. However, the city was sacked by the Russians shortly after Mazepa defected to the Swedes. The campaign of 1709 ended with the disastrous Swedish defeat at Poltava and subsequent surrender at Perevolochna, in which all Swedish troops were lost but a few who followed the king into exile in the Ottoman Empire. As a result, the anti-Swedish coalition resurrected with the treaties of Thorn and Copenhagen later that year.\nResult.\nBoth sides declared themselves victorious after the battle. Russian official declarations and leaflets announced the complete destruction of the Swedish army, while the Swedes emphasised that Lewenhaupt had managed to break through, despite being heavily outnumbered, and kept the field at the day of battle. Historians generally view it as a Russian victory, or a draw but with an aftermath, in which the wagon train was lost, favouring the Russians. A few believe it was a Swedish victory. Swedish historians has described it as a \"[Swedish] victory that became a defeat\", and a victory for Lewenhaupt but a defeat for the main army. In Russian historiography, the battle is sometimes styled the \"Mother of Poltava\" in reference to, among other things, a Russian morale boost which paved the way for the decisive victory the following year. Charles referred to it as the \"fortunate action\" in a letter to Lewenhaupt.\nThe battle has widely been seen as a great Russian victory and first indication of the campaign's result, but this view has also come to be challenged. Dorrell argues that it was far from a Russian triumph, since they had failed with their goal of destroying Lewenhaupt's heavily outnumbered army while also suffering greater losses; the Swedes withdrew in good order and, instead of leading a major pursuit, Peter marched in the opposite direction to celebrate and propagandise the outcome, having little direct responsibility for their subsequent losses.\nConsequences.\nWhile the loss of the wagon train deprived the Swedish main army of ammunition and materiel, and Lewenhaupt's troops of their provisions, it was other circumstances that led to their failure in reaching Moscow; the Smolensk-operation was aborted due to logistic reasons, and the Severia-operation because Charles was unable to secure the region for a base of operation. Some authors attest that the battle shattered the Swedish notion of invincibility and hurt their reputation in Europe, most importantly among their allies in Poland, but also the Ottoman Empire and other Great Powers. Others say that the Tsar's propaganda, which was spread for this purpose, had little effect among the Great Powers at the time. According to the Slovakian evangelist Daniel Krman, who visited Charles during the campaign, the battle and the subsequent Swedish propaganda influenced Mazepa to switch sides.\nCasualties.\nSwedish casualties.\nBecause of the destruction of Swedish documents after the battle, and before the surrender at Perevolochna in 1709, only three secondary Swedish sources but no official records exist of the Swedish strength and casualties.\nContemporary Swedish sources.\nDuring his captivity in Russia following the Surrender at Perevolochna, General Lewenhaupt gained access to Russian reports, which he used to write his account; it has been viewed as a statement of defence of questionable historical objectivity by later historians. He concludes that, while 8,284 Swedes were engaged, his strength never exceeded 6,000 men at any point in the battle, which suggests a loss of at least 2,284 on the battlefield (unless units were dispatched elsewhere). Of these, slightly over 1,000 were killed or captured. According to his estimations, 6,000 men reached Charles XII and 1,500 Riga; 1,614 were killed or captured on the battlefield and the Propoysk road, and 1,800 were captured afterwards. In all, 3,414 killed and captured out of 10,914 men.\nLieutenant von Weihe and Ensign Petre provides alternative numbers. von Weihe states that 2,000 Swedes were killed in the battle, and 1,800 captured in total. Petre, presenting a detailed list of each regiment's serviceable strength at Propoysk, claims that 6,503 Swedes marched therefrom with the rest being either killed or captured; Petre, however, includes the thousand Swedes who made it back to Riga among these losses. Uddgren questions whether Petre's account should be viewed as a diary and not more as a memoir of less historical value.\nOther estimates and calculations.\nSeveral authors have attempted to calculate the Swedish losses sustained in the battle and retreat on the basis of Petre's estimation of 12,950 men at the beginning of the campaign. By subtracting an overall 1,000 captured Swedes, some 500 killed at Propoysk and 6,500 who marched therefrom, as well as the 2,500 who got dispersed (of whom 1,250 made it back to Sweden), Konovaltjuk and Lyth concludes that less than 2,500 Swedes died in the battle and the road towards Propoysk; for a total of 4,000 killed and captured in the battle and pursuit. Artamonov, subtracting 877 captured based on Russian reports, 1,500 who made it back to the Swedish Baltic provinces and 6,700 who reached the main Swedish army, concludes that 3,873 Swedes died since having crossed the Dnieper on October 3 to rendezvousing with Charles twenty days later. For a total of 4,750 killed and captured. Additional calculations have been made by Uddgren, subtracting a patterned 6,000 at Propoysk and 1,500 arriving at Riga, and Dorrell, subtracting 6,503 survivors reaching Charles and 1,000 Riga, for total losses of 4,500 and 5,000 men, respectively.\nWithout specifying any sources, authors Dowling and Glaeser puts the Swedish casualties at 3,000, and Bodart, in his Milit\u00e4r-historisches Kriegs-Lexikon, at 6,000. Azyassky, writing for the Great Russian Encyclopedia, and Shkvarov estimates a Swedish loss of 6,400 and 6,396 men, respectively. The Russian proclamation claims that 8,000 Swedes were killed on the battlefield and 500 more at the Sozh, while other relations speak of 3,500 captured. According to General Gordon, 6,700 Swedes were killed or wounded on the battlefield and 5,000 in the pursuit. However, such numbers are viewed as unrealistic when comparing the amount of survivors with the initial strength, and because no other major battle at the time exceeded 40% losses for any side. Apart from the artillery, the Russians claimed to have captured 40\u201347 Swedish military colours.\nRussian casualties.\nContemporary Russian sources.\nAccording to the official accounts, there were 1,111 killed and 2,856 wounded Russians in the battle; Konovaltjuk and Lyth regard them as incomplete and contradictory \u2013 among other things, they do not report on missing men, killed in Bauer's division, or losses for officers and light cavalry \u2013 and increases the losses to 1,192 killed and 2,924 wounded, excluding light cavalry and 190 officers. According to the pseudonym \"J. H. v. L.\", writing for the Tsar, the losses were 1,277 and 2,734, respectively, numbers which gains support from Krotov. Lyth notes, in the Great Northern War Compendium, that \"the real figures are unknown but were probably much higher\".\nAlternative sources include that of General Gordon, according to whom 3,000 Russians were killed and 4,000 wounded. And field marshal Boris Sheremetev, concurrently watching Charles with the main army, stating that 8,000 of Russia's best troops were lost and that no clear victory was achieved. Author Bushkovitch, entrusting himself to the official accounts, calls this a \"wild exaggeration\" in his biography about Tsar Peter.\nOther estimates.\nWithout specifying any sources, Bodart puts the Russian losses at 4,000, and Dowling and Eggenberger at 10,000. Adlerfelt declared that the Russians lost 6,000 men killed and many more wounded; referring to the \"confession\" of a Russian Adjutant-General named Schultz, who was captured by the Swedes in early December 1708. Hence, a subsequent Swedish proclamation stated that the Russians had lost 6,000 killed and at least 12,000 wounded on the battlefield, while Swedish newspapers boosted the figure to 20,000 in total. During his captivity in Moscow, Lewenhaupt gained access to, according to him, trustworthy accounts from foreign officers in Russian service who assured him that no less than 9,000 Russians had been killed or wounded in the battle. Artamonov questions the reliability of this claim. The Swedes claimed that 17 Russian colours and two military drums were captured.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48757", "revid": "50109772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48757", "title": "Great Northern War", "text": "Swedish-Russian conflict (1700\u20131721)\nIn the Great Northern War (1700\u20131721) a coalition led by Russia successfully contested the supremacy of Sweden in Northern, Central and Eastern Europe. The initial leaders of the anti-Swedish alliance were Peter I of Russia, Frederick IV of Denmark\u2013Norway and Augustus II the Strong of Saxony\u2013Poland\u2013Lithuania. Frederick IV and Augustus II were defeated by Sweden, under Charles XII, and forced out of the alliance in 1700 and 1706, respectively, but rejoined it in 1709 after the defeat of Charles XII at the Battle of Poltava. George I of Great Britain and the Electorate of Hanover joined the coalition in 1714 for Hanover and in 1717 for Britain, and Frederick William I of Brandenburg-Prussia joined it in 1715.\nCharles XII led the Swedish Army. Swedish allies included Holstein-Gottorp, several Polish magnates under Stanis\u0142aw I Leszczy\u0144ski (1704\u20131710) and Cossacks under the Ukrainian Hetman Ivan Mazepa (1708\u20131710). The Ottoman Empire temporarily hosted Charles XII of Sweden and intervened against Peter I.\nThe war began when Denmark\u2013Norway, Saxony and Russia, sensing an opportunity as Sweden was ruled by the young Charles XII, formed a coalition against Sweden. Denmark invaded Sweden's ally Holstein-Gottorp, while Saxony and Russia declared war on the Swedish Empire and attacked Swedish Livonia and Swedish Ingria, respectively. Sweden parried the Danes at Travendal (August 1700) and the Russians at Narva (November 1700), and in a counter-offensive pushed Augustus II's forces through the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth to Saxony, dethroning Augustus on the way (September 1706) and forcing him to acknowledge defeat in the Treaty of Altranst\u00e4dt (October 1706). The treaty also secured the extradition and execution of Johann Reinhold Patkul, architect of the alliance seven years earlier. Meanwhile, the forces of Peter I had recovered from defeat at Narva and gained ground in Sweden's Baltic provinces, where they cemented Russian access to the Baltic Sea by founding Saint Petersburg in 1703. Charles XII moved from Saxony into Russia to confront Peter, but the campaign ended in 1709 with the destruction of the main Swedish army at the decisive Battle of Poltava (in present-day Ukraine) and Charles' exile in the Ottoman town of Bender. The Ottoman Empire defeated the Russian\u2013Moldavian army in the Pruth River Campaign, but that peace treaty was in the end without great consequence to Russia's position.\nAfter Poltava, the anti-Swedish coalition revived and subsequently Hanover and Prussia joined it. The remaining Swedish forces in plague-stricken areas south and east of the Baltic Sea were evicted, with the last city, Tallinn, falling in the autumn of 1710. The coalition members partitioned most of the Swedish dominions among themselves, destroying the Swedish \"dominium maris baltici\". Sweden proper was invaded from the west by Denmark\u2013Norway and from the east by Russia, which had occupied Finland by 1714. Sweden defeated the Danish invaders at the Battle of Helsingborg. Charles XII opened up a Norwegian front but was killed in the Siege of Fredriksten in 1718.\nThe war ended with the defeat of Sweden, leaving Russia as the new dominant power in the Baltic region and as a new major force in European politics. The Western powers, Great Britain and France, became caught up in the separate War of the Spanish Succession (1701\u20131714), which broke out over the Bourbon Philip of Anjou's succession to the Spanish throne and a possible joining of France and Spain. The formal conclusion of the Great Northern War came with the Swedish-Hanoverian and Swedish-Prussian Treaties of Stockholm (1719), the Dano-Swedish Treaty of Frederiksborg (1720), and the Russo-Swedish Treaty of Nystad (1721). By these treaties Sweden ceded its exemption from the Sound Dues and lost the Baltic provinces and the southern part of Swedish Pomerania. The peace treaties also ended its alliance with Holstein-Gottorp. Hanover gained Bremen-Verden, Brandenburg-Prussia incorporated the Oder estuary (Stettin Lagoons), Russia secured the Baltic Provinces, and Denmark strengthened its position in Schleswig-Holstein. In Sweden, the absolute monarchy had come to an end with the death of Charles XII, and Sweden's Age of Liberty began.\nBackground.\nBetween 1560 and 1658, Sweden created a Baltic empire centred on the Gulf of Finland and comprising the provinces of Karelia, Ingria, Estonia, and Livonia. During the Thirty Years' War Sweden gained tracts in Germany as well, including Western Pomerania, Wismar, the Duchy of Bremen, and Verden. During the same period, Sweden conquered Danish and Norwegian provinces north of the Sound (1645; 1658). These victories may be ascribed to a well-trained army, which despite its comparatively small size, was far more professional than most continental armies, and also to a modernization of administration (both civilian and military) in the course of the 17th century, which enabled the monarchy to harness the resources of the country and its empire effectively. Fighting in the field, the Swedish Army (which during the Thirty Years' War contained more German and Scottish mercenaries than ethnic Swedes, but was administered by the Swedish Crown) was able, in particular, to make quick, sustained marches across large tracts of land and to maintain a high rate of small arms fire due to proficient military drill.\nHowever, the Swedish state ultimately proved unable to support and maintain its army in a prolonged war. Campaigns on the continent had been proposed on the basis that the army would be financially self-supporting through plunder and taxation of newly gained land, a concept shared by most major powers of the period. The cost of the warfare proved to be much higher than the occupied countries could fund, and Sweden's coffers and resources in manpower were eventually drained in the course of long conflicts.\nThe foreign interventions in Russia during the Time of Troubles resulted in Swedish gains in the Treaty of Stolbovo (1617). The treaty deprived Russia of direct access to the Baltic Sea. Russian fortunes began to reverse in the final years of the 17th century, notably with the rise to power of Peter the Great, who looked to address the earlier losses and re-establish a Baltic presence. In the late 1690s, the adventurer Johann Patkul managed to ally Russia with Denmark and Saxony by the secret Treaty of Preobrazhenskoye, and in 1700 the three powers attacked.\nSweden and allies.\nCharles XII of Sweden succeeded Charles XI of Sweden in 1697, aged 14. From his predecessor, he took over the Swedish Empire as an absolute monarch. Charles XI had tried to keep the empire out of wars, and concentrated on inner reforms such as reduction and allotment, which had strengthened the monarch's status and the empire's military abilities. Charles XII refrained from all kinds of luxury and alcohol and usage of the French language, since he considered these things decadent and superfluous. He preferred the life of an ordinary soldier on horseback, not that of contemporary baroque courts. He determinedly pursued his goal of dethroning his adversaries, whom he considered unworthy of their thrones due to broken promises, thereby refusing to take several chances to make peace. During the war, the most important Swedish commanders besides Charles XII were his close friend Carl Gustav Rehnski\u00f6ld, also Magnus Stenbock and Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt.\nCharles Frederick, son of Frederick IV, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp (a cousin of Charles XII) and Hedvig Sophia, daughter of Charles XI of Sweden, had been the Swedish heir since 1702. He claimed the throne upon Charles XII's death in 1718, but was supplanted by Ulrike Eleonora. Charles Frederick was married to a daughter of Peter I, Anna Petrovna.\nIvan Mazepa was a Ukrainian Cossack hetman who fought for Russia but defected to Charles XII in 1708. Mazepa died in 1709 in Ottoman exile.\nArmy size.\nSweden's army peaked in 1707\u20131708 with an effective strength of about 100,000 men, and a nominal size of between 110,000 and 115,000 men. It fielded about 65,000 men at the outbreak of the war, and 40,000 in 1716. Charles XII mustered 60,000 men for the Norwegian campaign of 1718, which was reduced to 45,000 towards the end of the war. In early 1700, the Swedish Navy consisted of 39 battleships (ships of the line) of 48,000 tonnes, eight major and six minor cruising warships and one bomb vessel (4,500 tonnes). The battleship-fleet peaked in 1705\u20131709, with 43 ships (56,000 tonnes); as peace was concluded in 1721, only 23 battleships (32,000 tonnes) remained, several of which were unrepairable or nearing the end of their service life.\nHolstein-Gottorp had an army of about 2,695 when the Danes attacked in 1700 and laid siege to T\u00f6nning. At the second siege in 1713\u20131714, the garrison had 1,600 men with the rest fighting in the War of the Spanish Succession; these would later enter Swedish service as Holstein was occupied by the Danes.\nBy 1707, at the eve of the Russian campaign, the pro-Leszczy\u0144ski followers in Poland had swollen to 20,000 men from a core of 6,000. In addition, there were 4,000 to 5,000 troops of Sapieha's army and 12,040 of the Lithuanian Crown Army, now loyal to Stanis\u0142aw I.\nModern estimates puts the army Mazepa brought with him to Charles XII in 1708 at 2,000 to 4,000 Cossacks, in addition to some 5,000 left behind at Baturyn who were subsequently all killed or captured in the Sack of Baturyn. It peaked at 6,000 to 12,000 men the following year when 4,000 to 8,000 Zaporozhian Cossacks joined the Swedes and Ukrainian Cossacks on 10 May \u2013 at least 11,000 had thus switched sides in total.\nAnti-Swedish coalition.\nPeter the Great became Tsar in 1682 upon the death of his elder brother Feodor but did not become the actual ruler until 1689. He commenced reforming the country, turning the Russian tsardom into a modernized empire relying on trade and on a strong, professional army and navy. He greatly expanded the size of Russia during his reign while providing access to the Baltic, Black, and Caspian seas. Beside Peter, the principal Russian commanders were Aleksandr Danilovich Menshikov and Boris Sheremetev.\nAugustus II the Strong, elector of Saxony and another cousin of Charles XII, gained the Polish crown after the death of King John III Sobieski in 1696. His ambitions to transform the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth into an absolute monarchy were not realized due to the zealous nature of the Polish nobility and the previously initiated laws that decreased the power of the monarch. His meeting with Peter the Great in Rawa Ruska in September 1698, where the plans to attack Sweden were made, became legendary for its decadence.\nFrederick IV of Denmark-Norway, another cousin of Charles XII, succeeded Christian V in 1699 and continued his anti-Swedish policies. After the setbacks of 1700, he focused on transforming his state, an absolute monarchy, in a manner similar to Charles XI of Sweden. He did not achieve his main goal: to regain the former eastern Danish provinces lost to Sweden in the course of the 17th century. He was not able to keep northern Swedish Pomerania, Danish from 1712 to 1715. He did put an end to the Swedish threat south of Denmark. He ended Sweden's exemption from the Sound Dues (transit taxes/tariffs on cargo moved between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea).\nFrederick William I entered the war as elector of Brandenburg and king in Prussia\u2014the royal title had been secured in 1701. He was determined to gain the Oder estuary with its access to the Baltic Sea for the Brandenburgian core areas, which had been a state goal for centuries.\nGeorge I of the House of Hanover, elector of Hanover and, since 1714, king of Great Britain and of Ireland, took the opportunity to connect his landlocked German electorate to the North Sea.\nCoalition armies.\nRussia's army had 120,000 men in the late 1600s, not including Cossacks and Kalmucks. It quickly grew to between 168,000 and 200,000 effective troops in the early years of 1702 to 1705. Russia had 200,000 men under arms in 1707, and the army remained at between 164,000 (1711) and 200,000 (1719) for the rest of the war. Other sources mention 220,000 troops by 1710, without specifying if the number includes Cossacks and Kalmucks. By the time of Peter I's death in 1725, there were 210,000 regular troops in the army. Between 1710 and 1712, the Russian Navy launched their first five battleships on the Baltic Sea from Saint Petersburg, with 17 more being launched by 1721. In addition, seven more were built in Arkhangelsk, while 16 were purchased and three built by other nations. By 1721, the Baltic Fleet had grown to 37 battleships, nine frigates and two bomb vessels, totalling 55,000 tonnes, not counting an estimated 50 major galleys and 120 small oared craft.\nEstimates has the number of Cossacks fighting for Russia at between 30,000 and 50,000, and the Kalmucks at 15,000. Other sources puts the Cossacks and Kalmucks at 40,000 to 45,000, up to 100,000, and even 150,000 to 200,000 men.\nFor the most part, the Saxon Army had a nominal strength of 30,000 regular troops. However, only a limited effective strength could be achieved due to severe losses; the army had 18,000 men in 1700 and, including the losses sustained at the Battle of Klisz\u00f3w, 25,000 in August 1702. By 1717, it had reached an effective strength of 29,900 men. There were also an unknown number of militia to provide or reinforce garrisons; in 1706, at the time of Swedish invasion of Saxony, they reportedly counted 5,000 men. After the introduction of a new system in 1709, there were eight militia regiments.\nAccording to the military regulations of 1699, the Danish and Norwegian armies counted 23,021 and 12,848 men, respectively, while a subsequent muster recalled 13,660 for the latter. The Danish Army had about 38,900 mercenaries, provincial and militia troops as hostilities were renewed in 1709, excluding the contingents leased to the maritime powers in the War of the Spanish Succession, while the Norwegian Army had 17,500 men. As the contingents returned ahead of the Pomeranian campaign of 1715, the Danish Army was reorganised into a near-effective force of about 35,000. The Norwegians had 24,379 men at New Year's Eve 1715\u20131716, including three regiments temporarily transferred to the Danish Army. In early 1700, the Danish Navy consisted of 32 battleships and 26 cruising warships of 42,000 and 7,000 tonnes, respectively, as well as six bomb vessels, six blockships and seven galleys. Denmark's battleship-fleet peaked ahead of its second intervention of 1709, with 41 ships (58,000 tonnes). In 1721, 25 battleships (38,000 tonnes) remained.\nIn 1702, as the Swedes invaded Poland with 21,000 men, the Polish and Lithuanian Crown armies had 13,000 to 18,140 men, and 4,000 to 7,400 men, respectively. In 1703, the Polish Sejm agreed to raise the Polish and Lithuanian armies to 36,000 and 12,000 men, respectively. In total, 90,000 Poles and Lithuanians fought at the height of the Polish civil war which started in 1704; 70,000 of which would oppose the Swedes and their Polish puppet-king, Stanis\u0142aw I, or about three quarters of a total of 100,000 combatants.\nIn 1715, the year Prussia entered the war against Sweden, the standing Prussian Army counted 45,688 men. It had increased to 56,575 men in 1720, the year Prussia left the war. The Hanoverian Army had about 20,000 men at its entry into the Great Northern War in 1715.\n1700: Denmark, Riga and Narva.\nFrederik IV of Denmark\u2013Norway directed his first attack against Holstein-Gottorp, a Swedish client state and long-time rival of Denmark; Sweden, along with the Maritime Powers of England and the Dutch Republic, were guarantors of its sovereignty by the Convention of Altona in 1689, which ended a previous conflict between the two. Hanover (L\u00fcneburg), another ally of Holstein-Gottorp, would also assemble a relief-force. In March 1700, a Danish army laid siege to T\u00f6nning. Simultaneously, Augustus II's forces advanced through Swedish Livonia, captured D\u00fcnam\u00fcnde and laid siege to Riga.\nCharles XII of Sweden first focused on Denmark. The Swedish navy was able to outmaneuver the Danish Sound blockade and, in conjunction with an Anglo-Dutch fleet, carried out a bombardment of Copenhagen from 20 to 26 July. This allowed Charles XII to land an army at Humleb\u00e6k near the Danish capital, Copenhagen, while a Swedish-Hanoverian force broke through the Danish defenses at Reinbek to relieve T\u00f6nning. The surprise move and pressure by the Maritime Powers forced Denmark\u2013Norway to withdraw from the war in August 1700 according to the terms of the Peace of Travendal.\nCharles XII was now able to speedily deploy his army to the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea and face his remaining enemies: besides the army of Augustus II in Livonia, an army of Russian tsar Peter I was already on its way to invade Swedish Ingria, where it laid siege to Narva in October. In November, the Russian and Swedish armies met at the First Battle of Narva where the Russians suffered a crushing defeat.\nAfter the dissolution of the first coalition through the peace of Travendal and with the victory at Narva, the Swedish chancellor, Benedict Oxenstjerna, attempted to use the bidding for the favour of Sweden by France and the Maritime Powers (then on the eve of the War of the Spanish Succession) to end the war and make Charles an arbiter of Europe.\n1701\u20131706: Poland-Lithuania and Saxony.\nCharles XII then turned south to meet Augustus II, Elector of Saxony, King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania. The Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth was formally neutral at this point, as Augustus started the war as Elector of Saxony. Charles XII, however, defeated the Saxons and Russians at the Crossing of the D\u00fcna in 1701 and subsequently occupied the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, a Polish vassal state. Disregarding Polish negotiation proposals supported by the Swedish parliament, Charles XII then invaded Poland and Lithuania, decisively defeating the Saxon-Polish forces in the Battle of Klisz\u00f3w in 1702 and in the Battle of Pultusk in 1703. This successful invasion enabled Charles XII to dethrone Augustus II and coerce the Polish sejm to replace him with Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski in 1704, with help of the newly formed Swedish-led Warsaw Confederation. In response, an anti-Swedish Sandomierz Confederation in support of Augustus II was created the same year. In 1705, Leszczy\u0144ski was crowned Stanis\u0142aw I of Poland and Lithuania, following which a Swedish\u2013Polish treaty was signed; in practice, it subordinated the Commonwealth to Sweden both economically and militarily.\nAugust II resisted, still possessing control of his native Saxony, but was decisively defeated at the Battle of Fraustadt in 1706, a battle sometimes compared to the Ancient Battle of Cannae due to the Swedish forces' use of double envelopment, with a deadly result for the Saxon Army. In 1706, after a Swedish invasion of Saxony, August II was forced to sign the Treaty of Altranst\u00e4dt in which he made peace with the Swedish Empire, renounced his claims to the Polish crown, accepted Stanislaus Leszczy\u0144ski as king, and ended his alliance with Russia. Patkul was also extradited and executed by breaking on the wheel in 1707, an incident which, given his diplomatic immunity, infuriated opinion against the Swedish king, who was then expected to win the war against the only hostile power remaining, Tsar Peter's Russia.\n1702\u20131710: Russia and the Baltic provinces.\nThe Battle of Narva dealt a severe setback to Peter the Great, but the shift of Charles XII's army to the Polish-Saxon threat soon afterward provided him with an opportunity to regroup and regain territory in the Baltic provinces. Russian victories at Erastfer and N\u00f6teborg (Shlisselburg) provided access to Ingria in 1703, where Peter captured the Swedish fortress of Nyen, guarding the mouth of the River Neva. Thanks to General Adam Ludwig Lewenhaupt, whose outnumbered forces fended the Russians off in the battles of Gem\u00e4uerthof and Jakobstadt, Sweden was able to maintain control of most of its Baltic provinces. Before going to war, Peter had made preparations for a navy and a modern-style army, based primarily on infantry drilled in the use of firearms.\nThe Nyen fortress was soon abandoned and demolished by Peter, who built nearby a superior fortress as a beginning to the city of Saint Petersburg. By 1704, other fortresses were situated on the island of Kotlin and the sand flats to its south. These became known as Kronstadt and Kronslot. The Swedes attempted a raid on the Neva fort on 13 July 1704 with ships and landing armies, but the Russian fortifications held. In 1705, repeated Swedish attacks were made against Russian fortifications in the area, to little effect. A major attack on 15 July 1705 ended in the deaths of more than 500 Swedish men, or a third of its forces.\nIn view of continued failure to check Russian consolidation, and with declining manpower, Sweden opted to blockade Saint Petersburg in 1705. In the summer of 1706, Swedish General Georg Johan Maidel crossed the Neva with 4,000 troops and defeated an opposing Russian force, but made no move on Saint Petersburg. Later in the autumn Peter I led an army of 20,000 men in an attempt to take the Swedish town and fortress of Viborg. However, bad roads proved impassable to his heavy siege guns. The troops, who arrived on 12 October, therefore had to abandon the siege after only a few days. On 12 May 1708, a Russian galley fleet made a lightning raid on Borg\u00e5 and managed to return to Kronslot just one day before the Swedish battle fleet returned to the blockade, after being delayed by unfavourable winds.\nIn August 1708, a Swedish army of 12,000 men under General Georg Henrik Lybecker attacked Ingria, crossing the Neva from the north. They met stubborn resistance, ran out of supplies and, after reaching the Gulf of Finland west of Kronstadt, had to be evacuated by sea between 10 and 17 October. Over 11,000 men were evacuated but more than 5000 horses were slaughtered, which crippled the mobility and offensive capability of the Swedish army in Finland for several years. Peter I took advantage of this by redeploying a large number of men from Ingria to Ukraine.\nCharles spent the years 1702\u201306 in a prolonged struggle with Augustus II the Strong; he had already inflicted defeat on him at Riga in June 1701 and took Warsaw the following year, but trying to force a decisive defeat proved elusive. Russia left Poland in the spring of 1706, abandoning artillery but escaping from the pursuing Swedes, who stopped at Pinsk. Charles wanted not just to defeat the Commonwealth army but to depose Augustus, whom he regarded as especially treasonous, and have him replaced with someone who would be a Swedish ally, though this proved hard to achieve. After years of marches and fighting around Poland he finally had to invade Augustus' hereditary Saxony to take him out of the war. In the treaty of Altranst\u00e4dt (1706), Augustus was finally forced to step down from the Polish throne, but Charles had already lost the valuable advantage of time over his main enemy in the east, Peter I, who then had the time to recover and build up an army that was both new and better.\nAt this point, in 1707, Peter offered to return everything he had so far occupied (essentially Ingria) except Saint Petersburg and the line of the Neva, to avoid a full-scale war, but Charles XII refused. Instead he initiated a march from Saxony to invade Russia. Though his primary goal was Moscow, the strength of his forces was sapped by the cold weather (the winter of 1708/09 being one of the most severe in modern European history) and Peter's use of scorched earth tactics. When the main army turned south to recover in Ukraine, the second army with supplies and reinforcements was intercepted and routed at Lesnaya\u2014and so were the supplies and reinforcements of Swedish ally Ivan Mazepa in Baturyn. Charles was crushingly defeated by a larger Russian force under Peter in the Battle of Poltava and fled to the Ottoman Empire while the remains of his army surrendered at Perevolochna.\nThis shattering defeat in 1709 did not end the war, although it decided it. Denmark and Saxony joined the war again and Augustus the Strong, through the politics of Boris Kurakin, regained the Polish throne. Peter continued his campaigns in the Baltics, and eventually he built up a powerful navy. In 1710 the Russian forces captured Riga, at the time the most populated city in the Swedish realm, and Tallinn, evicting the Swedes from the Baltic provinces, now integrated in the Russian Tsardom by the capitulation of Estonia and Livonia.\nFormation of a new anti-Swedish alliance.\nAfter Poltava, Peter the Great and Augustus the Strong allied again in the Treaty of Thorn (1709); Frederick IV of Denmark-Norway with Augustus the Strong in the Treaty of Dresden (1709); and Russia with Denmark\u2013Norway in the subsequent Treaty of Copenhagen. In the Treaty of Hanover (1710), Hanover, whose elector was to become George I of Great Britain, allied with Russia. In 1713, Brandenburg-Prussia allied with Russia in the Treaty of Schwedt. George I of Great Britain and Hanover concluded three alliances in 1715: the Treaty of Berlin with Denmark\u2013Norway, the Treaty of Stettin with Brandenburg-Prussia, and the Treaty of Greifswald with Russia.\n1709\u20131714: Ottoman Empire.\nWhen his army surrendered, Charles XII of Sweden and a few soldiers escaped to Ottoman territory, founding a colony in front of Bender, Moldova. Peter I demanded Charles's eviction, and when the sultan refused, Peter decided to force it by invading the Ottoman Empire. The ensuing Pruth River Campaign resulted in a disaster for the Russians as Peter's army was trapped by an Ottoman army at the Pruth river. However, Peter managed to negotiate a retreat, making a few territorial concessions and promising to withdraw his forces from the Holy Roman Empire as well as allowing Charles's return to Sweden. These terms were laid out in the Treaty of Adrianople (1713). Charles showed no interest in returning, established a provisional court in his colony, and sought to persuade the sultan to engage in an Ottoman-Swedish assault on Russia. The sultan put an end to the generous hospitality granted and had the king arrested in what became known as the \"kalabalik\" in 1713. Charles was then confined at Timurtash and Demotika; later he abandoned his hopes for an Ottoman front and returned to Sweden in a 14-day ride.\n1710\u20131721: Finland.\nThe war between Russia and Sweden continued after the disaster of Poltava in 1709, though the shattered Swedish continental army could provide very little help. Russia captured Viborg in 1710 and successfully held it against Swedish attempts to retake the town in 1711. In 1712 the first Russian campaign to capture Finland began under the command of General Admiral Fyodor Apraksin. Apraksin gathered an army of 15,000 men at Viborg and started the operation in late August. Swedish General Georg Henrik Lybecker chose not to face the Russians with his 7,500 men in the prepared positions close to Viborg and instead withdrew west of Kymijoki river using scorched earth tactics. Apraksin's forces reached the river but chose not to cross it and instead withdrew back to Viborg, likely due to problems in supply. Swedish efforts to maintain their defences were greatly hampered by the drain of manpower by the continental army and various garrisons around the Baltic Sea as well as by the plague outbreak that struck Finland and Sweden between 1710 and 1713, which devastated the land killing, amongst others, over half of the population of Helsingfors (Helsinki).\nAfter the failure of 1712, Peter the Great ordered that further campaigns in war-ravaged regions of Finland with poor transportation networks were to be performed along the coastline and the seaways near the coast. Alarmed by the Russian preparations Lybecker requested naval units to be brought in as soon as possible in the spring of 1713. However, like so often, Swedish naval units arrived only after the initial Russian spring campaign had ended. Nominally under the command of Apraksin, but accompanied by Peter the Great, a fleet of coastal ships together with 12,000 men\u2014infantry and artillery\u2014began the campaign by sailing from Kronstadt on 2 May 1713; a further 4,000 cavalry were later sent overland to join with the army. The fleet had already arrived at Helsinki on 8 May and were met by 1,800 Swedish infantry under General Carl Gustaf Armfeldt, which started the Battle of Helsinki. Together with rowers from the ships the Russians had 20,000 men at their disposal even without the cavalry. The defenders, however, managed to fend off landing attempts by the attackers until the Russians landed at their flank at Sandviken, which forced Armfelt to retire towards Porvoo (Borg\u00e5) after setting afire both the town and all the supplies stored there as well as bridges leading north from the town. It was only on 12 May that a Swedish squadron under Admiral Erik Johan Lillie made it to Helsinki but there was nothing it could do.\nThe bulk of the Russian forces moved along the coast towards Borg\u00e5 and the forces of Lybecker, whom Armfelt had joined. On 21\u201322 May 1713 a Russian force of 10,000 men landed at Pern\u00e5 (Pernaja) and constructed fortifications there. Large stores of supplies and munitions were transported from Viborg and Saint Petersburg to the new base of operations. Russian cavalry managed to link up with the rest of the army there as well. Lybecker's army of 7000 infantry and 3000 cavalry avoided contact with the Russians and instead kept withdrawing further inland without even contesting the control of Borg\u00e5 region or the important coastal road between Helsinki (Helsingfors) and Turku (\u00c5bo). This also severed the contact between Swedish fleet and ground forces and prevented Swedish naval units from supplying it. Soldiers in the Swedish army fighting in Finland resented being repeatedly ordered to withdraw without even seeing the enemy. Lybecker was soon recalled to Stockholm for a hearing and Armfelt was ordered to the command of the army. Under his command the army in Finland stopped to engage the advancing Russians at P\u00e4lk\u00e4ne in October 1713, where a Russian flanking manoeuvre forced him to withdraw to avoid getting encircled. The armies met again later at Napue in February 1714, where the Russians won a decisive victory.\nIn 1714, far greater Swedish naval assets were diverted towards Finland, which managed to cut the coastal sea route past Hang\u00f6 cape already in early May 1714. This caused severe trouble for Russian supply route to Turku and beyond as supplies had to be carried overland. The Russian galley fleet arrived to the area on 29 June but stayed idle until 26\u201327 July when, under the leadership of Peter, Russian galleys managed to run the blockade making use of calm weather, which immobilized the Swedish battlefleet while losing only one galley of roughly 100. A small, hastily assembled Swedish coastal squadron met the Russian galley fleet west of Hang\u00f6 cape in the Battle of Gangut and was overpowered by the Russians who had nearly ten-fold superiority. The Russian breach of the blockade at Hang\u00f6 forced the Swedish fleet to withdraw to prevent the Russian fleet from reaching Sweden itself. The Russian Army occupied Finland mostly in 1713\u20131714, capturing \u00c5land from where the population had already fled to Sweden on 13 August 1714. Since the Russian galley fleet was not able to raid the Swedish coast, with the exception of Ume\u00e5, which was plundered on 18 September, the fleet instead supported the advance of the Russian Army, which led to hastily withdrawal by the Swedish Army from Raahe (Brahestad) to Tornio (Torne\u00e5). The brutal occupation period of Finland in 1714\u20131721 is known as the Great Wrath.\n1710\u20131716: Sweden and Northern Germany.\nIn 1710, the Swedish army in Poland retreated to Swedish Pomerania, pursued by the coalition. In 1711, siege was laid to Stralsund. Yet the town could not be taken due to the arrival of a Swedish relief army, led by general Magnus Stenbock, which secured the Pomeranian pocket before turning west to defeat an allied army in the Battle of Gadebusch. Pursued by coalition forces, Stenbock and his army was trapped and surrendered during the Siege of T\u00f6nning.\nIn 1714, Charles XII returned from the Ottoman Empire, arriving in Stralsund in November. In nearby Greifswald, already lost to Sweden, Russian tsar Peter the Great and British king George I, in his position as Elector of Hanover, had just signed an alliance on 17 (OS)/28 (NS) October. Previously a formally neutral party in the Pomeranian campaigns, Brandenburg-Prussia openly joined the coalition by declaring war on Sweden in the summer of 1715. Charles was then at war with much of Northern Europe, and Stralsund was doomed. Charles remained there until December 1715, escaping only days before Stralsund fell. When Wismar surrendered in 1716, all of Sweden's Baltic and German possessions were lost.\n1715\u20131721: Intervention of the Maritime Powers.\nAs Sweden prohibited all merchants from trading with Swedish ports under Russian occupation, 107 merchant ships of varying nationalities were seized by Swedish privateers between 1710 and June 1714. The resulting damage to international trade led the Dutch and British navies to send a squadron each into the Baltic Sea in 1715 to protect their merchant fleets; George I's pro-war lobby also hoped this would draw Britain into an open conflict with Sweden in the defence of Hanoverian interests. Charles XII ordered Swedish privateers to avoid engaging the Dutch and British squadrons, allowing their merchantmen as well as three ships of the line purchased by Russia safe passage. The British and Dutch squadrons returned to safe ports for winter, except for eight British warships that were left to operate in concert with the Danes until the fall of Stralsund. Their squadrons returned in 1716 with instructions to defend Danish Zealand from Swedish attacks and protect the planned allied invasion of Scania. The British squadron, in conjunction with Russian and Danish ships, initiated a loose blockade of the Swedish Karlskrona Naval Base, while the Dutch escorted friendly merchantmen. However, the invasion was cancelled due to rising distrust among the allies, and because Peter I considered it to be too late in the year and the Swedish defences as too formidable.\nThe continued Swedish threat, including Sweden's support for the Jacobite cause, prompted an even more aggressive stance from Britain in 1717, which proclaimed a prohibition on Swedish trade. A British fleet of 36 warships (25 of which were ships of the line) under Admiral George Byng was sent in April with instructions to capture or destroy any Swedish ships they encountered and to enforce a blockade of Swedish-controlled ports; the Dutch avoided becoming involved in these operations as to not risk their trade. The Swedish navy was driven into and blockaded at the ports of Gothenburg and Karlskrona, whose formidable defenses deterred the allies from a direct attack. Numerous Swedish privateers were captured, as was a large Swedish frigate by two British ships. The allies also made unsuccessful attempts to prevent trade between Sweden and Danzig, L\u00fcbeck and other neutral German ports. Charles XII, who did not wish to become involved in an open war with Britain, left Byng's fleet out on a limb by not responding to the attacks and blockades; with mounting operational costs, it was quickly reduced in size and eventually returned home by November. The following year, a British squadron of 10 warships was sent under John Norris into the Baltic, which once again blockaded Swedish ports.\nWhen Charles XII was killed in Norway in November 1718, bringing an abrupt end to any peace talks with Russia, his successor Ulrika Eleonora started negotiations with Britain in a search for allies. By now, the view of Russia as an aggressive and expansive naval power had grown stronger in the British Parliament. Sweden revoked the decree that allowed Swedish privateers to attack merchantmen, while Britain ceased its blockade of Swedish ports. With the Treaties of Stockholm, the two nations returned to the terms of the friendship pact of 1700. Over the next years, British squadrons once again sailed into the Baltic, now with instructions to work alongside the Swedish navy to defend its coast and encourage Russia to negotiate; in 1719, the British Baltic Squadron included 17 ships of the line and several smaller vessels. Russia and Britain came close to open war, but their commerce continued until peace between Russia and Sweden was finally signed in 1721.\n1716\u20131718: Norway.\nAfter Charles XII had returned from the Ottoman Empire and resumed personal control of the war effort, he initiated two Norwegian Campaigns, starting in February 1716, to force Denmark\u2013Norway into a separate peace treaty. Furthermore, he attempted to bar Great Britain access to the Baltic Sea. In search for allies, Charles XII also negotiated with British Jacobites. The Norwegian campaigns were halted and the army withdrawn when Charles XII was shot dead while besieging Norwegian Fredriksten on 30 November 1718 (OS). He was succeeded by his sister, Ulrika Eleonora.\n1719\u20131721: Sweden.\nAfter the death of Charles XII, Sweden still refused to make peace with Russia on Peter's terms. Despite a continued Swedish naval presence and strong patrols to protect the coast, small Russian raids took place in 1716 at \u00d6regrund, while in July 1717 a Russian squadron landed troops at Gotland who raided for supplies. To place pressure on Sweden, Russia sent a large fleet to the Swedish east coast in July 1719. There, under protection of the Russian battlefleet, the Russian galley fleet was split into three groups. One group headed for the coast of Uppland, the second to the vicinity of Stockholm, and the last to coast of S\u00f6dermanland. Together they carried a landing force of nearly 30,000 men. Raiding continued for a month and devastated amongst others the towns of Norrt\u00e4lje, S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje, Nyk\u00f6ping, and Norrk\u00f6ping, and almost all the buildings in the archipelago of Stockholm were burned. A smaller Russian force advanced on the Swedish capital but was stopped at the Battle of St\u00e4ket on 13 August. Swedish and British fleets, now allied with Sweden, sailed from the west coast of Sweden but failed to catch the raiders.\nIn 1719, Frederick IV assembled 35,000 men for an invasion of Bohusl\u00e4n. The Swedish army stationed there, under Field Marshal Rehnski\u00f6ld, consisted of some 10,000 men. The Dano-Norwegian land advance stalled, but Admiral Tordenskjold captured Marstrand and the fortress of Carlsten, while his later attack on New \u00c4lvsborg failed. Soon, an armistice was signed with Sweden, and peace was concluded the following year at Frederiksborg. \nAfter the Treaty of Frederiksborg in early 1720, Sweden was no longer at war with Denmark, which allowed more forces to be placed against the Russians. This did not prevent Russian galleys from raiding the town of Ume\u00e5 once again. Later, in July 1720, a squadron from the Swedish battlefleet engaged the Russian galley fleet in the Battle of Grengam. While the result of the battle is contested, it ended Russian galley raids in 1720. As negotiations for peace did not progress, the Russian galleys were once again sent to raid the Swedish coast in 1721, targeting primarily the Swedish coast between G\u00e4vle and Pite\u00e5.\nPeace.\nBy the time of Charles XII's death, the anti-Swedish allies became increasingly divided on how to fill the power gap left behind by the defeated and retreating Swedish armies. George I and Frederik IV both coveted hegemony in northern Germany, while Augustus the Strong was concerned about the ambitions of Frederick William I on the southeastern Baltic coast. Peter the Great, whose forces were spread all around the Baltic Sea, envisioned hegemony in East Central Europe and sought to establish naval bases as far west as Mecklenburg. In January 1719, George I, Augustus and emperor Charles VI concluded a treaty in Vienna aimed at reducing Russia's frontiers to the pre-war limits.\nHanover-Great Britain and Brandenburg-Prussia thereupon negotiated separate peace treaties with Sweden, the treaties of Stockholm in 1719 and early 1720, which partitioned Sweden's northern German dominions among the parties. The negotiations were mediated by French diplomats, who sought to prevent a complete collapse of Sweden's position on the southern Baltic coast and assured that Sweden was to retain Wismar and northern Swedish Pomerania. Hanover gained Swedish Bremen-Verden, while Brandenburg-Prussia incorporated southern Swedish Pomerania. In addition to the rivalries in the anti-Swedish coalition, there was an inner-Swedish rivalry between Charles Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, and Frederick I of Hesse-Cassel for the Swedish throne. The Gottorp party succumbed and Ulrike Eleonora, wife of Frederick I, transferred power to her husband in May 1720. When peace was concluded with Denmark, the anti-Swedish coalition had already fallen apart, and Denmark was not in a military position to negotiate a return of its former eastern provinces across the sound. Frederick I was, however, willing to cede Swedish support for his rival in Holstein-Gottorp, which came under Danish control with its northern part annexed, and furthermore cede the Swedish privilege of exemption from the Sound Dues. A respective treaty was concluded in Frederiksborg in June 1720.\nWhen Sweden finally was at peace with Hanover, Great Britain, Brandenburg-Prussia and Denmark\u2013Norway, it hoped that the anti-Russian sentiments of the Vienna parties and France would culminate in an alliance that would restore its Russian-occupied eastern provinces. Yet, primarily due to internal conflicts in Great Britain and France, that did not happen. Therefore, the war was finally concluded by the Treaty of Nystad between Russia and Sweden in Uusikaupunki (\"Nystad\") on 30 August 1721 (OS). Finland was returned to Sweden, while the majority of Russia's conquests (Swedish Estonia, Livonia, Ingria, Kexholm and a portion of Karelia) were ceded to the tsardom. Sweden's dissatisfaction with the result led to fruitless attempts at recovering the lost territories in the course of the following century, such as the Russo-Swedish War of 1741\u20131743, and the Russo-Swedish War of 1788\u20131790.\nSaxe-Poland-Lithuania and Sweden did not conclude a formal peace treaty; instead, they renewed the Peace of Oliva that had ended the Second Northern War in 1660.\nSweden had lost almost all of its \"overseas\" holdings gained in the 17th century and ceased to be a major power. Russia gained its Baltic territories and became one of the great powers of Europe.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48758", "revid": "17820167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48758", "title": "Quantum immortality", "text": ""}
{"id": "48759", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48759", "title": "Amadou Dialou", "text": ""}
{"id": "48760", "revid": "4444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48760", "title": "Paramount Studios", "text": ""}
{"id": "48761", "revid": "37575950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48761", "title": "Denazification", "text": "Allied initiative to remove Nazism\nDenazification () was an Allied initiative to rid German and Austrian society, culture, press, economy, judiciary, and politics of the Nazi ideology following the Second World War. It was carried out by removing those who had been Nazi Party or SS members from positions of power and influence, by disbanding or rendering impotent the organizations associated with Nazism, and by trying prominent Nazis for war crimes in the Nuremberg trials of 1946. The program of denazification was launched after the end of the war and was solidified by the Potsdam Agreement in August 1945. The term, in the hyphenated form \"de-nazification,\" was first used in 1943 by the Pentagon, intended to be applied in a narrow sense with reference to the post-war German legal system. However, it later took on a broader meaning, according to historian Frederick Taylor (see:\"Exorcising Hitler\").253\u2013254\nVery soon after the program started, due to the emergence of the Cold War, the western powers and the United States in particular began to lose interest in the program, somewhat mirroring the Reverse Course in American-occupied Japan. Denazification was carried out in an increasingly lenient and lukewarm way until being officially abolished in 1951. The American government soon came to view the program as ineffective and counterproductive. Additionally, the program was hugely unpopular in West Germany, where many Nazis maintained positions of power. Denazification was opposed by the new West German government of Konrad Adenauer, who declared that ending the process was necessary for West German rearmament.\nOn the other hand, in the Soviet occupation zone and later East Germany, denazification was considered as a critical element of the transformation into a socialist society, and the country was stricter in opposing Nazism than its counterpart.\nNot all former Nazis faced judgment. Performing special tasks for the occupation governments could protect Nazi members from prosecution, enabling them to continue working and in some cases reach prominence, as did special connections with the occupiers.256 One of the most notable cases involved Wernher von Braun, who was among other German scientists recruited by the United States through Operation Paperclip and later occupied key positions in the American space program.\nOverview.\nAbout 8million Germans, or 10% of the population, had been members of the Nazi Party. Nazi-related organizations also had huge memberships, such as the German Labor Front (25million), the National Socialist People's Welfare organization (17million), the League of German Women, and others.226 It was through the Party and these organizations that the Nazi state was run, involving as many as 45million Germans in total.255 In addition, Nazism found significant support among industrialists, who produced weapons or used slave labor, and large landowners, especially the Junkers in Prussia. Denazification after the surrender of Germany was thus an enormous undertaking, fraught with many difficulties.\nThe first difficulty was the enormous number of Germans who might have to be first investigated, then penalized if found to have supported the Nazi state to an unacceptable degree. In the early months of denazification there was a great desire to be utterly thorough, to investigate every suspect and hold every supporter of Nazism accountable; however, it was decided that the numbers simply made this goal impractical. The Morgenthau Plan had recommended that the Allies create a post-war Germany with all its industrial capacity destroyed, reduced to a level of subsistence farming; however, that plan was soon abandoned as unrealistic and, because of its excessive punitive measures, liable to give rise to German anger and aggression.119\u2013123 As time went on, another consideration that moderated the denazification effort in the West was the concern to keep enough good will of the German population to prevent the growth of communism.97\u201398\nThe denazification process was often completely disregarded by both the Soviets and the Western powers for German rocket scientists and other technical experts, who were taken out of Germany to work on projects in the victors' own countries or simply seized in order to prevent the other side from taking them. The US took 785 scientists and engineers from Germany to the United States, some of whom formed the backbone of the US space program (see Operation Paperclip).258\nIn the case of the top-ranking Nazis, such as G\u00f6ring, Hess, Ribbentrop, Streicher, and Speer, the initial proposal by the British was simply to arrest them and shoot them,230 but that course of action was replaced by putting them on trial for war crimes at the Nuremberg Trials in order to publicize their crimes while demonstrating, especially to the German people, that the trials and the sentences were just. However, the legal foundations of the trials were questioned, and many Germans were not convinced that the trials were anything more than \"victors' justice\".231\nMany refugees from Nazism were Germans and Austrians, and some had fought for Britain in the Second World War. Some were transferred into the Intelligence Corps and sent back to Germany and Austria in British uniform. However, German-speakers were small in number in the British zone, which was hampered by the language deficit. Due to its large German-American population, the US authorities were able to bring a larger number of German-speakers to the task of working in the Allied Military Government, although many were poorly trained.267, 300 They were assigned to all aspects of military administration, the interrogation of prisoners of war, collecting evidence for the War Crimes Investigation Unit, and the search for war criminals.\nApplication.\nAmerican zone.\nThe Joint Chiefs of Staff Directive 1067 directed US Army General Dwight D. Eisenhower's policy of denazification. A report of the Institute on Re-education of the Axis Countries in June 1945 recommended: \"Only an inflexible long-term occupation authority will be able to lead the Germans to a fundamental revision of their recent political philosophy.\" The United States military pursued denazification in a zealous and bureaucratic fashion, especially during the first months of the occupation.253 It had been agreed among the Allies that denazification would begin by requiring Germans to fill in a questionnaire () about their activities and memberships during Nazi rule. Five categories were established: \"Major Offenders\", \"Offenders\", \"Lesser Offenders\", \"Followers\", and \"Exonerated Persons\". The Americans, unlike the British, French, and Soviets, interpreted this to apply to every German over the age of 18 in their zone. Eisenhower initially estimated that the denazification process would take 50 years.\nWhen the nearly complete list of Nazi Party memberships was turned over to the Allies (by a German anti-Nazi who had rescued it from destruction in April 1945 as American troops advanced on Munich), it became possible to verify claims about participation or non-participation in the Party.249\u2013252 The 1.5million Germans who had joined before Hitler came to power were deemed to be hard-core Nazis.255 In May and June 1945, 700 were arrested daily, and 18,000 total by August. By September, 82,000 were in internment camps.\nProgress was slowed by the overwhelming numbers of Germans to be processed and by difficulties such as incompatible power systems and power outages, as with the Hollerith IBM data machine that held the American vetting list in Paris. As many as 40,000 forms could arrive in a single day to await processing. By December 1945, even though a full 500,000 forms had been processed, there remained a backlog of 4,000,000 forms from POWs and a potential case load of 7,000,000.261\u2013262 The \"Frageb\u00f6gen\" were, of course, filled out in German. The number of Americans working on denazification was inadequate to handle the workload, partly as a result of the demand in the US by families to have soldiers returned home.266 Replacements were mostly unskilled and poorly trained.267 In addition, there was too much work to be done to complete the process of denazification by 1947, the year American troops were expected to be completely withdrawn from Europe.\nPressure also came from the need to find Germans to run their own country. General George Patton wondered if it was \"silly to try to get rid of the most intelligent people in Germany\". He wrote, \"It is no more possible for a man to be a civil servant in Germany and not have paid lip service to Nazism than it is for a man to be a postmaster in America and not have paid lip service to the Democratic Party or Republican Party when it is in power\". Patton told the press that a controversy over whether Fritz Sch\u00e4ffer was suitable as Minister President of Bavaria was \"just like a Democrat-Republican election fight\".\nEisenhower replaced Patton with Lucius D. Clay as commander of Third United States Army and military governor of Bavaria for his statements. Nazis were, nonetheless, often the ones with training, experience, and willingness to cooperate (\"if all the Nazis had been exceedingly unpleasant and rude, denazification would have been easy\", one officer said); some non-party members probably had been turned down for membership, which made them less desirable than those who had joined. Those with individual natures great enough to defy Nazi rule probably would not work well under American rule. Sch\u00e4ffer\u2014a leader in the Bavarian People's Party who had described the Nazis as \"saviors of our Fatherland\"\u2014and Franz Oppenhoff in Aachen had shown that anti-Nazis did not necessarily believe in democracy.\nMilitary Government Law No. 8, announced on 26 September 1945, probably as a reaction to the Patton and Sch\u00e4ffer cases, prohibited Nazi members from any business employment other than laborer. Local detachments applied the directive to public employment as well, causing (for example) Wasserburg am Inn to lose 20 doctors, likely the entire number. , the lowest-priority detainees, had been just released but were immediately rearrested. In January 1946, a directive came from the Control Council entitled \"Removal from Office and from Positions of Responsibility of Nazis and Persons Hostile to Allied Purposes\". One of the punishments for Nazi involvement was to be barred from public office and/or restricted to manual labor or \"simple work\". At the end of 1945, 3.5million former Nazis awaited classification, many of them barred from work in the meantime.268 By the end of the winter of 1945\u20131946, 42% of public officials had been dismissed.278 Malnutrition was widespread, and the economy needed leaders and workers to help clear away debris, rebuild infrastructure, and get foreign exchange to buy food and other essential resources.255\nAnother concern leading to the Americans relinquishing responsibility for denazification and handing it over to the Germans arose from the fact that many of the American denazifiers were German Jews, former refugees returning to administer justice against the tormentors and killers of their relatives. It was felt, both among Germans and top American officials, that a desire for revenge might contaminate their objectivity.271\u2013273\nAs a result of these various pressures, and following a January 15, 1946, report of the Military Government decrying the efficiency of denazification, saying, \"The present procedure fails in practice to reach a substantial number of persons who supported or assisted the Nazis\", it was decided to involve Germans in the process. In March 1946, the Law for Liberation from National Socialism and Militarism () came into effect, turning over responsibility for denazification to the Germans.\nThe German-run denazification program differed in two ways: It differentiated between five levels of Nazi participation, and the length of prohibition from public life or business would be based on the scale of the crimes. Each zone had a Minister of Denazification. On April 1, 1946, a special law established 545 civilian tribunals under German administration (), with a staff of 22,000 mostly lay judges, enough, perhaps, to start to work but too many for all the staff themselves to be thoroughly investigated and cleared.281 They had a case load of 900,000. Several new regulations came into effect in the setting up of the German-run tribunals, including the idea that the aim of denazification was now rehabilitation rather than merely punishment and that someone whose guilt might meet the formal criteria could also have their specific actions taken into consideration for mitigation.282 Efficiency thus improved, while rigor declined.\nMany people had to fill in a new background form, called a \"Meldebogen\" (replacing the widely disliked \"Fragebogen\"), and were given over to justice under a \"Spruchkammer\", which assigned them to one of five categories:\nAgain, because the caseload was impossibly large, the German tribunals began to look for ways to speed up the process. Unless their crimes were serious, members of the Nazi Party born after 1919 were exempted on the grounds that they had been brainwashed. Disabled veterans were also exempted. To avoid the necessity of a slow trial in open court, which was required for those belonging to the most serious categories, more than 90% of cases were judged not to belong to the serious categories and therefore were dealt with more quickly.283\nMore \"efficiencies\" followed. The tribunals accepted statements from other people regarding the accused's involvement in Nazism. These statements earned the nickname of \"Persilscheine\", after advertisements for the laundry and whitening detergent Persil. There was corruption in the system, with Nazis buying and selling denazification certificates on the black market. Nazis who were found guilty were often punished with fines assessed in Reichsmarks, which had become nearly worthless.290 While the military government was aware of the fines' nominal cost, requiring a hearing for each case prevented mass acquittals of many individuals. In Bavaria, the Denazification Minister, Anton Pfeiffer, bridled under the \"victor's justice\", and presided over a system that reinstated 75% of officials the Americans had dismissed and reclassified 60% of senior Nazis.284 The denazification process lost a great deal of credibility, and there was often local hostility against Germans who helped administer the tribunals. Threats and even violence against tribunal members had become fairly commonplace.285\u2013288\nBy early 1947, the Allies held 90,000 Nazis in detention; another 1,900,000 were forbidden to work as anything but manual laborers. From 1945 to 1950, the Allied powers detained over 400,000 Germans in internment camps in the name of denazification.\nBy 1948, the Cold War was clearly in progress, and the US began to worry more about a threat from the Eastern Bloc rather than the latent Nazism within occupied Germany.277\nThe delicate task of distinguishing those truly complicit in or responsible for Nazi activities from mere \"followers\" made the work of the courts yet more difficult. US President Harry S. Truman alluded to this problem: \"though all Germans might not be guilty for the war, it would be too difficult to try to single out for better treatment those who had nothing to do with the Nazi regime and its crimes.\" Denazification was from then on supervised by special German ministers, like the Social Democrat Gottlob Kamm in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, with the support of the US occupation forces.\nContemporary American critics of denazification denounced it as a \"counterproductive witch hunt\" and a failure; in 1951, the provisional West German government granted amnesties to lesser offenders and ended the program.\nCensorship.\nWhile judicial efforts were handed over to German authorities, the US Army continued its efforts to denazify Germany through control of German media. The Information Control Division of the US Army had by July 1946 taken control of 37 German newspapers, six radio stations, 314 theaters, 642 cinemas, 101 magazines, 237 book publishers, and 7,384 book dealers and printers. Its main mission was democratization, but part of the agenda was also the prohibition of any criticism of the Allied occupation forces. In addition, on May 13, 1946, the Allied Control Council issued a directive for the confiscation of all media that could contribute to Nazism or militarism. Consequently, a list was drawn up of over 30,000 book titles, ranging from school textbooks to poetry, which were then banned. All the millions of copies of these books were to be confiscated and destroyed; the possession of a book on the list was made a punishable offense. The representative of the Military Directorate admitted that the order was in principle no different from the Nazi book burnings.\nThe censorship in the US zone was regulated by the occupation directive JCS 1067 (valid until July 1947) and in the May 1946 order valid for all zones (rescinded in 1950), Allied Control Authority Order No. 4, \"No. 4 \u2013 Confiscation of Literature and Material of a Nazi and Militarist Nature\". All confiscated literature was reduced to pulp instead of being burned. It was also directed by Directive No. 30, \"Liquidation of German Military and Nazi Memorials and Museums\". An exception was made for tombstones \"erected at the places where members of regular formations died on the field of battle\".\nArtworks were under the same censorship as other media: \"all collections of works of art related or dedicated to the perpetuation of German militarism or Nazism will be closed permanently and taken into custody.\" The directives were very broadly interpreted, leading to the destruction of thousands of paintings, and thousands more were shipped to deposits in the US. Those confiscated paintings still surviving in US custody include for example a painting \"depicting a couple of middle aged women talking in a sunlit street in a small town\". Artists were also restricted in which new art they were allowed to create; \"OMGUS was setting explicit political limits on art and representation\".\nThe publication \"Der Ruf\" (\"The Call\") was a popular literary magazine first published in 1945 by Alfred Andersch and edited by Hans Werner Richter. \"Der Ruf\", also called \"Independent Pages of the New Generation\", claimed to have the aim of educating the German people about democracy. In 1947, its publication was blocked by the American forces for being overly critical of the occupational government. Richter attempted to print many of the controversial pieces in a volume entitled \"Der Skorpion\" (\"The Scorpion\"). The occupational government blocked publication of \"Der Skorpion\" before it began, saying that the volume was too \"nihilistic\".\nPublication of \"Der Ruf\" resumed in 1948 under a new publisher, but \"Der Skorpion\" was blocked and not widely distributed. Unable to publish his works, Richter founded Group 47.\nThe Allied costs for occupation were charged to the German people. A newspaper that revealed the charges (including, among other things, thirty thousand bras) was banned by the occupation authorities for disclosing this information.\nIn 1946, the U.S. zone implemented a comprehensive survey known as the (questionnaire). The survey was used to identify the level of involvement post-war Germans had had with the Nazi regime. It was the initial tool in the process of identifying and purging Nazi influence from positions of power and public life. The survey consisted of 131 questions about personal information, political affiliation, military service, professional activities, financial and social status, and cultural and educational activities. The vast variety of questions allowed the Allies to assess, categorize, and determine eligibility for positions in government, education, and business.\nAn early version was created in 1944 by the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF). This original version of the set the foundation of later questionnaires that were created by the Allies in the different occupation zones. The early version consisted of 78 questions and asked about one's profession. In comparison, the 131-question survey asked more personal questions and allowed respondents to write comments and explanations for any responses needing clarification.\nThe inspiration for both variations of the questionnaire came from the , which was created in 1943 by political scientist Aldo L. Raffa. The goal of the document was similar to the denazification questionnaire but was aimed at the defascization of Italy from the former fascists under Mussolini.\nIn addition to the removal of Nazis from influential positions in government, education, and business, Mikkel Dack argues that the Fragebogen had the effect of forcing a large part of Germany's postwar population to confront their relationship to the Nazi regime. Moreover, the Fragebogen gave many Germans the opportunity to rewrite their past and construct a new anti-Nazi identity, further helping to distance the country from National Socialism.\nSoviet zone.\nFrom the beginning, denazification in the Soviet zone was considered a critical element of the transformation into a socialist society and was quickly and effectively implemented. Members of the Nazi Party and its organizations were often brutally beaten before being arrested and interned. The NKVD was directly in charge of this process and oversaw the camps. In 1948, the camps were placed under the same administration as the gulag in the Soviet government. According to official records, 122,600 people were interned; 34,700 of those interned in this process were considered to be Soviet citizens, with the rest being German. This process happened at the same time as the expropriation of large landowners and Junkers, who were also often former Nazi supporters.236\u2013241\nBecause part of the intended goal of denazification in the Soviet zone was also the removal of anti-socialist sentiment, the committees in charge of the process were politically skewed. A typical panel would have one member from the Christian Democratic Union, one from the Liberal Democratic Party of Germany, one from the Democratic Farmers' Party of Germany, one from the National Democratic Party of Germany (East Germany), three from the Socialist Unity Party of Germany, three from the National People's Army and three from political mass organizations (who were typically also supportive of the Socialist Unity Party).\nFormer Nazi officials quickly realized that they would face fewer obstacles and investigations in the zones controlled by the Western Allies. Many of them saw a chance to defect to the West on the pretext of anti-communism. Conditions in the internment camps were terrible, and between 42,000 and 80,000 prisoners died. When the camps were closed in 1950, prisoners were handed over to the East German government.\nBecause many of the functionaries of the Soviet occupation zone were themselves formerly prosecuted by the Nazi regime, mere former membership in the NSDAP was initially judged as a crime.\nEven before denazification was officially abandoned in West Germany, East German propaganda frequently portrayed itself as the only true anti-fascist state, and argued that the West German state was simply a continuation of the Nazi regime, employing the same officials that had administered the government during the Nazi dictatorship. From the 1950s, the reasoning for these accusations focused on the fact that many former functionaries of the Nazi regime were employed in positions in the West German government. However, East German propaganda also attempted to denounce as Nazis even politicians such as Kurt Schumacher, who had been imprisoned by the Nazi regime himself. Such allegations appeared frequently in the official Socialist Unity Party of Germany newspaper, the \"Neues Deutschland\". The East German uprising of 1953 in Berlin was officially blamed on Nazi \"agents provocateurs\" from West Berlin, who the \"Neues Deutschland\" alleged were then working in collaboration with the Western government with the ultimate aim of restoring Nazi rule throughout Germany. The Berlin Wall was officially called the Anti-Fascist Security Wall () by the East German government. As part of the propagandistic campaign against West Germany, Theodor Oberl\u00e4nder and Hans Globke, both former Nazi leaders involved in genocide, were among the first federal politicians to be denounced in the GDR. Both were sentenced to life imprisonment in absentia by the GDR in April 1960 and in July 1963. The president of West Germany Heinrich L\u00fcbke, in particular, was denounced during the official commemorations of the liberation of the concentration camps of Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen held at the GDR's National Memorials.\nHowever, in reality, substantial numbers of former Nazis rose to senior levels in East Germany. For example, those who had collaborated after the war with the Soviet occupation forces could protect Nazi members from prosecution, enabling them to continue working. Having special connections with the occupiers in order to have someone vouch for them could also shield a person from the denazification laws.256 In particular, the districts of Gera, Erfurt, and Suhl had significant amounts of former Nazi Party members in their government, whilst 13.6% of senior SED officials in Thuringia were former members of the Nazi Party. Notable ex-Nazis who eventually became prominent East German politicians included Kurt Nier, a deputy minister for foreign affairs, and Arno Von Lenski, a parliamentarian and major-general in the East German army who had worked in Roland Freisler's notorious Volksgerichthof trying opponents of the Nazi government as an effective \"kangaroo court\". Von Lenski was a member of the NPPD, a political party set up by East German authorities upon the encouragement of Stalin explicitly to appeal to former Nazi members and sympathisers, and which functioned as a loyal satellite of the Socialist Unity Party.\nBritish zone.\nThe British prepared a plan from 1942 onwards, assigning a number of quite junior civil servants to head the administration of liberated territory in the rear of the Armies, with draconian powers to remove from their posts, in both public and private domains, anyone suspected, usually on behavioral grounds, of harboring Nazi sympathies. For the British government, the rebuilding of German economic power was more important than the imprisonment of Nazi criminals. Economically hard pressed at home after the war, Britain did not want the burden of feeding and otherwise administering Germany.299\nIn October 1945, in order to constitute a working legal system, and given that 90% of German lawyers had been members of the Nazi Party, the British decided that 50% of the German Legal Civil Service could be staffed by \"nominal\" Nazis. Similar pressures caused them to relax the restriction even further in April 1946.256 In industry, especially in the economically crucial Ruhr area, the British began by being lenient about who owned or operated businesses, turning stricter by autumn of 1945. To reduce the power of industrialists, the British expanded the role of trade unions, giving them some decision-making powers.307\u2013308\nThey were, however, especially zealous during the early months of occupation in bringing to justice anyone, soldiers or civilians, who had committed war crimes against POWs or captured Allied aircrew.293\u2013295 In June 1945, an interrogation center at Bad Nenndorf was opened, where detainees were tortured with exposure to cold, beatings, sleep deprivation, denial of food, etc. A public scandal ensued, with the center eventually being closed down.305\u2013306\nThe British, to some extent, avoided being overwhelmed by the potential numbers of denazification investigations by requiring that no one need fill in the \"Fragebogen\" unless they were applying for an official or responsible position. This difference between American and British policy was decried by the Americans and caused some Nazis to seek shelter in the British zone.302\u2013303,310\nIn January 1946, the British started introducing German involvement in the denazification process, establishing denazification panels and an appeal body. Denazification was formally handed over to the zone's Land governments in October 1947.303,312\nFrench zone.\nThe French were less vigorous, for a number of reasons, than the other Western powers, not even using the term \"denazification\", instead calling it \"\u00e9puration\" (purification). At the same time, some French occupational commanders had served in the collaborationist Vichy regime during the war, where they had formed friendly relationships with the Germans. As a result, in the French zone, mere membership in the Nazi Party was much less important than in the other zones.317\u2013321\nBecause teachers had been strongly Nazified, the French began by removing three-quarters of all teachers from their jobs. However, finding that the schools could not be run without them, they were soon rehired, although subject to easy dismissal\u2014a similar process governed technical experts.321 The French were the first to turn over the vetting process to the Germans, while maintaining French power to reverse any German decision. Overall, the business of denazification in the French zone was considered a \"golden mean between an excessive degree of severity and an inadequate standard of leniency\", laying the groundwork for an enduring reconciliation between France and Germany. In the French zone, only thirteen Germans were categorized as \"major offenders\".322\nBrown book.\n\"Braunbuch \u2013 Kriegs- und Naziverbrecher in der Bundesrepublik: Staat \u2013 Wirtschaft \u2013 Verwaltung \u2013 Armee \u2013 Justiz \u2013 Wissenschaft\" (English title: \"Brown Book \u2013 War and Nazi Criminals in the Federal Republic: State, Economy, Administration, Army, Justice, Science\") is a book written by Albert Norden in 1965. In this book, Norden detailed 1,800 Nazis who maintained high-ranking positions in postwar West Germany.\nAltogether 1,800 West German persons and their past were covered: especially 15 Ministers and state secretaries, 100 admirals and generals, 828 judges or state lawyers and high law officers, 245 officials of the Foreign Office and of embassies and consulates in leading position, 297 high police officers and officers of the Verfassungsschutz. The first brown book was seized in West Germany \u2013 on Frankfurt Book Fair \u2013 by judicial resolution.\nThe contents of this book received substantial attention in West Germany and other countries. The West German government stated, at that time, that it was \"all falsification\". Later on, however, it became clear that the data of the book were largely correct. Hanns Martin Schleyer, for example, really had been a member of the SS. The book was translated into 10 languages. Amongst the reactions to it was also a similar West German book of the same name, covering the topic of Nazis re-emerging in high-level positions in the GDR.\nIn addition to the \"Braunbuch\" the educational booklet \"Das ganze System ist braun\" (\"The whole system is brown\") was published in the GDR.\nResponsibility and collective guilt.\nThe ideas of collective guilt and collective punishment originated not with the US and British people, but on higher policy levels. Not until late in the war did the US public assign collective responsibility to the German people. The most notable policy document containing elements of collective guilt and collective punishment is JCS 1067 from early 1945. Eventually horrific footage from the concentration camps would serve to harden public opinion and bring it more in line with that of policymakers.\nAs early as 1944, prominent US opinion makers had initiated a domestic propaganda campaign (which was to continue until 1948) arguing for a harsh peace for Germany, with a particular aim to end the apparent habit in the US of viewing the Nazis and the German people as separate entities.\nStatements made by the British and US governments, both before and immediately after Germany's surrender, indicate that the German nation as a whole was to be held responsible for the actions of the Nazi regime, often using the terms \"collective guilt\" and \"collective responsibility\".\nTo that end, as the Allies began their post-war denazification efforts, the Psychological Warfare Division (PWD) of Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force undertook a psychological propaganda campaign for the purpose of developing a German sense of collective responsibility.\nIn 1945, the Public Relations and Information Services Control Group of the British Element (CCG/BE) of the Allied Control Commission for Germany began to issue directives to officers in charge of producing newspapers and radio broadcasts for the German population to emphasize \"the moral responsibility of all Germans for Nazi crimes\". Similarly, among US authorities, such a sense of collective guilt was \"considered a prerequisite to any long-term education of the German people\".\nUsing the German press, which was under Allied control, as well as posters and pamphlets, a program was conducted which was intended to acquaint ordinary Germans with what had taken place in the concentration camps. An example of this was the use of posters with images of concentration camp victims coupled to text such as \"YOU ARE GUILTY OF THIS!\" or \"These atrocities: your fault!\"\nEnglish writer James Stern recounted an example in a German town soon after the German surrender:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[a] crowd is gathered around a series of photographs which though initially seeming to depict garbage instead reveal dead human bodies. Each photograph has a heading \"WHO IS GUILTY?\". The spectators are silent, appearing hypnotised and eventually retreat one by one. The placards are later replaced with clearer photographs and placards proclaiming \"THIS TOWN IS GUILTY! YOU ARE GUILTY!\"\nThe introduction text of one pamphlet published in 1945 by the American War Information Unit (Amerikanischen Kriegsinformationsamt) entitled \"Bildbericht aus f\u00fcnf Konzentrationslagern\" (\"Photo Report from Five Concentration Camps\") contained this explanation of the pamphlet's purpose:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thousands of Germans who live near these places were led through the camps to see with their own eyes which crimes were committed in their name. But it is not possible for most Germans to view a KZ. This pictorial report is intended for them.\nA number of films showing the concentration camps were made and screened to the German public, such as \"Die Todesm\u00fchlen\", released in the US zone in January 1946, and \"Welt im Film No. 5\" in June 1945. A film that was never finished due partly to delays and the existence of the other films was \"Memory of the Camps\". According to Sidney Bernstein, chief of Psychological Warfare Division, the objective of the film was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImmediately upon the liberation of the concentration camps, many German civilians were forced to see the conditions in the camps, bury rotting corpses and exhume mass graves. In some instances, civilians were also made to provide items for former concentration camp inmates.\nSurveys.\nThe US conducted opinion surveys in the American zone of occupied Germany. Tony Judt, in his book \"\", extracted and used some of them.\nBritish historian Ian Kershaw in his book \"\" writes about the various surveys carried out at the German population:\nHowever, in \"Hitler, Germans, and the \"Jewish Question\"\", Sarah Ann Gordon notes the difficulty of drawing conclusions from the surveys. For example, respondents were given three alternatives from which to choose, as in question 1:\nTo the question of whether an Aryan who marries a Jew should be condemned, 91% responded \"No\". To the question of whether \"All those who ordered the murder of civilians or participated in the murdering should be made to stand trial\", 94% responded \"Yes\".\nConsequently, the implications of these alarming results have been questioned and rationalized; as another example, Gordon singles out the question \"Extermination of the Jews and Poles and other non-Aryans was not necessary for the security of the Germans\", which included an implicit double negative to which the response was either yes or no. She concludes that this question was confusingly phrased (given that in the German language the affirmative answer to a question containing a negative statement is \"no\"): \"Some interviewees may have responded 'no' they did not agree with the statement, when they actually did agree that the extermination was not necessary.\" She further highlights the discrepancy between the antisemitic implications of the survey results (such as those later identified by Judt) with the 77% percent of interviewees who responded that actions against Jews were in no way justified.\nEnd.\nAs new political parties such as CDU-CSU formed in the Western Allies' zones, they annoyed the occupation authorities by stating that only top Nazi leaders needed denazification and that others were , \"Nazis by compulsion\". The West German political system, as it emerged from the occupation, was increasingly opposed to the Allied denazification policy. As denazification was deemed ineffective and counterproductive by the Americans, they did not oppose the plans of the West German chancellor, Konrad Adenauer, to end the denazification efforts. Adenauer's intention was to switch government policy to reparations and compensation for the victims of Nazi rule (\"Wiedergutmachung\"), stating that the main culprits had been prosecuted. In 1951 several laws were passed, ending the denazification. Officials were allowed to retake jobs in the civil service, and hiring quotas were established for these previously excluded individuals, with the exception of people assigned to Group I (Major Offenders) and II (Offenders) during the denazification review process. These individuals were referred to as \"131-ers\", after Article 131 of Federal Republic's Basic Law.\nSeveral amnesty laws were also passed which affected an estimated 792,176 people. Those pardoned included people with six-month sentences, 35,000 people with sentences of up to one year and include more than 3,000 functionaries of the SA, the SS, and the Nazi Party who participated in dragging victims to jails and camps; 20,000 other Nazis sentenced for \"deeds against life\" (presumably murder); 30,000 sentenced for causing bodily injury, and 5,200 who committed \"crimes and misdemeanors in office\". As a result, many people with a former Nazi past ended up again in the political apparatus of West Germany. In 1957, 77% of the German Ministry of Justice's senior officials were former Nazi Party members. Included in this ministry was Franz Massfeller, a former Nazi official who had participated in the meetings which followed the Wannsee Conference, in which the extermination of Jews was planned.\nHiding one's Nazi past.\nMembership in Nazi organizations is still not an open topic of discussion. German President Walter Scheel and Chancellor Kurt Georg Kiesinger were both former members of the Nazi Party. In 1950, a major controversy broke out when it emerged that Konrad Adenauer's State Secretary Hans Globke had played a major role in drafting antisemitic Nuremberg Race Laws in Nazi Germany. In the 1980s former UN Secretary General and President of Austria Kurt Waldheim was confronted with allegations he had lied about his wartime record in the Balkans.\nIt was not until 2006 that famous German writer G\u00fcnter Grass, occasionally viewed as a spokesman of \"the nation's moral conscience\", spoke publicly about the fact that he had been a member of the Waffen-SS\u00a0\u2013 he was conscripted into the Waffen-SS while barely seventeen years old and his duties were military in nature. Statistically, it was likely that there were many more Germans of Grass's generation (also called the \"Flakhelfer-Generation\") with biographies similar to his.\nJoseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI), on the other hand, was open about his membership at the age of fourteen of the Hitler Youth, when his church youth group was forced to merge with them.\nIn other countries.\nIn practice, denazification was not limited to Germany and Austria. In several European countries with a vigorous Nazi or fascist party, measures of denazification were carried out. In France the process was called \u00e9puration l\u00e9gale (\"legal cleansing\"). Prisoners of war held in detention in Allied countries were also subject to denazification qualifications before being returned to their countries of origin.\nDenazification was also practiced in many countries which came under German occupation, including Belgium, Norway, Greece and Yugoslavia, because satellite regimes had been established in these countries with the support of local collaborators.\nIn Greece, for instance, Special Courts of Collaborators were created after 1945 to try former collaborators. The three Greek \"quisling\" prime ministers were convicted and sentenced to death or life imprisonment. Other Greek collaborators after German withdrawal underwent repression and public humiliation, besides being tried (mostly on treason charges). In the context of the emerging Greek Civil War, however, most wartime figures from the civil service, the Greek Gendarmerie and the notorious Security Battalions were quickly integrated into the strongly anti-Communist postwar establishment.\nAn attempt to ban the swastika across the EU in early 2005 failed after objections from the British government and others. In early 2007, while Germany held the European Union presidency, Berlin proposed that the European Union should follow German Criminal Law and criminalize the denial of the Holocaust and the display of Nazi symbols including the swastika, which is based on the Ban on the Symbols of Unconstitutional Organizations Act (Strafgesetzbuch section 86a). This led to an opposition campaign by Hindu groups across Europe against a ban on the swastika. They pointed out that the swastika has been around for 5,000 years as a symbol of peace. The proposal to ban the swastika was dropped by the German government from the proposed European Union wide anti-racism laws on January 29, 2007.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48762", "revid": "41650088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48762", "title": "Vendozoa", "text": ""}
{"id": "48764", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48764", "title": "Tocantins", "text": "State of Brazil\nTocantins () is one of the 26 states of Brazil. It is the newest state, formed in 1988 and encompassing what had formerly been the northern two-fifths of the state of Goi\u00e1s. Tocantins covers and had an estimated population of 1,496,880 in 2014. Construction of its capital, Palmas, began in 1989; most of the other cities in the state date to the Portuguese colonial period. With the exception of Aragua\u00edna, there are few other cities with a significant population in the state. The government has invested in a new capital, a major hydropower dam, railroads and related infrastructure to develop this primarily agricultural area. The state has 0.75% of the Brazilian population and is responsible for 0.5% of the Brazilian GDP.\nTocantins has attracted hundreds of thousands of new residents, primarily to Palmas. It is building on its hydropower resources. The Araguaia and Tocantins rivers drain the largest watershed that lies entirely inside Brazilian territory. The Rio Tocantins has been dammed for hydropower, creating a large reservoir that has become a center of recreation. Because it is in the central zone of the country, Tocantins has characteristics of the Amazon Basin, and also semi-open pastures, known as \"cerrado\". The Bananal Island (\"Ilha do Bananal\"), in the southwest of the State, is the second largest fluvial island in the world. Tocantins is also home to the Araguaia National Park, the Caraj\u00e1s Indian reservations, and Jalap\u00e3o State Park, which is about from Palmas. There, the rivers create oases in the dry landscape, attracting many ecotourists to the region.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Tocantins\" refers to the Tocantins River, which itself derives from the Tupi language words \"tuk\u00e3\u00b4\", \"toucan\", and \"t\u00ef\", \"beak\", literally \"Toucan's beak\".\nGeography.\nThe geography of Tocantins is varied. It straddles both the Amazon rainforest and the coastal savanna. Many rivers (including the Tocantins River) traverse the state. Researchers have identified more than 20 archaeologically significant sites related to indigenous cultures.\nTocantins is bordered to the northeast by the states of Maranh\u00e3o and Piau\u00ed, Bahia to the east, Goi\u00e1s to the south, Mato Grosso to the west, and Par\u00e1 to the northwest. Tocantins was created from the northern two-fifths of Goi\u00e1s state in 1989 and is divided into 139 municipalities.\nFollowing its separation from Goi\u00e1s, the new state was transferred from Brazil's Central-West Region to the North Region.\nClimate.\nMost of Tocantins (except the extreme western and northern regions) is situated within a vast Brazilian area known as the cerrado. The cerrado region's typical climate is hot and semi-humid, with pronounced seasonal variation marked by a dry winter from May through October. The average annual rainfall is around 1500\u00a0mm.\nVegetation.\nThe \"cerrado\" landscape cover 87% of Tocantins and is characterized by extensive savanna formations crossed by gallery forests and stream valleys. Cerrado includes various types of vegetation. Humid fields and \"buriti\" palm paths are found where the water table is near the surface. Alpine pastures occur at higher altitudes and mesophytic forests on more fertile soils. In the north of Tocantins the cerrado gives place to a zone of transition for the Amazon biome, near Tocantins River.\nThe savanna formations are not homogenous. There is great variation between the amount of woody and herbaceous vegetation, forming a gradient from completely open \"cerrado\" \u2014 open fields dominated by grasses \u2014 to the closed, forest-like \"cerrado\" and the \"cerrad\u00e3o\" (\"big cerrado\"), a closed canopy forest. Intermediate forms include the dirty field, the \"cerrado\" field, and the \"cerrado\" sensu stricto, according to a growing density of trees.\nThe \"cerrado\" trees have characteristic twisted trunks covered by a thick bark, and leaves that are usually broad and rigid. Many herbaceous plants have extensive roots to store water and nutrients. The plant's thick bark and roots serve as adaptations for the periodic fires which sweep the cerrado landscape. The adaptations protect the plants from destruction and make them capable of sprouting again after the fire.\nAs in many savannas in the world, the \"cerrado\" ecosystems have been coexisting with fire since ancient times. Initially they developed adaptations to natural fires caused by lightning or volcanic activity.\nAlong the western boundary of the state is the floodplain of the Araguaia River, which includes extensive wetlands and Amazon tropical forest ecosystems. Bananal Island, formed by two branches of the Araguaia, is said to be the largest river island in the world. It consists mostly of marshlands and seasonally flooded savannas, with gallery forest. Where the two branches meet again they form an inland delta called Cant\u00e3o, a typical Amazonian igap\u00f3 flooded forest. The Araguaia is also one of the main links between the Amazonian lowlands and the Pantanal wetlands to the south, but the river is not fully navigable.\nHistory.\nPortuguese Jesuit missionaries explored what is today Tocantins state about 1625, seeking to convert the Amerindian peoples of the area to Christianity. The area is named after the Tocantins River, whose name is derived from an indigenous language. (From: Tuk\u00f4, \"Toucan\" + t\u00ef, \"beak\". lit. \"Toucan's beak\" in Tupi language.)\nBefore 1988 the area made up the northern two-fifths or one-third of Goi\u00e1s state. Since the 17th century, this area was relatively isolated by rivers navigable only in short portions and mountains, and difficult to access. As a result, the southern area of the state became more developed, particularly after this area was selected in 1956 as the site for the development of the new capital of Bras\u00edlia and the Federal District. A strong separatist movement developed in the north for independence of its people.\nAfter the government levied heavy taxes on mining in 1809, local residents began to organize a separatists movement. They made a minor revolt which was quickly crushed by the army. In the 19th century, a string of failed uprisings occurred in the north. Historically the area was inhabited chiefly by Amerindians in some intact indigenous tribes and pardos of Amerindian and Portuguese descent.\nIn the 1970s, the population of northern Goi\u00e1s lobbied the government to establish a separate state. In the 1988 Constitution, the State of Tocantins was created and admitted as a new Brazilian state.\nSince its establishment and investment by the government, as in the new capital of Palmas, Tocantins has been the fastest-growing Brazilian state. Its thriving economy is based on agriculture and agro-industry, attracting thousands of migrants from all over the country. The construction of the long-planned North\u2013South Railway is expected to further boost economic growth.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2022 census, there were 1,511,460 people residing in the state. The population density was .\nUrbanization: 71.5% (2004); Population growth: 2.6% (1991\u20132000); Houses: 355,502 (2005).\nThe 2022 census revealed the following numbers: 939,260 Pardos (brown, multiracial) people (62.1%), 350,613 White people (23.2%), 199,394 Black people (13.2%), 18,735 Amerindian people (1.2%), 3,405 Asian people (0.2%).\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nThe service sector is the largest component of GDP at 59.9%, followed by the industrial sector at 27.2%. Agriculture represents 12.9% of GDP (2004). Tocantins exports: soybean 89.2%, beef 10.5% (2002). Tocantins' economy is based on an aggressive expansionist model of agro-exports and is marked by consecutive records of primary hyper-surpluses: its exports reveal its strong agricultural inclination. Following the example of neighboring states (Mato Grosso and Goi\u00e1s), it is becoming a major grain producer (soy, corn, rice).\nAs with much of Brazil, Tocantins' economy is also dependent on cattle ranching. The state's pineapple plantations is considerable. In the state's north, charcoal and oils are extracted from the baba\u00e7u palm tree.\nThe gross value of the state's agricultural production was estimated at more than R$7.6 billion in 2019.\nIn soy, Tocantins is the largest producer in the northern region of Brazil. In the 2019 harvest, Tocantins harvested 3 million tons.\nIn maize, the state harvested close to 1 million tonnes in 2019.\nIn 2019 Tocantins was the leader in rice production in the North region, becoming the 3rd largest producer in Brazil. Harvested more than 670 thousand tons in the 2016/2017 harvest.\nRegarding pineapple, in 2018 Tocantins was the 6th largest producer state in Brazil, with 69 million fruits.\nIn 2019 the state's cattle herd was 8 million animals.\nAbout industry, Tocantins had an industrial GDP of R$4.5 billion in 2017, equivalent to 0.4% of the national industry. It employs 30,234 workers in the industry. The main industrial sectors are: Construction (34.1%), Industrial Services of Public Utility, such as Electricity and Water (28.4%), Food (22.5%), Non-metallic minerals (5.2%) and Chemicals (1.5%). These 5 sectors concentrate 91.7% of the state's industry.\nIts industry is mainly agroindustry, centralized in six districts located in five pole cities: Palmas, Aragua\u00edna, Gurupi, Porto Nacional and Para\u00edso do Tocantins. Its industry is still small and focused mainly on domestic consumption.\nIn the tertiary sector (commerce and services), its main activities are concentrated in the capital Palmas and also in the cities that are located on the side of the Bel\u00e9m-Bras\u00edlia Highway (BR-153 and BR-226). This highway is vital for Tocantins, as it cuts the state from north to south and allows for a better performance in the economic growth of the cities located on its banks, serving as a warehouse for road transport and services for travelers. In addition, the Bel\u00e9m-Bras\u00edlia Highway also facilitates the flow of production from Tocantins to other states and to ports on the coast.\nInfrastructure.\nThe main federal highways in Tocantins are BR-153 and BR-226, which together form the road axis of the Bel\u00e9m-Bras\u00edlia Highway. The others are BR-010, BR-235, and BR-242. These last highways still have many sections that are unpaved or even incomplete. In Tocantins, the Bel\u00e9m-Bras\u00edlia Highway (BR-153 and BR-226) was the first highway to be built and paved in the state, having been built during the late 1950s.\nTocantins has three airports served by regular flights: Palmas Airport, Aragua\u00edna Airport and Gurupi Airport. All other airports in the state are served only by air taxi companies.\nThe North\u2013South Railway (or EF-151) is in the construction process, being operated regularly from Aguiarn\u00f3polis to Porto Nacional by VLI while the West\u2013East Integration Railway (or EF-334) is still in the planning phase on the stretch that will pass through the state. The railway already connects A\u00e7ail\u00e2ndia to An\u00e1polis, but the section south of Porto Nacional is not operated regularly as there are no yards for loading/unloading wagons. Valec is still studying the concession model for the railway.\nThe state's main waterways are the Tocantins River and Araguaia River waterways.\nFlag.\nThe message of the flag is the phrase \"where the sun rises for all\". In the middle of the flag is the golden yellow sun, with its rays symbolically targeting to the future of the state. The sun is placed on a white band, where the white color represents peace. The blue in the upper left and the yellow in the bottom right represent the waters and the soil of the state. The colors date back to a flag used by the Autonomous Government of Palmas in the 19th century.\nThe flag was adopted with the state flag law (law no 094/89) of November 17, 1989.\nCities.\nTocantins contains 139 municipalities. For statistical purposes, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) divides the state into two mesoregions containing eight micro-regions. These statistical divisions were revised in 2017.\nImportant cities include:\nRepresented in popular culture.\n\"\" was the setting for the eighteenth season of the United States reality show \"Survivor,\" filmed in the microregion of Jalap\u00e3o in Tocantins. The premiere aired February 12, 2009.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48765", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48765", "title": "Swedish Bank Prize", "text": ""}
{"id": "48766", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48766", "title": "Bank of Sweden Prize", "text": ""}
{"id": "48767", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48767", "title": "Georgia (U.S. State)", "text": ""}
{"id": "48768", "revid": "46071083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48768", "title": "Georgia (country)", "text": "Country in the Caucasus between Europe and Asia\nGeorgia is a country in the Caucasus region on the coast of the Black Sea. It is located at the intersection of Eastern Europe and West Asia, and is today generally regarded as part of Europe. It is bordered to the north and northeast by Russia, to the south by Turkey and Armenia, and to the southeast by Azerbaijan. Georgia covers an area of . It has a population of 3.9 million, of which over a third live in the capital and largest city, Tbilisi. Ethnic Georgians, who are native to the region, constitute a majority of the country's population and are its titular nation.\nGeorgia has been inhabited since prehistory, hosting the world's earliest known sites of winemaking, gold mining, and textiles. The classical era saw the emergence of several kingdoms, such as Colchis and Iberia, that formed the nucleus of the modern Georgian state. In the early fourth century, Georgians officially adopted Christianity, which contributed to their unification under the Kingdom of Georgia. Georgia reached its Golden Age during the High Middle Ages under the reigns of King David IV and Queen Tamar. Beginning in the 15th century, the kingdom declined and disintegrated due to internal discord and pressure from various regional powers, including the Mongols, the Ottoman Empire, and Persia, before being gradually annexed into the Russian Empire starting in 1801.\nAfter the Russian Revolution in 1917, Georgia briefly emerged as an independent republic under German protection. However, the country was invaded and annexed by the Red Army in 1921; it then became one of the republics of the Soviet Union. In the 1980s, an independence movement grew quickly, leading to Georgia's secession from the Soviet Union in April 1991. For much of the subsequent decade, the country endured economic crises, political instability, and secessionist wars in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Following the peaceful Rose Revolution in 2003, Georgia strongly pursued a pro-Western foreign policy, introducing a series of reforms aimed at integration into the European Union and NATO. This Western orientation led to worsening relations with Russia, culminating in the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 and continued Russian occupation of parts of Georgia.\nGeorgia is a representative democracy governed as a unitary parliamentary republic. It is a developing country with a very high Human Development Index and an emerging market economy. Sweeping economic reforms since 2003 have resulted in one of the freest business climates in the world, greater economic freedom and transparency, and among the fastest rates of GDP growth. In 2018, Georgia became the second country to legalize cannabis, and the first former socialist state to do so. Georgia is a member of numerous international organizations, including the Council of Europe, Eurocontrol, BSEC, GUAM, and Energy Community. As part of the Association Trio, Georgia is an official candidate for membership in the European Union. Since October 2024, Georgia has been immersed in a deep political crisis.\nEtymology.\nNames of Georgia.\nAncient Greeks (Strabo, Herodotus, Plutarch, Homer, etc.) and Romans (Titus Livius, Tacitus, etc.) referred to early western Georgians as Colchians and eastern Georgians as Iberians (, in some Greek sources).\nThe first mention of the name \"Georgia\" is in Italian on the of Pietro Vesconte dated 1320. At the early stage of its appearance in the Latin world, the name was often spelled \"Jorgia\". Lore-based theories were given by traveller Jacques de Vitry, who explained the name's origin by the popularity of St. George among Georgians, while Jean Chardin thought that \"Georgia\" came from the Greek ('tiller of the land').\nModern scholarship generally derives the name Georgia from the Persian term \"Gurj\" (\u06af\u0631\u062c), a historical ethnonym for Georgians. The ultimate origin of this term is debated, though it may be connected to \"gur\u011f\u0101n\", a region name meaning \"land of wolves.\" From Persian, the term was borrowed into Byzantine Greek, Slavic, and later Western European languages. The adoption of the term Georgia in Western Europe coincided with increased contact during the Crusades and trade through Black Sea ports controlled by Genoese merchants. The association with St. George, a popular figure in medieval Christendom, may have reinforced the exonym's appeal in Latin Europe.\nThe native name is (; 'land of Kartvelians'), derived from the core central Georgian region of Kartli, recorded from the 9th century, and in extended usage referring to the entire medieval Kingdom of Georgia prior to the 13th century. The Georgian circumfix -X- is a standard geographic construction designating 'the area where X dwell', where X is an ethnonym. The self-designation used by ethnic Georgians is (, i.e. 'Kartvelians'), first attested in the \"Umm Leisun inscription\" found in the Old City of Jerusalem, dated to the 5th or 6th century.\nThe medieval \"Georgian Chronicles\" present an eponymous ancestor of the Kartvelians, Kartlos, a great-grandson of Japheth who medieval chroniclers believed to have been the root of the local name of their kingdom. However, scholars agree that the word \"Kartli\" is derived from the \"Karts\", a proto-Kartvelian tribe that emerged as a dominant regional group in ancient times. The name () consists of two parts. Its root, (), specifies an inhabitant of the core central-eastern Georgian region of Kartli, or Iberia as it is known in sources of the Eastern Roman Empire.\nState name.\nThe official English-language name of the country is \"Georgia\" per Article 2 of the English-language version of the Georgian Constitution, adopted in 1995 (although, at that time, the name was specified in Article 1 instead). In Georgia's two official languages (Georgian and Abkhaz), the country is named () and () respectively. Prior to the adoption of the Constitution in 1995 and following the dissolution of the USSR, the country was officially called the \"Republic of Georgia\".\nSeveral languages continue to use the Russian variant of the country's name, \"Gruzia\", which the Georgian authorities have sought to replace through diplomatic campaigns. Since 2006, Israel, Japan, South Korea and Hungary officially changed their appellation of the country to variants of the English \"Georgia\". In 2020, Lithuania became the first country in the world to adopt \"Sakartvelas\" in all official communications.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe oldest traces of archaic humans in what is now Georgia date from approximately 1.8\u00a0million years ago in the form of the Dmanisi hominins, a subspecies of \"Homo erectus\" representing the oldest-known fossils of hominins in Eurasia. Buffered by the Caucasus and benefiting from the Black Sea ecosystem, the region seems to have served as a refugium throughout the Pleistocene, while the first continuous primitive settlements date back to the Middle Paleolithic, close to 200,000 years ago. During the Upper Paleolithic, settlements developed mostly in Western Georgia, in the valleys of the Rioni and Qvirila rivers.\nSigns of agriculture date back to at least the 6th millennium BC, especially in Western Georgia, while the Mtkvari basin became stably populated in the 5th millennium BC, as evidenced with the rise of various cultures closely associated with the Fertile Crescent, including the Trialetian Mesolithic, the Shulaveri\u2013Shomu culture, and the Leyla-Tepe culture. Archaeological findings show that settlements in modern-day Georgia were responsible for the first use of fibers, possibly for clothing, more than 34,000 years ago, the first cases of viticulture (7th millennium BC), and the first signs of gold mining (3rd millennium BC).\nThe Kura-Araxes, Trialeti, and Colchian cultures coincided with the development of proto-Kartvelian tribes that may have come from Anatolia during the expansion of the Hittite Empire, including the Mushki, Laz, and Byzeres. Some historians have suggested that the collapse of the Hittite world in the Late Bronze Age led to an expansion of the influence of these tribes to the Mediterranean Sea, notably with the Kingdom of Tabal.\nAntiquity.\nThe classical period saw the rise of a number of Georgian states, including Colchis in western Georgia, where Greek mythology located the Golden Fleece sought after by the Argonauts. Archaeological evidence points to a wealthy kingdom in Colchis as early as the 14th century BC and an extensive trade network with Greek colonies on the eastern Black Sea shore (such as Dioscurias and Phasis), though, the entire region would be annexed first by Pontus and then by the Roman Republic in the first century BC.\nEastern Georgia remained a decentralized mosaic of various clans (ruled by individual \"mamasakhlisi\") until the 4th century BC when it was conquered by Alexander the Great, eventually leading to the creation of the Kingdom of Iberia under the protectorate of the Seleucid Empire, an early example of advanced state organization under one king and an aristocratic hierarchy. Various wars with the Roman Empire, Parthia, and Armenia made Iberia regularly change its allegiance, though it remained a Roman client state for most of its history.\nIn 337, King Mirian III adopted Christianity as the state religion of Iberia, beginning the Christianization of the Western Caucasus region and solidly anchoring it in Rome's sphere of influence by abandoning the ancient Georgian polytheistic religion heavily influenced by Zoroastrianism. However, the Peace of Acilisene in 384 formalized the Sasanian control over the entire Caucasus, though Christian rulers of Iberia sought to rebel at times, leading to devastating wars in the 5th\u20136th centuries, most famously under the rule of King Vakhtang Gorgasali who expanded Iberia to its largest historical extent by capturing all of western Georgia and building a new capital in Tbilisi.\nMedieval unification of Georgia.\nIn 580, the Sasanian Empire abolished the Kingdom of Iberia, leading to the disintegration of its constituent territories into various feudal regions by the early Middle Ages. The Roman\u2013Persian Wars plunged the region into chaos, with both Persia and Constantinople supporting various warring factions in the Caucasus, however, the Byzantine Empire was able to establish control over Georgian territories by the end of the 6th century, ruling Iberia indirectly through a local \"Kouropalates\".\nIn 645, the Arabs invaded southeastern Georgia, starting an extended period of Muslim domination in the region; this also led to the establishment of several feudal states seeking independence from each other, such as the Emirate of Tbilisi and the Principality of Kakheti. Western Georgia remained mostly a Byzantine protectorate, especially following the Lazic War.\nThe lack of a central government in Georgia allowed the rise of the Bagrationi dynasty in the early 9th century. Consolidating lands in the southwestern region of Tao-Klarjeti, Prince Ashot I (813\u2013830) used infighting between Arab governors to expand his influence to Iberia and was recognized as Presiding Prince of Iberia by both the Abbasid Caliphate and the Byzantine Empire. Though Ashot's descendants formed competing princely lines, Adarnase IV managed to unify most Georgian lands (except for Kakheti and Abkhazia) and was crowned King of the Iberians in 888, restoring the monarchy abolished three centuries prior.\nIn Western Georgia, the Kingdom of Abkhazia benefited from the weakening of Byzantium in the region to unify various tribes and become one of the most powerful states of the Caucasus in the 8th century. In the 9th-10th centuries, Abkhazia grew its influence through several military campaigns and came to control much of Iberia and competing with the Bagrationi. Dynastic conflicts eventually weakened Abkhazia in the second half of the 10th century while in Tao-Klarjeti, Prince David III used his influence within Byzantine Anatolia to empower the Bagrationi. Bagrat III, heir of the Bagrationi dynasty, successively became King of Abkhazia (978), Prince of Tao-Klarjeti (1000), and King of the Iberians (1008), allowing him to unify most Georgian feudal states and be crowned in 1010 as King of Georgia.\nGolden Age and Division.\nFor much of the 11th century, the nascent Georgian kingdom experienced geopolitical and internal difficulties, with various noble factions opposed to the centralization of the Georgian state. They were often backed by the Byzantine Empire, which feared a dominion of the Caucasus region by the Bagrationi dynasty, and in some instances fuelled internal conflict through aristocratic families seeking more power. However, ties between Byzantium and Georgia were normalized when the two countries faced a new common enemy, the rising Seljuk Empire in the 1060s. Following the decisive Byzantine defeat at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, Constantinople started to retreat from eastern Anatolia and entrusted Georgia with its administration, placing Georgia at the forefront of war with the Turks in the 1080s.\nThe Kingdom of Georgia reached its zenith in the 12th to early 13th centuries. This period during the reigns of David IV (r. 1089\u20131125) and his great-granddaughter Tamar (r. 1184\u20131213) has been widely termed as the Georgian Golden Age. This early Georgian renaissance, which preceded its Western European analog, was characterized by impressive military victories, territorial expansion, and a cultural renaissance in architecture, literature, philosophy and the sciences. The Golden Age of Georgia left a legacy of great cathedrals, romantic poetry and literature, and the epic poem \"The Knight in the Panther's Skin\", considered a national epic.\nDavid IV suppressed dissent of feudal lords and centralized power in his hands to effectively deal with foreign threats. In 1121, he decisively defeated much larger Turkish armies during the Battle of Didgori and abolished the Emirate of Tbilisi.\nThe 29-year reign of Tamar, the first female ruler of Georgia, is considered the most successful in Georgian history. Tamar was given the title \"king of kings\" and succeeded in neutralizing her opposition, while embarking on an energetic foreign policy aided by the downfall of the rival powers of the Seljuks and Byzantium. Supported by a powerful military \u00e9lite, Tamar was able to build on the successes of her predecessors to consolidate an empire that dominated the Caucasus, and extended over large parts of present-day Azerbaijan, Armenia, eastern Turkey, and northern Iran, and used the vacuum of power left by the Fourth Crusade to create the Empire of Trebizond as a Georgian vassal state.\nThe revival of the Kingdom of Georgia was set back after Tbilisi was captured and destroyed by the Khwarezmian leader Jalal ad-Din in 1226, followed by devastating invasions by Mongol ruler Genghis Khan. The Mongols were expelled by George V the Brilliant (r. 1299\u20131302), known for reuniting eastern and western Georgia and restoring the country's previous strength and Christian culture. After his death, local rulers fought for their independence from central Georgian rule, until the total disintegration of the kingdom in the 15th century. Georgia was further weakened by several disastrous invasions by Timur. Invasions continued, giving the kingdom no time for restoration, with both Qara Qoyunlu and Aq Qoyunlu Turkomans constantly raiding its southern provinces.\nTripartite division.\nThe Kingdom of Georgia collapsed into anarchy by 1466 and fragmented into three independent kingdoms and five semi-independent principalities. Neighbouring large empires subsequently exploited the internal division of the weakened country, and beginning in the 16th century, various Ottoman and Iranian forces subjugated western and eastern regions of Georgia, respectively. This pushed local Georgian rulers to seek closer ties with Russia. In 1649, the Kingdom of Imereti sent ambassadors to the Russian royal court, with Russia returning the favour in 1651. In the presence of these ambassadors, Alexander III of Imereti swore an oath of allegiance to Tsar Alexis of Russia on behalf of Imereti. Subsequent rulers also sought assistance from Pope Innocent XII but without success.\nThe rulers of regions that remained partly autonomous organized rebellions on various occasions. As a result of incessant Ottoman\u2013Persian Wars and deportations, the population of Georgia dwindled to 784,700 inhabitants at the end of the 18th century. Eastern Georgia, composed of the regions of Kartli and Kakheti, had been under Iranian suzerainty since the Peace of Amasya signed with neighbouring rivalling Ottoman Turkey (Safavid Georgia). With the death of Nader Shah in 1747, both kingdoms broke free and were reunified through a personal union under the energetic king Heraclius II, who succeeded in stabilizing Eastern Georgia to a degree.\nIn 1783, Russia and the eastern Georgian Kingdom of Kartli-Kakheti signed the Treaty of Georgievsk, which made eastern Georgia a protectorate of Russia, guaranteed its territorial integrity and the continuation of its reigning Bagrationi dynasty in return for prerogatives in the conduct of Georgian foreign affairs.\nDespite its commitment to defend Georgia, Russia rendered no assistance when the Iranians invaded in 1795, capturing and sacking Tbilisi and massacring its inhabitants. Although Russia initiated a punitive campaign against Persia in 1796, the Russian Imperial authorities subsequently violated key promises of the Georgievsk Treaty and in 1801 proceeded to annex eastern Georgia, while abolishing the Georgian royal Bagrationi dynasty, as well as the autocephaly of the Georgian Orthodox Church. Pyotr Bagration, one of the descendants of the abolished house of Bagrationi, later joined the Russian army and became a prominent general in the Napoleonic wars.\nWithin the Russian Empire.\nOn 22 December 1800, Tsar Paul I of Russia, at the alleged request of the Georgian King George XII, signed the proclamation on the incorporation of Georgia (Kartli-Kakheti) within the Russian Empire, which was finalized by a decree on 8 January 1801, and confirmed by Tsar Alexander I on 12 September 1801. The Bagrationi royal family was deported from the kingdom. The Georgian envoy in Saint Petersburg reacted with a note of protest that was presented to the Russian vice-chancellor, Prince Kurakin.\nIn May 1801, under the oversight of General Carl Heinrich von Knorring, Imperial Russia transferred power in eastern Georgia to the government headed by General Ivan Petrovich Lazarev. The Georgian nobility did not accept the decree until 12 April 1802, when Knorring assembled the nobility at the Sioni Cathedral and forced them to take an oath on the Imperial Crown of Russia. Those who disagreed were temporarily arrested.\nIn the summer of 1805, Russian troops on the Askerani River near Zagam defeated the Iranian army during the 1804\u201313 Russo-Persian War and saved Tbilisi from reconquest now that it was officially part of the Imperial territories. Russian suzerainty over eastern Georgia was officially finalized with Iran in 1813 following the Treaty of Gulistan. Following the annexation of eastern Georgia, the western Georgian kingdom of Imereti was annexed by Tsar Alexander I. The last Imeretian king and the last Georgian Bagrationi ruler, Solomon II, died in exile in 1815, after attempts to rally people against Russia and to enlist foreign support against the latter, had been in vain.\nDuring the Russo-Turkish Wars, numerous Georgians commanded Russian armies against the Turks, including Ivane Andronikashvili, Ivane Jambakurian-Orbeliani, and Ivane Bagration of Mukhrani. As result of these military campaigns against the Ottoman Empire, from 1803 to 1878 several of Georgia's historic territories previously lost to the Turks \u2013 such as Adjara \u2013 were recovered and also incorporated into the Russian Empire. The principality of Guria was abolished and incorporated in 1829, while Svaneti was gradually annexed in 1858. Mingrelia, although a Russian protectorate since 1803, was not absorbed until 1867.\nRussian rule offered the Georgians security from external threats, but it was also often heavy-handed and insensitive. By the late 19th century, discontent with the Russian authorities grew into a national revival movement led by Ilia Chavchavadze. This period also brought social and economic change to Georgia, with new social classes emerging: the emancipation of the serfs freed many peasants but did little to alleviate their poverty; the growth of capitalism created an urban working class in Georgia. Both peasants and workers found expression for their discontent through revolts and strikes, culminating in the Revolution of 1905. Their cause was championed by the socialist Mensheviks, who became the dominant political force in Georgia in the final years of Russian rule.\nDeclaration of independence.\nAfter the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic was established with Nikolay Chkheidze acting as its president. This weak and short-lived federation also included neighbouring Armenia and Azerbaijan. However, Georgians were not content with this cohabitation, and because of irreconcilable foreign policy differences Georgia declared independence on 26 May 1918, becoming an ally of the German Empire. The Menshevik Social Democratic Party of Georgia won the parliamentary election and its leader, Noe Zhordania, became prime minister. Despite the Soviet takeover, Zhordania was recognized as the legitimate head of the Georgian Government by France, UK, Belgium, and Poland through the 1930s.\nThe 1918 Georgian\u2013Armenian War, which erupted over parts of disputed provinces between Armenia and Georgia populated mostly by Armenians, ended because of British intervention. In 1918\u20131919, Georgian general Giorgi Mazniashvili led an attack against the White Army led by Moiseev and Denikin to claim the Black Sea coastline from Tuapse to Sochi and Adler for independent Georgia. In 1920 Soviet Russia recognized Georgia's independence with the Treaty of Moscow but the Russians effectively discarded this treaty only a year later, when the Red Army attacked Georgia in 1921 and formally annexed it into the Soviet Union in 1922.\nAlthough short-lived, Democratic Republic of Georgia would continue to be an inspiration for modern day Georgia due to its legacy of democracy and pluralism. DRG was one of the first countries in Europe to grant women the right to vote as enshrined in the Georgian constitution, which was \"unusual in most European constitutions at the time\". Several women of varying backgrounds were elected to the Georgian parliament.\nSoviet Socialist Republic.\nIn February 1921, during the Russian Civil War, the Red Army advanced into Georgia and brought the local Bolsheviks to power. The Georgian army was defeated, and the Social Democratic government fled the country. On 25 February 1921, the Red Army entered Tbilisi and established a government of workers' and peasants' soviets with Filipp Makharadze as acting head of state. Georgia was incorporated into what would soon become the Soviet Union. Soviet rule was firmly established only after local insurrections were defeated. Georgia would remain an unindustrialized periphery of the USSR until the first five-year plan (1928\u20131932), when it became a major centre for textile goods.\nJoseph Stalin, an ethnic Georgian, was prominent among the Bolsheviks, ultimately becoming the \"de facto\" leader of the Soviet Union from 1924 until his death on 5 March 1953. Fellow Georgians such as Lavrentiy Beria and Vsevolod Merkulov likewise held powerful positions in the Soviet government. Stalin's Great Purge between 1936 and 1938 led to thousands of Georgian dissidents, intellectuals, and other presumed threats to Soviet authority being executed or sent to Gulag penal labor camps, severely truncating the nation's cultural and intellectual life.\nDuring World War II, Germany led an Axis invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 with the aim of conquering all territory up to the Ural Mountains. As the initial operation stalled, the Axis launched the \"Fall Blau\" offensive in 1942 to take control of strategic Caucasian oil fields and munitions factories; ultimately, Axis troops were stopped before reaching Georgian borders. Over 700,000 Georgians\u2014constituting about 20 percent of the population\u2014fought in the Red Army to repel the invaders and advance towards Berlin; an estimated 350,000 were killed.\nAfter Stalin's death, Nikita Khrushchev became the leader of the Soviet Union and implemented a policy of de-Stalinization. Khrushchev's purges were met with riots in Tbilisi that had to be dispersed by military force. This violent turn of events that compromised Georgian loyalty to the Soviet Union contributed to the nation's consolidation. 1978 Georgian demonstrations saw the return of mass anti-Soviet protests, but this time government backed down.\nThroughout the remainder of the Soviet period, Georgia's economy continued to grow and experience significant improvement, though it increasingly exhibited blatant corruption and alienation of the government from the people. With the beginning of perestroika in 1986, the Georgian Soviet leadership proved so incapable of handling the changes that most Georgians, including rank and file communists, concluded that the only way forward was a break from the existing Soviet system.\nIndependence, civil wars.\nStarting in 1988, mass protests erupted in Georgia in favour of independence, led by Georgian nationalists such as Merab Kostava and Zviad Gamsakhurdia. The following year, the brutal suppression by Soviet forces of a large peaceful demonstration held in Tbilisi on 4\u20139 April 1989 proved to be a pivotal event in discrediting the continuation of Soviet rule over the country.\nIn October 1990, the first multi-party elections were held in Soviet Georgia, which were the first multi-party elections in the entire Soviet Union, in which the opposition groups were registered as formal political parties. The Round Table\u2014Free Georgia coalition led by Zviad Gamsakhurdia secured victory in this election and formed a new government. On 9 April 1991, shortly before the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Supreme Council of Georgia \ndeclared independence after a referendum held on 31 March. Georgia was the first non-Baltic republic of the Soviet Union to officially declare independence, with Romania becoming the first country to recognize Georgia in August 1991. On 26 May, Gamsakhurdia was elected president in the first presidential election with 86.5% of the vote on a turnout of over 83%.\nGamsakhurdia was soon deposed in a bloody \"coup d'\u00e9tat\", from 22 December 1991 to 6 January 1992. The coup was instigated by part of the National Guard and a paramilitary organization called \"Mkhedrioni\" (\"horsemen\"). The country then became embroiled in a bitter civil war, which lasted until December 1993. Simmering disputes within two regions of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, between local separatists and the majority Georgian populations, erupted into widespread inter-ethnic violence and wars. Supported by Russia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia achieved \"de facto\" independence from Georgia, with Georgia retaining control only in small areas of the disputed territories. Eduard Shevardnadze (Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1985 to 1991) was named as the head of Georgia's new government in March 1992 and was elected as head of state in that year's elections, later as president in 1995.\nDuring the War in Abkhazia (1992\u20131993), roughly 230,000 to 250,000 Georgians were expelled from Abkhazia by Abkhaz separatists and North Caucasian militants (including Chechens). Around 23,000 Georgians fled South Ossetia.\nIn 1994, Georgia was facing an economic crisis, with severe shortages of basics such as bread, water, electricity and heat.\nRose revolution and UNM government.\nIn 2003, Shevardnadze (who won re-election in 2000) was deposed by the Rose Revolution, after Georgian opposition and international monitors asserted that the 2 November 2003 parliamentary elections were marred by fraud. The revolution was led by Mikheil Saakashvili, Zurab Zhvania and Nino Burjanadze, former members and leaders of Shevardnadze's ruling party. Mikheil Saakashvili was elected as President of Georgia in 2004.\nFollowing the Rose Revolution, a series of reforms were launched to strengthen the country's military and economic capabilities, as well as to reorient its foreign policy westwards. According to the US Department of State, Georgia moved \"from a near-failed state in 2003 to a relatively well-functioning market economy in 2014...[and] Through dramatic police and institutional reforms, the government has eradicated low-level corruption\". The new government's efforts to reassert Georgian authority in the southwestern autonomous republic of Adjara led to a major crisis in 2004.\nThe country's newly pro-Western stance, along with accusations of Georgian involvement in the Second Chechen War, resulted in a severe deterioration of relations with Russia, fuelled also by Russia's open assistance and support to the two secessionist areas. Despite these increasingly difficult relations, in May 2005 Georgia and Russia reached a bilateral agreement by which Russian military bases (dating back to the Soviet era) in Batumi and Akhalkalaki were withdrawn. Russia withdrew all personnel and equipment from these sites by December 2007 while failing to withdraw from the Gudauta base in Abkhazia, which it was required to vacate after the adoption of the Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty during the 1999 Istanbul summit.\nRusso-Georgian War.\nAfter tense relations between Georgia and separatists in Abkhazia and South Ossetia ever since the dissolution of the Soviet Union (1991), relations between Russia and Georgia severely deteriorated into the April 2008 Russo-Georgian diplomatic crisis. The Russo-Georgian War (1\u201316 August 2008) resulted in (parts of) Abkhazia and South Ossetia being (still) under control of Russian-backed separatists, with Russian military bases being established in those regions, and Russia \u2013 according to the European Court of Human Rights \u2013 having direct control over those separatist regions.\nA bomb explosion on 1 August 2008 targeted a car transporting Georgian peacekeepers. South Ossetians were responsible for instigating this incident, which marked the opening of hostilities and injured five Georgian servicemen, then several South Ossetian militiamen were killed by snipers. South Ossetian separatists began shelling Georgian villages on 1 August. These artillery bombardments caused Georgian servicemen to return fire periodically.\nOn 7 August 2008, the Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili announced a unilateral ceasefire and called for peace talks. More attacks on Georgian villages (located in the South Ossetian conflict zone) were soon matched with gunfire from Georgian troops, who then proceeded to move in the direction of the capital of the self-proclaimed Republic of South Ossetia (Tskhinvali) on the night of 8 August, reaching its centre in the morning of 8 August. According to Russian military expert Pavel Felgenhauer, the Ossetian provocation was aimed at triggering Georgian retaliation, which was needed as a pretext for a Russian military invasion. According to Georgian intelligence and several Russian media reports, parts of the regular (non-peacekeeping) Russian Army had already moved to South Ossetian territory through the Roki Tunnel before the Georgian military action.\nRussia accused Georgia of \"aggression against South Ossetia\" and began a large land, air and sea invasion of Georgia under the pretext of a \"peace enforcement\" operation on 8 August 2008. Abkhaz forces opened a second front on 9 August with the Battle of the Kodori Valley, an attack on the Kodori Gorge, held by Georgia. Tskhinvali was seized by the Russian military by 10 August. Russian forces occupied Georgian cities beyond the disputed territories.\nDuring the conflict, there was a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Georgians in South Ossetia, including destruction of Georgian settlements after the war had ended. The war displaced 192,000 people, though many were able to return to their homes after the war. One year later, around 30,000 ethnic Georgians remained displaced. In an interview published in \"Kommersant\", South Ossetian leader Eduard Kokoity said he would not allow Georgians to return.\nThe President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, negotiated a ceasefire agreement on 12 August 2008. Russia recognized Abkhazia and South Ossetia as separate republics on 26 August. The Georgian government severed diplomatic relations with Russia. Russian forces left the buffer areas bordering Abkhazia and South Ossetia on 8 October and the European Union Monitoring Mission in Georgia was dispatched to the buffer areas. Since the war, Georgia has maintained that Abkhazia and South Ossetia are occupied Georgian territories.\nGeorgian Dream government (2012\u2013present).\nIn preparation for the 2012 parliamentary elections, Georgia implemented constitutional reforms to switch to a parliamentary democracy, moving executive powers from the President to the Prime Minister. The transition was set to start with the 2012 parliamentary elections and to be completed with the 2013 presidential elections.\nThe 2012 Georgian parliamentary election marked the defeat of the United National Movement and the victory of the Georgian Dream party \u2014 the first peaceful electoral transfer of power in Georgia. The first year marked the contentious \"cohabitation\" period between the new Georgian Dream government and President Saakashvili, who retained his post until the presidential election in October 2013. Giorgi Margvelashvili, nominated by Georgian Dream, won the election and succeeded Saakashvili, further solidifying the power of Georgian Dream. Bidzina Ivanishvili, a businessman who founded the Georgian Dream, served as its first Prime Minister before resigning in 2013. However, he continued to be the most influential person within the party, despite not holding any position until 2018. As for Saakashvili, he left Georgia shortly after the 2013 election and was convicted in 2018 in absentia on corruption charges and abuse of power, which he denied. Saakashvili continued to be the chairman of the United National Movement party from abroad, which now became the main opposition party\nGeorgian Dream won the 2016 parliamentary elections, achieving a constitutional supermajority of 115 out of 150 seats. In the 2018 presidential election, the Georgian Dream party backed independent Salome Zurabishvili, who won in the second round, becoming the first woman in Georgia to hold the office in full capacity. This was the last direct election of a Georgian president, as additional constitutional reforms removed the popular vote.\nIn 2019, protests erupted over the visit of Russian MP Sergei Gavrilov and his participation in the Interparliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy. The protesters demanded electoral reform to change the mixed proportional-majoritarian voting system which they alleged greatly benefited the ruling party in the 2016 election. The ruling party conceded on some demands and condemned Gavrilov's visit. After international mediation to overcome the deep political crisis in the run-up to the 2020 parliamentary elections, an amended electoral system was adopted, specifically for those elections. As result of the lowered threshold, nine parties were elected to parliament. Georgian Dream secured 48 percent of the votes, nearly the same as four years earlier, which translated into 90 out of 150 seats due to the more proportional electoral system with a highly reduced number of majoritarian districts. However, the opposition made accusations of fraud, triggering another round of political crisis, lasting months. The opposition and protesting citizens demanded a new vote. The political crisis was temporarily resolved by an EU brokered agreement in April 2021, from which both the ruling Georgian Dream and the opposition United National Movement withdrew a few months later.\nDuring the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Georgia provided diplomatic and humanitarian support for Ukraine but did not join other countries in imposing sanctions on Russia. Since the beginning of the war, Georgia has topped the list of countries to which Russian exiles moved. Russians, just like many foreigners, were allowed to stay in Georgia for one year without a visa, though many Georgians began to view the presence of more Russian citizens in Georgia as a security risk. Shortly after the outbreak of the war, Georgia applied for membership of the EU at the same time as Ukraine and Moldova. While the latter two received the candidate status a few months later, Georgia was given conditions to receive the candidate status, which predominantly focused on judicial reforms, rule of law, de-oligarchization and addressing the highly polarized political and media climate.\nIn the following months, the relations with the European Union worsened, and the Georgian Dream party turned from the pro-European social democratic one into the Eurosceptic and socially conservative party. In March 2023 Georgian Dream attempted to adopt the Law on Transparency of Foreign Influence, which requires Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) to register as \"agents of foreign influence\" if they receive more than 20 per cent of their funding from abroad. The discussions of the bill were determined amidst the protests and pressure from the US State Department, United Nations and European Union. A similar bill was introduced in April 2024 and adopted the next month.\nIn December 2023, despite not having fulfilled most conditions, Georgia was granted EU-candidate status. Instead, these criteria and additional ones, such as free and fair 2024 parliamentary elections, were made conditional for Georgia to move ahead to the actual accession talks.\nThe alleged irregularities and fraud in the 26 October 2024 Georgian parliamentary elections led to a political crisis and protests. The crisis was exacerbated after Prime Minister Irakli Kobakhidze announced the temporary suspension of the accession process of Georgia's EU membership until 2028, citing blackmail. Another round of political crisis developed amidst the inauguration of the ruling party candidate Mikheil Kavelashvili as the new president by the parliamentary electoral college, which the previous president Salome Zourabichvili, who went into opposition to the ruling party during the 2020\u20132021 Georgian political crisis, described as illegitimate and refused to recognize the transfer of power.\nGeography.\nGeorgia is a mountainous country situated almost entirely in the South Caucasus, while some slivers of the country are situated north of the Caucasus Watershed in the North Caucasus. The country lies between latitudes 41\u00b0 and 44\u00b0 N, and longitudes 40\u00b0 and 47\u00b0 E, with an area of . The Likhi Range divides the country into eastern and western halves. Historically, the western portion of Georgia was known as Colchis while the eastern plateau was called Iberia.\nThe Greater Caucasus Mountain Range forms the northern border of Georgia. The main roads through the mountain range into Russian territory lead through the Roki Tunnel between Shida Kartli and North Ossetia and the Darial Gorge (in the Georgian region of Khevi). The southern portion of the country is bounded by the Lesser Caucasus Mountains. The Greater Caucasus Mountain Range is much higher in elevation than the Lesser Caucasus Mountains, with the highest peaks rising more than above sea level.\nThe highest mountain in Georgia is Mount Shkhara at , and the second highest is Mount Janga at above sea level. Other prominent peaks include Mount Kazbek at , Shota Rustaveli Peak , Tetnuldi , Ushba , and Ailama . Out of the abovementioned peaks, only Kazbek is of volcanic origin. The region between Kazbek and Shkhara (a distance of about along the Main Caucasus Range) is dominated by numerous glaciers.\nThe term Lesser Caucasus Mountains is often used to describe the mountainous (highland) areas of southern Georgia that are connected to the Greater Caucasus Mountain Range by the Likhi Range. The overall region can be characterized as being made up of various, interconnected mountain ranges (largely of volcanic origin) and plateaus that do not exceed in elevation. Prominent features of the area include the Javakheti Volcanic Plateau, lakes, including Tabatskuri and Paravani, as well as mineral water and hot springs. Two major rivers in Georgia are the Rioni and the Mtkvari.\nTopography.\nThe landscape within the nation's boundaries is quite varied. Western Georgia's landscape ranges from low-land marsh-forests, swamps, and temperate rainforests to eternal snows and glaciers, while the eastern part of the country even contains a small segment of semi-arid plains.\nMuch of the natural habitat in the low-lying areas of western Georgia has disappeared during the past 100 years because of agricultural development and urbanization. A large majority of the forests that covered the Colchis plain are now virtually non-existent with the exception of the regions that are included in the national parks and reserves (e.g. Lake Paliastomi area). At present, the forest cover generally remains outside of the low-lying areas and is mainly located along the foothills and the mountains. Western Georgia's forests consist mainly of deciduous trees below above sea level and contain species such as oak, hornbeam, beech, elm, ash, and chestnut. Evergreen species such as box may also be found in many areas. About 1,000 of the 4,000 higher plants of Georgia are endemic.\nThe west-central slopes of the Meskheti Range in Ajaria as well as several locations in Samegrelo and Abkhazia are covered by temperate rain forests. Between above sea level, the deciduous forest becomes mixed with both broad-leaf and coniferous species making up the plant life. The zone is made up mainly of beech, spruce, and fir forests. From , the forest becomes largely coniferous. The tree line generally ends at around and the alpine zone takes over, which in most areas, extends up to an elevation of above sea level.\nThe general landscape of eastern Georgia comprises numerous valleys and gorges that are separated by mountains. In contrast with western Georgia, nearly 85 per cent of the forests of the region are deciduous. Coniferous forests only dominate in the Borjomi Gorge and in the extreme western areas. Out of the deciduous species of trees, beech, oak, and hornbeam dominate. Other deciduous species include several varieties of maple, aspen, ash, and hazelnut.\nAt higher elevations above above sea level (particularly in the Tusheti, Khevsureti, and Khevi regions), pine and birch forests dominate. In general, the forests in eastern Georgia occur between above sea level, with the alpine zone extending from 2,000\u20132,300 to 3,000\u20133,500 meters (6,562\u20137,546 to 9,843\u201311,483\u00a0ft). The only remaining large, low-land forests remain in the Alazani Valley of Kakheti.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Georgia is extremely diverse, considering the nation's small size. There are two main climatic zones, roughly corresponding to the eastern and western parts of the country. The Greater Caucasus Mountain Range plays an important role in moderating Georgia's climate and protects the nation from the penetration of colder air masses from the north. The Lesser Caucasus Mountains partially protect the region from the influence of dry and hot air masses from the south.\nMuch of western Georgia lies within the northern periphery of the humid subtropical zone with annual precipitation ranging from , reaching a maximum during the Autumn months. The climate of the region varies significantly with elevation and while much of the lowland areas of western Georgia are relatively warm throughout the year, the foothills and mountainous areas (including both the Greater and Lesser Caucasus Mountains) experience cool, wet summers and snowy winters (snow cover often exceeds in many regions).\nEastern Georgia has a transitional climate from humid subtropical to continental. The region's weather patterns are influenced both by dry Caspian air masses from the east and humid Black Sea air masses from the west. The penetration of humid air masses from the Black Sea is often blocked by mountain ranges (Likhi and Meskheti) that separate the eastern and western parts of the nation. The wettest periods generally occur during spring and autumn, while winter and summer months tend to be the driest. Much of eastern Georgia experiences hot summers (especially in the low-lying areas) and relatively cold winters. As in the western parts of the nation, elevation plays an important role in eastern Georgia where climatic conditions above are considerably colder than in the low-lying areas.\nBiodiversity.\nBecause of its high landscape diversity and low latitude, Georgia is home to about 5,601 species of animals, including 648 species of vertebrates (more than 1% of the species found worldwide) and many of these species are endemics. A number of large carnivores live in the forests, namely brown bears, wolves, lynxes and Caucasian leopards. The common pheasant (also known as the Colchian pheasant) is an endemic bird of Georgia which has been widely introduced throughout the rest of the world as a game bird. The number of invertebrate species is considered to be very high but data is distributed across a high number of publications. The spider checklist of Georgia, for example, includes 501 species. The Rioni River may contain a breeding population of the critically endangered bastard sturgeon.\nSlightly more than 6,500 species of fungi, including lichen-forming species, have been recorded from Georgia, but this number is far from complete. The true total number of fungal species occurring in Georgia, including species not yet recorded, is likely to be far higher, given the generally accepted estimate that only about seven per cent of all fungi worldwide have so far been discovered. Although the amount of available information is still very small, a first effort has been made to estimate the number of fungal species endemic to Georgia, and 2,595 species have been tentatively identified as possible endemics of the country. 1,729 species of plants have been recorded from Georgia in association with fungi. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature, there are 4,300 species of vascular plants in Georgia.\nGeorgia is home to four ecoregions: Caucasus mixed forests, Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests, Eastern Anatolian montane steppe, and Azerbaijan shrub desert and steppe. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.79/10, ranking it 31st globally out of 172 countries.\nGovernment and politics.\nGeorgia is a representative democratic parliamentary republic; the President serves as the largely ceremonial head of state, whereas the Prime Minister is head of government. Executive power is vested in the Cabinet of Georgia, composed of ministers headed by the Prime Minister and appointed by the Parliament. As of 2025, the Presidency is disputed between Salome Zourabichvili, who claims to be the \"de jure\" head of state, and Mikheil Kavelashvili, who was inaugurated by the ruling party following the widely disputed 2024 Georgian presidential election. Since February 2024, the post of the Prime Minister has been occupied by Irakli Kobakhidze, whose legitimacy is also disputed.\nLegislative authority is vested in the Parliament of Georgia. It is unicameral and has 150 members, known as deputies, of whom 30 are elected by plurality to represent single-member districts, and 120 are chosen to represent parties by proportional representation. Members of parliament are elected for four-year terms.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Georgia performs in the mid-range on overall democratic measures, with particular strength in absence of corruption.\nDifferent opinions exist regarding the degree of political freedom in Georgia. Saakashvili believed in 2008 that the country is \"on the road to becoming a European democracy.\" In their 2022 report[ [update]] Freedom House lists Georgia as \"partly free\", recognizing a trajectory of democratic improvement surrounding the 2012\u201313 transfer of power but observed a process of democratic backslide in later years of the Georgian Dream rule. In the 2023 Democracy Index, the Economist Intelligence Unit classifies Georgia as a \"hybrid regime\", which denotes an incomplete democratic transition from authoritarianism to democracy characterized by elements of both systems.\nIn 2025, the annual Democracy Index of the V-Dem Institute classified Georgia for the first time as an electoral autocracy, noting the country showed one of the biggest drops on the list and its largest one-year decline. V-Dem notes Georgia is considered to be in a so-called \"bell-turn\" episode or \"failed democratization\", meaning its autocratization took place less than five years after a period of democratization. The report describes that post-Saakashvili Georgia went through a period of democratization with improvements in judicial independence, freedom of speech, and civil liberties. The reversal of this trend started in 2018, with gradual deteriorations till 2023 when rapid democratic erosion set in, resulting in a plummeting of the score in 2024.\nForeign relations.\nThe explicit western orientation of Georgia, deepening political ties with the US and European Union, notably through its EU and NATO membership aspirations, the US Train and Equip military assistance programme, and the construction of the Baku\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Ceyhan pipeline, increasingly strained Tbilisi's relations with Moscow in the early 2000s. Georgia's decision to boost its presence in the coalition forces in Iraq was an important initiative. The European Union has identified Georgia as a prospective member, and Georgia has sought membership.\nGeorgia is currently working to become a full member of NATO. In August 2004, the Individual Partnership Action Plan of Georgia was submitted officially to NATO. On 29 October 2004, the North Atlantic Council of NATO approved the Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) of Georgia, and Georgia moved on to the second stage of Euro-Atlantic Integration. In 2005, the agreement on the appointment of Partnership for Peace (PfP) liaison officer between Georgia and NATO came into force, whereby a liaison officer for the South Caucasus was assigned to Georgia. On 2 March 2005, the agreement was signed on the provision of the host nation support to and transit of NATO forces and NATO personnel. On 6\u20139 March 2006, the IPAP implementation interim assessment team arrived in Tbilisi. On 13 April 2006, the discussion of the assessment report on implementation of the Individual Partnership Action Plan was held at NATO Headquarters, within 26+1 format. In 2009 the Georgia-NATO Interparliamentary Council was created within the NATO Parliamentary Assembly to hold twice yearly meetings to discuss all aspects of Georgia-NATO cooperation. In 2017, a poll by the National Democratic Institute, an American NGO, revealed that the majority of Georgians and politicians in Georgia support the push for NATO membership.\nIn 2011, the North Atlantic Council designated Georgia as an \"aspirant country\". Since 2014, Georgia\u2013NATO relations are guided by the Substantial NATO\u2013Georgia Package (SNGP), which includes the NATO\u2013Georgia Joint Training and Evaluation Centre and facilitation of multi-national and regional military drills.\nIn September 2019, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said that \"NATO approaching our borders is a threat to Russia.\" He was quoted as saying that if NATO accepts Georgian membership with the article on collective defence covering only Tbilisi-administered territory\u2014i.e., excluding the Georgian territories Abkhazia and South Ossetia, both of which are currently Russian-supported unrecognized breakaway republics\u2014\"we will not start a war, but such conduct will undermine our relations with NATO and with countries who are eager to enter the alliance.\"\nGeorge W. Bush became the first sitting U.S. president to visit the country. The street leading to Tbilisi International Airport has since been dubbed George W. Bush Avenue. On 2 October 2006, Georgia and the European Union signed a joint statement on the agreed text of the Georgia\u2013European Union Action Plan within the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The Action Plan was formally approved at the EU\u2013Georgia Cooperation Council session on 14 November 2006, in Brussels. In June 2014, the EU and Georgia signed an Association Agreement, which entered into force on 1 July 2016. On 13 December 2016, EU and Georgia reached the agreement on visa liberalization for Georgian citizens. On 27 February 2017, the Council adopted a regulation on visa liberalization for Georgians travelling to the EU for a period of stay of 90 days in any 180-day period.\nGeorgia applied for EU membership on 3 March 2022, soon after the beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In December 2023, Georgia was granted EU Candidate status by the European Council. In November 2024, Prime Minister Irakli Kobakhidze declared the country's EU accession process would be paused until 2028, leading to protests.\nMilitary.\nGeorgia's military is organized into land and air forces collectively known as the Georgian Defense Forces (GDF); naval forces were merged into the Coast Guard in 2009, which falls under the Internal Affairs Minister. More than 20% of the GDF consists of conscripts. The mission and functions of the GDF are based on the Constitution of Georgia, Georgia's Law on Defense and National Military Strategy, and international agreements to which Georgia is signatory. As of 2021, Georgia's military budget was 900\u20be ($) million, of which newly two-thirds is allocated for maintaining defence forces readiness and potency development. After its independence from the Soviet Union, Georgia began to develop its own military industry, namely through the state owned STC Delta. The country produces a range of indigenous military equipment, including armored vehicles, artillery systems, aviation systems, personal protection equipment, and small arms.\nGeorgian military personnel have served in several international operations. During later periods of the Iraq War, Georgia had up to 2,000 soldiers serving in the American-led Multi-National Force. Georgia also participated in the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan; with 1,560 troops in 2013, it was at that time the largest contributor among non-NATO countries and in per capita terms. Over 11,000 Georgian soldiers rotated through Afghanistan during the course of the war; 32 were killed, mostly during the Helmand campaign, and 435 were wounded, including 35 amputees.\nLaw enforcement.\nIn 2005, President Mikheil Saakashvili fired the entire traffic police force (numbering around 30,000 police officers) of the Georgian National Police due to corruption. A new force was then subsequently built around new recruits. The U.S. State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics and Law-Enforcement Affairs has provided assistance to the training efforts and continues to act in an advisory capacity.\nThe new \"Patruli\" force was first introduced in the summer of 2005 to replace the traffic police, a force which was accused of widespread corruption. The police introduced a 0\u20132\u20132 (currently, 1\u20131\u20132) emergency dispatch service in 2004.\nCorruption.\nPrior to the Rose Revolution, Georgia was among the most corrupt countries in the world. However, following the reforms brought by the peaceful revolution, corruption in the country abated dramatically. In 2010, Transparency International (TI) named Georgia \"the best corruption-buster in the world.\" In 2012, the World Bank called Georgia a \"unique success\" of the world in fighting corruption, noting \"Georgia's experience shows that the vicious cycle of endemic corruption can be broken and, with appropriate and decisive reforms, can be turned into a virtuous cycle.\"\nAlthough Georgia has been very successful in reducing blatant forms of corruption, other more subtle corrupt practices have been noted. For example, in its 2017 report, Council of Europe observed that while most day-to-day corruption has been eliminated, there are some indications of a \"clientelistic system\" whereby the country's leadership may allocate resources in ways that generate the loyalty and support it needs to stay in power. Since 2012 stagnation in corruption fighting efforts can be observed, according to Transparency International. Since 2016 the Transparency International Corruption Perception Index hovers around 56 out of 100 points. In comparison, that places Georgia in the top 50 out of 180 countries, among Central European and Mediterranean EU member states.\nHuman rights and freedom.\nHuman rights in Georgia are guaranteed by the country's constitution. There is an independent human rights \"public defender\" elected by the Parliament of Georgia to ensure such rights are enforced. Georgia has ratified the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in 2005. NGO \"Tolerance\", in its alternative report about its implementation, speaks of a rapid decrease in the number of Azerbaijani schools and cases of appointing headmasters to Azerbaijani schools who do not speak the Azerbaijani language.\nThe government came under criticism for its alleged use of excessive force on 26 May 2011 when it dispersed protesters led by Nino Burjanadze, among others, with tear gas and rubber bullets after they refused to clear Rustaveli Avenue for an independence day parade despite the expiration of their demonstration permit and despite being offered to choose an alternative venue. While human rights activists maintained that the protests were peaceful, the government pointed out that many protesters were masked and armed with heavy sticks and Molotov cocktails. Georgian opposition leader Nino Burjanadze said the accusations of planning a coup were baseless, and that the protesters' actions were legitimate.\nSince independence, Georgia maintained harsh policies against drugs, handing out lengthy sentences even for marijuana use. This came under criticism from human rights activists and led to protests. In response to lawsuits from civil society organizations, in 2018 the Constitutional Court of Georgia ruled that \"consumption of marijuana is an action protected by the right to free personality\" and that \"[Marijuana] can only harm the user's health, making that user him/herself responsible for the outcome. The responsibility for such actions does not cause dangerous consequences for the public.\" With this ruling, Georgia became one of the first countries in the world to legalize cannabis, although using the drug in the presence of children is still illegal and punishable by fines or imprisonment. Georgian prisons tend to be overcrowded with poor living conditions.\nLGBT individuals in Georgia frequently face harassment and violence. Minor protections exist against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. Since 2008 transgender people had been allowed to change their gender marker following sex reassignment surgery. However, a bill passed in 2024 seeks to remove many protections from LGBT people. The European Union, and various human rights organizations have condemned the legislation. In 2024, Georgian President Salome Zourabichvili condemned the high-profile murder of Kesaria Abramidze, a transgender woman, and subsequently attended her funeral to pay respects. The law prohibits both surgeries (or other manipulations) for changing a gender and indication of another gender in state-issued ID documents, among other things.\nAdministrative divisions.\nGeorgia is administratively divided into 9 regions, 1 capital region, and 2 autonomous republics. These in turn are subdivided into 67 districts and 5 self-governing cities.\nGeorgia contains two official autonomous regions, of which one has declared independence. Officially autonomous within Georgia, the de facto independent region of Abkhazia declared independence in 1999. In addition, another territory not officially autonomous has also declared independence. South Ossetia is officially known by Georgia as the Tskhinvali region, as it views \"South Ossetia\" as implying political bonds with Russian North Ossetia. It was called South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast when Georgia was part of Soviet Union. Its autonomous status was revoked in 1990. De facto separate since Georgian independence, offers were made to give South Ossetia autonomy again, but in 2006 an unrecognized referendum in the area resulted in a vote for independence.\nIn both Abkhazia and South Ossetia large numbers of people had been given Russian passports, some through a process of forced passportization by Russian authorities. This was used as a justification for Russian invasion of Georgia during the 2008 South Ossetia war after which Russia recognized the region's independence. Georgia considers the regions as occupied by Russia. The two self-declared republics gained limited international recognition after the 2008 Russo-Georgian War. Most countries consider the regions to be Georgian territory under Russian occupation.\nAbkhazia\nSamegrelo-Zemo Svaneti\nGuria\nAdjara\nSamtskhe-Javakheti\nImereti\nRacha-Lechkhumiand Kvemo Svaneti\nShidaKartli\nKvemo Kartli\nMtskheta-Mtianeti\nTbilisi\nKakheti\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEconomy.\nArchaeological research demonstrates that Georgia has been involved in commerce with many lands and empires since ancient times, largely due its location on the Black Sea and later on the historical Silk Road. Gold, silver, copper and iron have been mined in the Caucasus Mountains. Georgian wine making is a very old tradition and a key branch of the country's economy. The country has sizeable hydropower resources. Throughout Georgia's modern history agriculture and tourism have been principal economic sectors, because of the country's climate and topography.\nFor much of the 20th century, Georgia's economy was within the Soviet model of command economy. Since the fall of the USSR in 1991, Georgia embarked on a major structural reform designed to transition to a free market economy. As with all other post-Soviet states, Georgia faced a severe economic collapse. The civil war and military conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia aggravated the crisis. The agriculture and industry output diminished. By 1994 the gross domestic product had shrunk to a quarter of that of 1989.\nSince the early 21st century visible positive developments have been observed in the economy of Georgia. In 2007, Georgia's real GDP growth rate reached 12 per cent, making Georgia one of the fastest-growing economies in Eastern Europe. Georgia has become more integrated into the global trading network: its 2015 imports and exports account for 50% and 21% of GDP respectively. Georgia's main imports are vehicles, ores, fossil fuels and pharmaceuticals. Main exports are ores, ferro-alloys, vehicles, wines, mineral waters and fertilizers. The World Bank dubbed Georgia \"the number one economic reformer in the world\" because it has in one year improved from rank 112th to 18th in terms of ease of doing business, and by 2020 further improved its position to 6th in the world. As of 2021, it ranked 12th in the world for economic freedom. In 2019, Georgia ranked 61st on the Human Development Index (HDI). Between 2000 and 2019, Georgia's HDI score improved by 17.7%. Of factors contributing to HDI, education had the most positive influence as Georgia ranks in the top quintile in terms of education.\nGeorgia is developing into an international transport corridor through Batumi and Poti ports, Baku\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Kars Railway line, an oil pipeline from Baku through Tbilisi to Ceyhan, the Baku\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Ceyhan pipeline (BTC) and a parallel gas pipeline, the South Caucasus Pipeline.\nSince coming to power the Saakashvili administration accomplished a series of reforms aimed at improving tax collection. Among other things a flat income tax was introduced in 2004. As a result, budget revenues have increased fourfold and a once large budget deficit has turned into a surplus.\nAs of 2001, 54 per cent of the population lived below the national poverty line but by 2006 poverty decreased to 34 per cent and by 2015 to 10.1 per cent. In 2015, the average monthly income of a household was 1,022.3\u20be (about $426). 2015 calculations place Georgia's nominal GDP at US$13.98\u00a0billion. Georgia's economy is becoming more devoted to services (as of 2016[ [update]], representing 59.4 per cent of GDP), moving away from the agricultural sector (6.1 per cent). Since 2014, unemployment has been gradually decreasing each year but remained in double digits and worsened during the COVID-19 pandemic. A perception of economic stagnation led to a 2019 survey of 1,500 residents finding unemployment was considered a significant problem by 73% of respondents, with 49% reporting their income had decreased over the prior year.\nGeorgia's telecommunications infrastructure is ranked the last among its bordering neighbours in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI) \u2013 an indicator for determining the development level of a country's information and communication technologies. Georgia ranked number 58 overall in the 2016 NRI ranking, up from 60 in 2015. Georgia was ranked 56th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nTourism.\nTourism is an increasingly significant part of the Georgian economy. In 2016, over 2.7 million tourists brought approximately US$2.16\u00a0billion to the country. In 2019, the number of international arrivals reached a record high of 9.3\u00a0million people. with foreign exchange income in the year's first three-quarters amounting to over US$3\u00a0billion. The country plans to host 11 million visitors by 2025 with annual revenues reaching US$6.6\u00a0billion. According to the government, there are 103 resorts in different climatic zones in Georgia. Tourist attractions include more than 2,000 mineral springs, over 12,000 historical and cultural monuments, four of which are recognized as UNESCO World Heritage Sites (Bagrati Cathedral in Kutaisi and Gelati Monastery, historical monuments of Mtskheta, and Upper Svaneti). Other tourist attractions are Cave City, Ananuri Castle/Church, Sighnaghi and Mount Kazbek. In 2018, more than 1.4\u00a0million tourists from Russia visited Georgia.\nTransport.\nTransport in Georgia is provided by rail, road, ferry, and air. The total length of roads in Georgia, excluding the occupied territories, is and railways \u2013 . Positioned in the Caucasus and on the coast of the Black Sea, Georgia is a key country for connecting the European Union with Asia while bypassing Russia, forming part of the Trans-Caspian International Transport Route.\nThe Georgian railways represent an important transport artery for the Caucasus, as they make up the largest proportion of a route linking the Black and Caspian Seas. In turn, this has allowed them to benefit in recent years from increased energy exports from neighbouring Azerbaijan to the European Union, Ukraine, and Turkey. Passenger services are operated by the state-owned Georgian Railway while freight operations are carried out by a number of licensed operators. Since 2004, the Georgian Railways have been undergoing a rolling programme of fleet-renewal and managerial restructuring which is aimed at making the service provided more efficient and comfortable for passengers. Infrastructural development has also been high on the agenda for the railways, with the key Tbilisi railway junction expected to undergo major reorganization in the near future. Additional projects also include the construction of the economically important Kars\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Baku railway, which was opened on 30 October 2017 and connects much of the Caucasus with Turkey by standard gauge railway.\nAir and maritime transport is developing in Georgia, with the former mainly used by passengers and the latter for transport of freight. Georgia currently has four international airports, the largest of which is by far Tbilisi International Airport, hub for Georgian Airways, which offers connections to many large European cities. Other airports in the country are largely underdeveloped or lack scheduled traffic, although, as of late, efforts have been made to solve both these problems. There are a number of seaports along Georgia's Black Sea coast, the largest and most busy of which is the Port of Batumi; while the town is itself a seaside resort, the port is a major cargo terminal in the Caucasus and is often used by neighbouring Azerbaijan as a transit point for making energy deliveries to Europe. Scheduled and chartered passenger ferry services link Georgia with Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and Ukraine.\nDemographics.\nGeorgians do not fit into any of the main ethno-linguistic categories of Europe or Asia. The Georgian language, the most pervasive of the Kartvelian languages, is not Indo-European, Turkic, or Semitic. The present-day Georgian or Kartvelian nation is thought to have resulted from the fusion of indigenous inhabitants with various immigrants who moved into South Caucasus from Anatolia in remote antiquity.\nPreliminary results of 2024 census indicates that the population is approximately 3,914,000 as of November 2024, an increase from 3,713,804 in the previous census in October 2014. The population declined by 40,000 in 2021, a reversal of the trend towards stabilization of the last decade and, for the first time since independence, the population was recorded to be below 3.7\u00a0million. According to the 2014 census, Ethnic Georgians form about 86.8 percent of the population, while the remainder includes ethnic groups such as Abkhazians, Armenians, Assyrians, Azerbaijanis, Greeks, Jews, Kists, Ossetians, Russians, Ukrainians, Yezidis and others. The Georgian Jews are one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world. According to the 1926 census there were 27,728 Jews in Georgia. Georgia was also once home to significant ethnic German communities, numbering 11,394 according to the 1926 census. Most of them were deported during World War II.\nThe 2014 census, carried out in collaboration with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), found a population gap of approximately 700,000 compared to the 2014 data from the National Statistical Office of Georgia, Geostat, which was cumulatively built on the 2002 census. Consecutive research estimated the 2002 census to be inflated by 8 to 9 percent, which affected the annually updated population estimates in subsequent years. One explanation put forward by UNFPA is that families of emigrants continued to list them in 2002 as residents for fear of losing certain rights or benefits. Also, the population registration system from birth to death was non-functional. It was not until around 2010 that parts of the system became reliable again. With the support of the UNFPA, the demographic data for the period 1994\u20132014 has been retro-projected. On the basis of that back-projection, Geostat has corrected its data for these years.\nThe 1989 census recorded 341,000 ethnic Russians, or 6.3 percent of the population, 52,000 Ukrainians and 100,000 Greeks in Georgia. The population of Georgia, including the breakaway regions, has declined by more than 1 million due to net emigration in the period 1990\u20132010. Other factors in the population decline include birth-death deficits for the period 1995\u20132010 and the exclusion of Abkhazia and South Ossetia from the statistics. Russia received by far the most migrants from Georgia. According to United Nations data, this totalled 625,000 by 2000, declining to 450,000 by 2019. Initially, the out-migration was driven by non-Georgian ethnicities, but increasing numbers of Georgians emigrated as well, due to the war, the crisis-ridden 1990s, and the subsequent bad economic outlook. The 2010 Russian census recorded about 158,000 ethnic Georgians living in Russia, with approximately 40,000 living in Moscow by 2014. There were 184 thousand immigrants in Georgia in 2014 with most of them hailing from Russia (51.6%), Greece (8.3%), Ukraine (8.11%), Germany (4.3%), and Armenia (3.8%).\nIn the early 1990s, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, violent separatist conflicts broke out in the autonomous region of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali Region. Many Ossetians living in Georgia left the country, mainly to Russia's North Ossetia. On the other hand, at least 160,000 Georgians left Abkhazia after the breakout of hostilities in 1993. Of the Meskhetian Turks who were forcibly relocated in 1944, only a tiny fraction returned to Georgia as of 2008[ [update]].\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index, Georgia is one of 22 countries with a GHI score of less than 5. Differences between their scores are minimal. With a score under 5, Georgia has a level of hunger that is low.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguages.\nThe most widespread language group is the Kartvelian family, which includes Georgian, Svan, Mingrelian and Laz. The official language of Georgia is Georgian, with Abkhaz having official status within the autonomous region of Abkhazia. Georgian is the primary language of 87.7 per cent of the population, followed by 6.2 per cent speaking Azerbaijani, 3.9 per cent Armenian, 1.2 per cent Russian, and 1 per cent other languages.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nToday, 83.4 percent of the population practices Eastern Orthodox Christianity, with the majority of these adhering to the national Georgian Orthodox Church. The Georgian Orthodox Church is one of the world's oldest Christian churches, and claims apostolic foundation by Saint Andrew. In the first half of the 4th century, Christianity was adopted as the state religion of Iberia (present-day eastern Georgia), following the missionary work of Saint Nino of Cappadocia. The Church gained autocephaly during the early Middle Ages; it was abolished during the Russian domination of the country, restored in 1917 and fully recognized by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople in 1989.\nThe special status of the Georgian Orthodox Church is officially recognized in the Constitution of Georgia and the Concordat of 2002, although religious institutions are separate from the state.\nReligious minorities of Georgia include Muslims (10.7 percent), Armenian Christians (2.9 percent) and Roman Catholics (0.5 percent). 0.7 percent of those recorded in the 2014 census declared themselves to be adherents of other religions, 1.2 percent refused or did not state their religion and 0.5 percent declared no religion at all.\nIslam is represented by both Azerbaijani Shia Muslims (in the south-east), ethnic Georgian Sunni Muslims in Adjara, Chechen sub-ethnic group of Sunni Kists in the Pankisi Gorge, and Laz-speaking Sunni Muslims as well as Sunni Meskhetian Turks along the border with Turkey. In Abkhazia, a minority of the Abkhaz population is also Sunni Muslim. There are also smaller communities of Greek Muslims (of Pontic Greek origin) and Armenian Muslims, both of whom are descended from Ottoman-era converts to Turkish Islam from Eastern Anatolia who settled in Georgia following the Lala Mustafa Pasha's Caucasian campaign that led to the Ottoman conquest of the country in 1578. Georgian Jews trace the history of their community to the 6th century BC but due to immigration to Israel, by the early 2000s their numbers had dwindled to several thousand.\nDespite the long history of religious harmony in Georgia, there have been instances of religious discrimination and violence against \"nontraditional faiths\", such as Jehovah's Witnesses, by followers of the defrocked Orthodox priest Basil Mkalavishvili.\nIn addition to traditional religious organizations, Georgia retains secular and irreligious segments of society (0.5 percent), as well as a significant portion of religiously affiliated individuals who do not actively practice their faith.\nEducation.\nThe education system of Georgia has undergone sweeping, though controversial, modernization since 2004. Education in Georgia is mandatory for all children aged 6\u201314. The school system is divided into elementary (six years; ages 6\u201312), basic (three years; ages 12\u201315), and secondary (three years; ages 15\u201318), or alternatively vocational studies (two years). Access to higher education is given to students who have gained a secondary school certificate. Only those students who have passed the Unified National Examinations may enrol in a state-accredited higher education institution, based on ranking of the scores received at the exams.\nMost of these institutions offer three levels of study: a bachelor's programme (three to four years); a master's programme (two years), and a doctoral programme (three years). There is also a certified specialist's programme that represents a single-level higher education programme lasting from three to six years. As of 2016[ [update]], 75 higher education institutions are accredited by the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia. Gross primary enrolment ratio was 117 percent for the period of 2012\u20132014, the 2nd highest in Europe after Sweden.\nTbilisi has become the main artery of the Georgian educational system, particularly since the creation of the First Georgian Republic in 1918 permitted the establishment of modern, Georgian-language educational institutions. Tbilisi is home to several major institutions of higher education in Georgia, notably the Tbilisi State Medical University, which was founded as Tbilisi Medical Institute in 1918, and the Tbilisi State University (TSU), which was established in 1918 and remains the oldest university in the entire Caucasus region. The number of faculty and staff (collaborators) at TSU is approximately 5,000, with over 35,000 students enrolled. The following four universities are also located in Tbilisi: Georgian Technical University, which is Georgia's main and largest technical university, The University of Georgia (Tbilisi), as well as Caucasus University and Free University of Tbilisi.\nCulture.\nGeorgian culture evolved over thousands of years from its foundations in the Iberian and Colchian civilizations. Georgian culture enjoyed a renaissance and golden age of classical literature, arts, philosophy, architecture and science in the 11th century. Georgian culture was influenced by Classical Greece, the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the various Iranian empires (notably the Achaemenid, Parthian, Sassanian, Safavid, and Qajar empires), and later, since the 19th century, by the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union.\nThis long history has provided a national narrative which encompasses the successful preservation of unique culture and identity in a consistent territory, despite external pressures. Christianity and the Georgian language are particularly important national identifiers. These cultural, religious, and later political attributes are associated with a European and Western identity, based on a national perception of these attributes that contrasts with surrounding powers. This self-identity is stronger among the dominant ethnic Georgian population than in the country's minority groups.\nGeorgia is known for its folklore, traditional music, dances, theatre, cinema, and art. Notable painters from the 20th century include Niko Pirosmani, Lado Gudiashvili, Elene Akhvlediani; notable ballet choreographers include George Balanchine, Vakhtang Chabukiani, and Nino Ananiashvili; notable poets include Galaktion Tabidze, Lado Asatiani, and Mukhran Machavariani; and notable theatre and film directors include Robert Sturua, Tengiz Abuladze, Giorgi Danelia, and Otar Ioseliani.\nArchitecture and arts.\nGeorgian architecture has been influenced by many civilizations. There are several architectural styles for castles, towers, fortifications and churches. The Upper Svaneti fortifications, and the castle town of Shatili in Khevsureti, are some of the finest examples of medieval Georgian castle architecture. Other architectural features of Georgia include Rustaveli Avenue in Tbilisi and the Old Town District.\nGeorgian ecclesiastic art is one of the most notable aspects of Georgian Christian architecture, which combines the classical dome style with the original basilica style, forming what is known as the Georgian cross-dome style. Cross-dome architecture developed in Georgia during the 9th century; before that, most Georgian churches were basilicas. Other examples of Georgian ecclesiastic architecture can be found outside Georgia: Bachkovo Monastery in Bulgaria (built in 1083 by the Georgian military commander Grigorii Bakuriani), Iviron monastery in Greece (built by Georgians in the 10th century), and the Monastery of the Cross in Jerusalem (built by Georgians in the 9th century). One of the most famous late 19th/early 20th century Georgian artists was primitivist painter Niko Pirosmani.\nLiterature.\nThe Georgian language, and the Classical Georgian literature of the poet Shota Rustaveli, were revived in the 19th century after a long period of turmoil, laying the foundations of the romantics and novelists of the modern era such as Grigol Orbeliani, Nikoloz Baratashvili, Ilia Chavchavadze, Akaki Tsereteli, and Vazha-Pshavela. The Georgian language is written in three unique scripts which, according to traditional accounts, were invented by King Pharnavaz I of Iberia in the 3rd century BC.\nMedia.\nTelevision, magazines, and newspapers in Georgia are all operated by both state-owned and for-profit corporations which depend on advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Georgia guarantees freedom of speech. The media environment of Georgia remains the freest and most diverse in the South Caucasus, despite the long-term politicization and polarization affecting the sector. The political struggle for control over the public broadcaster has left it without a direction in 2014 too.\nMusic.\nGeorgia has an ancient musical tradition, which is primarily known for its early development of polyphony. Georgian polyphony is based on three vocal parts, a unique tuning system based on perfect fifths, and a harmonic structure rich in parallel fifths and dissonances. Three types of polyphony have developed in Georgia: a complex version in Svaneti, a dialogue over a bass background in the Kakheti region, and a three-part partially improvised version in western Georgia. The Georgian folk song \"Chakrulo\" was one of 27 musical compositions included on the Voyager Golden Records that were sent into space on Voyager 2 on 20 August 1977.\nCuisine.\nGeorgian cuisine and wine have evolved through the centuries, adapting traditions in each era. One of the most unusual traditions of dining is supra, or \"Georgian table\", which is also a way of socializing with friends and family. The head of \"supra\" is known as tamada. He also conducts the highly philosophical toasts, and makes sure that everyone is enjoying themselves. Various historical regions of Georgia are known for their particular dishes: for example, khinkali (meat dumplings), from eastern mountainous Georgia, and khachapuri, mainly from Imereti, Samegrelo and Adjara.\nWine.\nGeorgia is one of the oldest wine-producing countries in the world. Archaeology indicates that fertile valleys and slopes in and around Georgia have been home to grapevine cultivation and neolithic wine production (Georgian: , \"\u0263vino\") for millennia. Local traditions associated with wine are entwined with its national identity. In 2013, UNESCO added the ancient traditional Georgian winemaking method using the Kvevri clay jars to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.\nGeorgia's moderate climate and moist air, influenced by the Black Sea, provide the best conditions for vine cultivation. The soil in vineyards is so intensively cultivated that the grapevines grow up the trunks of fruit trees, eventually hanging down along the fruit when they ripen. This method of cultivation is called \"maglari\". Among the best-known Georgian wine regions are Kakheti (further divided into the micro-regions of Telavi and Kvareli), Kartli, Imereti, Racha-Lechkhumi and Kvemo Svaneti, Adjara and Abkhazia.\nGeorgian wine has been a contentious issue in recent relationships with Russia. Political tensions with Russia have contributed to the 2006 Russian embargo of Georgian wine, Russia claimed Georgia produced counterfeit wine. It was an \"official\" reason, but the instability of economic relations with Russia is well known, as they use the economic ties for political purposes. Counterfeiting problems stem from mislabelling by foreign producers and falsified \"Georgian Wine\" labels on wines produced outside of Georgia and imported into Russia under the auspices of being Georgian produced. The shipment of counterfeit wine has been primarily channelled through Russian managed customs checkpoints in Russian-occupied Georgian territories Abkhazia and South Ossetia, where no inspection and regulation occurs.\nSports.\nThe most popular sports in Georgia are football, basketball, rugby union, wrestling, judo, and weightlifting. Rugby is considered Georgia's national sport. Historically, Georgia has been famous for its physical education; the Romans were fascinated with Georgians' physical qualities after seeing the training techniques of ancient Iberia. Wrestling remains a historically important sport of Georgia, and some historians think that the Greco-Roman style of wrestling incorporates many Georgian elements.\nWithin Georgia, one of the most popularized styles of wrestling is the Kakhetian style. There were a number of other styles in the past that are not as widely used today. For example, the Khevsureti region of Georgia has three styles of wrestling. Other popular sports in 19th century Georgia were polo, and Lelo, a traditional Georgian game very similar to rugby.\nThe first and only race circuit in the Caucasian region is located in Georgia. Rustavi International Motorpark originally built in 1978, was re-opened in 2012 after total reconstruction costing $20\u00a0million. The track satisfies the FIA Grade 2 requirements and currently hosts the Legends car racing series and Formula Alfa competitions.\nBasketball was always one of the notable sports in Georgia, and Georgia had a few very famous Soviet Union national team members, such as Otar Korkia, Mikheil Korkia, Zurab Sakandelidze and Levan Moseshvili. Dinamo Tbilisi won the prestigious EuroLeague competition in 1962. Georgia has had five players in the NBA: Vladimir Stepania, Jake Tsakalidis, Nikoloz Tskitishvili, Tornike Shengelia and former Golden State Warriors centre Zaza Pachulia. Other notable basketball players include the two time EuroLeague champion Giorgi Shermadini and EuroLeague players Manuchar Markoishvili and Viktor Sanikidze. The sport is regaining its popularity in the country recently, and the Georgia national basketball team has qualified for the EuroBasket tournament five consecutive times since its first appearance in 2011.\nThere are a number of world-class Georgian MMA fighters. Ilia Topuria, Merab Dvalishvili, Giga Chikadze and Roman Dolidze are highly ranked fighters currently signed with the UFC.\nGeorgian athletes have won a total of 40 Olympic medals, mostly in wrestling, judo and weightlifting. Competitive bodybuilding sanctioned by the European IFBB is also popular in the country.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48770", "revid": "854798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48770", "title": "WZ sex-determination system", "text": ""}
{"id": "48771", "revid": "5745932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48771", "title": "English (programming language)", "text": ""}
{"id": "48772", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48772", "title": "Pick Operating System", "text": ""}
{"id": "48774", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48774", "title": "Lance", "text": "Long spear used by cavalry\nThe English term lance is derived, via Middle English \"launce\" and Old French \"lance\", from the Latin \"lancea\", a generic term meaning a spear or javelin employed by both infantry and cavalry, with English initially keeping these generic meanings. It developed later into a term for spear-like weapons specially designed and modified to be part of a \"weapon system\" for use couched under the arm during a charge, being equipped with special features such as grappers to engage with lance rests attached to breastplates, and vamplates, small circular plates designed to prevent the hand sliding up the shaft upon impact. These specific features were in use by the beginning of the late 14th century.\nThough best known as a military and sporting weapon carried by European knights and men-at-arms, the use of lances was widespread throughout East Asia, the Middle East, and North Africa wherever suitable mounts were available. Lances were the main weapon of lancers of the medieval period and beyond, and these troops also carried secondary weapons such as swords, battle axes, war hammers, maces, and daggers for use in hand-to-hand combat, since the lance was often a one-use-per-engagement weapon, becoming embedded in their targets or being broken on impact. Assuming the lance survived the initial impact without breaking, it could also prove inappropriate for more static, closer engagements where its length became a hindrance.\nEtymology.\nThe name is derived from the word , the Roman auxiliaries' javelin or throwing spear; although according to the OED, the word may be of Iberian origin. Also compare (), a Greek term for \"spear\" or \"lance\".\nA lance in the original sense is a light throwing spear or javelin. The English verb \"to launch\" \"fling, hurl, throw\" is derived from the term (via Old French ), as well as the rarer or poetic \"to lance\". The term from the 17th century came to refer specifically to spears not thrown, used for thrusting by heavy cavalry, and especially in jousting. The longer types of thrusting spear used by infantry are usually referred to simply as spears or later as pikes, though many other terms existed.\nHistory of use.\nLate Roman.\nDuring the late 3rd century the weapons of the cavalry attached to each Roman legion evolved from javelins and swords to sometimes include long reaching lances (\"contus\"). These required the use of both hands to thrust.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe Byzantine cavalry used lances (\"kontos\" or \"kontarion\") almost exclusively, often in mixed formations of mounted archers and lancers (\"cursores et defensores\"). The Byzantines used lances in both overarm and underarm grips, as well as being couched under the arm (held horizontally). The length of the standard \"kontarion\" is estimated at , which is shorter than that of the medieval knight of Western Europe.\nFormations of knights were known to use underarm-couched military lances in full-gallop closed-ranks charges against lines of opposing infantry or cavalry. Two variants on the couched lance charge developed, the French method, \"en haie\", with lancers in a double line, and the German method, with lancers drawn up in a deeper formation which was often wedge-shaped. It is commonly believed that this became the dominant European cavalry tactic in the 11th century after the development of the cantled saddle and stirrups (the Great Stirrup Controversy), and of rowel spurs (which enabled better control of the mount). Cavalry thus outfitted and deployed had a tremendous collective force in their charge, and could shatter most contemporary infantry lines.\nBecause of the extreme stopping power of a thrusting spear, it quickly became a popular weapon of infantry in the Late Middle Ages. These eventually led to the rise of the longest type of spears, the pike. This adaptation of the cavalry lance to infantry use was largely tasked with stopping lance-armed cavalry charges. During the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries, these weapons, both mounted and unmounted, were so effective that lancers and pikemen not only became a staple of every Western army, but also became highly sought-after mercenaries. (However, the pike had already been used by Philip II of Macedon in antiquity to great effect, in the form of the sarissa.)\nIn Europe, a jousting lance was a variation of the knight's lance which was modified from its original war design. In jousting, the lance tips would usually be blunt, often spread out like a cup or furniture foot, to provide a wider impact surface designed to unseat the opposing rider without spearing him through. The centre of the shaft of such lances could be designed to be hollow, in order for it to break on impact, as a further safeguard against impalement. They were on average long, and had hand guards built into the lance, often tapering for a considerable portion of the weapon's length. These are the versions that can most often be seen at medieval reenactment festivals. In war, lances were much more like stout spears, long and balanced for one-handed use, and with sharpened tips.\nLance (unit organization).\nAs a small unit that surrounded a knight when he went into battle during the 14th and 15th centuries, a lance might have consisted of one or two squires, the knight himself, one to three men-at-arms, and possibly an archer. Lances were often combined under the banner of a higher-ranking nobleman to form companies of knights that would act as an ad hoc unit.\n17th and 18th century decline in Western Europe.\nThe advent of wheellock technology spelled the end of the lance in Western Europe, with newer types of heavy cavalry such as reiters and cuirassiers spurning the old one-use weapon and increasingly supplanting the older gendarme type Medieval cavalry. While many Renaissance captains such as Sir Roger Williams continued to espouse the virtues of the lance, many such as Fran\u00e7ois de la Noue openly encouraged its abandonment in the face of the pistol's greater armor piercing power, handiness and greater general utility. At the same time the adoption of pike and shot tactic by most infantry forces would neuter much of the power of the lancer's breakneck charge, making them a non-cost effective type of military unit due to their expensive horses in comparison to cuirassiers and reiters, who usually charging only at a trot could make do with lower quality mounts. After the success of pistol-armed Huguenot heavy horse against their Royalist counterparts during the French Wars of Religion, most Western European powers started rearming their lancers with pistols, initially as an adjunct weapon and eventually as a replacement, with the Spanish retaining the lance the longest.\nOnly the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth with its far greater emphasis on cavalry warfare, large population of Szlachta nobility and general lower military technology level among its foes retained the lance to a considerable degree, with the famously winged Polish hussars having their glory period during the 17th and 18th centuries against a wide variety of enemy forces.\nIndigenous use in North America.\nAfter the Western introduction of the horse to Native Americans, the Plains Indians used the bow and lance, probably independently, as American cavalry of the time were armed with the pistol and sabre, firing forward at full gallop.\n19th century revival in Western Europe.\nThe mounted lancer experienced a renaissance in the 19th century. This followed on the demise of the pike and of body armor during the early 18th century, with the reintroduction of lances coming from Hungary and Poland, having retained large formations of lance-armed cavalry when they had become more or less obsolescent elsewhere in Europe. Lancers became especially prevalent during and after the Napoleonic Wars: a period when almost all the major European powers reintroduced the lance into their respective cavalry arsenals. Formations of uhlans and other types of cavalry used lances between in length as their primary weapons. The lance was usually employed in initial charges in close formation, with sabers being used in the melee that followed.\nThe Crimean War saw the use of the lance in the Charge of the Light Brigade. One of the four British regiments involved in the charge, plus the Russian Cossacks who counter-attacked, were armed with this weapon.\nDuring the War of the Triple Alliance (1864\u20131870), the Paraguayan cavalry made effective use of locally manufactured lances, both of conventional design and of an antique pattern used by gauchos for cattle herding.\nThe 1860s and 1870s saw the increasing common usage of ash, bamboo, beech, or pine wood for lance shafts of varying lengths, each with steel points and butts, adopted by the uhlan regiments of the Saxon, W\u00fcrttemberg, Bavarian, and Prussian armies.\nTwilight of use.\nIn the American Civil War, the 6th Pennsylvania Cavalry Regiment was equipped with lances modeled after Napoleon Bonaparte's forces in France. American troops had never previously used the lance in combat. The lances proved ineffective in battle and were replaced with carbine rifles in 1863.\nThe Franco-Prussian War of 1870 saw the extensive deployment of cavalry armed with lances on both sides. While the opportunities for decisive use of this weapon proved infrequent during the actual conflict, the entire cavalry corps (93 regiments of hussars, dragoons, cuirassiers, and uhlans) of the post-war Imperial German Army subsequently adopted the lance as a primary weapon. After 1893 the standard German cavalry lance was made of drawn tubular steel, covered with clear lacquer and with a hemp hand-grip. At it was the longest version then in use.\nThe Austrian cavalry had included regiments armed with lances since 1784. In 1884, the lance ceased to be carried either as an active service or parade weapon. However the eleven Uhlan regiments continued in existence until 1918, armed with the standard cavalry sabre.\nDuring the Second Boer War, British troops successfully used the lance on one occasion - against retreating Boers at the Battle of Elandslaagte (21 October 1899). However, the Boers made effective use of trench warfare, rapid-fire field artillery, continuous-fire machine guns, and accurate long-range repeating rifles from the beginning of the war. The combined effect was devastating, so much of the British cavalry was deployed as mounted infantry, dismounting to fight on foot. For some years after the Boer War, the six British lancer regiments officially carried the lance only for parades and other ceremonial duties. At the regimental level, training in the use of the lance continued, ostensibly to improve recruit riding skills. In 1909, the bamboo or ash lance with a steel head was reauthorized for general use on active service.\nThe Russian cavalry (except for the Cossacks) discarded the lance in the late 19th century, but in 1907, it was reissued for use by the front line of each squadron when charging in open formation. In its final form, the Russian lance was a long metal tube with a steel head and leather arm strap. It was intended as a shock weapon in the charge, to be dropped after impact and replaced by the sword for close combat in a melee. While demoralizing to an opponent, the lance was recognized as being an awkward encumbrance in forested regions.\nThe relative value of the lance and the sword as a principal weapon for mounted troops was an issue of dispute in the years immediately preceding World War I. Opponents of the lance argued that the weapon was clumsy, conspicuous, easily deflected, and inefficient in a melee. Arguments favoring the retention of the lance focused on the impact on morale of having charging cavalry preceded by \"a hedge of steel\" and on the effectiveness of the weapon against fleeing opponents.\nWorld War I and after.\nLances were still in use by the British, Turkish, Italian, Spanish, French, Belgian, Indian, German, and Russian armies at the outbreak of World War I. In initial cavalry skirmishes in France this antique weapon proved ineffective, German uhlans being \"hampered by their long lances and a good many threw them away\". A major action involving repeated charges by four regiments of German cavalry, all armed with lances, at Halen on 12 August 1914 was unsuccessful. Amongst the Belgian defenders was one regiment of lancers who fought dismounted.\nWith the advent of trench warfare, lances and the cavalry that carried them ceased to play a significant role. A Russian cavalry officer whose regiment carried lances throughout the war recorded only one instance where an opponent was killed by this weapon.\nThe Greco-Turkish War (1919\u20131922), saw an unexpected revival of lances amongst the cavalry of the Turkish National Army. During the successful Turkish offensives of the final stages of the war across the open plains of Asia Minor, Turkish mounted troops were armed with bamboo shafted-lances taken from military storage and inflicted heavy losses on the retreating Greek Army. \nThe cavalry branches of most armies which still retained lances as a service weapon at the end of World War I generally discarded them for all but ceremonial occasions during the 1920s and 1930s. There were exceptions during this era, such as the Polish cavalry, which retained the lance for combat use until either 1934 or 1937, but contrary to popular legend did not make use of it in World War II. The German cavalry retained the lance (Stahlrohrlanze) as a service weapon until 1927, as did the British cavalry until 1928. The Argentine cavalry were documented as carrying lances until the 1940s, but this appears to have been used as part of recruit riding school training, rather than serious preparation for use in active service.\nUse as flagstaff.\nThe United States Cavalry used a lance-like shaft as a flagstaff.\nMounted police use.\nWhen the Canadian North-West Mounted Police was established, it was modeled after certain British cavalry units that used lances. It made limited use of this weapon in small detachments during the 1870s, intended to impress indigenous peoples.\nThe modern Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the North-West Mounted Police's descendant, employs ceremonial, though functional, lances made of male bamboo. They feature a crimped swallowtail pennant, red above and white below.\nThe New South Wales Mounted Police, based at Redfern Barracks, Sydney, Australia, carry a lance with a navy blue and white pennant on ceremonial occasions.\nOther weapons.\n\"Lance\" is also the name given by some anthropologists to the light flexible javelins (technically darts) thrown by atlatls (spear-throwing sticks), but these are usually called \"atlatl javelins\". Some were not much larger than arrows, and were typically feather-fletched like an arrow and unlike the vast majority of spears and javelins (one exception would be several instances of the many types of ballista bolt, a mechanically thrown spear).\nA \"tilting-spear\" is a heraldric term for a lance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48775", "revid": "34301929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48775", "title": "Halberd", "text": "Type of polearm with axe blade topped with a spike\nA halberd (also called halbard or halbert) is a two-handed polearm that was in prominent use from the 13th to 16th centuries. The halberd consists of an axe blade topped with a spike mounted on a long shaft. It may have a hook or thorn on the back of the axe blade for grappling mounted combatants and protecting allied soldiers, typically musketeers. The halberd was usually long.\nThe word \"halberd\" is cognate with the German word \"Hellebarde\", deriving from Middle High German \"halm\" (handle) and \"barte\" (battleaxe) joined to form \"helmbarte\". Troops that used the weapon were called halberdiers or halbardiers. The word has also been used to describe a weapon of the early Bronze Age in Western Europe. This consisted of a blade mounted on a pole at a right angle.\nHistory.\nThe halberd is first mentioned (as ) in a work by 13th-century German poet Konrad von W\u00fcrzburg. John of Winterthur described it as a new weapon used by the Swiss at the Battle of Morgarten of 1315. The halberd was inexpensive to produce and very versatile in battle. As the halberd was eventually refined, its point was more fully developed to allow it to deal better with spears and pikes (and make it able to push back approaching horsemen), as was the hook opposite the axe head, which could be used to pull horsemen to the ground. A Swiss peasant used a halberd to kill Charles the Bold, the Duke of Burgundy, at the Battle of Nancy, decisively ending the Burgundian Wars. \nThe halberd was the primary weapon of the early Swiss armies in the 14th and early 15th centuries. Later the Swiss added the pike to better repel knightly attacks and roll over enemy infantry formations, with the halberd, hand-and-a-half sword, or the dagger known as the \"Schweizerdolch\" used for closer combat. The German \"Landsknechte\", who imitated Swiss warfare methods, also used the pike, supplemented by the halberd\u2014but their side arm of choice was a short sword called the \"Katzbalger\".\nAs long as pikemen fought other pikemen, the halberd remained a useful supplementary weapon for \"push of pike\", but when their position became more defensive, to protect the slow-loading arquebusiers and matchlock musketeers from sudden attacks by cavalry, the percentage of halberdiers in the pike units steadily decreased. By 1588, official Dutch infantry composition was down to 39% arquebuses, 34% pikes, 13% muskets, 9% halberds, and 2% one-handed swords. By 1600, troops armed exclusively with swords were no longer used and the halberd was only used by sergeants.\nResearchers suspected that a halberd or a bill sliced through the back of King Richard III's skull at the Battle of Bosworth Field on 22 August 1485, leaving his brain visible before killing him during the battle, and were later able to confirm that it was a halberd.\nWhile rarer than it had been from the late 15th to mid-16th centuries, the halberd was still used infrequently as an infantry weapon well into the mid-17th century. The armies of the Catholic League in 1625, for example, had halberdiers comprising 7% of infantry units, with musketeers comprising 58% and armored pikemen 35%. By 1627 this had changed to 65% muskets, 20% pikes, and 15% halberds. A near-contemporary depiction of the 1665 Battle of Montes Claros at Palace of the Marquises of Fronteira depicts a minority of the Portuguese and Spanish soldiers as armed with halberds. Antonio de Pereda's 1635 painting \"El Socorro a G\u00e9nova\" depicting the Relief of Genoa has all the soldiers armed with halberds. The most consistent users of the halberd in the Thirty Years' War were German sergeants who would carry one as a sign of rank. While they could use them in melee combat, more often they were used for dressing the ranks by grasping the shaft in both hands and pushing it against several men simultaneously. They could also be used to push pikes or muskets up or down, especially to stop overexcited musketeers from firing prematurely. Halberds and other polearms remained useful during instances of close-in fighting such as during stormings of towns and forts. At the Siege of Lyme Regis in April 1644 during the English Civil War, halberdiers were among the troops that repelled the attackers after their cannons made breaches in the walls.\nThe halberd has been used as a court bodyguard weapon for centuries, and is still the ceremonial weapon of the Swiss Guard in the Vatican and the \"Alabarderos\" (Halberdiers) Company of the Spanish Royal Guard. The halberd was one of the polearms sometimes carried by lower-ranking officers in European infantry units in the 16th through 18th centuries. In the British army, sergeants continued to carry halberds until 1793, when they were replaced by spontoons. The 18th-century halberd had, however, become simply a symbol of rank with no sharpened edge and insufficient strength to use as a weapon. It served as an instrument for ensuring that infantrymen in ranks stood correctly aligned with each other and that their muskets were aimed at the correct level.\nThe development of the halberd.\nThe word helmbarte or variations of it show up in German texts from the 13th century onwards. At that point, the halberd is not too distinct from other types of broad axes or bardiches used all over Europe. In the late 13th century the weapon starts to develop into a distinct weapon, with the top of the blade developing into a more acute thrusting point. This form of the halberd is erroneously sometimes called a voulge or a swiss voulge, but there is no evidence for the usage of these terms for this weapon historically. There were variations of these weapons with spikes on the back, though also plenty without. In the early 15th century the construction changes to incorporate sockets into the blade, instead of hoops as the previous designs had. With this development back spikes are directly integrated into the blade construction and become a universal part of the halberd design.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48778", "revid": "8766034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48778", "title": "Action theory (philosophy)", "text": "Theory of the processes causing willful human bodily movements\nAction theory or theory of action is an area in philosophy concerned with theories about the processes causing willful human bodily movements of a more or less complex kind. This area of thought involves epistemology, ethics, metaphysics, jurisprudence, and philosophy of mind, and has attracted the strong interest of philosophers ever since Aristotle's \"Nicomachean Ethics\" (Third Book). With the advent of psychology and later neuroscience, many theories of action are now subject to empirical testing.\nPhilosophical action theory, or the philosophy of action, should not be confused with sociological theories of social action, such as the action theory established by Talcott Parsons. Nor should it be confused with activity theory.\nOverview.\nBasic action theory typically describes action as intentional behavior caused by an \"agent\" in a particular \"situation\". The agent's \"desires\" and \"beliefs\" (e.g. a person wanting a glass of water and believing that the clear liquid in the cup in front of them is water) lead to bodily behavior (e.g. reaching across for the glass). In the simple theory (see Donald Davidson), the desire and belief jointly cause the action. Michael Bratman has raised problems for such a view and argued that we should take the concept of intention as basic and not analyzable into beliefs and desires.\nAristotle held that a thorough explanation must give an account of both the efficient cause, the agent, and the final cause, the intention.\nIn some theories a desire plus a belief about the means of satisfying that desire are always what is behind an action. Agents aim, in acting, to maximize the satisfaction of their desires. Such a theory of prospective rationality underlies much of economics and other social sciences within the more sophisticated framework of rational choice. However, many theories of action argue that rationality extends far beyond calculating the best means to achieve one's ends. For instance, a belief that I ought to do X, in some theories, can directly cause me to do X without my having to want to do X (i.e. have a desire to do X). Rationality, in such theories, also involves responding correctly to the reasons an agent perceives, not just acting on wants.\nWhile action theorists generally employ the language of causality in their theories of what the nature of action is, the issue of what causal determination comes to has been central to controversies about the nature of free will.\nConceptual discussions also revolve around a precise definition of action in philosophy. Scholars may disagree on which bodily movements fall under this category, e.g. whether thinking should be analysed as action, and how complex actions involving several steps to be taken and diverse intended consequences are to be summarised or decomposed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48780", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48780", "title": "Battle of Chancellorsville", "text": "1863 American Civil War battle\nThe Battle of Chancellorsville, April 30 \u2013 May 6, 1863, was a major battle of the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), and the principal engagement of the Chancellorsville campaign.\nConfederate General Robert E. Lee's risky decision to divide his army in the presence of a much larger enemy force resulted in a significant Confederate victory, described by some historians as Lee's \"perfect battle\". The victory, a product of Lee's audacity and Union general Joseph Hooker's timid decision-making, was tempered by heavy casualties, including Lt. Gen. Thomas J. \"Stonewall\" Jackson. Jackson was hit by friendly fire, requiring his left arm to be amputated. He died of pneumonia eight days later, a loss that Lee likened to losing his right arm.\nThe two armies had faced off against each other at Fredericksburg during the winter of 1862\u20131863. The Chancellorsville campaign began when Hooker secretly moved the bulk of his army up the left bank of the Rappahannock River, then crossed it on the morning of April 27, 1863. Union cavalry under Maj. Gen. George Stoneman began a long-distance raid against Lee's supply lines at about the same time. Crossing the Rapidan River via Germanna and Ely's Fords, the Federal infantry concentrated near Chancellorsville on April 30. Combined with the Union force facing Fredericksburg, Hooker planned a double envelopment, attacking Lee from both his front and rear.\nOn May 1, Hooker advanced from Chancellorsville toward Lee, but the Confederate general split his army in the face of superior numbers, leaving a small force at Fredericksburg to deter Maj. Gen. John Sedgwick from advancing, while he attacked Hooker's advance with about four-fifths of his army. Despite the objections of his subordinates, Hooker withdrew his men to the defensive lines around Chancellorsville, ceding the initiative to Lee. On May 2, Lee divided his army again, sending Stonewall Jackson's entire corps on a flanking march that routed the Union XI Corps. While performing a personal reconnaissance in advance of his line, Jackson was wounded by fire after dark from his own men, and cavalry commander Maj. Gen. J. E. B. Stuart temporarily replaced him as corps commander.\nThe fiercest fighting of the battle\u2014and the second bloodiest day of the Civil War\u2014occurred on May 3 as Lee launched multiple attacks against the Union position at Chancellorsville, resulting in heavy losses on both sides and the pulling back of Hooker's main army. That same day, Sedgwick advanced across the Rappahannock River, defeated the small Confederate force at Marye's Heights in the Second Battle of Fredericksburg, and then moved to the west. The Confederates fought a successful delaying action at the Battle of Salem Church. On the 4th, Lee turned his back on Hooker and attacked Sedgwick, and drove him back to Banks' Ford, surrounding them on three sides. Sedgwick withdrew across the ford early on May 5. Lee turned back to confront Hooker who withdrew the remainder of his army across U.S. Ford the night of May 5\u20136.\nThe campaign ended on May 7 when Stoneman's cavalry reached Union lines east of Richmond. Both armies resumed their previous position across the Rappahannock from each other at Fredericksburg. With the loss of Jackson, Lee reorganized his army, and flush with victory began what was to become the Gettysburg campaign a month later.\nBackground.\nUnion attempts against Richmond.\nIn the Eastern Theater of the American Civil War, the objective of the Union had been to advance and seize the Confederate capital, Richmond, Virginia. In the first two years of the war, four major attempts had failed: the first foundered just miles away from Washington, D.C., at the First Battle of Bull Run (First Manassas) in July 1861. Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan's Peninsula Campaign took an amphibious approach, landing his Army of the Potomac on the Virginia Peninsula in the spring of 1862 and coming within of Richmond before being turned back by Gen. Robert E. Lee in the Seven Days Battles.\nThat summer, Maj. Gen. John Pope's Army of Virginia was defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run. Finally, in December 1862, Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside's Army of the Potomac attempted to reach Richmond by way of Fredericksburg, Virginia, but was defeated at the Battle of Fredericksburg.\nShakeup in the Army of the Potomac.\nIn January 1863, the Army of the Potomac, following the Battle of Fredericksburg and the humiliating Mud March, suffered from rising desertions and plunging morale. Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside decided to conduct a mass purge of the Army of the Potomac's leadership, eliminating a number of generals who he felt were responsible for the disaster at Fredericksburg. In reality, he had no power to dismiss anyone without the approval of Congress.\nPredictably, Burnside's purge went nowhere, and he offered President Abraham Lincoln his resignation from command of the Army of the Potomac. He even offered to resign entirely from the Army, but the president persuaded him to stay, transferring him to the Western Theater, where he became commander of the Department of the Ohio. Burnside's former command, the IX Corps, was transferred to the Virginia Peninsula, a movement that prompted the Confederates to detach troops from Lee's army under Lt. Gen. James Longstreet, a decision that would be consequential in the upcoming campaign.\nAbraham Lincoln had become convinced that the appropriate objective for his Eastern army was the army of Robert E. Lee, not any geographic features such as a capital city, but he and his generals knew that the most reliable way to bring Lee to a decisive battle was to threaten his capital. Lincoln tried a fifth time with a new general on January 25, 1863\u2014Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, a man with a pugnacious reputation who had performed well in previous subordinate commands.\nWith Burnside's departure, Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin left as well. Franklin had been a staunch supporter of George B. McClellan and refused to serve under Hooker, because he disliked him personally and also because he was senior to Hooker in rank. Maj. Gen. Edwin V. Sumner stepped down due to old age (he was 65) and poor health. He was reassigned to a command in Missouri, but died before he could assume it. Brig. Gen. Daniel Butterfield was reassigned from command of the V Corps to be Hooker's chief of staff.\nHooker embarked on a much-needed reorganization of the army, doing away with Burnside's grand division system, which had proved unwieldy; he also no longer had sufficient senior officers on hand that he could trust to command multi-corps operations. He organized the cavalry into a separate corps under the command of Brig. Gen. George Stoneman (who had commanded the III Corps at Fredericksburg). But while he concentrated the cavalry into a single organization, he dispersed his artillery battalions to the control of the infantry division commanders, removing the coordinating influence of the army's artillery chief, Brig. Gen. Henry J. Hunt.\nHooker established a reputation as an outstanding administrator and restored the morale of his soldiers, which had plummeted to a new low under Burnside. Among his changes were fixes to the daily diet of the troops, camp sanitary changes, improvements and accountability of the quartermaster system, addition of and monitoring of company cooks, several hospital reforms, an improved furlough system, orders to stem rising desertion, improved drills, and stronger officer training.\nIntelligence and plans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy plans are perfect. May God have mercy on General Lee for I will have none.\n Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker\nHooker took advantage of improved military intelligence about the positioning and capabilities of the opposing army, superior to that available to his predecessors in army command. His chief of staff, Butterfield, commissioned Col. George H. Sharpe from the 120th New York Infantry to organize a new Bureau of Military Information in the Army of the Potomac, part of the provost marshal function under Brig. Gen. Marsena R. Patrick. Previously, intelligence gatherers, such as Allan Pinkerton and his detective agency, gathered information only by interrogating prisoners, deserters, \"contrabands\" (slaves), and refugees.\nThe new BMI added other sources including infantry and cavalry reconnaissance, spies, scouts, signal stations, and an aerial balloon corps. As he received the more complete information correlated from these additional sources, Hooker realized that if he were to avoid the bloodbath of direct frontal attacks, which were features of the battles of Antietam and, more recently, Fredericksburg, he could not succeed in his crossing of the Rappahannock \"except by stratagem.\"\nHooker's army faced Lee across the Rappahannock from its winter quarters in Falmouth and around Fredericksburg. Hooker developed a strategy that was, on paper, superior to those of his predecessors. He planned to send his 10,000 cavalrymen under Maj. Gen. George Stoneman to cross the Rappahannock far upstream and raid deep into the Confederate rear areas, destroying crucial supply depots along the railroad from the Confederate capital in Richmond to Fredericksburg, which would cut Lee's lines of communication and supply.\nHooker reasoned that Lee would react to this threat by abandoning his fortified positions on the Rappahannock and withdrawing toward his capital. At that time, Hooker's infantry would cross the Rappahannock in pursuit, attacking Lee when he was moving and vulnerable. Stoneman attempted to execute this turning movement on April 13, but heavy rains made the river crossing site at Sulphur Spring impassable. President Lincoln lamented, \"I greatly fear it is another failure already.\" Hooker was forced to create a new plan for a meeting with Lincoln, Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton, and general in chief Henry W. Halleck in Aquia on April 19.\nHooker's second plan was to launch both his cavalry and infantry simultaneously in a bold double envelopment of Lee's army. Stoneman's cavalry would make a second attempt at its deep strategic raid, but at the same time, 42,000 men in three corps (V, XI, XII Corps) would stealthily march to cross the Rappahannock upriver at Kelly's Ford. They would then proceed south and cross the Rapidan at Germanna and Ely's Ford, concentrate at the Chancellorsville crossroads, and attack Lee's army from the west.\nWhile they were under way, 10,000 men in two divisions from the II Corps would cross at the U.S. Ford and join with the V Corps in pushing the Confederates away from the river. The second half of the double envelopment was to come from the east: 40,000 men in two corps (I and VI Corps, under the overall command of John Sedgwick) would cross the Rappahannock below Fredericksburg and threaten to attack Stonewall Jackson's position on the Confederate right flank.\nThe remaining 25,000 men (III Corps and one division of the II Corps) would remain visible in their camps at Falmouth to divert Confederate attention from the turning movement. Hooker anticipated that Lee would either be forced to retreat, in which case he would be vigorously pursued, or he would be forced to attack the Union Army on unfavorable terrain.\nOne of the defining characteristics of the battlefield was a dense woodland south of the Rapidan known locally as the \"Wilderness of Spotsylvania\". The area had once been an open broadleaf forest, but during colonial times the trees were gradually cut down to make charcoal for local pig iron furnaces. When the supply of wood was exhausted, the furnaces were abandoned and secondary forest growth developed, creating a dense mass of brambles, thickets, vines, and low-lying vegetation.\nCatharine Furnace, abandoned in the 1840s, had recently been reactivated to produce iron for the Confederate war effort. This area was largely unsuitable for the deployment of artillery and the control of large infantry formations, which would nullify some of the Union advantage in military power. It was important for Hooker's plan that his men move quickly out of this area and attack Lee in the open ground to the east. There were three primary roads available for this west-to-east movement: the Orange Plank Road, the Orange Turnpike, and the River Road.\nThe Confederate dispositions were as follows: the Rappahannock line at Fredericksburg was occupied by Longstreet's First Corps division of Lafayette McLaws on Marye's Heights, with Jackson's entire Second Corps to their right. Early's division was at Prospect Hill and the divisions of Rodes, Hill, and Colston extended the Confederate right flank along the river almost to Skinker's Neck. The other division present from Longstreet's Corps, Anderson's, guarded the river crossings on the left flank. Stuart's cavalry was largely in Culpeper County near Kelly's Ford, beyond the infantry's left flank.\nInitial movements.\nApril 27\u201330: Movement to battle.\nOn April 27\u201328, the initial three corps of the Army of the Potomac began their march under the leadership of Slocum. They crossed the Rappahannock and Rapidan rivers as planned and began to concentrate on April 30 around the hamlet of Chancellorsville, which was little more than a single large, brick mansion at the junction of the Orange Turnpike and Orange Plank Road. Built in the early 19th century, it had been used as an inn on the turnpike for many years, but now served as a home for the Frances Chancellor family. Some of the family remained in the house during the battle.\nHooker arrived late in the afternoon on April 30 and made the mansion his headquarters. Stoneman's cavalry began on April 30 its second attempt to reach Lee's rear areas. Two divisions of II Corps crossed at U.S. Ford on April 30 without opposition. By dawn on April 29, pontoon bridges spanned the Rappahannock south of Fredericksburg and Sedgwick's force began to cross.\nPleased with the success of the operation so far, and realizing that the Confederates were not vigorously opposing the river crossings, Hooker ordered Sickles to begin the movement of the III Corps from Falmouth the night of April 30 \u2013 May 1. By May 1, Hooker had approximately 70,000 men concentrated in and around Chancellorsville.\nIn his Fredericksburg headquarters, Lee was initially in the dark about the Union intentions and he suspected that the main column under Slocum was heading towards Gordonsville. Jeb Stuart's cavalry was cut off at first by Stoneman's departure on April 30, but they were soon able to move freely around the army's flanks on their reconnaissance missions after almost all their Union counterparts had left the area.\nAs Stuart's intelligence information about the Union river crossings began to arrive, Lee did not react as Hooker had anticipated. He decided to violate one of the generally accepted principles of war and divide his force in the face of a superior enemy, hoping that aggressive action would allow him to attack and defeat a portion of Hooker's army before it could be fully concentrated against him. He became convinced that Sedgwick's force would demonstrate against him, but not become a serious threat, so he ordered about four-fifths of his army to meet the challenge from Chancellorsville. He left behind a brigade under Brig. Gen. William Barksdale on heavily fortified Marye's Heights behind Fredericksburg and one division under Maj. Gen. Jubal A. Early, on Prospect Hill south of the town.\nThese roughly 11,000 men and 56 guns would attempt to resist any advance by Sedgwick's 40,000. He ordered Stonewall Jackson to march west and link up with Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson's division, which had pulled back from the river crossings they were guarding and began digging earthworks on a north\u2013south line between the Zoan and Tabernacle churches. McLaws's division was ordered from Fredericksburg to join Anderson. This would amass 40,000 men to confront Hooker's movement east from Chancellorsville. Heavy fog along the Rappahannock masked some of these westward movements and Sedgwick chose to wait until he could determine the enemy's intentions.\nOpposing forces.\nUnion.\nThe Army of the Potomac, commanded by Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, had 133,868 men and 413 guns organized as follows:\nConfederate.\nGen. Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia fielded 60,298 men and 220 guns, organized as follows:\nThe Chancellorsville campaign was one of the most lopsided clashes of the war, with the Union's effective fighting force more than twice the Confederates', the greatest imbalance during the war in Virginia. Hooker's army was much better supplied and was well-rested after several months of inactivity. Lee's forces, on the other hand, were poorly provisioned and were scattered all over the state of Virginia. Some 15,000 men of Longstreet's Corps had previously been detached and stationed near Norfolk in order to block a potential threat to Richmond from Federal troops stationed at Fort Monroe and Newport News on the Peninsula, as well as at Norfolk and Suffolk.\nIn light of the continued Federal inactivity, by late March Longstreet's primary assignment became that of requisitioning provisions for Lee's forces from the farmers and planters of North Carolina and Virginia. As a result of this the two divisions of Maj. Gen. John Bell Hood and Maj. Gen. George Pickett were away from Lee's army and would take a week or more of marching to reach it in an emergency. After nearly a year of campaigning, allowing these troops to slip away from his immediate control was Lee's gravest miscalculation. Although he hoped to be able to call on them, these men would not arrive in time to aid his outnumbered forces.\nBattle.\nMay 1: Hooker passes on opportunity.\nJackson's men began marching west to join with Anderson before dawn on May 1. Jackson himself met with Anderson near Zoan Church at 8 a.m., finding that McLaws's division had already arrived to join the defensive position. But Stonewall Jackson was not in a defensive mood. He ordered an advance at 11 a.m. along two roads toward Chancellorsville: McLaws's division and the brigade of Brig. Gen. William Mahone on the Turnpike, and Anderson's other brigades and Jackson's arriving units on the Plank Road.\nAt about the same time, Hooker ordered his men to advance on three roads to the east: two divisions of Meade's V Corps (Griffin and Humphreys) on the River Road to uncover Banks's Ford, and the remaining division (Sykes) on the Turnpike; and Slocum's XII Corps on the Plank Road, with Howard's XI Corps in close support. Couch's II Corps was placed in reserve, where it would be soon joined by Sickles's III Corps.\nThe first shots of the Battle of Chancellorsville were fired at 11:20\u00a0a.m. as the armies collided. McLaws's initial attack pushed back Sykes's division. The Union general organized a counterattack that recovered the lost ground. Anderson then sent a brigade under Brig. Gen. Ambrose Wright up an unfinished railroad south of the Plank Road, around the right flank of Slocum's corps. This would normally be a serious problem, but Howard's XI Corps was advancing from the rear and could deal with Wright.\nSykes's division had proceeded farther forward than Slocum on his right, leaving him in an exposed position. This forced him to conduct an orderly withdrawal at 2 p.m. to take up a position behind Hancock's division of the II Corps, which was ordered by Hooker to advance and help repulse the Confederate attack. Meade's other two divisions made good progress on the River Road and were approaching their objective, Banks's Ford.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern attempts to rehabilitate and fumigate Joe Hooker's reputation usually and remarkably employ special pleading about the difficulties of moving in the Wilderness. Such arguments actually emphasize the salient factor on May 1: Getting out of that wilderness of course was the very essence of the general's needs. When he abandoned the chance to reach that desirable goal, Hooker at once passed the initiative, with all of its advantages, to Lee. The Confederate would make superb use of the opportunity.\nRobert K. Krick, \"Lee's Greatest Victory\"\nDespite being in a potentially favorable situation, Hooker halted his brief offensive. His actions may have demonstrated his lack of confidence in handling the complex actions of such a large organization for the first time (he had been an effective and aggressive division and corps commander in previous battles), but he had also decided before beginning the campaign that he would fight the battle defensively, forcing Lee, with his small army, to attack his own, larger one. At the [First] Battle of Fredericksburg (December 13, 1862), the Union army had done the attacking and met with a bloody defeat.\nHooker knew Lee could not sustain such a defeat and keep an effective army in the field, so he ordered his men to withdraw back into the Wilderness and take a defensive position around Chancellorsville, daring Lee to attack him or retreat with superior forces at his back. He confused matters by issuing a second order to his subordinates to hold their positions until 5 p.m., but by the time it was received, most of the Union units had begun their rearward movements. That evening, Hooker sent a message to his corps commanders, \"The major general commanding trusts that a suspension in the attack to-day will embolden the enemy to attack him.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe retrograde movement had prepared me for something of the kind, but to hear from [Hooker's] own lips that the advantages gained by the successful marches of his lieutenants were to culminate in fighting a defensive battle in that nest of thickets was too much, and I retired from his presence with the belief that my commanding general was a whipped man.\n Union Maj. Gen. Darius N. Couch\nHooker's subordinates were surprised and outraged by the change in plans. They saw that the position they were fighting for near the Zoan Church was relatively high ground and offered an opportunity for the infantry and artillery to deploy outside the constraints of the Wilderness. Meade exclaimed, \"My God, if we can't hold the top of the hill, we certainly can't hold the bottom of it!\" Viewing through the lens of hindsight, some of the participants and many modern historians judged that Hooker effectively lost the campaign on May 1. Stephen W. Sears observed, however, that Hooker's concern was based on more than personal timidity.\nThe ground being disputed was little more than a clearing in the Wilderness, to which access was available by only two narrow roads. The Confederate response had swiftly concentrated the aggressive Stonewall Jackson's corps against his advancing columns such that the Federal army was outnumbered in that area, about 48,000 to 30,000, and would have difficulty maneuvering into effective lines of battle. Meade's two divisions on the River Road were too far separated to support Slocum and Sykes, and reinforcements from the rest of the II Corps and the III Corps would be too slow in arriving.\nAs the Union troops dug in around Chancellorsville that night, creating log breastworks, faced with abatis, Lee and Stonewall Jackson met at the intersection of the Plank Road and the Furnace Road to plan their next move. Jackson believed that Hooker would retreat across the Rappahannock, but Lee assumed that the Union general had invested too much in the campaign to withdraw so precipitously. If the Federal troops were still in position on May 2, Lee would attack them. As they discussed their options, cavalry commander J.E.B. Stuart arrived with an intelligence report from his subordinate, Brig. Gen. Fitzhugh Lee.\nAlthough Hooker's left flank was firmly anchored by Meade's V Corps on the Rappahannock, and his center was strongly fortified, his right flank was \"in the air.\" Howard's XI Corps was camped on the Orange Turnpike, extending past Wilderness Church, and was vulnerable to a flanking attack. Investigations of a route to be used to reach the flank identified the proprietor of Catharine Furnace, Charles C. Wellford, who showed Jackson's cartographer, Jedediah Hotchkiss, a recently constructed road through the forest that would shield marchers from the observation of Union pickets. Lee directed Jackson to make the flanking march, a maneuver similar to the one that had been so successful prior to the Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas). An account by Hotchkiss recalls that Lee asked Jackson how many men he would take on the flanking march and Jackson replied, \"my whole command.\"\nMay 2: Jackson's flank attack.\nEarly on the morning of May 2, Hooker began to realize that Lee's actions on May 1 had not been constrained by the threat of Sedgwick's force at Fredericksburg, so no further deception was needed on that front. He decided to summon the I Corps of Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds to reinforce his lines at Chancellorsville. His intent was that Reynolds would form up to the right of the XI Corps and anchor the Union right flank on the Rapidan River.\nGiven the communications chaos of May 1, Hooker was under the mistaken impression that Sedgwick had withdrawn back across the Rappahannock and, based on this, that the VI Corps should remain on the north bank of the river across from the town, where it could protect the army's supplies and supply line. In fact, both Reynolds and Sedgwick were still west of the Rappahannock, south of the town.\nHooker sent his orders at 1:55\u00a0a.m., expecting that Reynolds would be able to start marching before daylight, but problems with his telegraph communications delayed the order to Fredericksburg until just before sunrise. Reynolds was forced to make a risky daylight march. By the afternoon of May 2, when Hooker expected him to be digging in on the Union right at Chancellorsville, Reynolds was still marching to the Rappahannock.\nMeanwhile, for the second time, Lee was dividing his army. Jackson would lead his Second Corps of 28,000 men around to attack the Union right flank while Lee exercised personal command of the remaining two divisions, about 13,000 men and 24 guns facing the 70,000 Union troops at Chancellorsville. For the plan to work, several things had to happen. First, Jackson had to make a 12-mile (19\u00a0km) march via roundabout roads to reach the Union right, and he had to do it undetected. Second, Hooker had to stay tamely on the defensive. Third, Early would have to keep Sedgwick bottled up at Fredericksburg, despite the four-to-one Union advantage there. And when Jackson launched his attack, he had to hope that the Union forces were unprepared.\nConfederate cavalry under Stuart kept most Union forces from spotting Jackson on his long flank march, which started between 7 and 8 a.m. and lasted until midafternoon. Several Confederate soldiers saw the Union observation balloon \"Eagle\" soaring overhead and assumed that they could likewise be seen, but no such report was sent to headquarters. When men of the III Corps spotted a Confederate column moving through the woods, their division commander, Brig. Gen. David B. Birney, ordered his artillery to open fire, but this proved little more than harassment. The corps commander, Sickles, rode to Hazel Grove to see for himself and he reported after the battle that his men observed the Confederates passing for over three hours.\nWhen Hooker received the report about the Confederate movement, he thought that Lee might be starting a retreat, but he also realized that a flanking march might be in progress. He took two actions. First, he sent a message at 9:30\u00a0a.m. to the commander of the XI Corps, Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard on his right flank: \"We have good reason to suppose the enemy is moving to our right. Please advance your pickets for purposes of observation as far as may be safe in order to obtain timely information of their approach.\"\nAt 10:50\u00a0a.m., Howard replied that he was \"taking measures to resist an attack from the west.\" Hooker's second action was to send orders to Sedgwick \u2013 \"attack the enemy in his front\" at Fredericksburg if \"an opportunity presents itself with a reasonable expectation of success\" \u2013 and Sickles \u2013 \"advance cautiously toward the road followed by the enemy, and harass the movement as much as possible\". Sedgwick did not take action from the discretionary orders. Sickles, however, was enthusiastic when he received the order at noon. He sent Birney's division, flanked by two battalions of Col. Hiram Berdan's U.S. sharpshooters, south from Hazel Grove with orders to pierce the column and gain possession of the road.\nBut the action came too late. Jackson had ordered the 23rd Georgia Infantry to guard the rear of the column and they resisted the advance of Birney and Berdan at Catherine Furnace. The Georgians were driven south and made a stand at the same unfinished railroad bed used by Wright's Brigade the day before. They were overwhelmed by 5 p.m. and most were captured. Two brigades from A.P. Hill's division turned back from the flanking march and prevented any further damage to Jackson's column, which by now had left the area.\nMost of Jackson's men were unaware of the small action at the rear of their column. As they marched north on Brock Road, Jackson was prepared to turn right on the Orange Plank Road, from which his men would attack the Union lines at around Wilderness Church. However, it became apparent that this direction would lead to essentially a frontal assault against Howard's line. Fitzhugh Lee met Jackson and they ascended a hill with a sweeping view of the Union position. Jackson was delighted to see that Howard's men were resting, unaware of the impending Confederate threat.\nAlthough by now it was 3 p.m., Jackson decided to march his men two miles farther and turn right on the Turnpike instead, allowing him to strike the unprotected flank directly. The attack formation consisted of two lines\u2014the divisions of Brig. Gens. Robert E. Rodes and Raleigh E. Colston\u2014stretching almost a mile on either side of the turnpike, separated by 200 yards, followed by a partial line with the arriving division of A.P. Hill.\nSignificant contributions to the impending Union disaster were the nature of the Union XI Corps and the incompetent performance of its commander, Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard. Howard failed to make any provision for defending against a surprise attack, even though Hooker had ordered him to do so. The Union right flank was not anchored on any natural obstacle, and the only defenses against a flank attack consisted of two cannons pointing out into the Wilderness.\nAlso, the XI Corps was not well respected \u2013 an outfit with poor morale and no history of battlefield success. Many of its officers and enlisted men were immigrants from Germany and other parts of Central Europe, including a number of political refugees from the 1848 revolutions. The corps had been formed in the spring of 1862 by merging Brig. Gen Louis Blenker's division with Maj. Gen John C. Fr\u00e9mont's Mountain Department in West Virginia. After a miserable trek across Virginia in which Blenker's troops were provisioned inadequately and suffered from widespread hunger, disease, and desertion, they joined with Fremont in a campaign that resulted in them being soundly defeated by Stonewall Jackson.\nFremont's army became part of Maj. Gen John Pope's Army of Virginia in the summer. Fremont had refused to serve under Pope and was replaced by Maj. Gen Franz Sigel, an inept political general who, however, was much beloved by his German troops. Louis Blenker fell from a horse during the Northern Virginia campaign and suffered injuries that would claim his life later in 1863. The corps suffered heavy casualties at Second Bull Run and was left behind in Washington D.C. during the Maryland campaign. During the Fredericksburg campaign, it did not join the rest of the army until after the battle was over.\nAfter Hooker took command, Sigel was the ranking general behind him. The XI Corps was the smallest in the army and Sigel's requests to general-in-chief Henry Halleck to have it enlarged were refused, so he resigned his command in March 1863 and was replaced by Maj. Gen Oliver O. Howard, who was widely unpopular with the enlisted men and brought in several new generals, such as Brig. Gen Francis Barlow, who had a reputation of being aggressive martinets. Eight of the 27 regiments in the corps had never been in battle before, while the remaining 21 had never been on the winning side of a battle. The German soldiers suffered from widespread ethnic friction with the rest of the army although a number of the regiments in the XI Corps consisted of native-born Americans.\nHooker had no major plans for the corps except for mopping up after the main battle was over, and it was placed out on the army's right flank where it was not expected to be involved in any fighting, and the woods to the west were assumed to be so thick that enemy troops could not possibly move through them and form a line of battle. As far as Hooker knew, the only possible route for a Confederate attack was along the turnpike, which would cause them to run right into the II and XII Corps, both elite outfits and well-entrenched. Further north, the Union line was held by the V Corps, also first-rate troops occupying an almost impregnable position.\nAs the day wore on, the men of the XI Corps became increasingly aware that something was going on in the woods to the west of them, but were unable to get any higher-ups to pay attention. Col. John C. Lee of the 55th Ohio received numerous reports of a Confederate presence out there, and Col. William Richardson of the 25th Ohio reported that huge numbers of Confederates were massing to the west. Col. Leopold von Gilsa, who commanded one of two brigades in Brig. Gen Charles Devens' division, went to Howard's headquarters warning him that an all-out enemy assault was imminent, but Howard insisted that it was impossible for the Confederates to get through the dense woods.\nMaj. Gen Carl Schurz, who commanded the 3rd Division of the corps, began rearranging his troops into a line of battle. Captain Hubert Dilger, who commanded Battery I of the 1st Ohio Artillery, rode out on a reconnaissance mission, narrowly missed being captured by the Confederates, and rode far north, almost to the banks of the Rapidan, and back south to Hooker's headquarters, but a haughty cavalry officer dismissed his concerns and would not let him in to see the general. Dilger next went to Howard's headquarters, but was merely told that the Confederate army was retreating and that it was not acceptable to make scouting expeditions without permission of higher-ups. As the sun started to go down, all remained quiet on the XI Corps's front, the noises of the III and XII Corps engaging Lee's rear guard coming from off in the distance.\nAround 5:30\u00a0p.m., Jackson turned to Robert Rodes and asked him \"General, are you ready?\" When Rodes nodded, Jackson replied, \"You may go forward then.\" Most of the men of the XI Corps were encamped and sitting down for supper and had their rifles unloaded and stacked. Their first clue to the impending onslaught was the observation of numerous animals, such as rabbits and foxes, fleeing in their direction out of the western woods. This was followed by the crackle of musket fire, and then the unmistakable scream of the \"Rebel Yell\".\nTwo of von Gilsa's regiments, the 153rd Pennsylvania and 54th New York, had been placed up as a heavy skirmish line and the massive Confederate assault rolled completely over them. A few men managed to get off a shot or two before fleeing. The pair of artillery pieces at the very end of the XI Corps line were captured by the Confederates and promptly turned on their former owners. Devens's division collapsed in a matter of minutes, slammed on three sides by almost 30,000 Confederates. Col. Robert Reily and his 75th Ohio managed to resist for about ten minutes before the regiment disintegrated with 150 casualties, including Reily himself, and joined the rest of the fleeing mob.\nCol. Lee would later write sarcastically, \"A rifle pit is useless when the enemy is on the same side and in rear of your line.\" Some men tried to stand and resist, but they were knocked over by their fleeing comrades and a hail of Confederate bullets. Maj. Gen. Carl Schurz ordered his division to shift from an east\u2013west alignment to north\u2013south, which they did with amazing precision and speed. They resisted for about 20 minutes and \"Leatherbreeches\" Dilger managed to drive the Confederates off the turnpike for a bit with his guns, but the sheer weight of Jackson's assault overwhelmed them, too, and they soon had to flee.\nDilger for a time stood alone with a gun firing double-shotted canister at the attackers, then limbered up to flee as the Confederates closed in on him. Three of his artillery horses were shot dead, and when he realized that the gun could not be moved, he had to abandon it. General Howard partially redeemed his inadequate performance prior to the battle by his personal bravery in attempting to rally the troops. He stood shouting and waving a flag held under the stump of his amputated arm lost at the Battle of Seven Pines in 1862, ignoring the danger of the heavy rifle fire, but he could only gather small pockets of soldiers to resist before his corps disintegrated. Col. Adolf Buschbeck's brigade put up a last-ditch stand along with Dilger's guns. They too had to retreat, but maintained good order as they went.\nThe chaos unfurling on the Union right had gone unnoticed at Hooker's headquarters until at last the sound of gunfire could be heard in the distance, followed by a panic-stricken mob of men and horses pouring into the Chancellorsville clearing. A staff officer yelled \"My God, here they come!\" as the mob ran to and past the Chancellor mansion. Hooker jumped onto his horse and frantically tried to take action. He ordered Maj. Gen Hiram Berry's division of the III Corps, once his own division, forward, yelling \"Receive them on your bayonets!\" Artillerymen around the clearing began moving guns into position around Fairview Cemetery.\nMeanwhile, down at Hazel Grove, the 8th Pennsylvania Cavalry were relaxing and awaiting orders to chase after Confederate wagon trains, also oblivious to the collapse of the XI Corps. The regiment's commander, Maj. Pennock Huey, received a notice that General Howard was requesting some cavalry. Huey saddled up his men and headed west along the turnpike, where they ran straight into Robert Rodes's division. After a confused fight, the 8th Pennsylvania Cavalry retreated to the safety of the Chancellorsville clearing with the loss of 30 men and three officers.\nBy nightfall, the Confederate Second Corps had advanced more than 1.25 miles, to within sight of Chancellorsville, but darkness and confusion were taking their toll. The attackers were almost as disorganized as the routed defenders. Although the XI Corps had been defeated, it had retained some coherence as a unit. The corps suffered nearly 2,500 casualties (259 killed, 1,173 wounded, and 994 missing or captured), about one quarter of its strength, including 12 of 23 regimental commanders, which suggests that they fought fiercely during their retreat.\nJackson's force was now separated from Lee's men only by Sickles's corps, which had been separated from the main body of the army after its foray attacking Jackson's column earlier in the afternoon. Like everyone else in the Union army, the III Corps had been unaware of Jackson's attack. When he first heard the news, Sickles was skeptical, but finally believed it and decided to pull back to Hazel Grove.\nSickles became increasingly nervous, knowing that his troops were facing an unknown number of Confederates to the west. A patrol of Jackson's troops was driven back by Union gunners, a minor incident that would come to be exaggerated into a heroic repulse of Jackson's entire command. Between 11 p.m. and midnight, Sickles organized an assault north from Hazel Grove toward the Plank Road, but called it off when his men began suffering artillery and rifle friendly fire from the Union XII Corps.\nStonewall Jackson wanted to press his advantage before Hooker and his army could regain their bearings and plan a counterattack, which might still succeed because of the sheer disparity in numbers. He rode out onto the Plank Road that night to determine the feasibility of a night attack by the light of the full moon, traveling beyond the farthest advance of his men. When one of his staff officers warned him about the dangerous position, Jackson replied, \"The danger is all over. The enemy is routed. Go back and tell A.P. Hill to press right on.\"\nAs he and his staff started to return, they were incorrectly identified as Union cavalry by men of the 18th North Carolina Infantry, who hit Jackson with friendly fire. Jackson's three bullet wounds were not in themselves life-threatening, but his left arm was broken and had to be amputated. While recovering, he contracted pneumonia and died on May 10. His death was a devastating loss for the Confederacy. Some historians and participants\u2014particularly those of the postbellum Lost Cause movement\u2014attribute the Confederate defeat at Gettysburg two months later to Jackson's absence.\nThe Union gunners at Fairview Cemetery were alert and nervous; they were a few hundred yards behind Berry's division and still-intact elements of the XI Corps and they found it quite impossible to fire their guns without the shells going over the heads of the infantrymen in front of them. A few friendly-fire casualties resulted from this as the gunners were quick to shoot at anything that looked like enemy soldiers; when they got sight of a large body of Confederates drawing near, they let loose a huge cannonade that landed on and around the party that was carrying the wounded Jackson to the rear and did end up wounding A.P. Hill.\nMay 3: Chancellorsville.\nDespite the fame of Stonewall Jackson's victory on May 2, it did not result in a significant military advantage for the Army of Northern Virginia. Howard's XI Corps had been defeated, but the Army of the Potomac remained a potent force and Reynolds's I Corps had arrived overnight, which replaced Howard's losses. About 76,000 Union men faced 43,000 Confederate at the Chancellorsville front. The two halves of Lee's army at Chancellorsville were separated by Sickles's III Corps, which occupied a strong position on high ground at Hazel Grove.\nUnless Lee could devise a plan to eject Sickles from Hazel Grove and combine the two halves of his army, he would have little chance of success in assaulting the formidable Union earthworks around Chancellorsville. Fortunately for Lee, Joseph Hooker inadvertently cooperated. Early on May 3, Hooker ordered Sickles to move from Hazel Grove to a new position on the Plank Road. As they were withdrawing, the trailing elements of Sickles's corps were attacked by the Confederate brigade of Brig. Gen. James J. Archer, which captured about 100 prisoners and four cannons. Hazel Grove was soon turned into a powerful artillery platform with 30 guns under Col. Porter Alexander.\nAfter Jackson was wounded on May 2, command of the Second Corps fell to his senior division commander, Maj. Gen. A.P. Hill. Hill was soon wounded himself. He consulted with Brig. Gen. Robert E. Rodes, the next most senior general in the corps, and Rodes acquiesced in Hill's decision to summon Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart to take command, notifying Lee after the fact. Brig. Gen. Henry Heth replaced Hill in division command.\nAlthough Stuart was a cavalryman who had never commanded infantry before, he was to deliver a creditable performance at Chancellorsville. By the morning of May 3, the Union line resembled a horseshoe. The center was held by the III, XII, and II Corps. On the left were the remnants of the XI Corps, and the right was held by the V and I Corps. On the western side of the Chancellorsville salient, Stuart organized his three divisions to straddle the Plank Road: Heth's in the advance, Colston's 300\u2013500 yards behind, and Rodes's, whose men had done the hardest fighting on May 2, near the Wilderness Church.\nThe attack began about 5:30\u00a0a.m. supported by the newly installed artillery at Hazel Grove, and by simultaneous attacks by the divisions of Anderson and McLaws from the south and southeast. The Confederates were resisted fiercely by the Union troops behind strong earthworks, and the fighting on May 3 was the heaviest of the campaign. The initial waves of assaults by Heth and Colston gained a little ground, but were beaten back by Union counterattacks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n At Hazel Grove, in short, the finest artillerists of the Army of Northern Virginia were having their greatest day. They had improved guns, better ammunition and superior organization. With the fire of battle shining through his spectacles, William Pegram rejoiced. \"A glorious day, Colonel,\" he said to Porter Alexander, \"a glorious day!\"\n Douglas Southall Freeman, \"Lee's Lieutenants\"\nRodes sent his men in last and this final push, along with the excellent performance of the Confederate artillery, carried the morning battle. Chancellorsville was the only occasion in the war in Virginia in which Confederate gunners held a decided advantage over their Federal counterparts. Confederate guns on Hazel Grove were joined by 20 more on the Plank Road to duel effectively with the Union guns on neighboring Fairview Hill, causing the Federals to withdraw as ammunition ran low and Confederate infantrymen picked off the gun crews.\nFairview was evacuated at 9:30\u00a0a.m., briefly recaptured in a counterattack, but by 10 a.m. Hooker ordered it abandoned for good. The loss of this artillery platform doomed the Union position at the Chancellorsville crossroads as well, and the Army of the Potomac began a fighting retreat to positions circling United States Ford. The soldiers of the two halves of Lee's army reunited shortly after 10 a.m. before the Chancellor mansion, wildly triumphant as Lee arrived on Traveller to survey the scene of his victory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lee's presence was the signal for one of those uncontrollable bursts of enthusiasm which none can appreciate who has not witnessed them. The fierce soldiers, with their faces blackened with the smoke of battle, the wounded crawling with feeble limbs from the fury of the devouring flames, all seemed possessed with a common impulse. One long unbroken cheer, in which the feeble cry of those who lay helpless on the earth blended with the strong voices of those who still fought, rose high above the roar of battle and hailed the presence of a victorious chief. He sat in the full realization of all that soldiers dream of\u2014triumph; and as I looked at him in the complete fruition of the success which his genius, courage, and confidence in his army had won, I thought that it must have been from some such scene that men in ancient days ascended to the dignity of gods.\u2014\u200a\nAt the height of the fighting on May 3, Hooker suffered an injury when at 9:15\u00a0a.m. a Confederate cannonball hit a wooden pillar he was leaning against at his headquarters. He later wrote that half of the pillar \"violently [struck me] ... in an erect position from my head to my feet.\" He likely received a concussion, which was sufficiently severe to render him unconscious for over an hour. Although clearly incapacitated after he arose, Hooker refused to turn over command temporarily to his second-in-command, Maj. Gen. Darius N. Couch, and, with Hooker's chief of staff, Maj. Gen. Daniel Butterfield, and Sedgwick out of communication (again due to the failure of the telegraph lines), there was no one at headquarters with sufficient rank or stature to convince Hooker otherwise. This failure may have affected Union performance over the next day and may have directly contributed to Hooker's seeming lack of nerve and timid performance throughout the rest of the battle.\nMeanwhile, at about 7:30\u00a0a.m., near Chancellorsville, III Corps, Second Division commander Maj. Gen. Hiram Berry was killed by Confederate musket fire. Brig. Gen. Gershom Mott, next in seniority, was also severely wounded at about that time. Believing himself to be next in command, Brig. Gen. Joseph Warren Revere (grandson of Paul Revere) assumed command of the division. Finding himself in among stragglers from the battle and unable to contact Sickles, Revere commanded a group of 500 or 600 soldiers to reform at a point about three miles to the north of Chancellorsville. This three-mile march away from the battlefield, described by Revere as a \"regrouping effort\" and not a retreat, led to his being court-martialed in August by Maj. Gen. Hooker. This coincided with Revere's friendly 1852 conversation with Stonewall Jackson, in which Jackson used horoscopes and astrology to predict Revere's \"culmination of the malign aspect\" in the first days of May 1863.\nMay 3: Fredericksburg and Salem Church.\nAs Lee was savoring his victory at the Chancellorsville crossroads, he received disturbing news: Maj. Gen. John Sedgwick's force had broken through the Confederate lines at Fredericksburg and was headed toward Chancellorsville. On the night of May 2, in the aftermath of Jackson's flank attack, Hooker had ordered Sedgwick to \"cross the Rappahannock at Fredericksburg on the receipt of this order, and at once take up your line of march on the Chancellorsville road until you connect with him. You will attack and destroy any force you may fall in with on the road.\"\nLee had left a relatively small force at Fredericksburg, ordering Maj. Gen. Jubal Early to \"watch the enemy and try to hold him.\" If he was attacked in \"overwhelming numbers,\" Early was to retreat to Richmond, but if Sedgwick withdrew from his front, he was to join with Lee at Chancellorsville. On the morning of May 2, Early received a garbled message from Lee's staff that caused him to start marching most of his men toward Chancellorsville, but he quickly returned after a warning from Brig. Gen. William Barksdale of a Union advance against Fredericksburg.\nAt 7 a.m. on May 3, Early was confronted with four Union divisions: Brig. Gen. John Gibbon of the II Corps had crossed the Rappahannock north of town, and three divisions of Sedgwick's VI Corps\u2014Maj. Gen. John Newton and Brig. Gens. Albion P. Howe and William T. H. Brooks\u2014were arrayed in line from the front of the town to Deep Run. Most of Early's combat strength was deployed to the south of town, where Federal troops had achieved their most significant successes during the December battle. Marye's Heights was defended by Barksdale's Mississippi brigade and Early ordered the Louisiana brigade of Brig. Gen. Harry T. Hays from the far right to Barksdale's left.\nBy midmorning, two Union attacks against the infamous stone wall on Marye's Heights were repulsed with numerous casualties. A Union party under flag of truce was allowed to approach ostensibly to collect the wounded, but while close to the stone wall, they were able to observe how sparsely the Confederate line was manned. A third Union attack was successful in overrunning the Confederate position. Early was able to organize an effective fighting retreat.\nJohn Sedgwick's road to Chancellorsville was open, but he wasted time in gathering his troops and forming a marching column. His men, led by Brooks's division, followed by Newton and Howe, were delayed for several hours by successive actions against the Alabama brigade of Brig. Gen. Cadmus M. Wilcox. His final delaying line was a ridge at Salem church, where he was joined by three brigades from McLaws's division and one from Anderson's, bringing the total Confederate strength to about 10,000 men.\nArtillery fire was exchanged by both sides in the afternoon and at 5:30\u00a0p.m., two brigades of Brooks's division attacked on both sides of the Plank Road. The advance south of the road reached as far as the churchyard, but was driven back. The attack north of the road could not break the Confederate line. Wilcox described the action as \"a bloody repulse to the enemy, rendering entirely useless to him his little success of the morning at Fredericksburg.\" Hooker expressed his disappointment in Sedgwick: \"my object in ordering General Sedgwick forward ... Was to relieve me from the position in which I found myself at Chancellorsville. ... In my judgment General Sedgwick did not obey the spirit of my order, and made no sufficient effort to obey it. ... When he did move it was not with sufficient confidence or ability on his part to manoeuvre his troops.\"\nThe fighting on May 3, 1863, was some of the most furious anywhere in the civil war. The loss of 21,357 men that day in the three battles, divided equally between the two armies, ranks the fighting only behind the Battle of Antietam as the bloodiest day of war in American history.\nMay 4\u20136: Union withdrawals.\nOn the evening of May 3 and all day May 4, Hooker remained in his defenses north of Chancellorsville. Lee observed that Hooker was threatening no offensive action, so felt comfortable ordering Anderson's division to join the battle against Sedgwick. He sent orders to Early and McLaws to cooperate in a joint attack, but the orders reached his subordinates after dark, so the attack was planned for May 4.\nBy this time Sedgwick had placed his divisions into a strong defensive position with its flanks anchored on the Rappahannock, three sides of a rectangle extending south of the Plank Road. Early's plan was to drive the Union troops off Marye's Heights and the other high ground west of Fredericksburg. Lee ordered McLaws to engage from the west \"to prevent [the enemy] concentrating on General Early.\"\nEarly reoccupied Marye's Heights on the morning of May 4, cutting Sedgwick off from the town. However, McLaws was reluctant to take any action. Before noon, Lee arrived with Anderson's division, giving him a total of 21,000 men, slightly outnumbering Sedgwick. Despite Lee's presence, McLaws continued his passive role and Anderson's men took a few hours to get into position, a situation that frustrated and angered both Early and Lee, who had been planning on a concentrated assault from three directions.\nThe attack finally began around 6 p.m. Two of Early's brigades (under Brig. Gens. Harry T. Hays and Robert F. Hoke) pushed back Sedgwick's left-center across the Plank Road, but Anderson's effort was a slight one and McLaws once again contributed nothing. Throughout the day on May 4, Hooker provided no assistance or useful guidance to Sedgwick, and Sedgwick thought about little else than protecting his line of retreat.\nSedgwick withdrew across the Rappahannock at Banks's Ford during the pre-dawn hours of May 5. When he learned that Sedgwick had retreated back over the river, Hooker felt he was out of options to save the campaign. He called a council of war and asked his corps commanders to vote about whether to stay and fight or to withdraw. Although a majority voted to fight, Hooker had had enough, and on the night of May 5\u20136, he withdrew back across the river at U.S. Ford.\nIt was a difficult operation. Hooker and the artillery crossed first, followed by the infantry beginning at 6 a.m. on May 6. Meade's V Corps served as the rear guard. Rains caused the river to rise and threatened to break the pontoon bridges.\nCouch was in command on the south bank after Hooker departed, but he was left with explicit orders not to continue the battle, which he had been tempted to do. The surprise withdrawal frustrated Lee's plan for one final attack against Chancellorsville. He had issued orders for his artillery to bombard the Union line in preparation for another assault, but by the time they were ready Hooker and his men were gone.\nThe Union cavalry under Brig. Gen. George Stoneman, after a week of ineffectual raiding in central and southern Virginia in which they failed to attack any of the objectives Hooker established, withdrew into Union lines east of Richmond\u2014the peninsula north of the York River, across from Yorktown\u2014on May 7, ending the campaign.\nAftermath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My God! It is horrible\u2014horrible; and to think of it, 130,000 magnificent soldiers so cut to pieces by less than 60,000 half-starved ragamuffins!\u2014\u200a\nCasualties.\nLee, despite being outnumbered by a ratio of over two to one, won arguably his greatest victory of the war, sometimes described as his \"perfect battle.\" But he paid a terrible price for it, taking more casualties than he had lost in any previous battle, including the stalemate at the Battle of Antietam. With only 60,000 men engaged, he suffered 13,303 casualties (1,665 killed, 9,081 wounded, 2,018 missing), losing some 22% of his force in the campaign\u2014men that the Confederacy, with its limited manpower, could not replace. Just as seriously, he lost his most aggressive field commander, Stonewall Jackson. Brig. Gen. Elisha F. Paxton was the other Confederate general killed during the battle. After Longstreet rejoined the main army, he was highly critical of Lee's strategy, saying that battles like Chancellorsville cost the Confederacy more men than it could afford to lose.\nOf the 133,000 Union men engaged, 17,197 were casualties (1,606 killed, 9,672 wounded, 5,919 missing), a percentage much lower than Lee's, particularly considering that it includes 4,000 men of the XI Corps who were captured on May 2. When comparing only the killed and wounded, there were almost no differences between the Confederate and Federal losses at Chancellorsville. The Union lost three generals in the campaign: Maj. Gens. Hiram G. Berry and Amiel W. Whipple and Brig. Gen. Edmund Kirby.\nAssessment of Hooker.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLee's Chancellorsville consisted of a pastiche of unbelievably risky gambits that led to a great triumph. Hooker's campaign, after the brilliant opening movements, degenerated into a tale of opportunities missed and troops underutilized.\nRobert K. Krick, \"Lee's Greatest Victory\"\nHooker, who began the campaign believing he had \"80 chances in 100 to be successful\", lost the battle through miscommunication, the incompetence of some of his leading generals (most notably Howard and Stoneman, but also Sedgwick), but mostly through the collapse of his own confidence. Hooker's errors included abandoning his offensive push on May 1 and ordering Sickles to give up Hazel Grove and pull back on May 2. He also erred in his disposition of forces; despite Abraham Lincoln's exhortation, \"this time put in \"all\" your men,\" some 40,000 men of the Army of the Potomac scarcely fired a shot. When later asked why he had ordered a halt to his advance on May 1, Hooker is reputed to have responded, \"For the first time, I lost faith in Hooker.\" However, Stephen W. Sears has categorized this as a myth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing has been more damaging to General Joseph Hooker's military reputation than this, from John Bigelow's \"The Campaign of Chancellorsville\" (1910): \"A couple of months later, when Hooker crossed the Rappahannock [actually, the Potomac] with the Army of the Potomac in the Campaign of Gettysburg he was asked by General Doubleday: 'Hooker, what was the matter with you at Chancellorsville? ... Hooker answered frankly ... 'Doubleday ... For once I lost confidence in Hooker'.\"\nSears's research has shown that Bigelow was quoting from a letter written in 1903 by an E. P. Halstead, who was on the staff of Doubleday's I Corps division. There is no evidence that Hooker and Doubleday ever met during the Gettysburg campaign, and they could not have done so since they were dozens of miles apart. Finally, Doubleday made no mention of such a confession from Hooker in his history of the Chancellorsville campaign, published in 1882. Sears concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It can only be concluded that forty years after the event, elderly ex-staff officer Halstead was at best retailing some vaguely remembered campfire tale, and at worst manufacturing a role for himself in histories of the campaign... Whatever Joe Hooker's failings at Chancellorsville, he did not publicly confess them.\nLincoln later told Connecticut Representative Deming that he believed the war could have been terminated at Chancellorsville had Hooker managed the battle better: specifically, \"when Hooker failed to reinforce Sedgwick, after hearing his cannon...\" However, he added, \"I do not know that I could have given any different orders had I been with them myself. I have not fully made up my mind how I should behave when minie-balls were whistling, and those great oblong shells shrieking in my ear. I might run away.\"\nUnion reaction.\nThe Union was shocked by the defeat. President Abraham Lincoln was quoted as saying, \"My God! My God, what will the country say!?\" A few generals were career casualties. Hooker relieved Stoneman for incompetence and for years waged a vituperative campaign against Howard, whom he blamed for his loss. He wrote in 1876 that Howard was \"a hypocrite ... totally incompetent ... a perfect old woman ... a bad man.\" He labeled Sedgwick as \"dilatory.\" Couch was so disgusted by Hooker's conduct of the battle (and his incessant political maneuvering) that he resigned and was placed in charge of the Department of the Susquehanna, commanding only Pennsylvania militia.\nPresident Lincoln chose to retain Hooker in command of the army, but the friction between Lincoln, general in chief Henry W. Halleck, and Hooker became intolerable in the early days of what would become known as the Gettysburg campaign and Lincoln relieved Hooker of command on June 28, just before the Battle of Gettysburg. One of the consequences of Chancellorsville at Gettysburg was the conduct of Daniel Sickles, who undoubtedly recalled the terrible consequences of withdrawing from Hazel Grove when he decided to ignore the commands of his general and moved his lines on the second day of battle to ensure that a minor piece of high ground, the Peach Orchard, was not available to the enemy's artillery.\nConfederate reaction.\nThe Confederate public had mixed feelings about the result, joy at Lee's tactical victory tempered by the loss of their most beloved general, Stonewall Jackson. The death of Jackson caused Lee to make the long-needed reorganization of the Army of Northern Virginia from two large corps into three, under James Longstreet, Richard S. Ewell, and A.P. Hill. The new assignments for the latter two generals caused some command difficulties in the upcoming Gettysburg campaign, which began in June. Of more consequence for Gettysburg, however, was the supreme confidence that Lee gained from his great victory at Chancellorsville, that his army was virtually invincible and would succeed at anything he asked it to do.\nLee later wrote \"At Chancellorsville we gained another victory; our people were wild with delight\u2014I, on the contrary, was more depressed than after Fredericksburg; our loss was severe, and again we gained not an inch of ground and the enemy could not be pursued.\u201d\nBattlefield preservation.\nThe battlefield was a scene of widespread destruction, covered with dead men and animals. The Chancellor family, whose house was destroyed during the battle, placed the entire 854-acre property for sale four months after the battle. A smaller version of the house was rebuilt using some of the original materials, which served as a landmark for many of the veteran reunions of the late 19th century. In 1927, the rebuilt house was destroyed by fire. That same year, the United States Congress authorized the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park, which preserves some of the land that saw fighting in the 1862 Battle of Fredericksburg, the Chancellorsville campaign, the Battle of the Wilderness, and the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House (the latter two being key battles in the 1864 Overland Campaign).\nIn May 2002, a regional developer announced a plan to build 2,300 houses and 2,000,000 square feet of commercial space on the 790-acre Mullins Farm, site of the first day of fighting at the Battle of Chancellorsville. Soon thereafter, the American Battlefield Trust, then known as The Civil War Trust, formed the Coalition to Save Chancellorsville, a network of national and local preservation groups that waged a vocal campaign against the development.\nFor nearly a year, the Coalition mobilized local citizens, held candlelight vigils and hearings, and encouraged residents to become more involved in preservation. Public opinion polling conducted by the Coalition found that more than two-thirds of local residents opposed the development. The survey also found that 90 percent of local residents believed their county has a responsibility to protect Chancellorsville and other historic resources.\nAs a result of these efforts, in March 2003 the Spotsylvania County Board of Supervisors denied the rezoning application that would have allowed for the development of the site. Immediately following the vote, the Civil War Trust and other Coalition members began working to acquire the battlefield. By working with county officials and developers, the Trust acquired 140 acres in 2004 and another 74 acres in 2006. The American Battlefield Trust and its federal, state and local partners have acquired and preserved of the battlefield in more than 15 different transactions from 2002 through mid-2023.\nIn popular media.\nThe battle formed the basis for Stephen Crane's 1895 novel \"The Red Badge of Courage\".\nThe battle serves as the background for one of F. Scott Fitzgerald's short stories, published in the February 1935 Esquire Magazine, entitled \"The Night at Chancellorsville.\"\nThe Battle of Chancellorsville was depicted in the 2003 film \"Gods and Generals\", based on the novel of the same name. The treatment of the battle in both the novel and the movie focuses on Jackson's assault on the Union right flank, his wounding, and his subsequent death.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48781", "revid": "44096033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48781", "title": "Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica", "text": "1687 work by Isaac Newton\n' (English: \"The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\"), often referred to as simply the ' (), is a book by Sir Isaac Newton that expounds Newton's laws of motion and his law of universal gravitation. The \"Principia\" is written in Latin and comprises three volumes, and was authorized, imprimatur, by Samuel Pepys, then-President of the Royal Society on 5 July 1686 and first published in 1687.\nThe is considered one of the most important works in the history of science. The French mathematical physicist Alexis Clairaut assessed it in 1747: \"The famous book of \"Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\" marked the epoch of a great revolution in physics. The method followed by its illustrious author Sir Newton ... spread the light of mathematics on a science which up to then had remained in the darkness of conjectures and hypotheses.\" The French scientist Joseph-Louis Lagrange described it as \"the greatest production of the human mind\". French polymath Pierre-Simon Laplace stated that \"The \"Principia\" is pre-eminent above any other production of human genius\". Newton's work has also been called \"the greatest scientific work in history\", and \"the supreme expression in human thought of the mind's ability to hold the universe fixed as an object of contemplation\". Mathematician Eric Temple Bell wrote \"It is no miracle then, when the power of Newton's mathematical genius is taken into account, the \"Principia\" is the unsurpassed masterpiece of both scientific coordination and the art of scientific prediction that it is.\"\nMathematician George F. Simmons wrote of the immense impact and influence of \"Principia\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this one book\u2013perhaps the greatest of all scientific treatises\u2013his success in using mathematical methods to explain the most diverse natural phenomena was so profound and far-reaching that he essentially created the sciences of physics and astronomy where only a handful of disconnected observations and simple inferences had existed before. These achievements launched the modern age of science and technology and radically altered the direction of human history.A more recent assessment has been that while acceptance of Newton's laws was not immediate, by the end of the century after publication in 1687, \"no one could deny that [out of the ] a science had emerged that, at least in certain respects, so far exceeded anything that had ever gone before that it stood alone as the ultimate exemplar of science generally\". A 2020 study established a new census of owners of the first edition of the \"Principia\", identifying 387 copies, significantly more than the long-held estimate of about 250. This new count suggests a much wider initial readership and a greater early impact on Enlightenment science, contrary to prior assumptions of its scarcity and limited early impact.\nThe forms a mathematical foundation for the theory of classical mechanics. Among other achievements, it explains Johannes Kepler's laws of planetary motion, which Kepler had first obtained empirically. In formulating his physical laws, Newton developed and used mathematical methods now included in the field of calculus, expressing them in the form of geometric propositions about \"vanishingly small\" shapes. In a revised conclusion to the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;, Newton emphasized the empirical nature of the work with the expression \"Hypotheses non fingo\" (\"I frame/feign no hypotheses\").\nAfter annotating and correcting his personal copy of the first edition, Newton published two further editions, during 1713 with errors of the 1687 corrected, and an improved version of 1726.\nContents.\nExpressed aim and topics covered.\nThe Preface of the work states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... Rational Mechanics will be the sciences of motion resulting from any forces whatsoever, and of the forces required to produce any motion, accurately proposed and demonstrated ... And therefore we offer this work as mathematical principles of his philosophy. For all the difficulty of philosophy seems to consist in this\u2014from the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of Nature, and then from these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena ...\nNewton situates himself within the contemporary scientific movement which had \"omit[ed] substantial forms and the occult qualities\" and instead endeavoured to explain the world by empirical investigation and outlining of empirical regularities.\nThe \"Principia\" deals primarily with massive bodies in motion, initially under a variety of conditions and hypothetical laws of force in both non-resisting and resisting media, thus offering criteria to decide, by observations, which laws of force are operating in phenomena that may be observed. It attempts to cover hypothetical or possible motions both of celestial bodies and of terrestrial projectiles. It explores difficult problems of motions perturbed by multiple attractive forces. Its third and final book deals with the interpretation of observations about the movements of planets and their satellites.\nThe book:\nThe opening sections of the \"Principia\" contain, in revised and extended form, nearly all of the content of Newton's 1684 tract \"De motu corporum in gyrum\".\nThe \"Principia\" begin with \"Definitions\" and \"Axioms or Laws of Motion\", and continues in three books:\nBook 1, \"De motu corporum\".\nBook 1, subtitled \"De motu corporum\" (\"On the motion of bodies\") concerns motion in the absence of any resisting medium. It opens with a collection of mathematical lemmas on \"the method of first and last ratios\", a geometrical form of infinitesimal calculus.\nThe second section establishes relationships between centripetal forces and the law of areas now known as Kepler's second law (Propositions 1\u20133), and relates circular velocity and radius of path-curvature to radial force (Proposition 4), and relationships between centripetal forces varying as the inverse-square of the distance to the center and orbits of conic-section form (Propositions 5\u201310).\nPropositions 11\u201331 establish properties of motion in paths of eccentric conic-section form including ellipses, and their relationship with inverse-square central forces directed to a focus and include Newton's theorem about ovals (lemma 28).\nPropositions 43\u201345 are demonstration that in an eccentric orbit under centripetal force where the apse may move, a steady non-moving orientation of the line of apses is an indicator of an inverse-square law of force.\nBook 1 contains some proofs with little connection to real-world dynamics. But there are also sections with far-reaching application to the solar system and universe:\nPropositions 57\u201369 deal with the \"motion of bodies drawn to one another by centripetal forces\". This section is of primary interest for its application to the Solar System, and includes Proposition 66 along with its 22 corollaries: here Newton took the first steps in the definition and study of the problem of the movements of three massive bodies subject to their mutually perturbing gravitational attractions, a problem which later gained name and fame (among other reasons, for its great difficulty) as the three-body problem.\nPropositions 70\u201384 deal with the attractive forces of spherical bodies. The section contains Newton's proof that a massive spherically symmetrical body attracts other bodies outside itself as if all its mass were concentrated at its centre. This fundamental result, called the Shell theorem, enables the inverse square law of gravitation to be applied to the real solar system to a very close degree of approximation.\nBook 2, part 2 of \"De motu corporum\".\nPart of the contents originally planned for the first book was divided out into a second book, which largely concerns motion through resisting mediums. Just as Newton examined consequences of different conceivable laws of attraction in Book 1, here he examines different conceivable laws of resistance; thus discusses resistance in direct proportion to velocity, and goes on to examine the implications of resistance in proportion to the square of velocity. Book 2 also discusses (in ) hydrostatics and the properties of compressible fluids; Newton also derives Boyle's law (incorrectly; for an ideal gas is not like an elastic fluid). The effects of air resistance on pendulums are studied in , along with Newton's account of experiments that he carried out, to try to find out some characteristics of air resistance in reality by observing the motions of pendulums under different conditions. Newton compares the resistance offered by a medium against motions of globes with different properties (material, weight, size). In Section 8, he derives rules to determine the speed of waves in fluids and relates them to the density and condensation (Proposition 48; this would become very important in acoustics). He assumes that these rules apply equally to light and sound and estimates that the speed of sound is around 1088 feet per second and can increase depending on the amount of water in air.\nLess of Book 2 has stood the test of time than of Books 1 and 3, and it has been said that Book 2 was largely written to refute a theory of Descartes which had some wide acceptance before Newton's work (and for some time after). According to Descartes's theory of vortices, planetary motions were produced by the whirling of fluid vortices that filled interplanetary space and carried the planets along with them. Newton concluded Book 2 by commenting that the hypothesis of vortices was completely at odds with the astronomical phenomena, and served not so much to explain as to confuse them.\nBook 3, \"De mundi systemate\".\nBook 3, subtitled \"De mundi systemate\" (\"On the system of the world\"), is an exposition of many consequences of universal gravitation, especially its consequences for astronomy. It builds upon the propositions of the previous books and applies them with further specificity than in Book 1 to the motions observed in the Solar System. Here (introduced by Proposition 22, and continuing in Propositions 25\u201335) are developed several of the features and irregularities of the orbital motion of the Moon, especially the variation. Newton lists the astronomical observations on which he relies, and establishes in a stepwise manner that the inverse square law of mutual gravitation applies to Solar System bodies, starting with the satellites of Jupiter and going on by stages to show that the law is of universal application. He also gives starting at Lemma 4 and Proposition 40 the theory of the motions of comets, for which much data came from John Flamsteed and Edmond Halley, and accounts for the tides, attempting quantitative estimates of the contributions of the Sun and Moon to the tidal motions; and offers the first theory of the precession of the equinoxes. Book 3 also considers the harmonic oscillator in three dimensions, and motion in arbitrary force laws.\nIn Book 3 Newton also made clear his heliocentric view of the Solar System, modified in a somewhat modern way, since already in the mid-1680s he recognised the \"deviation of the Sun\" from the centre of gravity of the Solar System. For Newton, \"the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World\", and that this centre \"either is at rest, or moves uniformly forward in a right line\". Newton rejected the second alternative after adopting the position that \"the centre of the system of the world is immoveable\", which \"is acknowledg'd by all, while some contend that the Earth, others, that the Sun is fix'd in that centre\". Newton estimated the mass ratios Sun:Jupiter and Sun:Saturn, and pointed out that these put the centre of the Sun usually a little way off the common center of gravity, but only a little, the distance at most \"would scarcely amount to one diameter of the Sun\".\nCommentary on the \"Principia\".\nThe sequence of definitions used in setting up dynamics in the \"Principia\" is recognisable in many textbooks today. Newton first set out the definition of mass\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The quantity of matter is that which arises conjointly from its density and magnitude. A body twice as dense in double the space is quadruple in quantity. This quantity I designate by the name of body or of mass.\nThis was then used to define the \"quantity of motion\" (today called momentum), and the principle of inertia in which mass replaces the previous Cartesian notion of \"intrinsic force\". This then set the stage for the introduction of forces through the change in momentum of a body. Curiously, for today's readers, the exposition looks dimensionally incorrect, since Newton does not introduce the dimension of time in rates of changes of quantities.\nHe defined space and time \"not as they are well known to all\". Instead, he defined \"true\" time and space as \"absolute\" and explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Only I must observe, that the vulgar conceive those quantities under no other notions but from the relation they bear to perceptible objects. And it will be convenient to distinguish them into absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathematical and common. ... instead of absolute places and motions, we use relative ones; and that without any inconvenience in common affairs; but in philosophical discussions, we ought to step back from our senses, and consider things themselves, distinct from what are only perceptible measures of them.\nTo some modern readers it can appear that some dynamical quantities recognised today were used in the \"Principia\" but not named. The mathematical aspects of the first two books were so clearly consistent that they were easily accepted; for example, John Locke asked Christiaan Huygens whether he could trust the mathematical proofs and was assured about their correctness.\nHowever, the concept of an attractive force acting at a distance received a cooler response. In his notes, Newton wrote that the inverse square law arose naturally due to the structure of matter. However, he retracted this sentence in the published version, where he stated that the motion of planets is consistent with an inverse square law, but refused to speculate on the origin of the law. Huygens and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz noted that the law was incompatible with the notion of the aether. From a Cartesian point of view, therefore, this was a faulty theory. Newton's defence has been adopted since by many famous physicists\u2014he pointed out that the mathematical form of the theory had to be correct since it explained the data, and he refused to speculate further on the basic nature of gravity. The sheer number of phenomena that could be organised by the theory was so impressive that younger \"philosophers\" soon adopted the methods and language of the \"Principia\".\nRules of Reason.\nPerhaps to reduce the risk of public misunderstanding, Newton included at the beginning of Book 3 (in the second (1713) and third (1726) editions) a section titled \"Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy\". In the four rules, as they came finally to stand in the 1726 edition, Newton effectively offers a methodology for handling unknown phenomena in nature and reaching towards explanations for them. The four Rules of the 1726 edition run as follows (omitting some explanatory comments that follow each):\nThis section of Rules for philosophy is followed by a listing of \"Phenomena\", in which are listed a number of mainly astronomical observations, that Newton used as the basis for inferences later on, as if adopting a consensus set of facts from the astronomers of his time.\nBoth the \"Rules\" and the \"Phenomena\" evolved from one edition of the \"Principia\" to the next. Rule 4 made its appearance in the third (1726) edition; Rules 1\u20133 were present as \"Rules\" in the second (1713) edition, and predecessors of them were also present in the first edition of 1687, but there they had a different heading: they were not given as \"Rules\", but rather in the first (1687) edition the predecessors of the three later \"Rules\", and of most of the later \"Phenomena\", were all lumped together under a single heading \"Hypotheses\" (in which the third item was the predecessor of a heavy revision that gave the later Rule 3).\nFrom this textual evolution, it appears that Newton wanted by the later headings \"Rules\" and \"Phenomena\" to clarify for his readers his view of the roles to be played by these various statements.\nIn the third (1726) edition of the \"Principia\", Newton explains each rule in an alternative way and/or gives an example to back up what the rule is claiming. The first rule is explained as a philosophers' principle of economy. The second rule states that if one cause is assigned to a natural effect, then the same cause so far as possible must be assigned to natural effects of the same kind: for example, respiration in humans and in animals, fires in the home and in the Sun, or the reflection of light whether it occurs terrestrially or from the planets. An extensive explanation is given of the third rule, concerning the qualities of bodies, and Newton discusses here the generalisation of observational results, with a caution against making up fancies contrary to experiments, and use of the rules to illustrate the observation of gravity and space.\nGeneral Scholium.\nThe \"General Scholium\" is a concluding essay added to the second edition, 1713 (and amended in the third edition, 1726). It is not to be confused with the \"General Scholium\" at the end of Book 2, Section 6, which discusses his pendulum experiments and resistance due to air, water, and other fluids.\nHere Newton used the expression hypotheses non fingo, \"I formulate no hypotheses\", in response to criticisms of the first edition of the \"Principia\". (\"Fingo\" is sometimes nowadays translated \"feign\" rather than the traditional \"frame,\" although \"feign\" does not properly translate \"fingo\"). Newton's gravitational attraction, an invisible force able to act over vast distances, had led to criticism that he had introduced \"occult agencies\" into science. Newton firmly rejected such criticisms and wrote that it was enough that the phenomena implied gravitational attraction, as they did; but the phenomena did not so far indicate the cause of this gravity, and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame hypotheses of things not implied by the phenomena: such hypotheses \"have no place in experimental philosophy\", in contrast to the proper way in which \"particular propositions are inferr'd from the phenomena and afterwards rendered general by induction\".\nNewton also underlined his criticism of the vortex theory of planetary motions, of Descartes, pointing to its incompatibility with the highly eccentric orbits of comets, which carry them \"through all parts of the heavens indifferently\".\nNewton also gave theological argument. From the system of the world, he inferred the existence of a god, along lines similar to what is sometimes called the argument from intelligent or purposive design. It has been suggested that Newton gave \"an oblique argument for a unitarian conception of God and an implicit attack on the doctrine of the Trinity\". The General Scholium does not address or attempt to refute the church doctrine; it simply does not mention Jesus, the Holy Ghost, or the hypothesis of the Trinity.\nPublishing the book.\nHalley and Newton's initial stimulus.\nIn January 1684, Edmond Halley, Christopher Wren and Robert Hooke had a conversation in which Hooke claimed to not only have derived the inverse-square law but also all the laws of planetary motion. Wren was unconvinced, Hooke did not produce the claimed derivation although the others gave him time to do it, and Halley, who could derive the inverse-square law for the restricted circular case (by substituting Kepler's relation into Huygens' formula for the centrifugal force) but failed to derive the relation generally, resolved to ask Newton.\nHalley's visits to Newton in 1684 thus resulted from Halley's debates about planetary motion with Wren and Hooke, and they seem to have provided Newton with the incentive and spur to develop and write what became \"Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica\". Halley was at that time a Fellow and Council member of the Royal Society in London (positions that in 1686 he resigned to become the Society's paid Clerk). Halley's visit to Newton in Cambridge in 1684 probably occurred in August. When Halley asked Newton's opinion on the problem of planetary motions discussed earlier that year between Halley, Hooke and Wren, Newton surprised Halley by saying that he had already made the derivations some time ago; but that he could not find the papers. (Matching accounts of this meeting come from Halley and the French mathematician Abraham de Moivre, in whom Newton had confided.) Halley then had to wait for Newton to \"find\" the results, and in November 1684 Newton sent Halley an amplified version of whatever previous work Newton had done on the subject. This took the form of a 9-page manuscript, \"De motu corporum in gyrum\" (\"Of the motion of bodies in an orbit\"): the title is shown on some surviving copies, although the (lost) original may have been without a title.\nNewton's tract \"De motu corporum in gyrum\", which he sent to Halley in late 1684, derived what is now known as the three laws of Kepler, assuming an inverse square law of force, and generalised the result to conic sections. It also extended the methodology by adding the solution of a problem on the motion of a body through a resisting medium. The contents of \"De motu\" so excited Halley by their mathematical and physical originality and far-reaching implications for astronomical theory, that he immediately went to visit Newton again, in November 1684, to ask Newton to let the Royal Society have more of such work. The results of their meetings clearly helped to stimulate Newton with the enthusiasm needed to take his investigations of mathematical problems much further in this area of physical science, and he did so in a period of highly concentrated work that lasted at least until mid-1686.\nNewton's single-minded attention to his work generally, and to his project during this time, is shown by later reminiscences from his secretary and copyist of the period, Humphrey Newton. His account tells of Isaac Newton's absorption in his studies, how he sometimes forgot his food, or his sleep, or the state of his clothes, and how when he took a walk in his garden he would sometimes rush back to his room with some new thought, not even waiting to sit before beginning to write it down. Other evidence also shows Newton's absorption in the \"Principia\": Newton for years kept up a regular programme of chemical or alchemical experiments, and he normally kept dated notes of them, but for a period from May 1684 to April 1686, Newton's chemical notebooks have no entries at all. So, it seems that Newton abandoned pursuits to which he was formally dedicated and did very little else for well over a year and a half, but concentrated on developing and writing what became his great work.\nThe first of the three constituent books was sent to Halley for the printer in spring 1686, and the other two books somewhat later. The complete work, published by Halley at his own financial risk, appeared in July 1687. Newton had also communicated \"De motu\" to Flamsteed, and during the period of composition, he exchanged a few letters with Flamsteed about observational data on the planets, eventually acknowledging Flamsteed's contributions in the published version of the \"Principia\" of 1687.\nPreliminary version.\nThe process of writing that first edition of the \"Principia\" went through several stages and drafts: some parts of the preliminary materials still survive, while others are lost except for fragments and cross-references in other documents.\nSurviving materials show that Newton (up to some time in 1685) conceived his book as a two-volume work. The first volume was to be titled \"De motu corporum, Liber primus\", with contents that later appeared in extended form as Book 1 of the \"Principia\".\nA fair-copy draft of Newton's planned second volume \"De motu corporum, Liber Secundus\" survives, its completion dated to about the summer of 1685. It covers the application of the results of \"Liber primus\" to the Earth, the Moon, the tides, the Solar System, and the universe; in this respect, it has much the same purpose as the final Book 3 of the \"Principia\", but it is written much less formally and is more easily read.\nIt is not known just why Newton changed his mind so radically about the final form of what had been a readable narrative in \"De motu corporum, Liber Secundus\" of 1685, but he largely started afresh in a new, tighter, and less accessible mathematical style, eventually to produce Book 3 of the \"Principia\" as we know it. Newton frankly admitted that this change of style was deliberate when he wrote that he had (first) composed this book \"in a popular method, that it might be read by many\", but to \"prevent the disputes\" by readers who could not \"lay aside the[ir] prejudices\", he had \"reduced\" it \"into the form of propositions (in the mathematical way) which should be read by those only, who had first made themselves masters of the principles established in the preceding books\". The final Book 3 also contained in addition some further important quantitative results arrived at by Newton in the meantime, especially about the theory of the motions of comets, and some of the perturbations of the motions of the Moon.\nThe result was numbered Book 3 of the \"Principia\" rather than Book 2 because in the meantime, drafts of \"Liber primus\" had expanded and Newton had divided it into two books. The new and final Book 2 was concerned largely with the motions of bodies through resisting mediums.\nBut the \"Liber Secundus\" of 1685 can still be read today. Even after it was superseded by Book 3 of the \"Principia\", it survived complete, in more than one manuscript. After Newton's death in 1727, the relatively accessible character of its writing encouraged the publication of an English translation in 1728 (by persons still unknown, not authorised by Newton's heirs). It appeared under the English title \"A Treatise of the System of the World\". This had some amendments relative to Newton's manuscript of 1685, mostly to remove cross-references that used obsolete numbering to cite the propositions of an early draft of Book 1 of the \"Principia\". Newton's heirs shortly afterwards published the Latin version in their possession, also in 1728, under the (new) title \"De Mundi Systemate\", amended to update cross-references, citations and diagrams to those of the later editions of the \"Principia\", making it look superficially as if it had been written by Newton after the \"Principia\", rather than before. The \"System of the World\" was sufficiently popular to stimulate two revisions (with similar changes as in the Latin printing), a second edition (1731), and a \"corrected\" reprint of the second edition (1740).\nHalley's role as publisher.\nThe text of the first of the three books of the \"Principia\" was presented to the Royal Society at the close of April 1686. Hooke made some priority claims (but failed to substantiate them), causing some delay. When Hooke's claim was made known to Newton, who hated disputes, Newton threatened to withdraw and suppress Book 3 altogether, but Halley, showing considerable diplomatic skills, tactfully persuaded Newton to withdraw his threat and let it go forward to publication. Samuel Pepys, as president, gave his imprimatur on 30 June 1686, licensing the book for publication. The Society had just spent its book budget on \"De Historia piscium\", and the cost of publication was borne by Edmund Halley (who was also then acting as publisher of the \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\"): the book appeared in summer 1687. After Halley had personally financed the publication of \"Principia\", he was informed that the society could no longer afford to provide him the promised annual salary of \u00a350. Instead, Halley was paid with leftover copies of \"De Historia piscium\".\nHistorical context.\nBeginnings of the Scientific Revolution.\nNicolaus Copernicus had moved the Earth away from the center of the universe with the heliocentric theory for which he presented evidence in his book \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\" (\"On the revolutions of the heavenly spheres\") published in 1543. Johannes Kepler wrote the book \"Astronomia nova\" (\"A new astronomy\") in 1609, setting out the evidence that planets move in elliptical orbits with the Sun at one focus, and that planets do not move with constant speed along this orbit. Rather, their speed varies so that the line joining the centres of the sun and a planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times. To these two laws he added a third a decade later, in his 1619 book \"Harmonices Mundi\" (\"Harmonies of the world\"). This law sets out a proportionality between the third power of the characteristic distance of a planet from the Sun and the square of the length of its year.\nThe foundation of modern dynamics was set out in Galileo's book \"Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo\" (\"Dialogue on the two main world systems\") where the notion of inertia was implicit and used. In addition, Galileo's experiments with inclined planes had yielded precise mathematical relations between elapsed time and acceleration, velocity or distance for uniform and uniformly accelerated motion of bodies.\nDescartes' book of 1644 \"Principia philosophiae\" (\"Principles of philosophy\") stated that bodies can act on each other only through contact: a principle that induced people, among them himself, to hypothesize a universal medium as the carrier of interactions such as light and gravity\u2014the aether. Newton was criticized for apparently introducing forces that acted at distance without any medium. Not until the development of particle theory was Descartes' notion vindicated when it was possible to describe all interactions, like the strong, weak, and electromagnetic fundamental interactions, using mediating gauge bosons and gravity through hypothesized gravitons.\nNewton's role.\nNewton had studied these books, or, in some cases, secondary sources based on them, and taken notes entitled \"Quaestiones quaedam philosophicae\" (\"Questions about philosophy\") during his days as an undergraduate. During this period (1664\u20131666) he created the basis of calculus and performed the first experiments in the optics of colour. At this time, his proof that white light was a combination of primary colours (found via prismatics) replaced the prevailing theory of colours and received an overwhelmingly favourable response and occasioned bitter disputes with Robert Hooke and others, which forced him to sharpen his ideas to the point where he already composed sections of his later book \"Opticks\" by the 1670s in response. Work on calculus is shown in various papers and letters, including two to Leibniz. He became a fellow of the Royal Society and the second Lucasian Professor of Mathematics (succeeding Isaac Barrow) at Trinity College, Cambridge.\nNewton's early work on motion.\nIn the 1660s Newton studied the motion of colliding bodies and deduced that the centre of mass of two colliding bodies remains in uniform motion. Surviving manuscripts of the 1660s also show Newton's interest in planetary motion and that by 1669 he had shown, for a circular case of planetary motion, that the force he called \"endeavour to recede\" (now called centrifugal force) had an inverse-square relation with distance from the center. After his 1679\u20131680 correspondence with Hooke, described below, Newton adopted the language of inward or centripetal force. According to Newton scholar J. Bruce Brackenridge, although much has been made of the change in language and difference of point of view, as between centrifugal or centripetal forces, the actual computations and proofs remained the same either way. They also involved the combination of tangential and radial displacements, which Newton was making in the 1660s. The difference between the centrifugal and centripetal points of view, though a significant change of perspective, did not change the analysis. Newton also clearly expressed the concept of linear inertia in the 1660s: for this Newton was indebted to Descartes' work published 1644.\nControversy with Hooke.\nHooke published his ideas about gravitation in the 1660s and again in 1674. He argued for an attracting principle of gravitation in \"Micrographia\" of 1665, in a 1666 Royal Society lecture \"On gravity\", and again in 1674, when he published his ideas about the \"System of the World\" in somewhat developed form, as an addition to \"An Attempt to Prove the Motion of the Earth from Observations\". Hooke clearly postulated mutual attractions between the Sun and planets, in a way that increased with nearness to the attracting body, along with a principle of linear inertia. Hooke's statements up to 1674 made no mention, however, that an inverse square law applies or might apply to these attractions. Hooke's gravitation was also not yet universal, though it approached universality more closely than previous hypotheses. Hooke also did not provide accompanying evidence or mathematical demonstration. On these two aspects, Hooke stated in 1674: \"Now what these several degrees [of gravitational attraction] are I have not yet experimentally verified\" (indicating that he did not yet know what law the gravitation might follow); and as to his whole proposal: \"This I only hint at present\", \"having my self many other things in hand which I would first compleat, and therefore cannot so well attend it\" (i.e., \"prosecuting this Inquiry\").\nIn November 1679, Hooke began an exchange of letters with Newton, of which the full text is now published. Hooke told Newton that Hooke had been appointed to manage the Royal Society's correspondence, and wished to hear from members about their researches, or their views about the researches of others; and as if to whet Newton's interest, he asked what Newton thought about various matters, giving a whole list, mentioning \"compounding the celestial motions of the planets of a direct motion by the tangent and an attractive motion towards the central body\", and \"my hypothesis of the lawes or causes of springinesse\", and then a new hypothesis from Paris about planetary motions (which Hooke described at length), and then efforts to carry out or improve national surveys, the difference of latitude between London and Cambridge, and other items. Newton's reply offered \"a fansy of my own\" about a terrestrial experiment (not a proposal about celestial motions) which might detect the Earth's motion, by the use of a body first suspended in air and then dropped to let it fall. The main point was to indicate how Newton thought the falling body could experimentally reveal the Earth's motion by its direction of deviation from the vertical, but he went on hypothetically to consider how its motion could continue if the solid Earth had not been in the way (on a spiral path to the centre). Hooke disagreed with Newton's idea of how the body would continue to move. A short further correspondence developed, and towards the end of it Hooke, writing on 6 January 1680 to Newton, communicated his \"supposition ... that the Attraction always is in a duplicate proportion to the Distance from the Center Reciprocall, and Consequently that the Velocity will be in a subduplicate proportion to the Attraction and Consequently as Kepler Supposes Reciprocall to the Distance.\" (Hooke's inference about the velocity was actually incorrect.)\nIn 1686, when the first book of Newton's \"Principia\" was presented to the Royal Society, Hooke claimed that Newton had obtained from him the \"notion\" of \"the rule of the decrease of Gravity, being reciprocally as the squares of the distances from the Center\". At the same time (according to Edmond Halley's contemporary report) Hooke agreed that \"the Demonstration of the Curves generated therby\" was wholly Newton's.\nA recent assessment about the early history of the inverse square law is that \"by the late 1660s\", the assumption of an \"inverse proportion between gravity and the square of distance was rather common and had been advanced by a number of different people for different reasons\". Newton himself had shown in the 1660s that for planetary motion under a circular assumption, force in the radial direction had an inverse-square relation with distance from the center. Newton, faced in May 1686 with Hooke's claim on the inverse square law, denied that Hooke was to be credited as author of the idea, giving reasons including the citation of prior work by others before Hooke. Newton also firmly claimed that even if it had happened that he had first heard of the inverse square proportion from Hooke, which it had not, he would still have some rights to it in view of his mathematical developments and demonstrations, which enabled observations to be relied on as evidence of its accuracy, while Hooke, without mathematical demonstrations and evidence in favour of the supposition, could only guess (according to Newton) that it was approximately valid \"at great distances from the center\".\nThe background described above shows there was basis for Newton to deny deriving the inverse square law from Hooke. On the other hand, Newton did accept and acknowledge, in all editions of the \"Principia\", that Hooke (but not exclusively Hooke) had separately appreciated the inverse square law in the Solar System. Newton acknowledged Wren, Hooke and Halley in this connection in the Scholium to Proposition 4 in Book 1. Newton also acknowledged to Halley that his correspondence with Hooke in 1679\u201380 had reawakened his dormant interest in astronomical matters, but that did not mean, according to Newton, that Hooke had told Newton anything new or original: \"yet am I not beholden to him for any light into that business but only for the diversion he gave me from my other studies to think on these things &amp; for his dogmaticalness in writing as if he had found the motion in the Ellipsis, which inclined me to try it ...\".) Newton's reawakening interest in astronomy received further stimulus by the appearance of a comet in the winter of 1680/1681, on which he corresponded with John Flamsteed.\nIn 1759, decades after the deaths of both Newton and Hooke, Alexis Clairaut, mathematical astronomer eminent in his own right in the field of gravitational studies, made his assessment after reviewing what Hooke had published on gravitation. \"One must not think that this idea ... of Hooke diminishes Newton's glory\", Clairaut wrote; \"The example of Hooke\" serves \"to show what a distance there is between a truth that is glimpsed and a truth that is demonstrated\".\nLocation of early edition copies.\nIt has been estimated that as many as 750 copies of the first edition were printed by the Royal Society, and \"it is quite remarkable that so many copies of this small first edition are still in existence ... but it may be because the original Latin text was more revered than read\". A survey published in 1953 located 189 surviving copies with nearly 200 further copies located by the most recent survey published in 2020, suggesting that the initial print run was larger than previously thought. However, more recent book historical and bibliographical research has examined those prior claims, and concludes that Macomber's earlier estimation of 500 copies is likely correct.\nIn 2016, a first edition sold for $3.7 million.\nThe second edition (1713) were printed in 750 copies, and the third edition (1726) were printed in 1,250 copies.\nA facsimile edition (based on the 3rd edition of 1726 but with variant readings from earlier editions and important annotations) was published in 1972 by Alexandre Koyr\u00e9 and I. Bernard Cohen.\nLater editions.\nSecond edition, 1713.\nTwo later editions were published by Newton: Newton had been urged to make a new edition of the \"Principia\" since the early 1690s, partly because copies of the first edition had already become very rare and expensive within a few years after 1687. Newton referred to his plans for a second edition in correspondence with Flamsteed in November 1694. Newton also maintained annotated copies of the first edition specially bound up with interleaves on which he could note his revisions; two of these copies still survive, but he had not completed the revisions by 1708. Newton had almost severed connections with one would-be editor, Nicolas Fatio de Duillier, and another, David Gregory seems not to have met with his approval and was also terminally ill, dying in 1708. Nevertheless, reasons were accumulating not to put off the new edition any longer. Richard Bentley, master of Trinity College, persuaded Newton to allow him to undertake a second edition, and in June 1708 Bentley wrote to Newton with a specimen print of the first sheet, at the same time expressing the (unfulfilled) hope that Newton had made progress towards finishing the revisions. It seems that Bentley then realised that the editorship was technically too difficult for him, and with Newton's consent he appointed Roger Cotes, Plumian professor of astronomy at Trinity, to undertake the editorship for him as a kind of deputy (but Bentley still made the publishing arrangements and had the financial responsibility and profit). The correspondence of 1709\u20131713 shows Cotes reporting to two masters, Bentley and Newton, and managing (and often correcting) a large and important set of revisions to which Newton sometimes could not give his full attention. Under the weight of Cotes' efforts, but impeded by priority disputes between Newton and Leibniz, and by troubles at the Mint, Cotes was able to announce publication to Newton on 30 June 1713. Bentley sent Newton only six presentation copies; Cotes was unpaid; Newton omitted any acknowledgement to Cotes.\nAmong those who gave Newton corrections for the Second Edition were: Firmin Abauzit, Roger Cotes and David Gregory. However, Newton omitted acknowledgements to some because of the priority disputes. John Flamsteed, the Astronomer Royal, suffered this especially.\nThe Second Edition was the basis of the first edition to be printed abroad, which appeared in Amsterdam in 1714.\nThird edition, 1726.\nAfter his serious illness in 1722 and after the appearance of a reprint of the second edition in Amsterdam in 1723, the 80-year-old Newton began to revise once again the Principia in the autumn of 1723. The third edition was published 25 March 1726, under the stewardship of \"Henry Pemberton, M.D., a man of the greatest skill in these matters...\"; Pemberton later said that this recognition was worth more to him than the two hundred guinea award from Newton.\nIn 1739\u20131742, two French priests, P\u00e8res Thomas LeSeur and Fran\u00e7ois Jacquier (of the Minim order, but sometimes erroneously identified as Jesuits), produced with the assistance of J.-L. Calandrini an extensively annotated version of the \"Principia\" in the 3rd edition of 1726. Sometimes this is referred to as the \"Jesuit edition\": it was much used, and reprinted more than once in Scotland during the 19th century.\n\u00c9milie du Ch\u00e2telet also made a translation of Newton's \"Principia\" into French. Unlike LeSeur and Jacquier's edition, hers was a complete translation of Newton's three books and their prefaces. She also included a Commentary section where she fused the three books into a much clearer and easier to understand summary. She included an analytical section where she applied the new mathematics of calculus to Newton's most controversial theories. Previously, geometry was the standard mathematics used to analyse theories. Du Ch\u00e2telet's translation is the only complete one to have been done in French and hers remains the standard French translation to this day.\nTranslations.\nFour full English translations of Newton's \"Principia\" have appeared, all based on Newton's 3rd edition of 1726. The first, from 1729, by Andrew Motte, was described by Newton scholar I. Bernard Cohen (in 1968) as \"still of enormous value in conveying to us the sense of Newton's words in their own time, and it is generally faithful to the original: clear, and well written\". The 1729 version was the basis for several republications, often incorporating revisions, among them a widely used modernised English version of 1934, which appeared under the editorial name of Florian Cajori (though completed and published only some years after his death). Cohen pointed out ways in which the 18th-century terminology and punctuation of the 1729 translation might be confusing to modern readers, but he also made severe criticisms of the 1934 modernised English version, and showed that the revisions had been made without regard to the original, also demonstrating gross errors \"that provided the final impetus to our decision to produce a wholly new translation\".\nThe second full English translation, into modern English, is the work that resulted from this decision by collaborating translators I. Bernard Cohen, Anne Whitman, and Julia Budenz; it was published in 1999 with a guide by way of introduction.\nThe third such translation is due to Ian Bruce, and appears, with many other translations of mathematical works of the 17th and 18th centuries, on his website.\nThe fourth complete English translation is due to Charles Leedham-Green, professor emeritus of mathematics at Queen Mary University of London, and was published in 2021 by Cambridge University Press. Prof. Leedham-Green was motivated to produce that translation, on which he worked for twenty years, in part because of his dissatisfaction with the work of Cohen, Whitman, and Budenz, whose translation of the \"Principia\" he found unnecessarily obscure. Leedham-Green's aim was to convey Newton's own reasoning and arguments in a way intelligible to a modern mathematical scientist. His translation is heavily annotated and his explanatory notes make use of the modern secondary literature on some of the more difficult technical aspects of Newton's work.\nDana Densmore and William H. Donahue have published a translation of the work's central argument, published in 1996, along with expansion of included proofs and ample commentary. The book was developed as a textbook for classes at St. John's College and the aim of this translation is to be faithful to the Latin text.\nVaria.\nIn 1977, the spacecraft Voyager 1 and 2 left earth for the interstellar space carrying a picture of a page from Newton's \"Principia Mathematica\", as part of the Golden Record, a collection of messages from humanity to extraterrestrials.\nIn 2014, British astronaut Tim Peake named his upcoming mission to the International Space Station \"Principia\" after the book, in \"honour of Britain's greatest scientist\". Tim Peake's \"Principia\" launched on 15 December 2015 aboard Soyuz TMA-19M.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nLatin versions.\nFirst edition (1687)\nSecond edition (1713)\nThird edition (1726)\nLater Latin editions"}
{"id": "48783", "revid": "478773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48783", "title": "Second-order desire", "text": ""}
{"id": "48784", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48784", "title": "Tourette's Disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "48785", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48785", "title": "Ontological distinction", "text": ""}
{"id": "48786", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48786", "title": "Polyvinylpyrrolidone", "text": "Water-soluble polymer\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPolyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), also commonly called povidone, is a water-soluble polymer compound made from the monomer \"N\"-vinylpyrrolidone. PVP is available in a range of molecular weights and related viscosities, and can be selected according to the desired application properties.\nUses.\nMedical.\nThere are high-purity injectable grades of PVP available on the market, for specific use in intravenous, intramuscular, and subcutaneous applications.\nPVP is a frequently used binder in pharmaceutical tablet formulations. Pharmacokinetic studies in humans and various laboratory animal models indicate no to very little systemic absorption of PVP following oral administration.\nPVP added to iodine forms a complex called povidone-iodine that possesses disinfectant properties. This complex is used in various products such as solutions, ointment, pessaries, liquid soaps, and surgical scrubs. It is sold under the trade names Pyodine and Betadine, among others.\nIt is used in pleurodesis (fusion of the pleura because of incessant pleural effusions). For this purpose, povidone-iodine is as effective and safe as talc, and may be preferred because of its easy availability and low cost.\nPVP is used in some contact lenses and their packaging solutions. It reduces friction, thus acting as a lubricant, or wetting agent, built into the lens. Examples of this use include Bausch &amp; Lomb's Ultra contact lenses with MoistureSeal Technology, Air Optix contact lens packaging solution (as an ingredient called \"copolymer 845\"), and Johnson &amp; Johnson's Acuvue contact lenses.\nPVP is used as a lubricant in some eye drops, e.g. Bausch &amp; Lomb's Soothe.\nPVP was used as a plasma volume expander for trauma victims after the 1950s. It is not preferred as a volume expander due to its ability to provoke histamine release and also interfere with blood grouping.\nTechnical.\nPVP is also used in many technical applications:\nOther uses.\nPVP binds to polar molecules exceptionally well, owing to its polarity. This has led to its application in coatings for photo-quality ink-jet papers and transparencies, as well as in inks for inkjet printers.\nPVP is also used in personal care products, such as shampoos and toothpastes, in paints, and adhesives that must be moistened, such as old-style postage stamps and envelopes. It has also been used in contact lens solutions and in steel-quenching solutions. PVP is the basis of the early formulas for hair sprays and hair gels, and still continues to be a component of some.\nAs a food additive, PVP is a stabilizer and has E number E1201. PVPP (crospovidone) is E1202. It is also used in the wine industry as a fining agent for white wine and some beers.\nIn in-vitro fertilisation laboratories, polyvinylpyrrolidone is used to slow down spermatozoa in order to capture them for e.g. ICSI.\nIn molecular biology, PVP can be used as a blocking agent during Southern blot analysis as a component of Denhardt's buffer. It is also exceptionally good at absorbing polyphenols during DNA purification. Polyphenols are common in many plant tissues and can deactivate proteins if not removed and therefore inhibit many downstream reactions like PCR.\nIn microscopy, PVP is useful for making an aqueous mounting medium.\nPVP can be used to screen for phenolic properties, as referenced in a 2000 study on the effect of plant extracts on insulin production.\nSafety.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved this chemical for many uses, and it is generally recognized as safe (GRAS). PVP is included in the Inactive Ingredient Database for use in oral, topical, and injectable formulations.\nHowever, there have been documented cases of allergic reactions to PVP/povidone, particularly regarding subcutaneous (applied under the skin) use and situations where the PVP has come in contact with autologous serum (internal blood fluids) and mucous membranes.\nExamples of documented allergic reactions:\nAdditionally, Povidone is commonly used in conjunction with other chemicals. Some of these, such as iodine and penicillin, for example, are blamed for allergic responses. Yet subsequent testing results in some patients show no signs of allergy to the suspect chemical. Allergies attributed to these other chemicals may possibly be caused by the PVP instead.\nProperties.\nPVP is soluble in water and other polar solvents. For example, it is soluble in various alcohols, such as methanol and ethanol, as well as in more exotic solvents like the deep eutectic solvent formed by choline chloride and urea (Relin). When dry it is a light flaky hygroscopic powder, readily absorbing up to 40% of its weight in atmospheric water. In solution, it has excellent wetting properties and readily forms films. This makes it good as a coating or an additive to coatings.\nA 2014 study found fluorescent properties of PVP and its oxidized hydrolyzate.\nHistory.\nPovidone was first synthesized by BASF chemist Walter Reppe, and a patent was filed in 1939 for one of the derivatives of acetylene chemistry. PVP was initially used as a blood plasma substitute and later in a wide variety of applications in medicine, pharmacy, cosmetics and industrial production. BASF continues to make PVP, including a pharmaceutical portfolio under the brand name of Kollidon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48787", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48787", "title": "Amanda (software)", "text": "Open source software\nThe Advanced Maryland Automatic Network Disk Archiver (Amanda) is an open source computer archiving tool that is able to back up data residing on multiple computers on a network. It uses a client\u2013server model, where the server contacts each client to perform a backup at a scheduled time.\nAmanda was initially developed at the University of Maryland and is released under a BSD-style license. Amanda is available both as a free community edition and fully supported enterprise edition. Amanda runs on almost any Unix or Unix-like systems. Amanda supports Windows systems using Samba or a native Win32 client with support for open files.\nAmanda supports both tape-based and disk-based backup, and provides some useful functionality not available in other backup products. Amanda supports tape-spanning \"i.e.\" if a backup set does not fit in one tape, it will be split into multiple tapes.\nEnterprise edition.\nA commercial version of Amanda was developed by the company Zmanda. It includes a management graphical user interface (GUI) and other features such as scheduler, plugin framework, and an optional cloud backup service support. The cloud backup option uses the Amazon S3 service from Amazon Web Services as the cloud storage provider and enables safe offsite storage of the Amanda backup data. The plugin framework allows for application-specific backups and is used by Amanda Enterprise to support applications such as Oracle database, Samba network share, NDMP, etc. Amanda Enterprise also supports image-level backup of live virtual machine running on VMware infrastructure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48791", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48791", "title": "Pathology", "text": "Study of disease\nPathology is the study of disease. The word \"pathology\" also refers to the study of disease in general, incorporating a wide range of biology research fields and medical practices. However, when used in the context of modern medical treatment, the term is often used in a narrower fashion to refer to processes and tests that fall within the contemporary medical field of \"general pathology\", an area that includes a number of distinct but inter-related medical specialties that diagnose disease, mostly through analysis of tissue and human cell samples. Pathology is a significant field in modern medical diagnosis and medical research. A physician practicing pathology is called a \"pathologist\".\nAs a field of general inquiry and research, pathology addresses components of disease: cause, mechanisms of development (pathogenesis), structural alterations of cells (morphologic changes), and the consequences of changes (clinical manifestations). In common medical practice, general pathology is mostly concerned with analyzing known clinical abnormalities that are markers or precursors for both infectious and non-infectious disease, and is conducted by experts in one of two major specialties, anatomical pathology and clinical pathology. Further divisions in specialty exist on the basis of the involved sample types (comparing, for example, cytopathology, hematopathology, and histopathology), organs (as in renal pathology), and physiological systems (oral pathology), as well as on the basis of the focus of the examination (as with forensic pathology). \nIdiomatically, \"a pathology\" may also refer to the predicted or actual progression of particular diseases (as in the statement \"the many different forms of cancer have diverse pathologies\" in which case a more precise choice of word would be \"pathophysiologies\"). The suffix \"-pathy\" is sometimes used to indicate a state of disease in cases of both physical ailment (as in cardiomyopathy) and psychological conditions (such as psychopathy).\nEtymology.\nThe Latin term \"pathology\" derives from the Ancient Greek roots \"pathos\" (), meaning \"experience\" or \"suffering\", and \"-logia\" (), meaning \"study of\". The term is of early 16th-century origin, and became increasingly popularized after the 1530s.\nHistory.\nThe study of pathology, including the detailed examination of the body, dissection and inquiry into specific maladies, dates back to antiquity. Rudimentary understanding of many conditions was present in most early societies and is attested to in the records of the earliest historical societies, including those of the Middle East, India, and China. By the Hellenic period of ancient Greece, a concerted causal study of disease was underway (see Medicine in ancient Greece), with many notable early physicians (such as Hippocrates, for whom the modern Hippocratic Oath is named) having developed methods of diagnosis and prognosis for a number of diseases. The medical practices of the Romans and those of the Byzantines continued from these Greek roots, but, as with many areas of scientific inquiry, growth in understanding of medicine stagnated somewhat after the Classical Era, but continued to slowly develop throughout numerous cultures. Notably, many advances were made in the medieval era of Islam (see Medicine in medieval Islam), during which numerous texts of complex pathologies were developed, also based on the Greek tradition. Even so, growth in complex understanding of disease mostly languished until knowledge and experimentation again began to proliferate in the Renaissance, Enlightenment, and Baroque eras, following the resurgence of the empirical method at new centers of scholarship. By the 17th century, the study of rudimentary microscopy was underway and examination of tissues had led British Royal Society member Robert Hooke to coin the word \"cell\", setting the stage for later germ theory.\nModern pathology began to develop as a distinct field of inquiry during the 19th Century through natural philosophers and physicians that studied disease and the informal study of what they termed \"pathological anatomy\" or \"morbid anatomy\". However, pathology as a formal area of specialty was not fully developed until the late 19th and early 20th centuries, with the advent of detailed study of microbiology. In the 19th century, physicians had begun to understand that disease-causing pathogens, or \"germs\" (a catch-all for disease-causing, or 'pathogenic', microbes, such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, amoebae, molds, protists, and prions) existed and were capable of reproduction and multiplication, replacing earlier beliefs in humors or even spiritual agents, that had dominated for much of the previous 1,500 years in European medicine. With the new understanding of causative agents, physicians began to compare the characteristics of one germ's symptoms as they developed within an affected individual to another germ's characteristics and symptoms. This approach led to the foundational understanding that diseases are able to replicate themselves, and that they can have many profound and varied effects on the human host. To determine causes of diseases, medical experts used the most common and widely accepted assumptions or symptoms of their times, a general principle of approach that persists in modern medicine.\nModern medicine was particularly advanced by further developments of the microscope to analyze tissues, to which Rudolf Virchow gave a significant contribution, leading to a slew of research developments.\nBy the late 1920s to early 1930s pathology was deemed a medical specialty. Combined with developments in the understanding of general physiology, by the beginning of the 20th century, the study of pathology had begun to split into a number of distinct fields, resulting in the development of a large number of modern specialties within pathology and related disciplines of diagnostic medicine.\nGeneral pathology.\nThe modern practice of pathology is divided into a number of subdisciplines within the distinct but deeply interconnected aims of biological research and medical practice. Biomedical research into disease incorporates the work of a vast variety of life science specialists, whereas, in most parts of the world, to be licensed to practice pathology as a medical specialty, one has to complete medical school and secure a license to practice medicine. Structurally, the study of disease is divided into many different fields that study or diagnose markers for disease using methods and technologies particular to specific scales, organs, and tissue types. \nAnatomical pathology.\nAnatomical pathology (\"Commonwealth\") or anatomic pathology (\"United States\") is a medical specialty that is concerned with the diagnosis of disease based on the gross, microscopic, chemical, immunologic and molecular examination of organs, tissues, and whole bodies (as in a general examination or an autopsy). Anatomical pathology is itself divided into subfields, the main divisions being surgical pathology, cytopathology, and forensic pathology. Anatomical pathology is one of two main divisions of the medical practice of pathology, the other being clinical pathology, the diagnosis of disease through the laboratory analysis of bodily fluids and tissues. Sometimes, pathologists practice both anatomical and clinical pathology, a combination known as general pathology.\nCytopathology.\nCytopathology (sometimes referred to as \"cytology\") is a branch of pathology that studies and diagnoses diseases on the cellular level. It is usually used to aid in the diagnosis of cancer, but also helps in the diagnosis of certain infectious diseases and other inflammatory conditions as well as thyroid lesions, diseases involving sterile body cavities (peritoneal, pleural, and cerebrospinal), and a wide range of other body sites. Cytopathology is generally used on samples of free cells or tissue fragments (in contrast to histopathology, which studies whole tissues) and cytopathologic tests are sometimes called smear tests because the samples may be smeared across a glass microscope slide for subsequent staining and microscopic examination. However, cytology samples may be prepared in other ways, including cytocentrifugation.\nDermatopathology.\nDermatopathology is a subspecialty of anatomic pathology that focuses on the skin and the rest of the integumentary system as an organ. It is unique, in that there are two paths a physician can take to obtain the specialization. All general pathologists and general dermatologists train in the pathology of the skin, so the term dermatopathologist denotes either of these who has reached a certain level of accreditation and experience; in the US, either a general pathologist or a dermatologist can undergo a 1 to 2 year fellowship in the field of dermatopathology. The completion of this fellowship allows one to take a subspecialty board examination, and becomes a board certified dermatopathologist. Dermatologists are able to recognize most skin diseases based on their appearances, anatomic distributions, and behavior. Sometimes, however, those criteria do not lead to a conclusive diagnosis, and a skin biopsy is taken to be examined under the microscope using usual histological tests. In some cases, additional specialized testing needs to be performed on biopsies, including immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, flow cytometry, and molecular-pathologic analysis. One of the greatest challenges of dermatopathology is its scope. More than 1500 different disorders of the skin exist, including cutaneous eruptions (\"rashes\") and neoplasms. Therefore, dermatopathologists must maintain a broad base of knowledge in clinical dermatology, and be familiar with several other specialty areas in Medicine.\nForensic pathology.\nForensic pathology focuses on determining the cause of death by post-mortem examination of a corpse or partial remains. An autopsy is typically performed by a coroner or medical examiner, often during criminal investigations; in this role, coroners and medical examiners are also frequently asked to confirm the identity of a corpse. The requirements for becoming a licensed practitioner of forensic pathology varies from country to country (and even within a given nation) but typically a minimal requirement is a medical doctorate with a specialty in general or anatomical pathology with subsequent study in forensic medicine. The methods forensic scientists use to determine death include examination of tissue specimens to identify the presence or absence of natural disease and other microscopic findings, interpretations of toxicology on body tissues and fluids to determine the chemical cause of overdoses, poisonings or other cases involving toxic agents, and examinations of physical trauma. Forensic pathology is a major component in the trans-disciplinary field of forensic science.\nHistopathology.\nHistopathology refers to the microscopic examination of various forms of human tissue. Specifically, in clinical medicine, histopathology refers to the examination of a biopsy or surgical specimen by a pathologist, after the specimen has been processed and histological sections have been placed onto glass slides. This contrasts with the methods of cytopathology, which uses free cells or tissue fragments. Histopathological examination of tissues starts with surgery, biopsy, or autopsy. The tissue is removed from the body of an organism and then placed in a fixative that stabilizes the tissues to prevent decay. The most common fixative is formalin, although frozen section fixing is also common. To see the tissue under a microscope, the sections are stained with one or more pigments. The aim of staining is to reveal cellular components; counterstains are used to provide contrast. Histochemistry refers to the science of using chemical reactions between laboratory chemicals and components within tissue. The histological slides are then interpreted diagnostically and the resulting pathology report describes the histological findings and the opinion of the pathologist. In the case of cancer, this represents the tissue diagnosis required for most treatment protocols.\nNeuropathology.\nNeuropathology is the study of disease of nervous system tissue, usually in the form of either surgical biopsies or sometimes whole brains in the case of autopsy. Neuropathology is a subspecialty of anatomic pathology, neurology, and neurosurgery. In many English-speaking countries, neuropathology is considered a subfield of anatomical pathology. A physician who specializes in neuropathology, usually by completing a fellowship after a residency in anatomical or general pathology, is called a neuropathologist. In day-to-day clinical practice, a neuropathologist generates diagnoses for patients. If a disease of the nervous system is suspected, and the diagnosis cannot be made by less invasive methods, a biopsy of nervous tissue is taken from the brain or spinal cord to aid in diagnosis. Biopsy is usually requested after a mass is detected by medical imaging. With autopsies, the principal work of the neuropathologist is to help in the post-mortem diagnosis of various conditions that affect the central nervous system. Biopsies can also consist of the skin. Epidermal nerve fiber density testing (ENFD) is a more recently developed neuropathology test in which a punch skin biopsy is taken to identify small fiber neuropathies by analyzing the nerve fibers of the skin. This test is becoming available in select labs as well as many universities; it replaces the traditional nerve biopsy test as less invasive.\nPulmonary pathology.\nPulmonary pathology is a subspecialty of anatomic (and especially surgical) pathology that deals with diagnosis and characterization of neoplastic and non-neoplastic diseases of the lungs and thoracic pleura. Diagnostic specimens are often obtained via bronchoscopic transbronchial biopsy, CT-guided percutaneous biopsy, or video-assisted thoracic surgery. These tests can be necessary to diagnose between infection, inflammation, or fibrotic conditions.\nRenal pathology.\nRenal pathology is a subspecialty of anatomic pathology that deals with the diagnosis and characterization of disease of the kidneys. In a medical setting, renal pathologists work closely with nephrologists and transplant surgeons, who typically obtain diagnostic specimens via percutaneous renal biopsy. The renal pathologist must synthesize findings from traditional microscope histology, electron microscopy, and immunofluorescence to obtain a definitive diagnosis. Medical renal diseases may affect the glomerulus, the tubules and interstitium, the vessels, or a combination of these compartments.\nSurgical pathology.\nSurgical pathology is one of the primary areas of practice for most anatomical pathologists. Surgical pathology involves the gross and microscopic examination of surgical specimens, as well as biopsies submitted by surgeons and non-surgeons such as general internists, medical subspecialists, dermatologists, and interventional radiologists. Often an excised tissue sample is the best and most definitive evidence of disease (or lack thereof) in cases where tissue is surgically removed from a patient. These determinations are usually accomplished by a combination of gross (i.e., macroscopic) and histologic (i.e., microscopic) examination of the tissue, and may involve evaluations of molecular properties of the tissue by immunohistochemistry or other laboratory tests.\nThere are two major types of specimens submitted for surgical pathology analysis: biopsies and surgical resections. A biopsy is a small piece of tissue removed primarily for surgical pathology analysis, most often in order to render a definitive diagnosis. Types of biopsies include core biopsies, which are obtained through the use of large-bore needles, sometimes under the guidance of radiological techniques such as ultrasound, CT scan, or magnetic resonance imaging. Incisional biopsies are obtained through diagnostic surgical procedures that remove part of a suspicious lesion, whereas excisional biopsies remove the entire lesion, and are similar to therapeutic surgical resections. Excisional biopsies of skin lesions and gastrointestinal polyps are very common. The pathologist's interpretation of a biopsy is critical to establishing the diagnosis of a benign or malignant tumor, and can differentiate between different types and grades of cancer, as well as determining the activity of specific molecular pathways in the tumor. Surgical resection specimens are obtained by the therapeutic surgical removal of an entire diseased area or organ (and occasionally multiple organs). These procedures are often intended as definitive surgical treatment of a disease in which the diagnosis is already known or strongly suspected, but pathological analysis of these specimens remains important in confirming the previous diagnosis.\nClinical pathology.\nClinical pathology is a medical specialty that is concerned with the diagnosis of disease based on the laboratory analysis of bodily fluids such as blood and urine, as well as tissues, using the tools of chemistry, clinical microbiology, hematology and molecular pathology. Clinical pathologists work in close collaboration with medical technologists, hospital administrations, and referring physicians. Clinical pathologists learn to administer a number of visual and microscopic tests and an especially large variety of tests of the biophysical properties of tissue samples involving automated analysers and cultures. Sometimes the general term \"laboratory medicine specialist\" is used to refer to those working in clinical pathology, including medical doctors, Ph.D.s and doctors of pharmacology. Immunopathology, the study of an organism's immune response to infection, is sometimes considered to fall within the domain of clinical pathology.\nHematopathology.\nHematopathology is the study of diseases of blood cells (including constituents such as white blood cells, red blood cells, and platelets) and the tissues, and organs comprising\nthe hematopoietic system. The term hematopoietic system refers to tissues and organs that produce and/or primarily host hematopoietic cells and includes bone marrow, the lymph nodes, thymus, spleen, and other lymphoid tissues. In the United States, hematopathology is a board certified subspecialty (licensed under the American Board of Pathology) practiced by those physicians who have completed a general pathology residency (anatomic, clinical, or combined) and an additional year of fellowship training in hematology. The hematopathologist reviews biopsies of lymph nodes, bone marrows and other tissues involved by an infiltrate of cells of the hematopoietic system. In addition, the hematopathologist may be in charge of flow cytometric and/or molecular hematopathology studies.\nMolecular pathology.\nMolecular pathology is focused upon the study and diagnosis of disease through the examination of molecules within organs, tissues or bodily fluids. Molecular pathology is multidisciplinary by nature and shares some aspects of practice with both anatomic pathology and clinical pathology, molecular biology, biochemistry, proteomics and genetics. It is often applied in a context that is as much scientific as directly medical and encompasses the development of molecular and genetic approaches to the diagnosis and classification of human diseases, the design and validation of predictive biomarkers for treatment response and disease progression, and the susceptibility of individuals of different genetic constitution to particular disorders. The crossover between molecular pathology and epidemiology is represented by a related field \"molecular pathological epidemiology\". Molecular pathology is commonly used in diagnosis of cancer and infectious diseases. Molecular Pathology is primarily used to detect cancers such as melanoma, brainstem glioma, brain tumors as well as many other types of cancer and infectious diseases. Techniques are numerous but include quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), multiplex PCR, DNA microarray, in situ hybridization, DNA sequencing, antibody-based immunofluorescence tissue assays, molecular profiling of pathogens, and analysis of bacterial genes for antimicrobial resistance. Techniques used are based on analyzing samples of DNA and RNA. Pathology is widely used for gene therapy and disease diagnosis.\nOral and maxillofacial pathology.\nOral and Maxillofacial Pathology is one of nine dental specialties recognized by the American Dental Association, and is sometimes considered a specialty of both dentistry and pathology. Oral Pathologists must complete three years of post doctoral training in an accredited program and subsequently obtain diplomate status from the American Board of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. The specialty focuses on the diagnosis, clinical management and investigation of diseases that affect the oral cavity and surrounding maxillofacial structures including but not limited to odontogenic, infectious, epithelial, salivary gland, bone and soft tissue pathologies. It also significantly intersects with the field of dental pathology. Although concerned with a broad variety of diseases of the oral cavity, they have roles distinct from otorhinolaryngologists (\"ear, nose, and throat\" specialists), and speech pathologists, the latter of which helps diagnose many neurological or neuromuscular conditions relevant to speech phonology or swallowing. Owing to the availability of the oral cavity to non-invasive examination, many conditions in the study of oral disease can be diagnosed, or at least suspected, from gross examination, but biopsies, cell smears, and other tissue analysis remain important diagnostic tools in oral pathology.\nMedical training and accreditation.\nBecoming a pathologist generally requires specialty-training after medical school, but individual nations vary somewhat in the medical licensing required of pathologists. In the United States, pathologists are physicians (D.O. or M.D.) who have completed a four-year undergraduate program, four years of medical school training, and three to four years of postgraduate training in the form of a pathology residency. Training may be within two primary specialties, as recognized by the American Board of Pathology: anatomical pathology and clinical pathology, each of which requires separate board certification. The American Osteopathic Board of Pathology also recognizes four primary specialties: anatomic pathology, dermatopathology, forensic pathology, and laboratory medicine. Pathologists may pursue specialised fellowship training within one or more subspecialties of either anatomical or clinical pathology. Some of these subspecialties permit additional board certification, while others do not.\nIn the United Kingdom, pathologists are physicians licensed by the UK General Medical Council. The training to become a pathologist is overseen by the Royal College of Pathologists. After four to six years of undergraduate medical study, trainees proceed to a two-year foundation program. Full-time training in histopathology currently lasts between five and five and a half years, encompassing specialist training in surgical pathology, cytopathology, and autopsy pathology. It is also possible to take a Royal College of Pathologists diploma in forensic pathology, dermatopathology, or cytopathology, recognising additional specialist training and expertise, and to get specialist accreditation in forensic pathology, pediatric pathology, and neuropathology. The General Medical Council oversees all postgraduate medical training and education in the UK.\nIn France, pathology is separated into two distinct specialties: anatomical pathology and clinical pathology. Residencies for both lasts four years. Residency in anatomical pathology is open to physicians only, while clinical pathology is open to both physicians and pharmacists. At the end of the second year of clinical pathology residency, residents can choose between general clinical pathology and a specialization in one of the disciplines, but they can not practice anatomical pathology, nor can anatomical pathology residents practice clinical pathology.\nOverlap with other diagnostic medicine.\nThough separate fields in terms of medical practice, a number of areas of inquiry in medicine and\nmedical science either overlap greatly with general pathology, work in tandem with it, or contribute significantly to the understanding of the pathology of a given disease or its course in an individual. As a significant portion of all general pathology practice is concerned with cancer, the practice of oncology makes extensive use of both anatomical and clinical pathology in diagnosis and treatment. In particular, biopsy, resection, and blood tests are all examples of pathology work that is essential for the diagnoses of many kinds of cancer and for the staging of cancerous masses. In a similar fashion, the tissue and blood analysis techniques of general pathology are of central significance to the investigation of serious infectious disease and as such inform significantly upon the fields of epidemiology, etiology, immunology, and parasitology. General pathology methods are of great importance to biomedical research into disease, wherein they are sometimes referred to as \"experimental\" or \"investigative\" pathology.\nMedical imaging is the generating of visual representations of the interior of a body for clinical analysis and medical intervention. Medical imaging reveals details of internal physiology that help medical professionals plan appropriate treatments for tissue infection and trauma. Medical imaging is also central in supplying the biometric data necessary to establish baseline features of anatomy and physiology so as to increase the accuracy with which early or fine-detail abnormalities are detected. These diagnostic techniques are often performed in combination with general pathology procedures and are themselves often essential to developing new understanding of the pathogenesis of a given disease and tracking the progress of disease in specific medical cases. Examples of important subdivisions in medical imaging include radiology (which uses the imaging technologies of X-ray radiography) magnetic resonance imaging, medical ultrasonography (or ultrasound), endoscopy, elastography, tactile imaging, thermography, medical photography, nuclear medicine and functional imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography. Though they do not strictly relay images, readings from diagnostics tests involving electroencephalography, magnetoencephalography, and electrocardiography often give hints as to the state and function of certain tissues in the brain and heart respectively.\nPathology informatics.\nPathology informatics is a subfield of health informatics. It is the use of information technology in pathology. It encompasses pathology laboratory operations, data analysis, and the interpretation of pathology-related information.\nKey aspects of pathology informatics include:\nPsychopathology.\nPsychopathology is the study of mental illness, particularly of severe disorders. Informed heavily by both psychology and neurology, its purpose is to classify mental illness, elucidate its underlying causes, and guide clinical psychiatric treatment accordingly. Although diagnosis and classification of mental norms and disorders is largely the purview of psychiatry\u2014the results of which are guidelines such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, which attempt to classify mental disease mostly on behavioural evidence, though not without controversy\u2014the field is also heavily, and increasingly, informed upon by neuroscience and other of the biological cognitive sciences. Mental or social disorders or behaviours seen as generally unhealthy or excessive in a given individual, to the point where they cause harm or severe disruption to the person's lifestyle, are often called \"pathological\" (e.g., pathological gambling or pathological liar).\nNon-humans.\nAlthough the vast majority of lab work and research in pathology concerns the development of disease in humans, pathology is of significance throughout the biological sciences. Two main catch-all fields exist to represent most complex organisms capable of serving as host to a pathogen or other form of disease: veterinary pathology (concerned with all non-human species of kingdom of Animalia) and phytopathology, which studies disease in plants.\nVeterinary pathology.\nVeterinary pathology covers a vast array of species, but with a significantly smaller number of practitioners, so understanding of disease in non-human animals, especially as regards veterinary practice, varies considerably by species. Nevertheless, significant amounts of pathology research are conducted on animals, for two primary reasons: 1) The origins of diseases are typically zoonotic in nature, and many infectious pathogens have animal vectors and, as such, understanding the mechanisms of action for these pathogens in non-human hosts is essential to the understanding and application of epidemiology and 2) those animals that share physiological and genetic traits with humans can be used as surrogates for the study of the disease and potential treatments as well as the effects of various synthetic products. For this reason, as well as their roles as livestock and companion animals, mammals generally have the largest body of research in veterinary pathology. Animal testing remains a controversial practice, even in cases where it is used to research treatment for human disease. As in human medical pathology, the practice of veterinary pathology is customarily divided into the two main fields of anatomical and clinical pathology.\nPlant pathology.\nAlthough the pathogens and their mechanics differ greatly from those of animals, plants are subject to a wide variety of diseases, including those caused by fungi, oomycetes, bacteria, viruses, viroids, virus-like organisms, phytoplasmas, protozoa, nematodes and parasitic plants. Damage caused by insects, mites, vertebrate, and other small herbivores is not considered a part of the domain of plant pathology. The field is connected to plant disease epidemiology and especially concerned with the horticulture of species that are of high importance to the human diet or other human utility.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "48799", "revid": "20661259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48799", "title": "Occupied territory", "text": ""}
{"id": "48803", "revid": "26718967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48803", "title": "Gamma-ray burst", "text": "Flash of gamma rays from a distant galaxy\nIn gamma-ray astronomy, gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are extremely energetic events occurring in distant galaxies which represent the brightest and most powerful class of explosion in the Universe. These extreme electromagnetic emissions are second only to the Big Bang as the most energetic and luminous phenomena known. Gamma-ray bursts can last from a few milliseconds to several hours. After the initial flash of gamma rays, a longer-lived afterglow is emitted, usually in the longer wavelengths of X-ray, ultraviolet, optical, infrared, microwave or radio frequencies.\nThe intense radiation of most observed GRBs is thought to be released during a supernova or superluminous supernova as a high-mass star implodes to form a neutron star or a black hole. Short-duration (sGRB) events are a subclass of GRB signals that are now known to originate from the cataclysmic merger of binary neutron stars.\nThe sources of most GRB are billions of light years away from Earth, implying that the explosions are both extremely energetic (a typical burst releases as much energy in a few seconds as the Sun will in its entire 10-billion-year lifetime) and extremely rare (a few per galaxy per million years). All GRBs in recorded history have originated from outside the Milky Way galaxy, although a related class of phenomena, soft gamma repeaters, are associated with magnetars within our galaxy. A gamma-ray burst in the Milky Way pointed directly at Earth would likely sterilize the planet or cause a mass extinction. The Late Ordovician mass extinction has been hypothesised by some researchers to have occurred as a result of such a gamma-ray burst.\nGRB signals were first detected in 1967 by the Vela satellites, which were designed to detect covert nuclear weapons tests; after an \"exhaustive\" period of analysis, this was published as academic research in 1973. Following their discovery, hundreds of theoretical models were proposed to explain these bursts, such as collisions between comets and neutron stars. Little information was available to verify these models until the 1997 detection of the first X-ray and optical afterglows and direct measurement of their redshifts using optical spectroscopy, and thus their distances and energy outputs. These discoveries\u2014and subsequent studies of the galaxies and supernovae associated with the bursts\u2014clarified the distance and luminosity of GRBs, definitively placing them in distant galaxies.\nHistory.\nGamma-ray bursts were first observed in the late 1960s by the U.S. Vela satellites, which were built to detect gamma radiation pulses emitted by nuclear weapons tested in space. The United States suspected that the Soviet Union might attempt to conduct secret nuclear tests after signing the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963. On July 2, 1967, at 14:19 UTC, the Vela 4 and Vela 3 satellites detected a flash of gamma radiation unlike any known nuclear weapons signature. Uncertain what had happened but not considering the matter particularly urgent, the team at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, led by Ray Klebesadel, filed the data away for investigation. As additional Vela satellites were launched with better instruments, the Los Alamos team continued to find inexplicable gamma-ray bursts in their data. By analyzing the different arrival times of the bursts as detected by different satellites, the team was able to determine rough estimates for the sky positions of 16 bursts and definitively rule out a terrestrial or solar origin. Contrary to popular belief, the data was never classified. After thorough analysis, the findings were published in 1973 as an \"Astrophysical Journal\" article entitled \"Observations of Gamma-Ray Bursts of Cosmic Origin\".\nMost early hypotheses of gamma-ray bursts posited nearby sources within the Milky Way Galaxy. From 1991, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO) and its Burst and Transient Source Explorer (BATSE) instrument, an extremely sensitive gamma-ray detector, provided data that showed the distribution of GRBs is isotropic (that is, not biased towards any particular direction in space). If the sources were from within our own galaxy, they would be strongly concentrated in or near the galactic plane. The absence of any such pattern in the case of GRBs provided strong evidence that gamma-ray bursts must come from beyond the Milky Way. However, some Milky Way models are still consistent with an isotropic distribution.\nCounterpart objects as candidate sources.\nFor decades after the discovery of GRBs, astronomers searched for a counterpart at other wavelengths: i.e., any astronomical object in positional coincidence with a recently observed burst. Astronomers considered many distinct classes of objects, including white dwarfs, pulsars, supernovae, globular clusters, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and BL Lac objects. All such searches were unsuccessful, and in a few cases particularly well-localized bursts (those whose positions were determined with what was then a high degree of accuracy) could be clearly shown to have no bright objects of any nature consistent with the position derived from the detecting satellites. This suggested an origin of either very faint stars or extremely distant galaxies. Even the most accurate positions contained numerous faint stars and galaxies, and it was widely agreed that final resolution of the origins of cosmic gamma-ray bursts would require both new satellites and faster communication.\nAfterglow.\nSeveral models for the origin of gamma-ray bursts postulated that the initial burst of gamma rays should be followed by \"afterglow\": slowly fading emission at longer wavelengths created by collisions between the burst ejecta and interstellar gas. Early searches for this afterglow were unsuccessful, largely because it is difficult to observe a burst's position at longer wavelengths immediately after the initial burst. The breakthrough came in February 1997 when the satellite BeppoSAX detected a gamma-ray burst (GRB 970228) and when the X-ray camera was pointed towards the direction from which the burst had originated, it detected fading X-ray emission. The William Herschel Telescope identified a fading optical counterpart 20 hours after the burst. Once the GRB faded, deep imaging was able to identify a faint, distant host galaxy at the location of the GRB as pinpointed by the optical afterglow.\nBecause of the very faint luminosity of this galaxy, its exact distance was not measured for several years. Well after then, another major breakthrough occurred with the next event registered by BeppoSAX, GRB 970508. This event was localized within four hours of its discovery, allowing research teams to begin making observations much sooner than any previous burst. The spectrum of the object revealed a redshift of \"z\"\u00a0=\u00a00.835, placing the burst at a distance of roughly 6\u00a0billion\u00a0light years from Earth. This was the first accurate determination of the distance to a GRB, and together with the discovery of the host galaxy of 970228 proved that GRBs occur in extremely distant galaxies. Within a few months, the controversy about the distance scale ended: GRBs were extragalactic events originating within faint galaxies at enormous distances. The following year, GRB 980425 was followed within a day by a bright supernova (SN 1998bw), coincident in location, indicating a clear connection between GRBs and the deaths of very massive stars. This burst provided the first strong clue about the nature of the systems that produce GRBs.\nMore recent instruments \u2013 launched from 2000.\nBeppoSAX functioned until 2002 and CGRO (with BATSE) was deorbited in 2000. However, the revolution in the study of gamma-ray bursts motivated the development of a number of additional instruments designed specifically to explore the nature of GRBs, especially in the earliest moments following the explosion. The first such mission, HETE-2, was launched in 2000 and functioned until 2006, providing most of the major discoveries during this period. One of the most successful space missions to date, Swift, was launched in 2004 and as of May 2024 is still operational. Swift is equipped with a very sensitive gamma-ray detector as well as on-board X-ray and optical telescopes, which can be rapidly and automatically slewed to observe afterglow emission following a burst. More recently, the Fermi mission was launched carrying the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor, which detects bursts at a rate of several hundred per year, some of which are bright enough to be observed at extremely high energies with Fermi's Large Area Telescope. Meanwhile, on the ground, numerous optical telescopes have been built or modified to incorporate robotic control software that responds immediately to signals sent through the Gamma-ray Burst Coordinates Network. This allows the telescopes to rapidly repoint towards a GRB, often within seconds of receiving the signal and while the gamma-ray emission itself is still ongoing.\nThe Space Variable Objects Monitor is a small X-ray telescope satellite for studying the explosions of massive stars by analysing the resulting gamma-ray bursts, developed by China National Space Administration (CNSA), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and the French Space Agency (CNES), launched on 22 June 2024 (07:00:00 UTC).\nThe Taiwan Space Agency is launching a cubesat called The Gamma-ray Transients Monitor to track GRBs and other bright gamma-ray transients with energies ranging from 50 keV to 2 MeV in Q4 2026.\nShort bursts and other observations.\nNew developments since the 2000s include the recognition of short gamma-ray bursts as a separate class (likely from merging neutron stars and not associated with supernovae), the discovery of extended, erratic flaring activity at X-ray wavelengths lasting for many minutes after most GRBs, and the discovery of the most luminous (GRB 080319B) and the former most distant (GRB 090423) emissive sources in the universe. Prior to a flurry of discoveries from the James Webb Space Telescope, the presumptive source of GRB 090429B was the most distant known object in the universe.\nIn October 2018, astronomers reported that GRB 150101B (detected in 2015) and GW170817, a gravitational wave event detected in 2017 (which has been associated with GRB 170817A, a burst detected 1.7 seconds later), may have been produced by the same mechanism\u2014the merger of two neutron stars. The similarities between the two events, in terms of gamma ray, optical, and x-ray emissions, as well as to the nature of the associated host galaxies, were considered \"striking\", suggesting the two separate events may both be the result of the merger of neutron stars, and both may be a kilonova, which may be more common in the universe than previously understood, according to the researchers.\nThe highest energy light observed from a gamma-ray burst was one teraelectronvolt, from GRB 190114C in 2019. Although enormous for such a distant event, this energy is around 3 orders of magnitude lower than the highest energy light observed from closer gamma ray sources within our Milky Way galaxy, for example a 2021 event of 1.4 petaelectronvolts.\nClassification.\nThe light curves of gamma-ray bursts are extremely diverse and complex. No two gamma-ray burst light curves are identical, with large variation observed in almost every property: the duration of observable emission can vary from milliseconds to tens of minutes, there can be a single peak or several individual subpulses, and individual peaks can be symmetric or with fast brightening and very slow fading. Some bursts are preceded by a \"precursor\" event, a weak burst that is then followed (after seconds to minutes of no emission at all) by the much more intense \"true\" bursting episode. The light curves of some events have extremely chaotic and complicated profiles with almost no discernible patterns.\nAlthough some light curves can be roughly reproduced using certain simplified models, little progress has been made in understanding the full diversity observed. Many classification schemes have been proposed, but these are often based solely on differences in the appearance of light curves and may not always reflect a true physical difference in the progenitors of the explosions. However, plots of the distribution of the observed duration for a large number of gamma-ray bursts show a clear bimodality, suggesting the existence of two separate populations: a \"short\" population with an average duration of about 0.3 seconds and a \"long\" population with an average duration of about 30 seconds. Both distributions are very broad with a significant overlap region in which the identity of a given event is not clear from duration alone. Additional classes beyond this two-tiered system have been proposed on both observational and theoretical grounds.\nShort gamma-ray bursts.\nEvents with a duration of less than about two seconds are classified as short gamma-ray bursts (sGRB). These account for about 30% of gamma-ray bursts, but until 2005, no afterglow had been successfully detected from any short event and little was known about their origins. Following this, several dozen short gamma-ray burst afterglows were detected and localized, several of them associated with regions of little or no star formation, such as large elliptical galaxies. This ruled out a link to massive stars, confirming the short events to be physically distinct from long events. In addition, there had been no association with supernovae.\nThe true nature of these objects was thus initially unknown, but the leading hypothesis was that they originated from the mergers of binary neutron stars or a neutron star with a black hole. Such mergers were hypothesized to produce kilonovae, and evidence for a kilonova associated with short GRB 130603B was reported in 2013. The mean duration of sGRB events of around 200 milliseconds implied (due to causality) that the sources must be of very small physical diameter in stellar terms: less than 0.2 light-seconds (60,000\u00a0km or 37,000 miles)\u2014about four times the Earth's diameter. The observation of minutes to hours of X-ray flashes after an sGRB was seen as consistent with small particles of a precursor object like a neutron star initially being swallowed by a black hole in less than two seconds, followed by some hours of lower-energy events as remaining fragments of tidally disrupted neutron star material would remain in orbit, spiraling into the black hole over a longer period of time.\nThe origin of short gamma-ray bursts in kilonovae was finally conclusively established in 2017, when short GRB 170817A co-occurred with the detection of gravitational wave GW170817, a signal from the merger of two neutron stars.\nUnrelated to these cataclysmic origins, short-duration gamma-ray signals are also produced by giant flares from soft gamma repeaters in our own\u2014or nearby\u2014galaxies.\nLong gamma-ray bursts.\nMost observed events (70%) have a duration of greater than two seconds and are classified as long gamma-ray bursts. Because these events constitute the majority of the population and because they tend to have the brightest afterglows, they have been observed in much greater detail than their short counterparts. Almost every well-studied long gamma-ray burst has been linked to a galaxy with rapid star formation, and in many cases to a core-collapse supernova as well, unambiguously associating long GRBs with the deaths of massive stars. Long GRB afterglow observations, at high redshift, are also consistent with the GRB having originated in star-forming regions.\nIn December 2022, astronomers reported the observation of GRB\u00a0211211A for 51 seconds, the first evidence of a long GRB likely associated with mergers of \"compact binary objects\" such as neutron stars or white dwarfs. Following this, GRB\u00a0191019A (2019, 64s) and GRB 230307A (2023, 35s) have been argued to signify an emerging class of long GRB which may originate from these types of progenitor events.\nUltra-long gamma-ray bursts.\nulGRB are defined as GRB lasting more than 10,000 seconds, covering the upper range to the limit of the GRB duration distribution. They have been proposed to form a separate class, caused by the collapse of a blue supergiant star, a tidal disruption event or a new-born magnetar. Only a small number have been identified to date, their primary characteristic being their gamma ray emission duration. The most studied ultra-long events include GRB 101225A and GRB 111209A. The low detection rate may be a result of low sensitivity of current detectors to long-duration events, rather than a reflection of their true frequency. A 2013 study, on the other hand, shows that the existing evidence for a separate ultra-long GRB population with a new type of progenitor is inconclusive, and further multi-wavelength observations are needed to draw a firmer conclusion.\nEnergetics.\nGamma-ray bursts are very bright as observed from Earth despite their typically immense distances. An average long GRB has a bolometric flux comparable to a bright star of our galaxy despite a distance of billions of light years (compared to a few tens of light years for most visible stars). Most of this energy is released in gamma rays, although some GRBs have extremely luminous optical counterparts as well. GRB 080319B, for example, was accompanied by an optical counterpart that peaked at a visible magnitude of 5.8, comparable to that of the dimmest naked-eye stars despite the burst's distance of 7.5\u00a0billion light years. This combination of brightness and distance implies an extremely energetic source. Assuming the gamma-ray explosion to be spherical, the energy output of GRB 080319B would be within a factor of two of the rest-mass energy of the Sun (the energy which would be released were the Sun to be converted entirely into radiation).\nGamma-ray bursts are thought to be highly focused explosions, with most of the explosion energy collimated into a narrow jet. The jets of gamma-ray bursts are ultrarelativistic, and are the most relativistic jets in the universe. The matter in gamma-ray burst jets may also become superluminal, or faster than the speed of light in the jet medium, with there also being effects of time reversibility. The approximate angular width of the jet (that is, the degree of spread of the beam) can be estimated directly by observing the achromatic \"jet breaks\" in afterglow light curves: a time after which the slowly decaying afterglow begins to fade rapidly as the jet slows and can no longer beam its radiation as effectively. Observations suggest significant variation in the jet angle from between 2 and 20 degrees.\nBecause their energy is strongly focused, the gamma rays emitted by most bursts are expected to miss the Earth and never be detected. When a gamma-ray burst is pointed towards Earth, the focusing of its energy along a relatively narrow beam causes the burst to appear much brighter than it would have been were its energy emitted spherically. The total energy of typical gamma-ray bursts has been estimated at 3 \u00d7 1044\u00a0J,\u00a0\u2013 which is larger than the total energy (1044\u00a0J) of ordinary supernovae (type Ia, Ibc, II), with gamma-ray bursts also being more powerful than the typical supernova. Very bright supernovae have been observed to accompany several of the nearest GRBs. Further support for focusing of the output of GRBs comes from observations of strong asymmetries in the spectra of nearby type Ic supernovae and from radio observations taken long after bursts when their jets are no longer relativistic.\nThe discovery of GRB 190114C suggests that previous observations may have underestimated the total energy output of GRBs. Measurements indicate that the energy released in very-high-energy gamma rays may be comparable to the combined energy emitted at all lower wavelengths.\nShort (time duration) GRBs appear to come from a lower-redshift (i.e. less distant) population and are less luminous than long GRBs. The degree of beaming in short bursts has not been accurately measured, but as a population they are likely less collimated than long GRBs or possibly not collimated at all in some cases.\nProgenitors.\nBecause of the immense distances of most gamma-ray burst sources from Earth, identification of the progenitors, the systems that produce these explosions, is challenging. The association of some long GRBs with supernovae and the fact that their host galaxies are rapidly star-forming offer very strong evidence that long gamma-ray bursts are associated with massive stars. The most widely accepted mechanism for the origin of long-duration GRBs is the collapsar model, in which the core of an extremely massive, low-metallicity, rapidly rotating star collapses into a black hole in the final stages of its evolution. Matter near the star's core rains down towards the center and swirls into a high-density accretion disk. The infall of this material into a black hole drives a pair of relativistic jets out along the rotational axis, which pummel through the stellar envelope and eventually break through the stellar surface and radiate as gamma rays. Some alternative models replace the black hole with a newly formed magnetar, although most other aspects of the model (the collapse of the core of a massive star and the formation of relativistic jets) are the same.\nThe closest analogs within the Milky Way galaxy of the stars producing long gamma-ray bursts are likely the Wolf\u2013Rayet stars, extremely hot and massive stars, which have shed most or all of their hydrogen envelope. Eta Carinae, Apep, and WR 104 have been cited as possible future gamma-ray burst progenitors. It is unclear if any star in the Milky Way has the appropriate characteristics to produce a gamma-ray burst.\nThe massive-star model probably does not explain all types of gamma-ray burst. There is strong evidence that some short-duration gamma-ray bursts occur in systems with no star formation and no massive stars, such as elliptical galaxies and galaxy halos. The favored hypothesis for the origin of most short gamma-ray bursts is the merger of a binary system consisting of two neutron stars. According to this model, the two stars in a binary slowly spiral towards each other because gravitational radiation releases energy until tidal forces suddenly rip the neutron stars apart and they collapse into a single black hole. The infall of matter into the new black hole produces an accretion disk and releases a burst of energy, analogous to the collapsar model. Numerous other models have also been proposed to explain short gamma-ray bursts, including the merger of a neutron star and a black hole, the accretion-induced collapse of a neutron star, or the evaporation of primordial black holes.\nAn alternative explanation proposed by Friedwardt Winterberg is that in the course of a gravitational collapse and in reaching the event horizon of a black hole, all matter disintegrates into a burst of gamma radiation.\nTidal disruption events.\nThis class of GRB-like events was first discovered through the detection of Swift J1644+57 (originally classified as GRB 110328A) by the Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission on 28 March 2011. This event had a gamma-ray duration of about 2 days, much longer than even ultra-long GRBs, and was detected in many frequencies for months and years after. It occurred at the center of a small elliptical galaxy at redshift 3.8 billion light years away. This event has been accepted as a tidal disruption event (TDE), where a star wanders too close to a supermassive black hole, shredding the star. In the case of Swift J1644+57, an astrophysical jet traveling at near the speed of light was launched, and lasted roughly 1.5 years before turning off.\nSince 2011, only 4 jetted TDEs have been discovered, of which 3 were detected in gamma-rays (including Swift J1644+57). It is estimated that just 1% of all TDEs are jetted events.\nEmission mechanisms.\nThe means by which gamma-ray bursts convert energy into radiation remains poorly understood, and as of 2010 there was still no generally accepted model for how this process occurs. Any successful model of GRB emission must explain the physical process for generating gamma-ray emission that matches the observed diversity of light curves, spectra, and other characteristics. Particularly challenging is the need to explain the very high efficiencies that are inferred from some explosions: some gamma-ray bursts may convert as much as half (or more) of the explosion energy into gamma-rays. Early observations of the bright optical counterparts to GRB 990123 and to GRB 080319B, whose optical light curves were extrapolations of the gamma-ray light spectra, have suggested that inverse Compton scattering may be the dominant process in some events. In this model, pre-existing low-energy photons are scattered by relativistic electrons within the explosion, augmenting their energy by a large factor and transforming them into gamma-rays.\nThe nature of the longer-wavelength afterglow emission (ranging from X-ray through radio) that follows gamma-ray bursts is better understood. Any energy released by the explosion not radiated away in the burst itself takes the form of matter or energy moving outward at nearly the speed of light. As this matter collides with the surrounding interstellar gas, it creates a relativistic shock wave that then propagates forward into interstellar space. A second shock wave, the reverse shock, may propagate back into the ejected matter. Extremely energetic electrons within the shock wave are accelerated by strong local magnetic fields and radiate as synchrotron emission across most of the electromagnetic spectrum. This model has generally been successful in modeling the behavior of many observed afterglows at late times (generally, hours to days after the explosion), although there are difficulties explaining all features of the afterglow very shortly after the gamma-ray burst has occurred.\nRate of occurrence and potential effects on life.\nGamma ray bursts can have harmful or destructive effects on life. Considering the universe as a whole, the safest environments for life similar to that on Earth are the lowest density regions in the outskirts of large galaxies. Our knowledge of galaxy types and their distribution suggests that life as we know it can only exist in about 10% of all galaxies. Furthermore, galaxies with a redshift, \"z\", higher than 0.5 are unsuitable for life as we know it, because of their higher rate of GRBs and their stellar compactness.\nAll GRBs observed to date have occurred well outside the Milky Way galaxy and have been harmless to Earth. However, if a GRB were to occur within the Milky Way within 5,000 to 8,000 light-years and its emission were beamed straight towards Earth, the effects could be harmful and potentially devastating for its ecosystems. Currently, orbiting satellites detect on average approximately one GRB per day. The closest observed GRB as of March 2014 was GRB 980425, located away (z=0.0085) in an SBc-type dwarf galaxy. GRB 980425 was far less energetic than the average GRB and was associated with the Type Ib supernova SN 1998bw.\nEstimating the exact rate at which GRBs occur is difficult; for a galaxy of approximately the same size as the Milky Way, estimates of the expected rate (for long-duration GRBs) can range from one burst every 10,000 years, to one burst every 1,000,000 years. Only a small percentage of these would be beamed towards Earth. Estimates of rate of occurrence of short-duration GRBs are even more uncertain because of the unknown degree of collimation, but are probably comparable.\nSince GRBs are thought to involve beamed emission along two jets in opposing directions, only planets in the path of these jets would be subjected to the high energy gamma radiation. A GRB could potentially vaporize anything in its beams' paths within a range of around 200 light-years.\nAlthough nearby GRBs hitting Earth with a destructive shower of gamma rays are only hypothetical events, high energy processes across the galaxy have been observed to affect the Earth's atmosphere.\nEffects on Earth.\nEarth's atmosphere is very effective at absorbing high energy electromagnetic radiation such as x-rays and gamma rays, so these types of radiation would not reach any dangerous levels at the surface during the burst event itself. The immediate effect on life on Earth from a GRB within a few kiloparsecs would only be a short increase in ultraviolet radiation at ground level, lasting from less than a second to tens of seconds. This ultraviolet radiation could potentially reach dangerous levels depending on the exact nature and distance of the burst, but it seems unlikely to be able to cause a global catastrophe for life on Earth.\nThe long-term effects from a nearby burst are more dangerous. Gamma rays cause chemical reactions in the atmosphere involving oxygen and nitrogen molecules, creating first nitrogen oxide then nitrogen dioxide gas. The nitrogen oxides cause dangerous effects on three levels. First, they deplete ozone, with models showing a possible global reduction of 25\u201335%, with as much as 75% in certain locations, an effect that would last for years. This reduction is enough to cause a dangerously elevated UV index at the surface. Secondly, the nitrogen oxides cause photochemical smog, which darkens the sky and blocks out parts of the sunlight spectrum. This would affect photosynthesis, but models show only about a 1% reduction of the total sunlight spectrum, lasting a few years. However, the smog could potentially cause a cooling effect on Earth's climate, producing a \"cosmic winter\" (similar to an impact winter, but without an impact), but only if it occurs simultaneously with a global climate instability. Thirdly, the elevated nitrogen dioxide levels in the atmosphere would wash out and produce acid rain. Nitric acid is toxic to a variety of organisms, including amphibian life, but models predict that it would not reach levels that would cause a serious global effect. The nitrates might in fact be of benefit to some plants.\nAll in all, a GRB within a few kiloparsecs, with its energy directed towards Earth, will mostly damage life by raising the UV levels during the burst itself and for a few years thereafter. Models show that the destructive effects of this increase can cause up to 16 times the normal levels of DNA damage. It has proved difficult to assess a reliable evaluation of the consequences of this on the terrestrial ecosystem, because of the uncertainty in biological field and laboratory data.\nHypothetical effects on Earth in the past.\nThere is a very good chance (but no certainty) that at least one lethal GRB took place during the past 5 billion years close enough to Earth as to significantly damage life. There is a 50% chance that such a lethal GRB took place within two kiloparsecs of Earth during the last 500 million years.\nThe Ordovician mass extinction 450 million years ago may have been caused by a GRB. Estimates suggest that approximately 20\u201360% of the total phytoplankton biomass in the Ordovician oceans would have perished in a GRB, because the oceans were mostly oligotrophic and clear. The late Ordovician species of trilobites that spent portions of their lives in the plankton layer near the ocean surface were much harder hit than deep-water dwellers, which tended to remain within quite restricted areas. This is in contrast to the usual pattern of extinction events, wherein species with more widely spread populations typically fare better. A possible explanation is that trilobites remaining in deep water would be more shielded from the increased UV radiation associated with a GRB. Also supportive of this hypothesis is the fact that during the late Ordovician, burrowing bivalve species were less likely to go extinct than bivalves that lived on the surface.\nA case has been made that the 774\u2013775 carbon-14 spike was the result of a short GRB, though a very strong solar flare is another possibility.\nGRB candidates in the Milky Way.\nNo gamma-ray bursts from within our own galaxy, the Milky Way, have been observed, and the question of whether one has ever occurred remains unresolved. In light of evolving understanding of gamma-ray bursts and their progenitors, the scientific literature records a growing number of local, past, and future GRB candidates. Long duration GRBs are related to superluminous supernovae, or hypernovae, and most luminous blue variables (LBVs) and rapidly spinning Wolf\u2013Rayet stars are thought to end their life cycles in core-collapse supernovae with an associated long-duration GRB. Knowledge of GRBs, however, is from metal-poor galaxies of former epochs of the universe's evolution, and it is impossible to directly extrapolate to encompass more evolved galaxies and stellar environments with a higher metallicity, such as the Milky Way.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Ultimatum GRB Collision is a \"hypothetical astronomical event\" proposed and conceptually presented by \"Shreeram Khadka\", describing an extreme scenario in which two independent gamma-ray burst (GRB) jets collide during their emission phase.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48804", "revid": "50524921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48804", "title": "London Marathon", "text": "Annual race held in London, England\nThe London Marathon (also known as the TCS London Marathon for sponsorship reasons) is an annual marathon held in London, England. Founded by athletes Chris Brasher and John Disley in 1981, it is typically held in April, although it moved to October for 2020, 2021, and 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The largely flat course is set around the River Thames, starting in Blackheath and finishing at The Mall. Hugh Brasher (son of Chris) is the current race director and Nick Bitel its chief executive.\nThe race has several components: it has a mass race for the public, professional races for men and women long-distance runners, elite-level wheelchair races for men and women, and a 3-mile mini marathon event for under-17 athletes. There is a significant charity running aspect to the marathon, with participants helping to raise over \u00a31 billion since its founding, including \u00a367 million at the 2024 London Marathon which was the highest amount for a single-day fund-raising event.\nSince 2006, the elite race has been part of the World Marathon Majors, which includes seven of the world's top level marathon races. The London Marathon has seen the marathon world record broken on seven occasions: Khalid Khannouchi broke the men's record in 2002, while women's records have been broken by Grete Waitz (1983), Ingrid Kristiansen (1985), Paula Radcliffe (2002, 2003, 2005) and Mary Jepkosgei Keitany (2017). The current elite course records are held by Kelvin Kiptum (2:01:25 in 2023) and Paula Radcliffe (2:15:25 in 2003). The current wheelchair course records are held by Marcel Hug (1:23:44 in 2023) and Catherine Debrunner (1:38:24 in 2022). The race often has a title sponsorship, it has been branded the \"TCS London Marathon\" since 2022.\nEditions.\n\"NOTE: The 2020 race was restricted to elite athletes in able-bodied (30 for each sex) and invited wheelchair athletes.\"\nHistory.\nThe London Marathon was not the first long-distance running event held in the city, which has a long history of marathon events. The Polytechnic Marathon (also known as the \"Poly\") was first held in 1909.\nThe current London Marathon was founded in 1981 by Olympic champion and journalist Chris Brasher and athlete John Disley. Shortly after completing the New York City Marathon in November 1979 Brasher wrote an article for \"The Observer\" newspaper which began:\nTo believe this story you must believe that the human race be one joyous family, working together, laughing together, achieving the impossible. Last Sunday, in one of the most trouble-stricken cities in the world, 11,532 men and women from 40 countries in the world, assisted by over a million black, white and yellow people, laughed, cheered and suffered during the greatest folk festival the world has seen.\nThe first London Marathon was held on 29 March 1981, more than 20,000 applied to run. 6,747 were accepted and 6,255 crossed the finish line on Constitution Hill. The Marathon's popularity has steadily grown since then. As at 2009, 746,635 people have completed the race since its inception. In 2010, 36,549 people crossed the line, the biggest field since the race began. The first wheelchair marathon race was held in 1983 and the event was credited with reducing the stigma surrounding disabled athletes. In 2013 the IPC Athletics Marathon World Cup was held within the London Marathon featuring athletes of both genders in the T42\u2013T46 and T11\u2013T13 categories. In August 2013 it was announced that the event would be staged in London until 2017 and feature athletes in the T11-T12, T13, T42-T44, T43, T45-46, T51-52 and the T53-54 class.\nFor many years the London and Polytechnic Marathons competed with each other until, in 1996, the latter folded in due to the popularity of the former.\nFollowing the Boston Marathon bombing, organisers of the 2013 London Marathon undertook a review of their security arrangements, despite no specific threats against the event. A 30-second silence was held before the start of the marathon to show respect and support to those affected by the tragedy.\nIn April 2025, race organisers announced they will no longer post on X.\nOrganisation.\nThe race is currently organised by Hugh Brasher, son of Chris, as race director and Nick Bitel as chief executive. Previously David Bedford and Bitel had overseen a period of great change for the race, including amendments to the course in 2005 which saw the cobbled section by the Tower of London replaced with a flat stretch along the Highway.\nDan Tunstall Pedoe was the medical director of the London Marathon for 25 years between the first one in 1981 until 2005. In 2003, Pedoe was shadowed by Sanjay Sharma from St George's Hospital (University of London) who took over the role in its entirety in 2006. Medical cover is provided by 150 doctors. Also assisting were more than 1,500 volunteers of St. John Ambulance, who organise over 50 first aid posts along the route, and three field hospitals at the finish. St John Ambulance also provide a number of healthcare professions for the event, including nurses, paramedics, ambulances with crews. After pressure from Sophie Power and sheRACES, the marathon now allows pregnant and post-partum women to defer their place to a later date of their choosing, thus ensuring they are fully fit and well when they race.\nThe BBC covers the event, devoting rolling coverage for most of the morning. The theme music associated with this coverage, and with the event itself, is called \"Main Titles to The Trap\", composed by Ron Goodwin for the film \"The Trap\".\nThere are three separate groups of starters: Elite Women, Wheelchair (Men and Women), and Elite Men followed by Mass Race.\nCourse.\nThe marathon is run over a largely flat course around the River Thames, and spans .\nThe route has markers at one mile intervals. Although the race publicity (athlete advice, timing charts and so on) is mile-oriented, the individual timing splits that are available to competitors after the event are kilometre-oriented.\nThe course begins at three separate points: the 'red start' in southern Greenwich Park on Charlton Way, the 'green start' in St John's Park, and the 'blue start' on Shooter's Hill Road. From these points around Blackheath at above sea level, south of the River Thames, the route heads east through Charlton. The three courses converge after in Woolwich, close to the Royal Artillery Barracks.\nAs the runners reach the , they pass by the Old Royal Naval College and head towards \"Cutty Sark\" drydocked in Greenwich. Heading next into Deptford and Surrey Quays/Rotherhithe in the Docklands, and out towards Bermondsey, competitors race along Jamaica Road before reaching the half-way point as they cross Tower Bridge. Running east again along The Highway through Wapping, competitors head up towards Limehouse and into Mudchute in the Isle of Dogs via Westferry Road, before heading into Canary Wharf.\nAs the route leads away from Canary Wharf into Poplar, competitors run west down Poplar High Street back towards Limehouse and on through Commercial Road. They then move back onto The Highway, onto Lower and Upper Thames Streets. Heading into the final leg of the race, competitors pass The Tower of London on Tower Hill. In the penultimate mile along The Embankment, the London Eye comes into view, before the athletes turn right into Birdcage Walk to complete the final , catching the sights of Big Ben and Buckingham Palace, and finishing in The Mall alongside St. James's Palace. This final section of the route formed part of the 2012 Olympic Marathon Course.\nSince the first marathon, the course has undergone very few route changes. In the first race, the course took a diversion around Southwark Park before re-joining Jamaica Road on the way to Tower Bridge and was routed through St Katherine Docks past the Tower Hotel, en route to the Tower of London and the cobblestoned stretch of road that in later years was carpeted, to help runners prevent injury on the uneven surface. In 1982, the finishing post was moved from Constitution Hill to Westminster Bridge due to construction works. It remained there for twelve years before moving to its present location at The Mall. In 2005, the route around the Isle of Dogs between was switched from a clockwise to an anti-clockwise direction, and at the route was diverted to avoid St Katherine Docks and the cobblestoned area near the Tower of London. In 2008, a suspected gas leak at a pub in Wapping diverted the course, but in 2009 the race followed the same path as in 2007.\nSince 2012 mile 21 has become a significant cheer zone with Run Dem Crew transforming the stretch of Commercial Road outside the former Limehouse Town Hall into a street party with music and confetti cannons.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 London Marathon was run on a non-traditional course, consisting of 19.6 laps of length around St James's Park, taking in The Mall, Horse Guards Parade, Birdcage Walk and Buckingham Palace. The final circuit was along the Mall, following the finish line of the traditional London Marathon course.\nResults.\nLondon is one of the top six world marathons that form the World Marathon Majors competition with a million prize purse. The inaugural marathon had 7,741 entrants, 6,255 of whom completed the race. The first Men's Elite Race in 1981 was tied between American Dick Beardsley and Norwegian Inge Simonsen, who crossed the finish line holding hands in 2 hours, 11 minutes, 48 seconds. The first Women's Elite Race, also in 1981, was won by Briton Joyce Smith in 2:29:57. In 1983, the first wheelchair races took place. Organized by the British Sports Association for the Disabled (BASD), 19 people competed and 17 finished. Gordon Perry of the United Kingdom won the Men's Wheelchair Race, coming in at 3:20:07, and Denise Smith, also of the UK, won the Women's Wheelchair Race in 4:29:03.\nWorld records for marathon running have been set several times. Khalid Khannouchi, representing the United States, set the men's world record in 2:05:38 in 2002. The following year, British runner Paula Radcliffe set the women's world record in 2:15:25 (later briefly downgraded to \"world best\" by the IAAF as it was achieved in a mixed race, but restored to the title of \"world Record\" shortly thereafter); in 2017 Mary Keitany of Kenya set a world record of 2:17:01 for an all-women's marathon. Previous women's world records were set in 1983 and 1985 by Grete Waitz and Ingrid Kristiansen respectively, both of Norway. The current men's course record is 2:01:25 set by Kenyan Kelvin Kiptum in 2023. Marcel Hug of Switzerland set the Men's Wheelchair Race course record at 1:26:27 in 2021, and the Women's equivalent was set by Swiss athlete Manuela Sch\u00e4r in 2021, with 1:39:52.\nAmateur runners.\nThe race attracts amateur runners who make up the bulk of the thirty thousand or more participants; commonly running in fancy dress for charity causes.\nIn 2002, Lloyd Scott completed the marathon wearing a deep sea diving suit that weighed a total of , with each shoe weighing ; he also set a record for the slowest London Marathon time. On 19 April 2003, former boxer Michael Watson, who had been told he would never be able to walk again after a fight with Chris Eubank, made headlines by finishing the marathon in six days. In 2006, Sir Steve Redgrave (winner of five consecutive Olympic gold medals) set a new Guinness World Record for money raised through a marathon by collecting \u00a31.8\u00a0million in sponsorship. This broke the record set the previous year by the founder of the Oasis Trust, Steve Chalke, who had collected over \u00a31.25\u00a0million. In 2011, Chalke raised a new record \u00a32.32\u00a0million. The \u00a3500 that Claire Squires collected before the race increased to over \u00a31 million after she died having collapsed during the 2012 race.\nA small number of runners, known as the \"Ever Presents\", have completed each of the London Marathons since 1981. When the list was first established in 1995, there were 42. After 2019, their number has shrunk to 10. At the running of the 2019 event, the oldest runner was 85-year old Kenneth Jones, whilst the youngest runner was 60-year-old Chris Finill. They are all male.\nIn 2025, Singaporean marathon record holder Soh Rui Yong set a new Guinness World Record for fastest ever marathon in a suit, running 2:39:57. This broke the previous record of 2:40:53 by Frenchman Emmanuel Bonnier. Soh accomplished this feat while an MBA student at London Business School and is also a graduate of University College London Law School.\nEntry.\nThere are multiple ways that runners can enter the London Marathon. The breakdown of places is not publicly shared by the organisation. As of 2023, the available places are generally considered to be distributed approximately as follows:\nAs well as a small number of places distributed directly to overseas ballot, tour operators and those deferred from previous editions.\nCharity.\nThe majority of runners at the London Marathon do so using a Charity Place. To obtain this, they commit to raising a minimum amount for a registered charitable cause. In contrast to the other World Marathon Majors and other international events, London Marathon has a bigger focus on charity running than other similar events. London Marathon participants have helped to raise over \u00a31 billion since its founding, including \u00a367 million (dated to Apr 24 2024) at the 2024 London Marathon which was the highest amount for a single-day fund-raising event.\nGeneral Ballot.\nIn recent years, following the growth in popularity of recreational running, it has become increasingly difficult to obtain a place via the general ballot or lottery. In 2024, success in the ballot is estimated to be below 3%. There have been a number of changes in recent years to address the increase in applications (online applications, removal of multi-ballot entry guarantee etc.). The 2025 event ballot received more than 840,000 applications, exceeding the record of 578,000 previously set by the 2024 ballot.\nGood for age.\nThe Good-for-Age entry route is the entry route for the majority of \"competitive\" runners. The aim of the good-for-age category is to provide places for those who achieve a sufficiently fast age-graded time. Due to a greater number of men meeting the Good-for-age criteria, places were capped at 3,000 entries for each gender to ensure an even gender split. This has led to the reduction in the Good for Age mens times in recent years. There is a 10% difference in the marathon World Record pace, but a 26% difference in the London Marathon Good for Age entry times. London Marathon is now harder to enter for men than Boston.\nMini Marathon.\nThe Virgin Money Giving Mini London Marathon is the sister of The London Marathon. The course is the last of the London Marathon and is for under-13s, under-15s and under-17s from all 33 London Boroughs along with 13 teams from ten English regions and three Home Countries: Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. There is also a Mini Wheelchair race on the day. The race doubles as the British Athletics 3mile Championships.\nBBC live coverage.\nThe BBC has broadcast coverage of the London Marathon since its inception in 1981 and has broadcast the race live, and in full, since 1984. Originally hosted out-of-vision by David Coleman, more recently the main presenters on BBC One have been Sue Barker, Jonathan Edwards and Gabby Logan. The highlight presenters on BBC Two have been Jonathan Edwards (2007\u201312), Sonali Shah (2013), and Helen Skelton (2014\u201315). The commentators for the Marathon on the BBC were David Coleman, Ron Pickering, Brendan Foster, Paul Dickinson, Steve Cram, Andrew Cotter, Stuart Storey, Paula Radcliffe, Dame Tanni Grey-Thompson, Liz McColgan, and Rob Walker.\nTheme tune.\nThe theme tune used by the BBC every year is from the film score of \"The Trap\", a 1966 film about a Canadian fur trapper, starring Oliver Reed and Rita Tushingham. The music was written by Ron Goodwin and is performed by the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra.\nSponsorship and marketing.\nThe original sponsors of the London Marathon were Gillette, who sponsored the event from 1981 to 1983. Subsequent sponsors have been Mars (1984\u20131988), ADT (1989\u20131992), NutraSweet (1993\u20131995), and Flora (1996\u20132009). Virgin Money sponsored the marathon from 2010, after signing a five-year \u00a317m sponsorship deal in 2008. In April 2013, the London Marathon renewed its sponsorship deal with Virgin Money for a further five years and the race changed its name to the Virgin Money London Marathon. In 2021 it was announced that Indian consultancy company Tata Consultancy Services would take over sponsorship of the London Marathon from 2022.\nA number of other companies and organisations also use the event for brand identification and marketing, including New Balance, Lucozade Sport, and Fuller's Brewery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*https://\n*https://"}
{"id": "48808", "revid": "43147063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48808", "title": "Second Council of Constantinople", "text": "Ecumenical council held in 553 in response to the Three Chapters controversy\nThe Second Council of Constantinople is the fifth of the first seven ecumenical councils recognized by both the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church. It is also recognized by the Old Catholics and others. Protestant opinions and recognition of it are varied. Some Protestants, such as Calvinists, recognize the first four councils, whereas Lutherans and most Anglo-Catholics accept all seven. Constantinople II was convoked by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I under the presidency of Patriarch Eutychius of Constantinople. It was held from 5 May to 2 June 553. Participants were overwhelmingly Eastern bishops\u2014only sixteen Western bishops were present, including nine from Illyricum and seven from Africa, but none from Italy\u2014out of the 152 total.\nThe main work of the council was to confirm the condemnation issued by edict in 551 by the Emperor Justinian against the Three Chapters. These were the Christological writings and ultimately the person of Theodore of Mopsuestia (died 428), certain writings against Cyril of Alexandria's Twelve Anathemas accepted at the Council of Ephesus, written by Theodoret of Cyrrhus (died c.\u2009466), and a letter written against Cyrillianism and the Ephesian Council by Ibas of Edessa (died 457).\nThe purpose of the condemnation was to make plain that the Great Church, which followed a Chalcedonian creed, was firmly opposed to Nestorianism as supported by the Antiochene school which had either assisted Nestorius, the eponymous heresiarch, or had inspired the teaching for which he was anathematized and exiled. The council also condemned the teaching that Mary could not be rightly called the Mother of God () but only the mother of the man () or the mother of Christ ().\nThe Second Council of Constantinople is also considered as one of the many attempts by Byzantine Emperors to bring peace in the empire between the Chalcedonian and non-Chalcedonian factions of the church which had been in continuous conflict since the times of the Council of Ephesus in AD 431.\nProceedings.\nThe council was presided over by Eutychius, Patriarch of Constantinople, assisted by the other three eastern patriarchs or their representatives. Pope Vigilius was also invited; but even though he was at this period resident in Constantinople (to avoid the perils of life in Italy, convulsed by the war against the Ostrogoths), he declined to attend, and even issued a document forbidding the council from proceeding without him (his 'First Constitutum'). For more details see Pope Vigilius.\nThe council, however, proceeded without the pope to condemn the Three Chapters. And during the seventh session of the council, the bishops had Vigilius stricken from the diptychs for his refusal to appear at the council and approve its proceedings, effectively excommunicating him personally but not the rest of the Western Church. Vigilius was then imprisoned in Constantinople by the emperor and his advisors were exiled. After six months, in December 553, he agreed, however, to condemn the Three Chapters, claiming that his hesitation was due to being misled by his advisors. His approval of the council was expressed in two documents, (a letter to Eutychius of Constantinople on 8 December 553, and a second \"Constitutum\" of 23 February 554, probably addressed to the Western episcopate), condemning the Three Chapters, on his own authority and without mention of the council.\nIn Northern Italy the ecclesiastical provinces of Milan and Aquileia broke communion with Rome. Milan accepted the condemnation only toward the end of the sixth century, whereas Aquileia did not do so until about 700. The rest of the Western Church accepted the decrees of the council, though without great enthusiasm. Though ranked as one of the ecumenical councils, it never attained in the West the status of either Nicaea or Chalcedon.\nIn Visigothic Spain (Reccared having converted a short time prior) the churches never accepted the council; when news of the later Third Council of Constantinople was communicated to them by Rome it was received as the \"fifth\" ecumenical council, not the sixth. Isidore of Seville, in his \"Chronicle\" and \"De Viris Illustribus\", judged Justinian a tyrant and persecutor of the orthodox and an admirer of heresy, contrasting him with Facundus of Hermiane and Victor of Tunnuna, who was considered a martyr.\nDespite the conflict between the council and the pope, and the inability to reconcile Chalcedonians and non-Chalcedonians, the council still made a significant theological contribution. The canons condemning the Three Chapters were preceded by ten dogmatic canons which defined Chalcedonian Christology with a new precision, bringing out that Christ has two natures, the human and the divine, in one person. The 'two natures' defined at Chalcedon were now clearly interpreted as two sets of attributes possessed by a single person, Christ God, the Second Person of the Trinity. Later Byzantine Christology, as found in Maximus the Confessor and John of Damascus, was built upon this basis. It might have proved sufficient, moreover, to bring about the reunion of Chalcedonians and non-Chalcedonians, had it not been for the severance of connections between the two groups that resulted from the Muslim conquests of the next century.\nActs.\nThe original Greek acts of the council are lost, but an old Latin version exists, possibly made for Vigilius, of which there is a critical edition and of which there is now an English translation and commentary, and a modern Greek translation and commentary. It has been alleged (probably falsely) that the original Acts of the Fifth Council had been tampered with in favour of Monothelitism. It used to be argued that the extant acts are incomplete, since they make no mention of the debate over Origenism. However, the solution generally accepted today is that the bishops signed the canons condemning Origenism before the council formally opened. This condemnation was confirmed by Pope Vigilius and the subsequent ecumenical council (Third Council of Constantinople) gave its \"assent\" in its Definition of Faith to the five previous synods, including \"... the last, that is the Fifth holy Synod assembled in this place, against Theodore of Mopsuestia, Origen, Didymus, and Evagrius ...\"; its full conciliar authority has only been questioned in modern times.\nThere is a Syriac account of the council in the \"Melkite Chronicle\" of 641.\nAlso, one of the Acts of the Council at Constantinople, were the Anathemas issued against those who rejected the Perpetual Virginity of Mary.\nAftermath.\nJustinian hoped that this would contribute to a reunion between the Chalcedonians and non-Chalcedonians in the eastern provinces of the Empire. Various attempts at reconciliation between these parties within the Byzantine Empire were made by many emperors over the four centuries following the Council of Ephesus, none of them successful. Some attempts at reconciliation, such as this one, the condemnation of the Three Chapters, and the unprecedented posthumous anathematization of Theodore\u2014who had once been widely esteemed as a pillar of orthodoxy\u2014caused further schisms and heresies to arise in the process, such as the aforementioned schism of the Three Chapters and the emergent semi-monophysite compromises of monoenergism and monotheletism. These propositions assert, respectively, that Christ possessed no human energy but only a divine function or principle of operation (purposefully formulated in an equivocal and vague manner, and promulgated between 610 and 622 by the Emperor Heraclius under the advice of the Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople) and that Christ possessed no human will but only a divine will, \"will\" is understood to mean the desires and appetites in accord with nature (promulgated in 638 by the same and opposed most notably by Maximus the Confessor).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48809", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48809", "title": "Earth impacts", "text": ""}
{"id": "48814", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48814", "title": "Aerobot", "text": "Flying robot for planetary exploration\nAn aerobot is an aerial robot, usually used in the context of an uncrewed space probe or unmanned aerial vehicle.\nWhile work has been done since the 1960s on robot \"rovers\" to explore the Moon and other worlds in the Solar System, such machines have limitations. They tend to be expensive and have limited range, and due to the communications time lags over interplanetary distances, they have to be smart enough to navigate without disabling themselves.\nFor planets with atmospheres of any substance, however, there is an alternative: an autonomous flying robot, or \"aerobot\". Most aerobot concepts are based on aerostats, primarily balloons, but occasionally airships. Flying above obstructions in the winds, a balloon could explore large regions of a planet in detail for relatively low cost. Airplanes for planetary exploration have also been proposed.\nBasics of balloons.\nWhile the notion of sending a balloon to another planet sounds strange at first, balloons have a number of advantages for planetary exploration. They can be made light in weight and are potentially relatively inexpensive. They can cover a great deal of ground, and their view from a height gives them the ability to examine wide swathes of terrain with far more detail than would be available from an orbiting satellite. For exploratory missions, their relative lack of directional control is not a major obstacle as there is generally no need to direct them to a specific location.\nBalloon designs for possible planetary missions have involved a few unusual concepts. One is the solar, or infrared (IR) Montgolfiere. This is a hot-air balloon where the envelope is made from a material that traps heat from sunlight, or from heat radiated from a planetary surface. Black is the best color for absorbing heat, but other factors are involved and the material may not necessarily be black.\nSolar Montgolfieres have several advantages for planetary exploration, as they can be easier to deploy than a light gas balloon, do not necessarily require a tank of light gas for inflation, and are relatively forgiving of small leaks. They do have the disadvantage that they are only aloft during daylight hours.\nThe other is a \"reversible fluid\" balloon. This type of balloon consists of an envelope connected to a reservoir, with the reservoir containing a fluid that is easily vaporized. The balloon can be made to rise by vaporizing the fluid into gas, and can be made to sink by condensing the gas back into fluid. There are a number of different ways of implementing this scheme, but the physical principle is the same in all cases.\nA balloon designed for planetary exploration will carry a small gondola containing an instrument payload. The gondola will also carry power, control, and communications subsystems. Due to weight and power supply constraints, the communications subsystem will generally be small and low power, and interplanetary communications will be performed through an orbiting planetary probe acting as a relay.\nA solar Montgolfiere will sink at night, and will have a guide rope attached to the bottom of the gondola that will curl up on the ground and anchor the balloon during the darkness hours. The guide rope will be made of low friction materials to keep it from catching or tangling on ground features.\nAlternatively, a balloon may carry a thicker instrumented \"snake\" in place of the gondola and guiderope, combining the functions of the two. This is a convenient scheme for making direct surface measurements.\nA balloon could also be anchored to stay in one place to make atmospheric observations. Such a static balloon is known as an \"aerostat\".\nOne of the trickier aspects of planetary balloon operations is inserting them into operation. Typically, the balloon enters the planetary atmosphere in an \"aeroshell\", a heat shield in the shape of a flattened cone. After atmospheric entry, a parachute will extract the balloon assembly from the aeroshell, which falls away. The balloon assembly then deploys and inflates.\nOnce operational, the aerobot will be largely on its own and will have to conduct its mission autonomously, accepting only general commands over its long link to Earth. The aerobot will have to navigate in three dimensions, acquire and store science data, perform flight control by varying its altitude, and possibly make landings at specific sites to provide close-up investigation.\nThe Venus Vega balloons.\nSoviet scientist G.M. Moskalenko studied the possibility of lighter than air exploration of Venus in the 1970s.\nThe first, and so far only, planetary balloon mission was performed by the Space Research Institute of Soviet Academy of Sciences in cooperation with the French space agency CNES in 1985. A small balloon, similar in appearance to terrestrial weather balloons, was carried on each of the two Soviet Vega Venus probes, launched in 1984.\nThe first balloon was inserted into the atmosphere of Venus on 11 June 1985, followed by the second balloon on 15 June 1985. The first balloon failed after only 56 minutes, but the second operated for a little under two Earth days until its batteries ran down.\nThe Venus Vega balloons were the idea of Jacques Blamont, chief scientist for CNES and the father of planetary balloon exploration. He energetically promoted the concept and enlisted international support for the small project.\nThe scientific results of the Venus VEGA probes were modest. More importantly, the clever and simple experiment demonstrated the validity of using balloons for planetary exploration.\nThe Mars aerobot effort.\nAfter the success of the Venus VEGA balloons, Blamont focused on a more ambitious balloon mission to Mars, to be carried on a Soviet space probe.\nThe atmospheric pressure on Mars is about 150 times less than that of Earth. In such a thin atmosphere, a balloon with a volume of could carry a payload of , while a balloon with a volume of could carry .\nThe French had already conducted extensive experiments with solar Montgolfieres, performing over 30 flights from the late 1970s into the early 1990s. The Montgolfieres flew at an altitude of 35 kilometers, where the atmosphere was as thin and cold as it would be on Mars, and one spent 69 days aloft, circling the Earth twice.\nEarly concepts for the Mars balloon featured a \"dual balloon\" system, with a sealed hydrogen or helium-filled balloon tethered to a solar Montgolfiere. The light-gas balloon was designed to keep the Montgolfiere off the ground at night. During the day, the Sun would heat up the Montgolfiere, causing the balloon assembly to rise.\nEventually, the group decided on a cylindrical sealed helium balloon made of aluminized PET film, and with a volume of . The balloon would rise when heated during the day and sink as it cooled at night.\nTotal mass of the balloon assembly was , with a gondola and a instrumented guiderope. The balloon was expected to operate for ten days. Unfortunately, although considerable development work was performed on the balloon and its subsystems, Russian financial difficulties pushed the Mars probe out from 1992, then to 1994, and then to 1996. The Mars balloon was dropped from the project due to cost.\nJPL aerobot experiments.\nBy this time, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) had become interested in the idea of planetary aerobots, and in fact a team under Jim Cutts of JPL had been working on concepts for planetary aerobots for several years, as well as performing experiments to validate aerobot technology.\nThe first such experiments focused on a series of reversible-fluid balloons, under the project name ALICE, for \"Altitude Control Experiment\". The first such balloon, ALICE 1, flew in 1993, with other flights through ALICE 8 in 1997.\nRelated work included the characterization of materials for a Venus balloon envelope, and two balloon flights in 1996 to test instrument payloads under the name BARBE, for \"Balloon Assisted Radiation Budget Equipment\".\nBy 1996, JPL was working on a full-fledged aerobot experiment named PAT, for \"Planetary Aerobot Testbed\", which was intended to demonstrate a complete planetary aerobot through flights into Earth's atmosphere. PAT concepts envisioned a reversible-fluid balloon with a 10-kilogram payload that would include navigation and camera systems, and eventually would operate under autonomous control. The project turned out to be too ambitious, and was cancelled in 1997. JPL continued to work on a more focused, low-cost experiments to lead to a Mars aerobot, under the name MABVAP, for \"Mars Aerobot Validation Program\". MABVAP experiments included drops of balloon systems from hot-air balloons and helicopters to validate the tricky deployment phase of a planetary aerobot mission, and development of envelopes for superpressure balloons with materials and structures suited to a long-duration Mars mission.\nJPL also provided a set of atmospheric and navigation sensors for the Solo Spirit round-the-world manned balloon flights, both to support the balloon missions and to validate technologies for planetary aerobots.\nWhile these tests and experiments were going on, JPL performed a number of speculative studies for planetary aerobot missions to Mars, Venus, Saturn's moon Titan, and the outer planets.\nMars.\nJPL's MABVAP technology experiments were intended to lead to an actual Mars aerobot mission, named MABTEX, for \"Mars Aerobot Technology Experiment\". As its name implies, MABTEX was primarily intended to be an operational technology experiment as a precursor to a more ambitious efforts. MABTEX was envisioned as a small superpressure balloon, carried to Mars on a \"microprobe\" weighing no more than . Once inserted, the operational balloon would have a total mass of no more than and would remain operational for a week. The small gondola would have navigational and control electronics, along with a stereo imaging system, as well as a spectrometer and magnetometer.\nPlans envisioned a follow-on to MABTEX as a much more sophisticated aerobot named MGA, for \"Mars Geoscience Aerobot\". Design concepts for MGA envisioned a superpressure balloon system very much like that of MABTEX, but much larger. MGA would carry a payload ten times larger than that of MABTEX, and would remain aloft for up to three months, circling Mars more than 25\u00a0times and covering over . The payload would include sophisticated equipment, such as an ultrahigh resolution stereo imager, along with oblique imaging capabilities; a radar sounder to search for subsurface water; an infrared spectroscopy system to search for important minerals; a magnetometer; and weather and atmospheric instruments. MABTEX might be followed in turn by a small solar-powered blimp named MASEPA, for \"Mars Solar Electric Propelled Aerobot\".\nVenus.\nJPL has also pursued similar studies on Venus aerobots. A Venus Aerobot Technology Experiment (VEBTEX) has been considered as a technology validation experiment, but the focus appears to have been more on full operational missions. One mission concept, the Venus Aerobot Multisonde (VAMS), envisions an aerobot operating at altitudes above that would drop surface probes, or \"sondes\", onto specific surface targets. The balloon would then relay information from the sondes directly to Earth, and would also collect planetary magnetic field data and other information. VAMS would require no fundamentally new technology, and may be appropriate for a NASA low-cost Discovery planetary science mission.\nSignificant work has been performed on a more ambitious concept, the Venus Geoscience Aerobot (VGA). Designs for the VGA envision a relatively large reversible-fluid balloon, filled with helium and water, that could descend to the surface of Venus to sample surface sites, and then rise again to high altitudes and cool off.\nDeveloping an aerobot that can withstand the high pressures and temperatures (up to 480 degrees Celsius, or almost 900 degrees Fahrenheit) on the surface of Venus, as well as passage through sulfuric acid clouds, will require new technologies. As of 2002, VGA was not expected to be ready until late in the following decade. Prototype balloon envelopes have been fabricated from polybenzoxazole, a polymer that exhibits high strength, resistance to heat, and low leakage for light gases. A gold coating is applied to allow the polymer film to resist corrosion from acid clouds.\nWork has also been done on a VGA gondola weighing about . In this design, most instruments are contained in a spherical pressure vessel with an outer shell of titanium and an inner shell of stainless steel. The vessel contains a solid-state camera and other instruments, as well as communications and flight control systems. The vessel is designed to tolerate pressures of up to a hundred atmospheres and maintain internal temperatures below even on the surface of Venus. The vessel is set at the bottom of a hexagonal \"basket\" of solar panels that in turn provide tether connections to the balloon system above, and is surrounded by a ring of pipes acting as a heat exchanger. An S-band communications antenna is mounted on the rim of the basket, and a radar antenna for surface studies extends out of the vessel on a mast.\nThe Venus Atmospheric Maneuverable Platform (VAMP) is a mission concept by the aerospace companies Northrop Grumman and LGarde for a powered, long endurance, semi-buoyant inflatable aircraft that would explore the upper atmosphere of Venus for biosignatures as well as perform atmospheric measurements.\nIn April 2021 it was reported that NASA allocated work to design and test robotic balloons for future exploration of Venus.\nTitan.\nTitan, the largest moon of Saturn, is an attractive target for aerobot exploration, as it has a nitrogen atmosphere five times as dense as that of Earth's that contains a smog of organic photochemicals, hiding the moon's surface from view by visual sensors. An aerobot would be able to penetrate this haze to study the moon's mysterious surface and search for complex organic molecules. NASA has outlined a number of different aerobot mission concepts for Titan, under the general name of Titan Biologic Explorer.\nOne concept, known as the Titan Aerobot Multisite mission, involves a reversible-fluid balloon filled with argon that could descend from high altitude to the surface of the moon, perform measurements, and then rise again to high altitude to perform measurements and move to a different site. Another concept, the Titan Aerobot Singlesite mission, would use a superpressure balloon that would select a single site, vent much of its gas, and then survey that site in detail.\nAn ingenious variation on this scheme, the Titan Aerover, combines aerobot and rover. This vehicle features a triangular frame that connects three balloons, each about in diameter. After entry into Titan's atmosphere, the aerover would float until it found an interesting site, then vent helium to descend to the surface. The three balloons would then serve as floats or wheels as necessary. JPL has built a simple prototype that looks like three beachballs on a tubular frame.\nNo matter what form the Titan Biologic Explorer mission takes, the system would likely require an atomic-powered radioisotope thermoelectric generator module for power. Solar power would not be possible at Saturn's distance and under Titan's smog, and batteries would not give adequate mission endurance. The aerobot would also carry a miniaturized chemical lab to search for complicated organic chemicals.\nOutside of JPL, other mission studies of Titan aerobot concepts have included studies of airships by MIT and NASA Glenn,\nJupiter.\nFinally, aerobots might be used to explore the atmosphere of Jupiter and possibly the other gaseous outer planets. As the atmospheres of these planets are largely composed of hydrogen, and since there is no lighter gas than hydrogen, such an aerobot would have to be a Montgolfiere. As sunlight is weak at such distances, the aerobot would obtain most of its heating from infrared energy radiated by the planet below.\nA Jupiter aerobot might operate at altitudes where the air pressure ranges from one to ten atmospheres, occasionally dropping lower for detailed studies. It would make atmospheric measurements and return imagery and remote sensing of weather phenomena, such as Jupiter's Great Red Spot. A Jupiter aerobot might also drop sondes deep into the atmosphere and relay their data back to an orbiter until the sondes are destroyed by temperature and pressure.\nPlanetary aircraft.\nWinged airplane concepts have been proposed for robotic exploration in the atmosphere of Mars, Venus, Titan, and even Jupiter.\nThe main technical challenges of flying on Mars include:\nAn aircraft concept, ARES was selected for a detailed design study as one of the four finalists for the 2007 Mars Scout Program opportunity, but was eventually not selected in favor of the Phoenix mission. In the design study, both half-scale and full-scale aircraft were tested under Mars-atmospheric conditions. \"(See also Mars airplane.)\"\nPlanetary rotorcraft.\nIn 2002, a paper was published suggesting autonomous robotic helicopters for Mars exploration, possible for the Mars Scout Program. A number of advantages of a viable rotorcraft design were noted, including the ability to pass over difficult Mars terrain yet still visit multiple sites \"in situ\". The short hop made by Lunar Surveyor 6 in 1967 was noted as example of hopping to visit another site.\n\"Ingenuity\", part of NASA's Mars 2020 mission, is a defunct robotic helicopter that demonstrated the first rotorcraft flight in the atmosphere of Mars. The aircraft was deployed from the \"Perseverance\" rover, and initially flew five times during its 30-day test campaign early in the mission. Each flight took no more than 110 seconds, at altitudes ranging from off the ground, and covered a maximum distance of up to per flight. It used autonomous control and communicated with \"Perseverance\" directly after each landing. It achieved the first powered flight on another planet. \"Ingenuity\" had been operating on Mars for sols ( total days; ) before retirement, when all four of its rotor blades were likely damaged, causing NASA to retire the craft.\nNASA's \"Dragonfly\" mission, planned for 2027, will feature a rotorcraft which will explore Titan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48815", "revid": "45451327", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48815", "title": "Fu-Go balloon bomb", "text": "WWII Japanese incendiary weapon\n was an deployed by Japan against the United States during World War II. It consisted of a hydrogen-filled paper balloon in diameter, with a payload of four incendiary devices and one high-explosive anti-personnel bomb. The uncontrolled balloons were carried over the Pacific Ocean from Japan to North America by fast, high-altitude air currents, today known as the jet stream, and used a sophisticated sandbag ballast system to maintain their altitude. The bombs were intended to ignite large-scale forest fires and spread panic.\nBetween November 1944 and April 1945, the Imperial Japanese Army launched about 9,300 balloons from sites on coastal Honshu, of which about 300 were found or observed in the U.S., Canada, and Mexico. The bombs were ineffective as fire starters due to damp seasonal conditions, with no forest fires being attributed to the offensive. A U.S. media censorship campaign prevented the Imperial Army from learning of the offensive's results. On May 5, 1945, six civilians were killed by one of the bombs near Bly, Oregon, becoming the war's only deaths by enemy action in the contiguous United States. The Fu-Go balloon bomb was the first weapon system with intercontinental range, predating the intercontinental ballistic missile.\nBackground.\nThe balloon bomb concept was developed by the Imperial Japanese Army's Ninth Technical Research Institute (also known as the Noborito Research Institute), tasked with creating special weapons. In 1933, Lieutenant General Reikichi Tada started a balloon bomb program at Noborito designated Fu-Go, which proposed a hydrogen-filled balloon in diameter with a time fuse, capable of delivering bombs up to . The project was not completed and stopped by 1935.\nAfter the Doolittle Raid in April 1942, in which American planes bombed the Japanese mainland, the Imperial General Headquarters directed Noborito to develop a retaliatory bombing capability against the U.S. In mid-1942, Noborito investigated several proposals, including long-range bombers that could make one-way sorties from Japan to cities on the U.S. West Coast, and small bomb-laden seaplanes which could be launched from submarines. On September 9, 1942, the latter was tested in the Lookout Air Raid, in which a Yokosuka E14Y seaplane was launched from a submarine off the Oregon coast. Warrant Officer Nobuo Fujita dropped two large incendiary bombs in Siskiyou National Forest in the hopes of starting a forest fire and safely returned to the submarine. Response crews spotted the plane and contained the small blazes. The program was cancelled by the Imperial Navy.\nAlso in September 1942, Major General Sueki Kusaba, who had served under Tada in the original balloon bomb program in the 1930s, was assigned to the laboratory and revived the Fu-Go project with a focus on longer flights. The Oregon air raid, while not achieving its strategic objective, had demonstrated the potential of using unmanned balloons at a low cost to ignite large-scale forest fires. According to U.S. interviews with Japanese officials after the war, the balloon bomb campaign was undertaken \"almost exclusively for home propaganda purposes\", and the Army had little expectation of its effectiveness.\nDesign and development.\nBy March 1943, Kusaba's team developed a design capable of floating at for up to 30 hours. The balloons were constructed from four to five thin layers of \"washi\", a durable paper derived from the paper mulberry (\"k\u014dzo\") bush, which were glued together with \"konnyaku\" (Japanese potato) paste. The Army mobilized thousands of teenage girls at high schools across the country to laminate and glue the sheets together, with final assembly and inflation tests at large indoor arenas including the Nichigeki Music Hall and Ry\u014dgoku Kokugikan sumo hall in Tokyo. The original proposal called for night launches from submarines located off of the U.S. coast, a distance the balloons could cover in 10 hours. A calibrated timer would release an incendiary bomb at the end of the flight. Two submarines (\"I-34\" and \"I-35\") were prepared and two hundred balloons were produced by August 1943, but attack missions were postponed due to the need for submarines as weapons and food transports.\nEngineers next investigated the feasibility of balloon launches against the United States from the Japanese mainland, a distance of at least . Engineers sought to make use of strong seasonal air currents discovered flowing from west to east at high altitude and speed over Japan, today known as the jet stream. The currents had been investigated by Japanese scientist Wasaburo Oishi in the 1920s. In late 1943, the Army consulted Hidetoshi Arakawa of the Central Meteorological Observatory, who used Oishi's data to extrapolate the air currents across the Pacific Ocean and estimate that a balloon released in winter and that maintained an altitude of could reach the North American continent in 30 to 100 hours. Arakawa further found that the strongest winds blew from November to March at speeds approaching .\nChanging pressure levels in a fixed-volume balloon posed technical challenges. During the day, heat from the sun increased pressure, risking the balloon rising above the air currents or bursting. A relief valve was added to allow gas to escape when the envelope's internal pressure rose above a set level. At night, cool temperatures risked the balloon falling below the currents, an issue that worsened as gas was released. To resolve this, engineers developed a sophisticated ballast system with 32 sandbags mounted around a cast aluminum wheel, with each sandbag connected to gunpowder blowout plugs. The plugs were connected to three redundant aneroid barometers calibrated for an altitude between , below which one sandbag was released; the next plug was armed two minutes after the previous plug was blown. A separate altimeter set between controlled the later release of the bombs. A one-hour activating fuse for the altimeters was ignited at launch, allowing the balloon time to ascend above these two thresholds. Tests of the design in August 1944 indicated success, with several balloons releasing radiosonde signals for up to 80 hours (the maximum time allowed by the batteries). A self-destruct system was added; a three-minute fuse triggered by the release of the last bomb would detonate a block of picric acid and destroy the carriage, followed by an 82-minute fuse that would ignite the hydrogen and destroy the envelope.\nIn late 1942, the Imperial General Headquarters had directed the Navy to begin its own balloon bomb program in parallel with the Army project. Lieutenant Commander Kiyoshi Tanaka headed a group which developed a rubberized silk balloon, designated the B-Type (in contrast to the Army's A-Type). The silk material was an effort to create a flexible envelope that could withstand pressure changes. The design was tested in August 1944, but the balloons burst immediately after reaching altitude, determined to be the result of faulty rubberized seams. The Navy program was subsequently consolidated under Army control, due in part to the declining availability of rubber as the war continued. The B-Type balloons were later equipped with a version of the A-Type's ballast system and tested on November 2, 1944; one of these balloons, which was not loaded with bombs, became the first to be recovered by Americans after being spotted in the water off San Pedro, California, on November 4.\nThe final A-Type design was in diameter, and had a gas volume of and a lifting capacity of at operating altitude. The bomb payload most commonly carried was:\nOffensive and defenses.\nA balloon launch organization of three battalions was formed. The first battalion included headquarters and three squadrons, totaling 1,500 men, at nine launch stations at Otsu in Ibaraki Prefecture. The second battalion of 700 men in three squadrons operated six launch stations at Ichinomiya, Chiba, and the third battalion of 600 men in two squadrons operated six launch stations at Nakoso, Fukushima. The Otsu site featured its own hydrogen plant, while the second and third battalions used hydrogen gas transported from factories around Tokyo. The combined launching capacity of the sites was about 200 balloons per day, with 15,000 launches planned through March. The Army estimated that only 10 percent of the balloons would survive the journey across the Pacific Ocean.\nEach launch pad consisted of anchor screws drilled into the ground in a circle the same diameter as the balloons. After anchoring an envelope, hoses were used to fill it with of hydrogen while it was tied down with guide ropes and detached from the anchors. The carriage was attached with shroud lines, and the guide ropes were untied. Each launch required a crew of 30 men and took between 30 minutes and one hour, depending on the presence of surface winds. The best time for launches was after a high-pressure front had passed, and wind conditions were best before the onshore breezes at sunrise. Suitable wind conditions were only expected for three to five days a week, for a total of about fifty days during the winter period of maximum jet stream velocity.\nThe first balloons were launched on November 3, 1944. Some balloons in each of the launches carried radiosonde equipment instead of bombs, and were tracked by direction finding stations to follow their progress. Two weeks after the discovery of the B-Type balloon off San Pedro, an A-Type balloon was found in the ocean off Kailua, Hawaii, on November 14. More were found near Thermopolis, Wyoming, on December 6 (with an explosion heard by witnesses, and a crater later located) and near Kalispell, Montana, on December 11, followed by finds near Marshall and Holy Cross, Alaska, and Estacada, Oregon, later in the month. Authorities were placed on heightened alert, and forest rangers were ordered to report landings and recoveries. The balloons continued to be discovered across North America, with sightings and partial or full recoveries in Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan (where an incendiary bomb was found at Farmington in the easternmost incident), Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming; in Canada in Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and the Northwest and Yukon Territories; in Mexico in Baja California Norte and Sonora; and at sea. By August 1945, the U.S. Army had recorded 285 balloon incidents (28 by January, 54 in February, 114 in March, 42 in April, 16 in May, 17 in June, and 14 in July).\nMost U.S. defense plans were only fully implemented after the offensive ended in April 1945. In response to the threat of wildfires in the Pacific Northwest during the summer months, the Army's Western Defense Command (WDC), Fourth Air Force, and Ninth Service Command organized the \"Firefly Project\" with Stinson L-5 Sentinel and Douglas C-47 Skytrain aircraft and 2,700 troops, including 200 paratroopers from the all-black 555th Parachute Infantry Battalion, who were deployed in 36 firefighting missions between May and October 1945. The Army used the U.S. Forest Service as a proxy agency, unifying fire suppression communications between federal and state agencies and modernizing the service through an influx of military personnel, equipment, and tactics. In the WDC's \"Lightning Project\", health and agricultural officers, veterinarians, and 4-H clubs were instructed to report any new diseases of crops or livestock caused by potential biological warfare. Stocks of decontamination chemicals, ultimately unused, were shipped to key points in the western states. Although biological warfare had been a concern for months, the WDC's plan was not formalized and fully implemented until July 1945. A sub-section of the project, \"Arrow\", provided for rapid air transportation of all balloon remains to the Technical Air Intelligence Center laboratory in Washington, D.C., for biological analysis. A U.S. investigation after the war concluded there had not been plans for chemical or biological payloads.\nArmy Air Forces and Navy fighter planes were scrambled on several occasions to intercept balloons, but they had little success due to inaccurate sighting reports, bad weather, and the very high altitude at which they traveled. In all, only about 20 balloons were shot down by U.S. and Canadian pilots. Attempts to track the radiosonde balloons produced 95 suspected signals, but they were of little use due to the very low proportion of balloons with transmitters, and observed fading of signals as they approached. Experiments on recovered balloons in February 1945 to determine their radar reflectivity were unsuccessful. In the \"Sunset Project\", initiated in early April and fully operational by June, the Fourth Air Force attempted to detect balloons with search radars at ground-controlled interception sites in coastal Washington, but the project detected nothing and was cancelled in early August. \nFew American officials believed at first that the balloons could have come directly from Japan. Early U.S. theories speculated that they were launched from German prisoner of war camps or from Japanese-American internment centers. After bombs of Japanese origin were found, it was believed that the balloons were launched from coastal submarines. Statistical analysis of valve serial numbers suggested that tens of thousands of balloons had been produced. The mineral and diatom composition of sand from the sandbags was studied by the Military Geology Unit of the United States Geological Survey, which assessed its origin as Shiogama, Miyagi, or less likely, Ichinomiya, Chiba, only the latter being correct. Aerial reconnaissance of Shiogama in May 1945 showed what was mistakenly interpreted as inflated balloons and a possible launch area at the beach.\nCensorship campaign.\nOn January 4, 1945, the U.S. Office of Censorship sent a confidential memo to newspaper editors and radio broadcasters asking that they give no publicity to balloon incidents; this proved highly effective, with the agency sending another memo three months later stating that cooperation had been \"excellent\" and that \"there is no question that your refusal to publish or broadcast information about these balloons has baffled the Japanese, annoyed and hindered them, and has been an important contribution to security.\" The Imperial Army only ever learned of the balloon at Kalispell from an article in the Chinese newspaper \"Ta Kung Pao\" on December 18, 1944. The Kalispell find was originally reported on December 14 by the \"Western News\", a weekly published in Libby, Montana; the story later appeared in articles in the January 1, 1945, editions of \"Time\" and \"Newsweek\" magazines, as well as on the front page of the January 2 edition of \"The Oregonian\" of Portland, Oregon, before the Office of Censorship sent the memo. Starting in mid-February 1945, Japanese propaganda broadcasts falsely announced numerous fires and a panicked American public, further claiming casualties in the hundreds or thousands.\nOne breach occurred in late February, when Representative Arthur L. Miller mentioned the balloons in a weekly column he sent to all 91 newspapers in his Nebraska district, which stated in part: \"As a final act of desperation, it is believed that the Japs may release fire balloons aimed at our great forests in the northwest\". In response, intelligence officers at the Seventh Service Command in Omaha contacted the editors at all 91 papers, requesting censorship; this was largely successful, with only two papers printing the column. In late March, the United Press (UP) wrote a detailed article on the balloons intended for its national distributors; the Army officer who reported the breach commented that it included \"a lot of mechanical detail on the thing, in addition to being a hell of a scare story\". Censors contacted the UP, which replied that the article had not yet been teletyped; all five copies were retrieved and destroyed. Investigators determined the information originated from a briefing to Colorado state legislators, which had been leaked in an open session. \nIn late April, censors investigated the nationally-syndicated comic strip \"Tim Tyler's Luck\" by Lyman Young, which depicted a Japanese balloon recovered by the crew of a U.S. submarine. In subsequent weeks, its protagonists fought monster vines which sprang from seeds the balloon was carrying, created by an evil Japanese horticulturalist. A few weeks later, the comic strip \"Smilin' Jack\" by Zack Mosley depicted a plane crashing into a Japanese balloon, which exploded and started a fire upon falling to the ground. In both cases, the Office of Censorship deemed it unnecessary to censor the Sunday comics.\nAbandonment and results.\nBy mid-April 1945, Japan lacked the resources to continue manufacturing balloons, with both paper and hydrogen in short supply. Furthermore, the Army had little evidence that the balloons were reaching North America, let alone causing damage. The campaign was halted, with no intention to revive it when the jet stream regained strength in fall 1945. The last balloon was launched on April 20. In total, about 9,300 were launched in the campaign (about 700 in November 1944, 1,200 in December, 2,000 in January 1945, 2,500 in February, 2,500 in March, and 400 in April), of which about 300 were found or observed in North America. The Fu-Go balloon bomb is considered to be the first weapon system in history with intercontinental range, a significant development in warfare which was followed by the advent of the world's first intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), the Soviet Union's R-7, in 1957.\nOnly \"one or two\" small grass fires were attributed to the balloon bombs. As predicted by Imperial Army officials, the winter and spring launch dates had limited the chances of the incendiaries starting fires due to the high levels of precipitation in the Pacific Northwest; forests were generally snow-covered or too damp to catch fire easily. Furthermore, much of the western U.S. received disproportionately more precipitation in 1945 than in any other year in the decade, with some areas receiving of precipitation more than other years. The most damaging attack occurred on March 10, 1945, when a balloon descended near Toppenish, Washington, and collided with electric transmission lines, causing a short circuit which cut off power to the Manhattan Project's production facility at the state's Hanford Engineer Works. Backup devices restored power to the site, but it took three days for its plutonium-producing nuclear reactors to be restored to full capacity; the plutonium was later used in Fat Man, the atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki.\nSingle lethal attack.\nOn May 5, 1945, six civilians were killed near Bly, Oregon, when they discovered one of the balloon bombs in Fremont National Forest, becoming the only fatalities from Axis action in the continental U.S. during the war. Reverend Archie Mitchell and his pregnant wife Elsie (age 26) drove up Gearhart Mountain that day with five of their Sunday school students for a picnic. While Archie was parking the car, Elsie and the children discovered a balloon and carriage, loaded with an anti-personnel bomb, on the ground. A large explosion occurred; the four boys (Edward Engen, 13; Jay Gifford, 13; Dick Patzke, 14; and Sherman Shoemaker, 11) were killed instantly, while Elsie and Joan Patzke (13) died from their wounds shortly afterwards. An Army investigation concluded that the bomb had likely been kicked or dropped, and that it had lain undisturbed for about one month before the incident. The U.S. press blackout was lifted on May 22 so the public could be warned of the balloon threat.\nA memorial, the Mitchell Monument, was built in 1950 at the site of the explosion, and the surrounding Mitchell Recreation Area was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003. A ponderosa pine near the site bears scars on its trunk from the bomb's shrapnel. In 1987, a group of Japanese women involved in Fu-Go production as schoolgirls delivered 1,000 paper cranes to the victims' families as a symbol of peace and healing, and six cherry trees were planted at the site on the incident's 50th anniversary in 1995.\nAfter World War II.\nAll Japanese records on the Fu-Go program were destroyed in compliance with a directive issued on August 15, 1945, the day Japan announced its surrender. Thus, a single interview with Lieutenant Colonel Terato Kunitake of the Army General Staff and a Major Inouye became the source of nearly all information on the project's objectives for U.S. investigators. A five-volume report, prepared by a team led by Karl T. Compton of the Office of Scientific Research and Development and Edward L. Moreland of MIT, was later submitted to President Harry S. Truman.\nThe remains of balloons have continued to be discovered after the war. At least eight were found in the 1940s, three in the 1950s, two in the 1960s, and one in the 1970s. A carriage with a live bomb was found near Lumby, British Columbia, in 2014 and detonated by a Royal Canadian Navy ordnance disposal team. Remains of another balloon were found near McBride, British Columbia, in 2019. Many war museums in the U.S. and Canada hold Fu-Go fragments, including the National Air and Space Museum and the Canadian War Museum.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48816", "revid": "48549243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48816", "title": "Frodo (disambiguation)", "text": "Frodo Baggins is a fictional character in \"The Lord of the Rings\" by J.R.R. Tolkien.\nFrodo may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48818", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48818", "title": "Platonic theories of universals", "text": ""}
{"id": "48819", "revid": "50402045", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48819", "title": "Clash of Civilizations", "text": "Cultural conflict thesis by Samuel P. Huntington\nThe Clash of Civilizations is a thesis that people's cultural and religious identities will be the primary source of conflict in the post\u2013Cold War world. The American political scientist Samuel P. Huntington argued that future wars would be fought not between countries, but between cultures. It was proposed in a 1992 lecture at the American Enterprise Institute, which was then developed in a 1993 \"Foreign Affairs\" article titled The Clash of Civilizations?, in response to his former student Francis Fukuyama's 1992 book \"The End of History and the Last Man\". Huntington later expanded his thesis in a 1996 book The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order.\nThe phrase itself was earlier used by Albert Camus in 1946, by Girilal Jain in his analysis of the Ayodhya dispute in 1988, by Bernard Lewis in an article in the September 1990 issue of \"The Atlantic Monthly\" titled \"The Roots of Muslim Rage\" and by Mahdi El Mandjra in his book \"La premi\u00e8re guerre civilisationnelle\" published in 1992. Even earlier, the phrase appears in a 1926 book regarding the Middle East by Basil Mathews: \"Young Islam on Trek: A Study in the Clash of Civilizations\". This expression derives from clash of cultures, already used during the colonial period and the Belle \u00c9poque.\nHuntington began his thinking by surveying the diverse theories about the nature of global politics in the post\u2013Cold War period. Some theorists and writers argued that human rights, liberal democracy, and the capitalist free market economy had become the only remaining ideological alternative for nations in the post\u2013Cold War world. Specifically, Francis Fukuyama argued that the world had reached the end of history in a Hegelian sense.\nHuntington believed that while the age of ideology had ended, the world had only reverted to a normal state of affairs characterized by cultural conflict. In his thesis, he argued that the primary axis of conflict in the future will be along cultural lines. As an extension, he posits that the concept of different civilizations, as the highest category of cultural identity, will become increasingly useful in analyzing the potential for conflict. At the end of his 1993 \"Foreign Affairs\" article, \"The Clash of Civilizations?\", Huntington writes, \"This is not to advocate the desirability of conflicts between civilizations. It is to set forth descriptive hypothesis as to what the future may be like.\"\nIn addition, the clash of civilizations, for Huntington, represents a development of history. In the past, world history was mainly about the struggles between monarchs, nations and ideologies, such as that seen within Western civilization. However, after the end of the Cold War, world politics moved into a new phase, in which non-Western civilizations are no longer the exploited recipients of Western civilization but have become additional important actors joining the West to shape and move world history.\nMajor civilizations according to Huntington.\nHuntington divided the world into the major civilizations in his thesis as such:\nHuntington's thesis of civilizational clash.\nHuntington argues that the trends of global conflict after the end of the Cold War are increasingly appearing at these civilizational divisions. Wars such as those following the break up of Yugoslavia, in Chechnya, and between India and Pakistan were cited as evidence of inter-civilizational conflict. He also argues that the widespread Western belief in the universality of the West's values and political systems is na\u00efve and that continued insistence on democratization and such universal norms will only further antagonize other civilizations. Huntington sees the West as reluctant to accept this because it built the international system, wrote its laws, and gave it substance in the form of the United Nations.\nHuntington identifies a major shift of economic, military, and political power from the West to the other civilizations of the world, most significantly to what he identifies as the two challenger civilizations, Sinic and Islam.\nIn Huntington's view, East Asian Sinic civilization is culturally asserting itself and its values relative to the West due to its rapid economic growth. Specifically, he believes that China's goals are to reassert itself as the regional hegemon, and that other countries in the region will bandwagon with China due to the history of hierarchical command structures implicit in the Confucian Sinic civilization, as opposed to the individualism and pluralism valued in the West. Regional powers such as the two Koreas and Vietnam will acquiesce to Chinese demands and become more supportive of China rather than attempting to oppose it. Huntington therefore believes that the rise of China poses one of the most significant problems and the most powerful long-term threat to the West, as Chinese cultural assertion clashes with the American desire for the lack of a regional hegemony in East Asia.\nHuntington argues that the Islamic civilization has experienced a massive population explosion which is fueling instability both on the borders of Islam and in its interior, where fundamentalist movements are becoming increasingly popular. Manifestations of what he terms the Islamic resurgence include the 1979 Iranian revolution and the first Gulf War. Perhaps the most controversial statement Huntington made in the \"Foreign Affairs\" article was, \"Islam has bloody borders\". Huntington believes this to be a real consequence of several factors, including the previously mentioned Muslim youth bulge and population growth and Islamic proximity to many civilizations including Sinic, Orthodox, Western, and African.\nHuntington sees Islamic civilization as a potential ally to China, both having more revisionist goals and sharing common conflicts with other civilizations, especially the West. Specifically, he identifies common Chinese and Islamic interests in the areas of weapons proliferation, human rights, and democracy that conflict with those of the West, and feels that these are areas in which the two civilizations will cooperate.\nRussia, Japan, and India are what Huntington terms swing civilizations and may favor either side. Russia, for example, clashes with the many Muslim ethnic groups on its southern border (such as Chechnya) but\u2014according to Huntington\u2014cooperates with Iran to avoid further Muslim-Orthodox violence in Southern Russia, and to help continue the flow of oil. Huntington argues that a Sino-Islamic connection is emerging in which China will cooperate more closely with Iran, Pakistan, and other states to augment its international position.\nHuntington also argues that civilizational conflicts are particularly prevalent between Muslims and non-Muslims, identifying the bloody borders between Islamic and non-Islamic civilizations. This conflict dates back as far as the initial thrust of Islam into Europe, its eventual expulsion in the Iberian reconquista, the attacks of the Ottoman Turks on Eastern Europe and Vienna, and the European imperial division of the Islamic nations in the 1800s and 1900s.\nHuntington also believes that some of the factors contributing to this conflict are that both Christianity (upon which Western civilization is based) and Islam are:\nMore recent factors contributing to a Western\u2013Islamic clash, Huntington wrote, are the Islamic Resurgence and demographic explosion in Islam, coupled with the values of Western universalism\u2014that is, the view that all civilizations should adopt Western values\u2014that infuriate Islamic fundamentalists. All these historical and modern factors combined, Huntington wrote briefly in his \"Foreign Affairs\" article and in much more detail in his 1996 book, would lead to a bloody clash between the Islamic and Western civilizations.\n\"Why civilizations will clash\".\nHuntington offers six explanations for why civilizations will clash:\n\"The West versus 'the Rest\"'.\nHuntington suggests that in the future the central axis of world politics tends to be the conflict between Western and non-Western civilizations, in Stuart Hall's phrase, the conflict between the West and 'the Rest'. He offers three forms of general and fundamental actions that non-Western civilization can take in response to Western countries.\n\"Core state and fault line conflicts\".\nIn Huntington's view, intercivilizational conflict manifests itself in two forms: fault line conflicts and core state conflicts.\n\"Fault line conflicts\" are on a local level and occur between adjacent states belonging to different civilizations or within states that are home to populations from different civilizations.\n\"Core state conflicts\" are on a global level between the major states of different civilizations. Core state conflicts can arise out of fault line conflicts when core states become involved.\nThese conflicts may result from a number of causes, such as: relative influence or power (military or economic), discrimination against people from a different civilization, intervention to protect kinsmen in a different civilization, or different values and culture, particularly when one civilization attempts to impose its values on people of a different civilization.\nModernization, Westernization, and \"torn\" countries.\nJapan, China and the Four Asian Tigers have modernized in many respects while maintaining traditional or authoritarian societies which distinguish them from the West. Some of these countries have clashed with the West and some have not.\nPerhaps the ultimate example of non-Western modernization is Russia, the core state of the Orthodox civilization. Huntington argues that Russia is primarily a non-Western state although he seems to agree that it shares a considerable amount of cultural ancestry with the modern West. According to Huntington, the West is distinguished from Orthodox Christian countries by its experience of the Renaissance, Reformation, the Enlightenment; by overseas colonialism rather than contiguous expansion and colonialism; and by the infusion of Classical culture through ancient Greece rather than through the continuous trajectory of the Byzantine Empire.\nHuntington refers to countries that are seeking to affiliate with another civilization as torn countries. Turkey, whose political leadership has systematically tried to Westernize the country since the 1920s, is his chief example. Turkey's history, culture, and traditions are derived from Islamic civilization, but Turkey's elite, beginning with Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk who took power as first President in 1923, imposed Western institutions and dress, embraced the Latin alphabet, joined NATO, and has sought to join the European Union.\nMexico and Russia are also considered to be torn by Huntington. He also gives the example of Australia as a country torn between its Western civilizational heritage and its growing economic engagement with Asia.\nAccording to Huntington, a torn country must meet three requirements to redefine its civilizational identity. Its political and economic elite must support the move. Second, the public must be willing to accept the redefinition. Third, the elites of the civilization that the torn country is trying to join must accept the country.\nThe book claims that to date no torn country has successfully redefined its civilizational identity, this mostly due to the elites of the host civilization refusing to accept the torn country, though if Turkey gained membership in the European Union, it has been noted that many of its people would support Westernization, as in the following quote by EU Minister Egemen Ba\u011f\u0131\u015f: \"This is what Europe needs to do: they need to say that when Turkey fulfills all requirements, Turkey will become a member of the EU on date X. Then, we will regain the Turkish public opinion support in one day.\" If this were to happen, it would, according to Huntington, be the first to redefine its civilizational identity.\nInfluence.\nThe clash of civilizations theory is known to have a substantial scholarly and policy impact. It has been widely cited, both in academic studies, and by various political figures, with studies documenting specific influences of the clash of civilizations theory. The war on terror has been theorized as both an accurate prediction of the theory, and as a result of both Western and Islamist leaders adopting the premise of a clash between their cultures. The theory has been described as a paradigm that is particularly prevalent in right wing politics across Western democracies, and was viewed as part of the Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign. The theory has been used to describe right-wing ideology in Israel, particularly to justify clashes between Jews and Palestinians. It had been observed as influencing the worldview of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Islam. The clash of civilizations had also influenced Viktor Orban in his rejection of Multi-culturalism and in adding restrictions for Muslim immigration.\nCriticism.\nThe book has been criticized by various academic writers, who have empirically, historically, logically, or ideologically challenged its claims. Political scientist Paul Musgrave writes that \"Clash of Civilization\" \"enjoys great cachet among the sort of policymaker who enjoys name-dropping Sun Tzu, but few specialists in international relations rely on it or even cite it approvingly. Bluntly, \"Clash\" has not proven to be a useful or accurate guide to understanding the world.\" Other books, written for the general public, similarly challenge Huntington's contentious claims. For example, in his work \"Identity and Violence: The illusion of destiny\", The Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen advances several critiques of Huntington's main concept of an inevitable \"Clash\" along civilizational lines. He argues that violence occurs when individuals see each other as having a singular affiliation (e.g., Hindu, Muslim, Christian), as opposed to multiple affiliations: e.g., Hindu, woman, housewife, mother, artist, daughter, member of a particular socio-economic class etc. In this sense, and to the detriment of civilization distinctiveness, it is argued that all of these dimensions can, and should be a source of a personal identity.\nMoreover, in an article explicitly referring to Huntington, the same scholar Amartya Sen (1999) argues that \"diversity is a feature of most cultures in the world. Western civilization is no exception. The practice of democracy that has won out in the modern West is largely a result of a consensus that has emerged since the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution, and particularly in the last century or so. To read in this a historical commitment of the West\u2014over the millennia\u2014to democracy, and then to contrast it with non-Western traditions (treating each as monolithic) would be a great mistake.\"\nIn his 2003 book \"Terror and Liberalism\", Paul Berman argues that distinct cultural boundaries do not exist in the present day. He argues there is \"no Islamic civilization nor a Western civilization\", and that the evidence for a civilization clash is not convincing, especially when considering relationships such as that between the United States and Saudi Arabia. In addition, he cites the fact that many Islamic extremists spent a significant amount of time living or studying in the Western world. According to Berman, conflict arises because of philosophical beliefs various groups share (or do not share), regardless of cultural or religious identity.\nTimothy Garton Ash objects to the \"extreme cultural determinism... crude to the point of parody\" of Huntington's idea that Catholic and Protestant Europe is headed for democracy, but that Orthodox Christian and Islamic Europe must accept dictatorship.\nThe clash of civilizations has been criticized as promoting an ideologically conservative attempt to maintain the imperial gains from Western colonialism. Edward Said issued a response to Huntington's thesis in his 2001 article, \"The Clash of Ignorance\". Said argues that Huntington's categorization of the world's fixed civilizations \"omits the dynamic interdependency and interaction of culture\". A longtime critic of the Huntingtonian paradigm, and an outspoken proponent of Arab issues, Said (2004) also argues that the clash of civilizations thesis is an example of \"the purest invidious racism, a sort of parody of Hitlerian science directed today against Arabs and Muslims\" (p.\u00a0293).\nNoam Chomsky has criticized the concept of the clash of civilizations as just being a new justification for the United States \"for any atrocities that they wanted to carry out\", which was required after the Cold War as the Soviet Union was no longer a viable threat.\nIn \"21 Lessons for the 21st Century\", Yuval Noah Harari called the clash of civilizations a misleading thesis. He wrote that Islamic fundamentalism is more of a threat to a global civilization, rather than a confrontation with the West. He also argued that talking about civilizations using analogies from evolutionary biology is wrong.\nNathan J. Robinson criticizes Huntington's thesis as inconsistent. He notes that according to Huntington, \"Spanish-speaking Catholic-majority Spain is West, while Spanish-speaking Catholic-majority Mexico is not part of Western civilization, and instead belongs with Brazil as part of Latin American civilization.\" Robinson concludes, \"If you look at the map and think these divisions make sense, which you might, it is because what you are mostly seeing here is a map of prejudices. [Huntington] indeed shows how a lot of people think of the world, especially in America.\"\nThe literary criticism podcast \"If Books Could Kill\" raises the concern that Huntington may be seen as publishing genocide apologia, uncritically repeating verbatim the assertions of Serbian soldiers during the Kosovo genocide that ethnic cleansing is necessary due to the high Muslim Albanian birth rate. \nIntermediate Region.\nHuntington's geopolitical model, especially the structures for North Africa and Eurasia, is largely derived from the Intermediate Region geopolitical model first formulated by Dimitri Kitsikis and published in 1978. The Intermediate Region, which spans the Adriatic Sea and the Indus River, is neither Western nor Eastern (at least, with respect to the Far East) but is considered distinct. Concerning this region, Huntington departs from Kitsikis contending that a civilizational fault line exists between the two dominant yet differing religions (Eastern Orthodoxy and Sunni Islam), hence a dynamic of external conflict. However, Kitsikis establishes an integrated civilization comprising these two peoples along with those belonging to the less dominant religions of Shia Islam, Alevism, and Judaism. They have a set of mutual cultural, social, economic and political views and norms which radically differ from those in the West and the Far East. In the Intermediate Region, therefore, one cannot speak of a civilizational clash or external conflict, but rather an internal conflict, not for cultural domination, but for political succession. This has been successfully demonstrated by documenting the rise of Christianity from the Hellenized Roman Empire, the rise of the Islamic caliphates from the Christianized Roman Empire and the rise of Ottoman Empire from the Islamic caliphates and the Christianized Roman Empire.\nOpposing concepts.\nIn recent years, the theory of \"Dialogue Among Civilizations\", a response to Huntington's \"Clash of Civilizations\", has become the center of some international attention. The concept was originally coined by Austrian philosopher Hans K\u00f6chler in an essay on cultural identity (1972). In a letter to UNESCO, K\u00f6chler had earlier proposed that the cultural organization of the United Nations should take up the issue of a \"dialogue between different civilizations\" (). In 2001, Iranian president Mohammad Khatami introduced the concept at the global level. At his initiative, the United Nations proclaimed the year 2001 as the \"United Nations Year of Dialogue among Civilizations\".\nThe Alliance of Civilizations (AOC) initiative was proposed at the 59th General Assembly of the United Nations in 2005 by the Spanish Prime Minister, Jos\u00e9 Luis Rodr\u00edguez Zapatero and co-sponsored by the Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan. The initiative is intended to galvanize collective action across diverse societies to combat extremism, to overcome cultural and social barriers between mainly the Western and predominantly Muslim worlds, and to reduce the tensions and polarization between societies which differ in religious and cultural values.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "48821", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48821", "title": "Georgia (state)", "text": ""}
{"id": "48823", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48823", "title": "Malabo", "text": "Capital of Equatorial Guinea\nMalabo ( , ; (formerly Santa Isabel ) is the capital of Equatorial Guinea in the province of Bioko Norte. It is located on the north coast of the island of Bioko (, and as \"Fernando P\u00f3\" by the Europeans). In 2018, the city had a population of approximately 297,000 inhabitants.\nSpanish is the official language of the city and of the country as well, but Pichinglis is used as a language of wider communication across Bioko island, including Malabo.\nMalabo is the oldest city in Equatorial Guinea. Ciudad de la Paz is a planned community under construction in mainland Equatorial Guinea which was designed to replace Malabo as the capital. The institutions of governance of Equatorial Guinea began the process of locating to Ciudad de la Paz in February 2017.\nHistory.\nEuropean discovery and Portuguese occupation.\nIn 1472, in an attempt to find a new route to India, the Portuguese navigator Fern\u00e3o do P\u00f3, encountered the island of Bioko, which he called \"Formosa\". Later, the island was named after its discoverer, Fernando P\u00f3. At the beginning of the 16th century, specifically in 1507, the Portuguese Ramos de Esquivel made a first attempt at colonization on the island of Fernando P\u00f3. He established a factory in \"Concepci\u00f3n\" (now Riaba) and developed plantations of sugarcane.\nWith the treaties of San Ildefonso in 1777 and El Pardo in 1778, during the reign of the Spanish King Charles III, the Portuguese gave to the Spanish the islands of Fernando P\u00f3, Annob\u00f3n, and the right to conduct trade in the mainland, an area of influence of approximately 800\u00a0000 km2 in Africa, in exchange for the Colonia del Sacramento in R\u00edo de la Plata and the Santa Catarina Island off the Brazilian coast (occupied by the Spaniards) during a recent war trying to stop Portuguese expansion in the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata. The area stretched from the Niger Delta to the mouth of Ogoou\u00e9 River \u2014 in current Gabon \u2014 and included, besides the islands of Fernando P\u00f3 and Annob\u00f3n, the islets of Corisco and Elobeyes. Spain wasn't interested in these lands because Spain already had vast colonies in other parts of the world, Spain lost interest in Spanish Guinea in 1827 and authorized the British to use the island as a base for suppressing the slave trade.\nBritish presence.\nIn 1821, the \"Nelly\" approached the island of Fernando P\u00f3. He found it abandoned and founded the establishments of \"Melville Bay\" (now Riaba) and \"San Carlos\" (now Luba). Some years later, another British captain, William Fitzwilliam Owen, decided to colonize the island and in the north of it \u2014 on the site of the present capital \u2014 erected a base for British ships hunting slave traders. Thus, on 25 December 1827, \"Port Clarence\" was founded on the ruins of a previous Portuguese settlement. The name was chosen in honor of the Duke of Clarence, who later became King William IV. The Bubis indigenous to the island called it \"Ripot\u00f3\" (place of the foreigners). The population of the capital was increased by the arrival of slaves freed by the British. These freedmen were settled in Port Clarence before the establishment of Sierra Leone as a colony for freed slaves. The descendants of these freed slaves remained on the island. They joined other migrants who arrived as free workers from Liberia, Sierra Leone, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Benin, Nigeria and Cameroon, and became the population group called Creole or fernandinos, whose language was Pichinglis, a Bantu-English Creole with some Spanish elements.\nDuring the British period, the British consul automatically became the governor of the colony, including Governor John Beecroft, a British mulatto who modernized the capital, and whose work was later recognized by Spain with a monument in Punta Fernanda.\nSpanish definitive control and new capital.\nIn 1844, when Queen Isabella II of Spain ruled after the regency of her mother Maria Cristina and Baldomero Espartero, in an attempt to modernize Spain and rescue its heritage, Spain let the UK know its desire to regain control of the colony and thus the island. It took another decade to implement this direct control. The capital already had more dynamic and Protestant religious missions which were very successful. Both factors helped to change the attitude of Spain, in addition to internal reasons already alluded.\nSpain again took control of the island in 1855 and the capital, Port Clarence, was renamed \"Santa Isabel\", in honor of Queen Isabella II. The capital of the island of Fernando P\u00f3 became the capital of Equatorial Guinea.\nIts present name was given to the town in 1973 as part of the campaign of President Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema to replace place names of European origin with African names, in this case honoring Malabo L\u00f6p\u00e8lo M\u00eblaka, the last Bubi king. Malabo, the son of King Moka, surrendered to the Spaniards. His uncle Sas Ebuera, head of the Bubi warriors, claimed to represent legitimate Bubi rule and continued resisting, confronting the Spanish openly in 1898. After the Spanish killed Sas Ebuera, Malabo became the king unopposed, but with no authority. Bubi clans and settlements were slow to accept Spanish sovereignty over the island, and the full conquest and pacification of the island was not achieved until 1912.\nReign of Terror.\nDuring the so-called \"Reign of Terror\" of Mac\u00edas Nguema, the dictator suppressed much of the intelligentsia of the country, initiating the process of taking over the positions of the public administration by part of the natives of Mongomo and clan Esangui.\nThe infamous Black Beach prison, also known as \"Blay Beach prison\" (or Playa Negra prison), sits at the mouth of the C\u00f3nsul River, beside the black beach and behind the Governor's Palace and barracks. Several people have been jailed there during the 35 years of dictatorship. Among those imprisoned and tortured are many political leaders such as Rafael Upi\u00f1alo (Movimiento), Fabi\u00e1n Nsue (UP), Felipe Ondo Obiang (FDR), Mart\u00edn Puye of Movement for the Self-Determination of Bioko Island (MAIB) or Pl\u00e1cido Mic\u00f3 Abogo of the Social Democratic Convergence for Social Democracy (CPDS). A group of mercenaries were jailed at Black Beach for the 2004 coup d'\u00e9tat attempt against President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo.\nGeography.\nMalabo is situated in the north of the island of Bioko, at coordinates 3\u00b0 45' 7.43\" North and 8\u00b0 46' 25.32\" East. The south of Malabo is limited by the C\u00f3nsul River and just across the river, south-west, is the hospital. West of the city, located about 9\u00a0km from the center of Malabo, is renewed Malabo International Airport. In the coastal region north of the city are the bays and capes. The elder is the punta de la Unidad Africana located just behind the Malabo Government Building and which occupies the entire eastern part of the Bay of Malabo. Another cape of importance is punta Europa located in the west of the city near to the airport.\nClimate.\nMalabo features a tropical monsoon climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Am\"). Malabo receives on average of rain per year. The city has a pronounced, albeit short, sunnier (but still cloudy) dry season from December through February. January is normally its driest month with of rain falling on average. It also has a very long cloudy wet season that covers the remaining nine months from March to November. On average, the months hit hardest by the wet season are September and October, which receive of rain and showers between them.\nDaytime temperatures do not vary at all day to day, and vary only a few degrees throughout the entire year. At night, the average low temperature is in every month of the year but January to April have a slightly higher diurnal range because it is clearer. Nonetheless, with only 1,020 hours of sunshine per year, Malabo is one of the cloudiest, wettest and most lightning-prone capitals of the world, and experiences much fog and haze even when it is not raining in the driest months.\nAdministration.\nThe mayor is Mar\u00eda Coloma Edjang Mbengono who establishes the municipal services prescribed by law, which are the responsibility of the municipality. These include drinking water and others public sources, lighting, paving of roads, cemeteries, cleaning and sanitation, the sanitary waste treatment and waste, disinfecting, emergency first aid, health inspections and drinks, health inspection of poor housing, public banks, slaughterhouses, markets and the elimination of stagnant water.\nCultural centres.\nThrough the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development (AECID), are made several development projects at both regional and national level. Headquartered in the Technical Cooperation Office in Malabo (created in 1984), carried out actions for the development of the culture, health, education and institutional strengthening. Stressing the Cultural Center of Spain in Malabo (CCEM), founded in 2003, where young people are encouraged to feel a cultural space where they can unleash their creative freedom. It also has three geographical axes, in order to capture the largest number of people in the region and contribute to its development. Activities include the training, art, film, theater, music and games, with the two main festivals: Traveling Film Festival of Equatorial Guinea (FECIGE) and the International Festival of Hip Hop in Malabo.\nAnother important center is the Hispano-Guinean Cultural Center, from 2012 Equatorial Guinean Cultural Center began as headquarters of Institute Cardinal Cisneros, and then archive, museum and library. It was built in the 1950s.\nThe Museum of Modern Art Equatorial Guinea has traditional and contemporary art of the country and the continent. The city also hosts the National Library, built in 1916.\nTourism.\nThe tourism sector is seeing significant expansion. Since the discovery of oil, numerous infrastructural developments have been made. The city of Malabo is a focal point for tourism in Equatorial Guinea, due to its direct connections with major tourist attractions on the island of Bioko. Nearby tourist attractions include the following:\nDemographics.\nMalabo has a relatively young population. Approximately 45% of the population is under 15. Only about 4% of the population is more than 65 years old. Most of the population lives in rural areas of the island.\nEconomy.\nMalabo is the commercial and financial center. Malabo's economy is based on the administration and other services. Trade is also one of the most prominent and important economic activities, especially since the arrival of US companies which exploit oil wells close to the coast. This trade also comes from the presence of Americans, Mexicans, Nigerians, Cameroonians, Spanish and other Central Africans; The building that was originally built by the Banco Popular Espa\u00f1ol, but after independence became the seat of Banco de Guinea Ecuatorial.\nThe main industry in the city is fishing, while cacao and coffee are the main products of export.\nMalabo has a high-tonnage port, connected mainly with the ports of Douala, (Cameroon) and Bata, and an air link via an international airport.\nEducation.\nThe National University of Equatorial Guinea (UNGE) and the National Distance Education University (UNED), the latter Spanish-language, have headquarters in the city. The Colegio Nacional Enrique Nv\u00f3 Okenve, another of the country's universities, has one of its two campuses in the city.\nInternational schools:\nAttractions.\nMalabo has preserved buildings from the colonial era, such as the Presidential Palace and the Palace of Justice of Malabo. Other colonial buildings are also found downtown, although they are worn; for example the wooden 19th-century buildings on Nigeria and Rey Boncoro streets.\nNotable buildings include the Cathedral of Santa Isabel, of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Malabo. It is a church in the Gothic Revival style, built between 1897 and 1916. Its architect was Luis Segarra Llairad\u00f3, paid by contributions from the government of Spain and the donations of the faithful. It has two spires 40 meters high. In January 2020 a fire due to an electrical failure caused the calcination of part of its structure, currently there is work ongoing for an early restoration in November 2021.\nOther points of interest are \"La Gaditana\", known as \"Finca Amilivia\" prior to 1918, the casa Teodolita, built in 1902 and one of the oldest homes in the city, the City Hall building in Malabo, the Church of El\u00e1 Nguema, Independence Square, Parque Nacional de Malabo, the Casa de Espa\u00f1a and the bay of the harbor.\nTransport.\nPublic transport system.\nPublic buses make the journey between downtown Malabo and the neighborhood of Ela Nguema. Taxis circulate in the city and outlying areas.\nMaritime transport.\nThe port of Malabo can theoretically reach a treatment capacity of 200,000 tons/year. The main maritime links are with national destination to Bata and international to Spain and Douala in Cameroon.\nAviation.\nThe Malabo International Airport serves the city. It is located 7\u00a0km from the centre in Punta Europa, Bioko. It serves long-distance direct flights to Europe and some African capitals.\nFrom Malabo airport, one can fly to any of the other airports in the country. These airports are located in the region of Annob\u00f3n, Bata, Mongomoyen, and Corisco.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples (Catholic: Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Malabo, Protestant, Evangelical Christian: Assemblies of God). Malabo Mosque was established in 2015.\nSports.\nThe main sports facility of Malabo, and the country, is the Estadio de Malabo, with a capacity of 15,250 spectators. The stadium is home to the Equatorial Guinea national football team and hosted matches during the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations. Notably, the Spain national football team, at the time World Champions, played a friendly at this stadium. The stadium also is home to the CD El\u00e1 Nguema, the main club of the country. Also located in Malabo is the Estadio Internacional. The Estadio Internacional has a 6,000-seat capacity. The Equatorial Guinea national football team played here until the Estadio de Malabo was opened.\nThe 2012 Africa Cup of Nations was organized jointly by Gabon and Equatorial Guinea. One of the four venues for the tournament was the Estadio de Malabo, the main stadium of the country, constructed in 2007. In Malabo were disputed six matches of the group stage (one match of Group A and five of group B), and one cross of quarterfinals\nOn 16 November 2013, the Spain national football team played a friendly match against the Equatorial Guinea national football team. It was the first visit by a European team to the country, and the match was criticized by several organizations, including the president of the Liga Nacional de F\u00fatbol Profesional, Javier Tebas, due to the political situation of the country and the government of Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo.\nSome of the top clubs in the country, who have won the Equatoguinean Primera Divisi\u00f3n several times, are from Malabo. The club with the most league titles is the CD El\u00e1 Nguema with 14. Other league champions from the city are the Renacimiento FC and the Atl\u00e9tico Malabo or Cafe Bank Sportif. Another club in the city is the Atl\u00e9tico Semu, once champion of Equatoguinean Cup.\nAnother important club from the city is the Malabo Kings of basketball, which was champion of the country, and in 2013 was proclaimed champion Central Zone of Africa Basketball Championship, winning in Kinshasa at Talia from Gabon. The Malabo Kings had already finished second in 2011, Yaound\u00e9 (Cameroon). In 2013 held in Malabo on I Campus of Basketball Ciudad de Malabo organized by the Equatorial Guinea Basketball Federation and Club de Baloncesto Conejero from Spain.\nMalabo was originally to host the 2019 African Games but due to economic problems they decide to withdraw its hosting rights and was replaced by Casablanca, Morocco.\nDiscovery of oil.\nMalabo has been significantly affected by Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo's growing co-operation with the petroleum industry. The country's production has reached as of 2005[ [update]], an increase which led to a doubling of the city's population, but for the vast majority, very little of that wealth has been invested in development.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48824", "revid": "31876559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48824", "title": "Gravitational lens", "text": "Light bending by mass between source and observer\nA gravitational lens is matter, such as a cluster of galaxies or a point particle, that bends light from a distant source as it travels toward an observer. The amount of gravitational lensing is described by Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity. If light is treated as corpuscles travelling at the speed of light, Newtonian physics also predicts the bending of light, but only half of that predicted by general relativity.\nOrest Khvolson (1924) and Frantisek Link (1936) are generally credited with being the first to discuss the effect in print, but it is more commonly associated with Einstein, who made unpublished calculations on it in 1912 and published an article on the subject in 1936.\nIn 1937, Fritz Zwicky posited that galaxy clusters could act as gravitational lenses, a claim confirmed in 1979 by observation of the Twin QSO SBS 0957+561.\nDescription.\nUnlike an optical lens, a point-like gravitational lens produces a maximum deflection of light that passes closest to its center, and a minimum deflection of light that travels furthest from its center. Consequently, a gravitational lens has no single focal point, but a focal line. The term \"lens\" in the context of gravitational light deflection was first used by O.\u00a0J.\u00a0Lodge, who remarked that it is \"not permissible to say that the solar gravitational field acts like a lens, for it has no focal length\". If the (light) source, the massive lensing object, and the observer lie in a straight line, the original light source will appear as a ring around the massive lensing object (provided the lens has circular symmetry). If there is any misalignment, the observer will see an arc segment instead.\nThis phenomenon was first mentioned in 1924 by the St. Petersburg physicist Orest Khvolson, and quantified by Albert Einstein in 1936. It is usually referred to in the literature as an Einstein ring, since Khvolson did not concern himself with the flux or radius of the ring image. More commonly, where the lensing mass is complex (such as a galaxy group or cluster) and does not cause a spherical distortion of spacetime, the source will resemble partial arcs scattered around the lens. The observer may then see multiple distorted images of the same source; the number and shape of these depending upon the relative positions of the source, lens, and observer, and the shape of the gravitational well of the lensing object.\nThere are three classes of gravitational lensing:\nGravitational lenses act equally on all kinds of electromagnetic radiation, not just visible light, and also in non-electromagnetic radiation, like gravitational waves. Weak lensing effects are being studied for the cosmic microwave background as well as galaxy surveys. Strong lenses have been observed in radio and x-ray regimes as well. If a strong lens produces multiple images, there will be a relative time delay between two paths: that is, in one image the lensed object will be observed before the other image.\nHistory.\nHenry Cavendish in 1784 (in an unpublished manuscript) and Johann Georg von Soldner in 1801 (published in 1804) had pointed out that Newtonian gravity predicts that starlight will bend around a massive object as had already been supposed by Isaac Newton in 1704 in his \"Queries\" No.1 in his book \"Opticks\". The same value as Soldner's was calculated by Einstein in 1911 based on the equivalence principle alone. However, Einstein noted in 1915, in the process of completing general relativity, that his (and thus Soldner's) 1911-result is only half of the correct value. Einstein became the first to calculate the correct value for light bending.\nThe first observation of light deflection was performed by noting the change in position of stars as they passed near the Sun on the celestial sphere. The observations were performed in 1919 by Arthur Eddington, Frank Watson Dyson, and their collaborators during the total solar eclipse on May 29. The solar eclipse allowed the stars near the Sun to be observed. Observations were made simultaneously in the cities of Sobral, Cear\u00e1, Brazil and in S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe on the west coast of Africa. The observations demonstrated that the light from stars passing close to the Sun was slightly bent, so that stars appeared slightly out of position.\nThe result was considered spectacular news and made the front page of most major newspapers. It made Einstein and his theory of general relativity world-famous. When asked by his assistant what his reaction would have been if general relativity had not been confirmed by Eddington and Dyson in 1919, Einstein said \"Then I would feel sorry for the dear Lord. The theory is correct anyway.\" In 1912, Einstein had speculated that an observer could see multiple images of a single light source, if the light were deflected around a mass. This effect would make the mass act as a kind of gravitational lens. However, as he only considered the effect of deflection around a single star, he seemed to conclude that the phenomenon was unlikely to be observed for the foreseeable future since the necessary alignments between stars and observer would be highly improbable. Several other physicists speculated about gravitational lensing as well, but all reached the same conclusion that it would be nearly impossible to observe.\nAlthough Einstein made unpublished calculations on the subject, the first discussion of the gravitational lens in print was by Khvolson, in a short article discussing the \"halo effect\" of gravitation when the source, lens, and observer are in near-perfect alignment, now referred to as the Einstein ring.\nIn 1936, after some urging by Rudi W. Mandl, Einstein reluctantly published the short article \"Lens-Like Action of a Star By the Deviation of Light In the Gravitational Field\" in the journal \"Science\".\nIn 1937, Fritz Zwicky first considered the case where the newly discovered galaxies (which were called 'nebulae' at the time) could act as both source and lens, and that, because of the mass and sizes involved, the effect was much more likely to be observed.\nIn 1963 Yu. G. Klimov, S. Liebes, and Sjur Refsdal recognized independently that quasars are an ideal light source for the gravitational lens effect.\nIt was not until 1979 that the first gravitational lens would be discovered. It became known as the \"Twin QSO\" since it initially looked like two identical quasistellar objects. (It is officially named SBS 0957+561.) This gravitational lens was discovered by Dennis Walsh, Bob Carswell, and Ray Weymann using the Kitt Peak National Observatory 2.1 meter telescope.\nIn the 1980s, astronomers realized that the combination of CCD imagers and computers would allow the brightness of millions of stars to be measured each night. In a dense field, such as the galactic center or the Magellanic clouds, many microlensing events per year could potentially be found. This led to efforts such as Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment, or OGLE, that have characterized hundreds of such events, including those of OGLE-2016-BLG-1190Lb and OGLE-2016-BLG-1195Lb.\nApproximate Newtonian description.\nNewton wondered whether light, in the form of corpuscles, would be bent due to gravity. The Newtonian prediction for light deflection refers to the amount of deflection a corpuscle would feel under the effect of gravity, and therefore one should read \"Newtonian\" in this context as the referring to the following calculations and not a belief that Newton held in the validity of these calculations.\nFor a gravitational point-mass lens of mass formula_1, a corpuscle of mass formula_2 feels a force\n formula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the lens-corpuscle separation. If we equate this force with Newton's second law, we can solve for the acceleration that the light undergoes:\n formula_5\nThe light interacts with the lens from initial time formula_6 to formula_7, and the velocity boost the corpuscle receives is\n formula_8\nIf one assumes that initially the light is far enough from the lens to neglect gravity, the perpendicular distance between the light's initial trajectory and the lens is \"b\" (the impact parameter), and the parallel distance is formula_9, such that formula_10. We additionally assume a constant speed of light along the parallel direction, formula_11, and that the light is only being deflected a small amount. After plugging these assumptions into the above equation and further simplifying, one can solve for the velocity boost in the perpendicular direction. The angle of deflection between the corpuscle's initial and final trajectories is therefore (see, e.g., M.\u00a0Meneghetti 2021)\n formula_12\nAlthough this result appears to be half the prediction from general relativity, classical physics predicts that the speed of light formula_13 is observer-dependent (see, e.g., L.\u00a0Susskind and A.\u00a0Friedman 2018) which was superseded by a universal speed of light in special relativity.\nExplanation in terms of spacetime curvature.\nIn general relativity, light follows the curvature of spacetime, hence when light passes around a massive object, it is bent. This means that the light from an object on the other side will be bent towards an observer's eye, just like an ordinary lens. In general relativity the path of light depends on the shape of space (i.e. the metric). The gravitational attraction can be viewed as the motion of undisturbed objects in a background curved \"geometry\" or alternatively as the response of objects to a \"force\" in a flat geometry. The angle of deflection is\n formula_14\ntoward the mass \"M\" at a distance \"r\" from the affected radiation, where \"G\" is the universal constant of gravitation, and \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum.\nSince the Schwarzschild radius formula_15 is defined as formula_16, and escape velocity formula_17 is defined as formula_18, this can also be expressed in simple form as\n formula_19\nSearch for gravitational lenses.\nMost of the gravitational lenses in the past have been discovered accidentally. A search for gravitational lenses in the northern hemisphere (Cosmic Lens All Sky Survey, CLASS), done in radio frequencies using the Very Large Array (VLA) in New Mexico, led to the discovery of 22 new lensing systems, a major milestone. This has opened a whole new avenue for research ranging from finding very distant objects to finding values for cosmological parameters so we can understand the universe better.\nA similar search in the southern hemisphere would be a very good step towards complementing the northern hemisphere search as well as obtaining other objectives for study. If such a search is done using well-calibrated and well-parameterized instruments and data, a result similar to the northern survey can be expected. The use of the Australia Telescope 20\u00a0GHz (AT20G) Survey data collected using the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) stands to be such a collection of data. As the data were collected using the same instrument maintaining a very stringent quality of data we should expect to obtain good results from the search. The AT20G survey is a blind survey at 20\u00a0GHz frequency in the radio domain of the electromagnetic spectrum. Due to the high frequency used, the chances of finding gravitational lenses increases as the relative number of compact core objects (e.g. quasars) are higher (Sadler et al. 2006). This is important as the lensing is easier to detect and identify in simple objects compared to objects with complexity in them. This search involves the use of interferometric methods to identify candidates and follow them up at higher resolution to identify them. Full detail of the project is currently under works for publication.\nMicrolensing techniques have been used to search for planets outside the Solar System. A statistical analysis of specific cases of observed microlensing over the time period of 2002 to 2007 found that most stars in the Milky Way galaxy hosted at least one orbiting planet within 0.5 to 10 AU.\nIn 2009, weak gravitational lensing was used to extend the mass-X-ray-luminosity relation to older and smaller structures than was previously possible to improve measurements of distant galaxies.\nAs of 2013[ [update]] the most distant gravitational lens galaxy, J1000+0221, had been found using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope. While it remains the most distant quad-image lensing galaxy known, an even more distant two-image lensing galaxy was subsequently discovered by an international team of astronomers using a combination of Hubble Space Telescope and Keck telescope imaging and spectroscopy. The discovery and analysis of the IRC 0218 lens was published in the \"Astrophysical Journal Letters\" on June 23, 2014.\nResearch published September 30, 2013 in the online edition of \"Physical Review Letters\", led by McGill University in Montreal, Qu\u00e9bec, Canada, has discovered the B-modes, that are formed due to gravitational lensing effect, using National Science Foundation's South Pole Telescope and with help from the Herschel space observatory. This discovery would open the possibilities of testing the theories of how our universe originated.\nSolar gravitational lens.\nAlbert Einstein predicted in 1936 that rays of light from the same direction that skirt the edges of the Sun would converge to a focal point approximately 542 AU from the Sun. Thus, a probe positioned at this distance (or greater) from the Sun could use the Sun as a gravitational lens for magnifying distant objects on the opposite side of the Sun. A probe's location could shift around as needed to select different targets relative to the Sun.\nThis distance is far beyond the progress and equipment capabilities of space probes such as \"Voyager 1\", and beyond the known planets and dwarf planets, though over thousands of years 90377 Sedna will move farther away on its highly elliptical orbit. The high gain for potentially detecting signals through this lens, such as microwaves at the 21-cm hydrogen line, led to the suggestion by Frank Drake in the early days of SETI that a probe could be sent to this distance. A multipurpose probe SETISAIL and later FOCAL was proposed to the ESA in 1993, but is expected to be a difficult task. If a probe does pass 542 AU, magnification capabilities of the lens will continue to act at farther distances, as the rays that come to a focus at larger distances pass further away from the distortions of the Sun's corona. A critique of the concept was given by Landis, who discussed issues including interference of the solar corona, the high magnification of the target, which will make the design of the mission focal plane difficult, and an analysis of the inherent spherical aberration of the lens.\nIn 2020, NASA physicist Slava Turyshev presented his idea of Direct Multipixel Imaging and Spectroscopy of an Exoplanet with a Solar Gravitational Lens Mission. The lens could reconstruct the exoplanet image with ~25\u00a0km-scale surface resolution, enough to see surface features and signs of habitability.\nMeasuring weak lensing.\nKaiser, Squires and Broadhurst (1995), Luppino &amp; Kaiser (1997) and Hoekstra et al. (1998) prescribed a method to invert the effects of the point spread function (PSF) smearing and shearing, recovering a shear estimator uncontaminated by the systematic distortion of the PSF. This method (KSB+) is the most widely used method in weak lensing shear measurements.\nGalaxies have random rotations and inclinations. As a result, the shear effects in weak lensing need to be determined by statistically preferred orientations. The primary source of error in lensing measurement is due to the convolution of the PSF with the lensed image. The KSB method measures the ellipticity of a galaxy image. The shear is proportional to the ellipticity. The objects in lensed images are parameterized according to their weighted quadrupole moments. For a perfect ellipse, the weighted quadrupole moments are related to the weighted ellipticity. KSB calculate how a weighted ellipticity measure is related to the shear and use the same formalism to remove the effects of the PSF.\nKSB's primary advantages are its mathematical ease and relatively simple implementation. However, KSB is based on a key assumption that the PSF is circular with an anisotropic distortion. This is a reasonable assumption for cosmic shear surveys, but the next generation of surveys (e.g. LSST) may need much better accuracy than KSB can provide.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading\nExternal links.\nHistorical papers"}
{"id": "48826", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48826", "title": "Gravitational lensing", "text": ""}
{"id": "48827", "revid": "1306492587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48827", "title": "Wittenberg", "text": "Town in Saxony-Anhalt, Germany\nWittenberg, officially Lutherstadt Wittenberg, is the fourth-largest town in the state of Saxony-Anhalt, in the Federal Republic of Germany. It is situated on the River Elbe, north of Leipzig and south-west of the reunified German federal capital city of Berlin, and has a population of 46,008 (2018).\nWittenberg has close connections with Martin Luther (1483\u20131546) and the 16th century religious / theological movement of Protestantism begun here in the Reformation, and the large branch of Western Christianity started here of Evangelical Lutheranism, for which it received the honorific title \"Lutherstadt\" and has been called the \"cradle of the Reformation\" and \"cradle of Protestantism\". Several of Wittenberg's buildings are associated with the historical / religious events, including a preserved part of the Augustinian monastery of the local community of the world-wide Roman Catholic Order of St. Augustine in which Luther lived, first as a celibate monk and later as property owner with his later wife Katharina von Bora (c.\u20091499\u00a0\u2013 1552), and family. Wittenberg was also the seat of the prince Elector of Saxony, a dignity held by the dukes of the Duchy of Saxe-Wittenberg, making it one of the most powerful cities in the thousand-years-old Holy Roman Empire (A.D. c.800 / 962\u20131806) in Central Europe.\nToday Wittenberg is an industrial centre and tourist destination, with an intact historic centre and various additional memorial sites dedicated to Martin Luther and his friend and fellow theologian / reformer Melanchthon, author of the Evangelical Lutheran seminal theological document of the Augsburg Confession of 1530. The buildings associated with those two figures were added to the UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization) designated World Heritage list in 1996, along with other sites in nearby Eisleben, because of their religious significance and testimony to one of the most influential religious, political and social movements of world history from the Medieval / Middle Ages era in the History of Europe.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Duchy of Saxony 1180\u20131296\n Duchy of Saxe-Wittenberg 1296\u20131356\n Electorate of Saxony 1356\u20131806\n Kingdom of Saxony 1806\u20131815\n Kingdom of Prussia 1815\u20131871\n German Empire 1871\u20131918\n Weimar Republic 1918\u20131933\n Nazi Germany 1933\u20131945\n Soviet occupation zone 1945\u20131949\n East Germany 1949\u20131990\n 1990\u2013\"present\"\nHistorical documents first mention the settlement in 1180 as a small village founded by Flemish colonists under the rule of the House of Ascania. In 1260 this village became the residence of the dukes of Saxe-Wittenberg, and in 1293 the settlement was granted its town charter as a free-standing town.\nWittenberg developed into an important trade centre during the following few centuries because of its central location. When the local branch of the Ascanians died out in 1422, control of Saxe-Wittenberg passed to the House of Wettin. The town became an important regional political and cultural centre at the end of the 15th century when Frederick III \"the Wise\", the Elector of Saxony from 1486 to 1525, made his residence in Wittenberg. Several parts of the boundaries of the town were extended soon afterwards. The second bridge over the Elbe River was built between 1487 and 1490 and the castle church (the \"Schlosskirche\" in German) was erected between 1496 and 1506. The Elector's palace was rebuilt at the same time.\nIn 1502 , Elector Frederick founded the University of Wittenberg, which attracted some writers such as Luther, \u2014a professor of theology beginning in 1508 \u2014 and Melanchthon (1497\u20131560) \u2014 a friend and disciple along with a theologian and professor of Greek starting a decade later in 1518.\nOn 31 October 1517, according to legend, Luther nailed his \"95 Theses\" against the selling of indulgences to the huge wooden double-doors front entrance (which longtime served as an informal bulletin board for the parish and local academic community) of the All Saints' Church / Castle Church \u2013 an event taken as marking the beginning of the Protestant Reformation and the start of a major branch of Western Christianity of Evangelical Lutheranism. The more radical later Protestant group of the Anabaptist movement also had one of its earliest homes in Wittenberg, when the Zwickau prophets moved there in late 1521 only to be suppressed by upset and angry Luther when he returned from temporary hiding and exile at the remote hilltop Wartburg Castle in the spring of 1522. There he had spent months of time, effort and research into translating the texts in the languages ancient Hebrew, Ancient Greek and Latin and manuscripts of the Old Testament and New Testament in the Bible into then common 16th century version of their German language so that the Christian lay people could read the Holy Scriptures in Luther's Bible in their own tongue.\nThe Capitulation of Wittenberg (1547) is the name given to the treaty by which John Frederick the Magnanimous was compelled to resign the electoral dignity and most of his territory to the Albertine branch of the noble House of Wettin.\nDuring the 18th century in 1760, during the Seven Years' War (1753 / 1756\u20131763, the military forces of the Habsburg monarchy of the Austrian Empire bombarded the Kingdom of Prussia's Royal Prussian Army, which occupied the town. \nWarfare again touched Wittenberg by the First French Empire of neighboring France far to the west, took control in 1806, during the Napoleonic Wars (1803\u20131815) and Napoleon Bonaparte (1769\u20131821), (Emperor Napoleon I commanded the refortification of around the edges of town in 1813. The following year in 1814, the Royal Prussian Army under Bogislav Friedrich Emanuel von Tauentzien had returned now a half-century later, this time storming the outskirts of Wittenberg; he received the title of \"von Wittenberg\" as a battle reward. Following the fall and exile of Napoleon in 1814 and 1815, and as a result of the negotiations at the ensuing major European peace conference at the Congress of Vienna, in the capital of Vienna, Austria, Wittenberg and Saxony was transferred to became part of the Kingdom of Prussia mostly further to the north and east, and administered within the Province of Saxony. Wittenberg continued to be a fortress and military post of the third class during the rest of the 19th century with the reorganisation of German defences until later dismantled two years after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u20131871. That important Central Europe conflict resulting in the organization and proclamation of the German Empire in 1871, which endured under the rule of the German Emperor from the House of Hohenzollern in Berlin until the First World War\nA prisoner-of-war camp outside of town from 1914 to 1918 was built and set up. A camp was set up at Klein Wittenberg, from the city. Eight compounds held 13,000 men of soldiers, sailors and pilots captured from the Allied armies of several opposing enemy nations. During the typhus epidemic of 1914\u20131915, conditions were harsh. The camp medical officer, Dr. Aschenbach who supposedly did the best he could, was later awarded the Imperial German military decoration of the Iron Cross for his part in the epidemic. The award however was controversial and later questioned by the Allies, who won the conflict.\nThe use of dogs to attack P.O.W.'s was mentioned and criticised by the United States Ambassador to Germany from 1913 to 1917, James W. Gerard. His book of the era was later produced by the Hollywood motion pictures industry as a silent film \"My Four Years in Germany\", in 1918.\nUnlike many other historic German cities during World War II, Wittenberg's town centre was spared destruction during the conflict. The Allies agreed not to bomb Wittenberg, though fighting took place in the town, with bullet pock-marks visible on the statues of Luther and Melanchthon in the market square \u2013 or so the popular version of the town's history goes. In actual fact the Luther statue was not even present in the town square during much of the war but in storage at Luther Brunnen, a roadhouse a few kilometres north of the town.\nWittenberg's reputation as a town protected from Allied bombing is largely accurate. However, just outside Wittenberg the government had built the \"Arado Flugzeugwerke\" (the Arado Aircraft Factory), which produced components of airplanes for the Luftwaffe. This war factory was worked by Jews, Russians, Poles, political prisoners and even a few Americans\u2014all prisoners engaging in forced labour, including POW's who were supposed to be exempt from this sort of labor. American and British planes bombed the factory near the end of the war, and in destroying it killed over one thousand of the prisoners and POW's placed by the Germans in this war plant. The 1995 publication of \"...und morgen war Krieg!\" by Renate Gruber-Lieblich\nattempts to document this tragic bombing outside Wittenberg.\nIn 1945, Wittenberg issued 19 of its own postage stamps, each depicting Hitler but with a large black round overprint covering his face. At the end of the war, Soviet forces occupied Wittenberg; it became part of East Germany in 1949. During the East German period, it formed part of Halle District. By means of the peaceful revolution in 1989, the communist r\u00e9gime dissolved and the town has been governed democratically since 1990.\nWittenberg is currently characterized by renovation and new construction work, an economic recovery and tourism development as a \"place of pilgrimage for the Reformation\". With the Luther Decade starting in 2008, the city began preparing for the 500th anniversary of the Reformation, which took place in 2017. Numerous buildings have been restored, the infrastructure has been partially renewed and numerous new attractions have been created in the city (e.g. the new Lutherstadt Wittenberg Hauptbahnhof, Arsenal shopping centre, Luthergarden or the Panometer).\nIn 2014 Lutherstadt Wittenberg was awarded the honorary title European City of the Reformation by the Community of Protestant Churches in Europe.\nHistorical population.\nThe figures are given for the metropolitan district at the point in time. Up to 1791 the figures are generally estimated, later figures are from census or local authorities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: 2012 census.\nDivisions.\nThe town Wittenberg consists of Wittenberg proper and the following \"Ortschaften\" or municipal divisions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nWittenberg has a typical oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"; Trewartha: \"Dobk\") with cool winters and warm summers. The average temperature in Wittenberg ranges from in winter to in summer, with the average temperature from May to September being above . Winter begins in early October and spring begins in mid-April of the following year. There are 14.1 days of daytime high temperatures exceeding each year, and about 18 days of daytime maximum temperatures below freezing each winter.\nThe Wittenberg weather station has recorded the following extreme values:\nSights and culture.\nLutherstadt Wittenberg has a wide range of cultural sites. Most are located within the historic old town along the \"Wittenberg Culture Mile\".\nWittenberg is home to numerous historical sites, as well as portraits and other paintings by Lucas Cranach the Elder and Younger. On the doors of All Saints' Church, the \"Schlosskirche\" (\"castle church\", built in 1496\u20131506) Luther is said to have nailed his 95 theses in 1517. It was seriously damaged by fire in 1760 during a bombardment by the French during the Seven Years' War, was practically rebuilt, and was later (1885\u20131892) restored. The wooden doors, burnt in 1760, were replaced in 1858 by bronze doors, bearing the Latin text of the theses. Inside the church are the tombs of Martin Luther, Philipp Melanchthon, Johannes Bugenhagen, Paul Eber and of the electors Frederick the Wise (by Peter Vischer the Younger, 1527) and John the Constant (by Hans Vischer), and portraits of the reformers by Lucas Cranach the Younger, who is also buried in the church.\nSt. Mary's Church, the parish church in which Luther often preached, was built in the 14th century, but has been much altered since Luther's time. It contains a painting by Lucas Cranach the Elder, representing the Last Supper (with the faces of Luther and other reformers), Baptism and Confession, also a font by Hermann Vischer the Elder (1457). In addition, there are numerous historic paintings in the church.\nThe ancient electoral palace is another of the buildings that suffered severely in 1760; it now contains archives.\nMartin Luther's home, the Lutherhaus, where he studied and lived both before and after the Reformation, is now a museum containing many artifacts from his life. Melanchthon's house and the house of Lucas Cranach the Elder, mayor of Wittenberg, can also be found here. Statues of Luther (by Schadow), Melanchthon and Bugenhagen embellish the town. The spot outside the Elster Gate where Luther publicly burned the papal bull in 1520 is marked by an oak tree.\nThe original Wittenberg University quadrangle also lies in the city centre.\nBuildings.\nChurches.\nSchlosskirche.\nOne of the town's main attractions is the Schlosskirche (Castle Church), most notably associated with the publication of Martin Luther's 95 Theses, a bold attack on the Roman Catholic Church's practice of indulgences. The castle church was remodelled between 1883 and 1892. According to the intentions of the builders, the world-historical significance of the castle church was to be expressed. In the spirit of the historicism period, the statement was related to the precursors and bearers of the Reformation, thus creating a Reformation memorial. On the occasion of the 500th anniversary of the posting of the theses in 2017, the church was extensively renovated.\nStadtkirche Wittenberg.\nSt. Mary's Town Church and Parish Church is the mother church of the Reformation. The first Protestant service was held in it in 1521 by Justus Jonas the Elder and Andreas Bodenstein of Karlstadt. As Martin Luther's preaching church, it was the Reformation official church of the general superintendents of the Saxon Kurkreis. After the Congress of Vienna it became the official residence of the Wittenberg superintendents. The artistic decoration is well preserved and includes works by Lucas Cranach the Elder and Lucas Cranach the Younger. Epitaphs on the interior and exterior walls refer to the work of many important personalities. The cemetery chapel of the Holy Corpse stands to the south of the town church and once belonged to the walled cemetery area of the church.\nUnbefleckte Empf\u00e4ngnis Catholic Church.\nThe church on Mauerstra\u00dfe was consecrated in 1872 by Bishop Konrad Martin. It was renovated in 1999/2000.\nChrist Church.\nChrist Church was built as another church in 1907/1908 in the suburb of Kleinwittenberg in historicist forms.\nOther buildings.\nAugusteum and Luther House.\nThe representative showcase building Augusteum was once an extension of the University of Wittenberg \"Leucorea\". In the inner courtyard of the Augusteum is the former home of Martin Luther. Today, the building houses the Reformation History Museum with its collections of pictures, writings and contemporary exhibits from the Reformation era\nMelanchthon House.\nThe architectural style of the Melanchthon House in Collegienstra\u00dfe, which expresses the self-confident modernity of the Renaissance, is an architectural sight. In this house the reformer Philipp Melanchthon lived and died. It houses an exhibition. In 2013, the house received an extension according to plans by the architects Dietsch &amp; Weber from Halle made of grey brick.\nUniversity \"Leucorea\" Wittenberg.\nFounded in 1502, the Reformation Martin Luther and Melanchthon spent time at the University of Leucorea in Collegienstra\u00dfe. \nHamlethaus.\nThe Hamlethaus in Collegienstra\u00dfe blends into the ensemble of the town.\nBugenhagenhaus.\nThe Bugenhagen House next to the town church is the oldest Protestant vicarage in the world and is one of the most significant memorials to the Reformation. Until 1997, it was the residence and place of work of the Wittenberg superintendents without interruption since the Reformation. Johannes Bugenhagen was the first pastor to live here until his death in 1558. Between 2004 and 2007, the building was thoroughly renovated and now serves as a spiritual community and meeting centre.\nStadthaus.\nThe Stadthaus is a modern building complex on Arsenalplatz that includes several historic buildings. Their origins date back to the 13th century. The town house contains significant remains of the medieval building fabric of the former monastery church of the Franciscans, which in turn was used as the burial place of the Ascanians. As early as 1536, the building was converted into a granary by Conrad Thei\u00df and heavily remodelled by adding several levels. The medieval windows were closed and pouring openings were installed. During the Seven Years' War, the building was severely damaged and rebuilt with a lower building height. Several building activities in the following period have greatly changed the appearance of the building. At the end of the 19th century, for example, one storey was added and large window openings were broken in on the south side. Between 1945 and 1992, Arsenal Square with the town house was occupied by the Red Army and therefore inaccessible. On the site of the former Franciscan monastery, the city's Central Visitors' Reception was opened in 2014/2015. It includes the event centre Stadthaus, the Historical City Information, the Council Archive and the Tourist and City Information Centre.\nAltes Rathaus and Marktplatz.\nIn the centre of the old town is the market square, where a ensemble of town houses has grown up over the centuries. On it are the Renaissance town hall, the monuments to Martin Luther (designed by Schadow) and Philipp Melanchthon (by Drake), as well as the Marktbrunnen. Since the town administration has been located in the former Tauentzien barracks in Lutherstra\u00dfe beginning in 2000 (New Town Hall), the town hall on the market square has been called the Old Town Hall and has since served more representative purposes.\nCranach-H\u00f6fe.\nThe Cranach Courts attest to the work of Lucas Cranach the Elder, Lucas Cranach the Younger, Hans Cranach, Augustin Cranach, and Lucas Cranach III in Wittenberg. The building at Markt 4 and the pharmacy with the courtyard at Schlossstra\u00dfe 1 show points of contact with Lucas Cranach and his descendants.\nLucas Cranach the Elder set up his own print shop in the once-famous printing town of Wittenberg. Among other things, the 95 Theses, the first part of the Luther Bible, Luther's Table Talks, and numerous woodcuts were printed here. After the reconstruction of the Cranach courtyards, a historic print shop was re-established in Schlossstrasse, where texts (e.g. Luther's table speeches) and illustrations (in linocut) are now produced as privately printed matter using the letterpress process. The historical Gutenberg press in the Cranachhof at Markt 4 demonstrates how printing was done in the Middle Ages.\nWittenberg Castle.\nWittenberg Castle is the former residence of the Saxon Electors. After being destroyed in 1760 and 1814, it was used as a barracks as part of the defensive fortifications. Since the First World War, the castle has served civilian purposes.\nCoat of arms.\nWittenberg's civic coat of arms conveys with its various heraldic elements something of the town's history. On 27 June 1293, Wittenberg was granted town rights by Duke Albert II. There then arose a mediaeval town whose highest governing body was its council. This council, known to have existed as early as 1317, was given the job of administering the town in its care through law and legislation, and of handling the town's revenue. For documentation, the administration used its own seal.\nOne version of what is believed to be the town's oldest town seal, which the council used, and which dated from the first half of the 14th century, set the pattern with its elements for various civic coats of arms down to the present day.\nThe coat of arms symbolizes, with its crenelated wall and the towers within and each side, a town that was already strongly fortified by 1409.\nThe two shields in the centre form the coat of arms of the Electorate of Saxony with the Saxon arms on the right, whose gold and black stripes recall the Ascanian rulers' house colours with the \n\"Rautenkranz\" or crancelin (literally \"rue wreath\"; see the Saxony article for more) across them symbolizing the town's founder Duke Albrecht II since 1262, when it appeared in his arms.\nThe shield on the left is the Wittenberg district's arms. In 1356, Emperor Charles IV bestowed upon the Duke of Saxony-Wittenberg the honour of Elector. Wittenberg became an Electoral residence. The shield with its crossed swords stands for the office of \"Arch-Marshal of the Holy Roman Empire\" inextricably joined by the Electorate, brought to Wittenberg by Rudolf I. Both coats of arms continued to be used by the Wettins after the Ascanians died out.\nThe flowing water at the foot of the shield symbolizes Wittenberg's location on the River Elbe.\nThe fish is a salmon, which as once abundant in the Elbe. The fishermen, like all professions in town, got their own order in 1422, and the fish found its way onto their coat of arms.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nThe town is a centre of the chemical industry with the SKW Stickstoffwerke Piesteritz GmbH. The whole area of the industrial park covers more than 220 hectares with more than 1,500 workers. Tourism plays a major role. Wittenberg is one of the top destinations in Saxony-Anhalt.\nLutherstadt Wittenberg station is the main railway station. It connects Wittenberg hourly with Berlin to the north and Leipzig and Halle (Saale) to the south. The station was rebuilt to be more environmentally friendly and re-opened in December 2016.\nTheatre, culture and education.\nWittenberg has a long tradition of cultural events. The Central German State Theatre (\"Mitteldeutsches Landestheater\") reached great importance in GDR times. Since 1996, the town has staged open-air theatre shows based on the Lutheran history still alive in many historical places of the ancient town. As highlights, in 2001 and 2005, Fernando Scarpa became the artistic director of the \"B\u00fchne Wittenberg\" (Stage Wittenberg), a project for theatre, art and culture in the whole of Germany which attracts many visitors to the town and whose success is known European-wide. On 2002 and 2003 Stefano Vagnini, Italian composer and organist created the music for \"Thesys\" and \"Luther Stories\". \nWittenberg is the seat of the Leucorea which is part of the Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg, the largest university in Saxony-Anhalt.\nPersonalities from the 19th to the 21st century.\nNot only the men of the Reformation era Martin Luther, Philipp Melanchthon and Lucas Cranach left their mark on Wittenberg. Much more than in its role as the capital of Kursachsen and as the residential town of Saxony-Wittenberg, the city was shaped by the university. The names and dates of many personalities are recorded on memorial plaques on the houses in the old town.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nWittenberg is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48829", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48829", "title": "Diabeties", "text": ""}
{"id": "48830", "revid": "38664462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48830", "title": "Georgia (U.S. state)", "text": "U.S. state\nGeorgia ( ) is a state in the Southeastern, South Atlantic, and Deep South regions of the United States. It borders Tennessee to the northwest, North Carolina and South Carolina to the northeast, Atlantic Ocean to the east, Florida to the south, and Alabama to the west. Of the 50 U.S. states, Georgia is the 24th-largest by area and eighth-most populous. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, its 2024 estimated population was 11,180,878. Atlanta, a global city, is both the state's capital and its largest city. The Atlanta metropolitan area, with a population greater than 6.3 million people in 2023, is the eighth most populous metropolitan area in the United States and contains about 57% of Georgia's entire population. Other major metropolitan areas in the state include Augusta, Savannah, Columbus, and Macon.\nThe Province of Georgia was established in 1732, with its first settlement occurring in 1733 when Savannah was founded. By 1752, Georgia had transitioned into a British royal colony, making it the last and southernmost of the original Thirteen Colonies. Named in honor of King George II of Great Britain, the Georgia Colony extended from South Carolina down to Spanish Florida and westward to French Louisiana along the Mississippi River. On January 2, 1788, Georgia became the fourth state to ratify the United States Constitution.\nBetween 1802 and 1804, a portion of western Georgia was carved out to create the Mississippi Territory, which eventually became the U.S. states of Alabama and Mississippi. Georgia declared its secession from the Union on January 19, 1861, joining the ranks of the original seven Confederate States. After the Civil War, it was the last state to be readmitted to the Union on July 15, 1870. In the late 19th century, during the post-Reconstruction period, Georgia's economy underwent significant changes, driven by a coalition of influential politicians, business leaders, and journalists, notably Henry W. Grady, who promoted the \"New South\" ideology focused on reconciliation and industrialization.\nIn the mid-20th century, several notable figures from Georgia, including Martin Luther King Jr., emerged as key leaders in the civil rights movement. Additionally, Jimmy Carter was born, lived and raised in the state. Atlanta was chosen to host the 1996 Summer Olympics, celebrating the centennial of the modern Olympic Games. Since 1945, Georgia has experienced significant population and economic expansion, aligning with the larger Sun Belt trend. Between 2007 and 2008, 14 of Georgia's counties were listed among the 100 fastest-growing counties in the United States.\nGeorgia is defined by a diversity of landscapes, flora, and fauna. The northern part of the state features the Blue Ridge Mountains, which are part of the broader Appalachian Mountain range. Moving south, the Piedmont plateau stretches from the foothills of the Blue Ridge to the Fall Line, an escarpment that marks the transition to the Coastal Plain in the southern region of the state. The highest elevation in the state is Brasstown Bald, reaching above sea level, while the lowest point is at the Atlantic Ocean. Except for some elevated areas in the Blue Ridge, Georgia predominantly experiences a humid subtropical climate. Among the states located entirely east of the Mississippi River, Georgia ranks as the largest in terms of land area.\nHistory.\nPre-settlement.\nBefore settlement by European colonists, Georgia was governed by mound building polities such as Ocute and Coosa.\nColonial era and Revolutionary War.\nOn February 12, 1733, a year after Georgia was established as a British colony, the Province of Georgia was established in Savannah by British General James Oglethorpe. It was administered by the Trustees for the Establishment of the Colony of Georgia in America under a charter issued by (and named for) King George II. The Trustees implemented an elaborate plan for the colony's settlement, known as the Oglethorpe Plan, which envisioned an agrarian society of yeoman farmers and prohibited slavery. The colony was invaded by the Spanish in 1742, during the War of Jenkins' Ear. In 1752, after the government failed to renew subsidies that had helped support the colony, the Trustees turned over control to the crown. Georgia became a crown colony, with a governor appointed by the king of Great Britain.\nThe Province of Georgia was one of the Thirteen Colonies that revolted against British rule in the American Revolution. Its delegates to the Second Continental Congress, which convened in present-day Independence Hall in Philadelphia, joined other delegates in unanimously approving the Declaration of Independence, which declared the Thirteen Colonies free and independent from British colonial rule.\nIndependence.\nGeorgia's first constitution was ratified in February 1777. Georgia was the 10th state to ratify the Articles of Confederation on July 24, 1778, and was the 4th state to ratify the United States Constitution on January 2, 1788.\nAfter the Creek War (1813\u20131814), General Andrew Jackson forced the Muscogee (Creek) tribes to surrender land to Georgia, including in the Treaty of Fort Jackson (1814), surrendering 21 million acres in what is now southern Georgia and central Alabama, and the Treaty of Indian Springs (1825). In 1829, gold was discovered in the North Georgia mountains leading to the Georgia Gold Rush and establishment of a federal mint in Dahlonega, which continued in operation until 1861. The resulting influx of American settlers put pressure on the federal U.S. government to take land from the Cherokee Nation. In 1830, President Andrew Jackson signed into law the Indian Removal Act, sending many eastern Indian nations to reservations in present-day Oklahoma, including all of Georgia's tribes. Despite the Supreme Court's ruling in \"Worcester v. Georgia\" (1832) that U.S. states were not permitted to redraw Indian boundaries, President Jackson and the state of Georgia ignored the ruling. In 1838, his successor, Martin Van Buren, dispatched federal troops to gather the tribes and deport them west of the Mississippi. This forced relocation, known as the Trail of Tears, led to the death of more than four thousand Cherokees.\nAmerican Civil War.\nIn early 1861, as the American Civil War commenced, Georgia chose to leave the Union to join the Confederacy. Support for secession from the Union enjoyed a slight majority among the state's delegates, and the state ultimately became one of several major military theaters during the Civil War.\nMajor battles took place at Chickamauga, Kennesaw Mountain, and Atlanta. In December 1864, a large swath of the state from Atlanta to Savannah, was destroyed during General William Tecumseh Sherman's March to the Sea, during which 18,253 Georgian soldiers were killed, representing roughly one of every five then in service of the Confederacy. One of the most notorious Civil War sites in the state was the Andersonville Prison, where nearly 13,000 Union prisoners of war died because of inhumane conditions and ill treatment. Following the war, the camp's commander Henry Wirz was sentenced to death for war crimes and hanged, making him the highest-ranking Confederate official to be executed.\nReconstruction and civil rights.\nGeorgia did not re-enter the Union until July 15, 1870, as the last of the former Confederate states to be re-admitted. Federal troops would continue to be stationed in the state until the end of the Reconstruction era in 1877. With white Democrats having regained power in the state legislature, they passed a poll tax that year which disenfranchised many poor black (and some white) people, preventing them from registering. In 1908, the state established a white primary; with the only competitive contests within the Democratic Party, it was another way to exclude black people from politics. They constituted 46.7% of the state's population in 1900, but the proportion of Georgia's population that was African American dropped thereafter to 28%, primarily due to tens of thousands leaving the state during the Great Migration.&lt;ref name=\"pop/perc\"&gt;http:// , accessed March 15, 2008&lt;/ref&gt; In 1910, a secret meeting was held on Jekyll Island, off Georgia's Atlantic coast, to plan for the creation of an American central banking system. The decisions made at the meeting resulted in the passing of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913.\nAccording to the Equal Justice Initiative's 2015 report on lynching in the United States (1877\u20131950), Georgia had 531 deaths, the second-highest total of these extralegal executions of any state in the South. The overwhelming number of victims were black and male. Many of the killings were committed by the white supremacist hate group the Ku Klux Klan (KKK), whose second iteration was formed at Georgia's Stone Mountain by William Joseph Simmons on November 25, 1915. The Klan's revival was spurned in part by the 1913 murder of 13-year-old Mary Phagan and the lynching two years later of her convicted killer, Jewish pencil factory supervisor and B'nai B'rith Atlanta chapter president Leo Frank. The affair led to the creation of the Anti-Defamation League, which successfully lobbied for Frank to be posthumously pardoned in 1986. Political disfranchisement persisted through the mid-1960s, until after Congress passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\nMartin Luther King Jr., an Atlanta-born Baptist minister who was part of the educated middle class that had developed in the city's African-American community, emerged as a national leader in the civil rights movement in the 1950s. King joined with others to form the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) in Atlanta in 1957 to provide political leadership for the civil rights movement across the South. In 1956, riots occurred at the Sugar Bowl in Atlanta following a clash between Georgia Tech's president Blake R. Van Leer and Governor Marvin Griffin.\nOn February 5, 1958, during a training mission flown by a B-47, a Mark 15 nuclear bomb, also known as the Tybee Bomb, was lost off the coast of Tybee Island near Savannah. The bomb was thought by the Department of Energy to lie buried in silt at the bottom of Wassaw Sound.\nBy the 1960s, the proportion of African Americans in Georgia had declined to 28% of the state's population, after waves of migration to the North and some immigration by whites. With their voting power diminished, it took some years for African Americans to win a state-wide office. Julian Bond, a civil rights leader, was elected to the Georgia's House of Representatives in 1965, and served multiple terms there and subsequently in Georgia's State Senate.\nAtlanta mayor Ivan Allen Jr. testified before Congress in support of the Civil Rights Act, and Governor Carl Sanders worked with the Kennedy administration charged with ensuring the state's compliance. Ralph McGill, editor and syndicated columnist at the \"Atlanta Constitution\", wrote supportively of civil rights movement. In 1970, Jimmy Carter, who was recently elected the state's governor, declared in his inaugural address that the era of racial segregation had ended. In 1972, Georgians elected Andrew Young to Congress as the first African American Congressman since the Reconstruction era.\nLate 20th and early 21st centuries.\nIn 1980, construction was completed on an expansion of what is now named Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport (ATL). The busiest and most efficient airport in the world, it accommodates more than a hundred million passengers annually. Employing more than 60,000 people, the airport became a major engine for economic growth. With the advantages of cheap real estate, low taxes, right-to-work laws and a regulatory environment limiting government interference, the Atlanta metropolitan area became a national center of finance, insurance, technology, manufacturing, real estate, logistics, and transportation companies, as well as the film, convention, and trade show businesses. As a testament to the city's growing international profile, in 1990 the International Olympic Committee selected Atlanta as the site of the 1996 Summer Olympics. Taking advantage of Atlanta's status as a transportation hub, in 1991, UPS established its headquarters in the suburb of Sandy Springs. In 1992, construction finished on Bank of America Plaza, the tallest building in the U.S. outside of New York City or Chicago.\nOn February 19, 2003, Georgia adopted its current state flag, resembling the state's first official flag. In 2024, it was announced that Atlanta would host multiple games during the 2026 FIFA World Cup, which further substantiated the economic investment and growth in the city and state.\nGeography.\nBoundaries.\nBeginning from the Atlantic Ocean, the state's eastern border with South Carolina runs up the Savannah River, northwest to its origin at the confluence of the Tugaloo and Seneca Rivers. It then continues up the Tugaloo (originally Tugalo) and into the Chattooga River, its most significant tributary. These bounds were decided in the 1797 Treaty of Beaufort, and tested in the U.S. Supreme Court in the two \"Georgia v. South Carolina\" cases in 1923 and 1989.\nThe border then takes a sharp turn around the tip of Rabun County, at latitude 35\u00b0N, though from this point it diverges slightly south (due to inaccuracies in the original survey, conducted in 1818). This northern border was originally the Georgia and North Carolina border all the way to the Mississippi River, until Tennessee was divided from North Carolina, and the Yazoo companies induced the legislature of Georgia to pass an act, approved by the governor in 1795, to sell the greater part of Georgia's territory presently comprising Alabama and Mississippi.\nThe state's western border runs in a straight line south-southeastward from a point southwest of Chattanooga, to meet the Chattahoochee River near West Point. It continues downriver to the point where it joins the Flint River (the confluence of the two forming Florida's Apalachicola River); the southern border goes almost due east and very slightly south, in a straight line to the St. Mary's River, which then forms the remainder of the boundary back to the ocean.\nThe water boundaries are still set to be the original thalweg of the rivers. Since then, several have been inundated by lakes created by dams, including the Apalachicola/Chattahoochee/Flint point now under Lake Seminole.\nAn 1818 survey erroneously placed Georgia's border with Tennessee south of the intended location of the 35th parallel north. State legislators still dispute this placement, as correction of this inaccuracy would allow Georgia access to water from the Tennessee River.\nGeology and terrain.\nGeorgia consists of five principal physiographic regions: The Cumberland Plateau, Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians, Blue Ridge Mountains, Piedmont, and the Atlantic coastal plain. Each region has its own distinctive characteristics. For instance, the region, which lies in the northwest corner of the state, includes limestone, sandstone, shale, and other sedimentary rocks, which have yielded construction-grade limestone, barite, ocher, and small amounts of coal.\nEcology.\nThe state of Georgia has approximately 250 tree species and 58 protected plants. Georgia's native trees include red cedar, a variety of pines, oaks, hollies, cypress, sweetgum, scaly-bark and white hickories, and sabal palmetto. East Georgia is in the subtropical coniferous forest biome and conifer species as other broadleaf evergreen flora make up the majority of the southern and coastal regions. Yellow jasmine and mountain laurel make up just a few of the flowering shrubs in the state.\nWhite-tailed deer are found in nearly all counties of Georgia. The northern mockingbird and brown thrasher are among the 160 bird species that live in the state.\nReptiles include the eastern diamondback, copperhead, and cottonmouth snakes as well as alligators; amphibians include salamanders, frogs and toads. There are about 79 species of reptile and 63 amphibians known to live in Georgia. The Argentine black and white tegu is currently an invasive species in Georgia. It poses a problem to local wildlife by chasing down and killing many native species and dominating habitats.\nThe most popular freshwater game fish are trout, bream, bass, and catfish, all but the last of which are produced in state hatcheries for restocking. Popular saltwater game fish include red drum, spotted seatrout, flounder, and tarpon. Porpoises, whales, shrimp, oysters, and blue crabs are found inshore and offshore of the Georgia coast.\nIn 2008, a Georgia man was convicted for illegally killing a vagrant Florida panther that had walked 960\u00a0km to Troup County from SW Florida.\nClimate.\nThe majority of the state is primarily a humid subtropical climate. Hot and humid summers are typical, except at the highest elevations. The entire state, including the North Georgia mountains, receives moderate to heavy precipitation, which varies from in central Georgia to approximately around the northeast part of the state. The degree to which the weather of a certain region of Georgia is subtropical depends on the latitude, its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean or Gulf of Mexico, and the elevation. The latter factor is felt chiefly in the mountainous areas of the northern part of the state, which are farther away from the ocean and can be above sea level. The USDA plant hardiness zones for Georgia range from zone 6b (no colder than ) in the Blue Ridge Mountains to zone 8b (no colder than ) along the Atlantic coast and Florida border.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded is in Louisville on July 24, 1952, while the lowest is in northern Floyd County on January 27, 1940. Georgia is one of the leading states in frequency of tornadoes, though they are rarely stronger than EF1. Although tornadoes striking the city are very rare, an EF2 tornado hit down\ntown Atlanta on March 14, 2008, causing moderate to severe damage to various buildings. With a coastline on the Atlantic Ocean, Georgia is also vulnerable to hurricanes, although direct hurricane strikes were rare during the 20th century. Georgia often is affected by hurricanes that strike the Florida Panhandle, weaken over land, and bring strong tropical storm winds and heavy rain to the interior, a recent example being Hurricane Michael, as well as hurricanes that come close to the Georgia coastline, brushing the coast on their way north without ever making landfall. Hurricane Matthew of 2016 and Hurricane Dorian of 2019 did just that.\nDue to anthropogenic climate change, the climate of Georgia is warming. This is already causing major disruption, for example, from sea level rise (Georgia is more vulnerable to it than many other states because its land is sinking) and further warming will increase it.\nMajor cities.\nAtlanta, located in north-central Georgia at the Eastern Continental Divide, has been Georgia's capital city since 1868. It is the most populous city in Georgia, with a 2020 U.S. census population of just over 498,000. The state has seventeen cities with populations over 50,000, based on official 2020 U.S. census data.\nAlong with the rest of the Southeast, Georgia's population continues to grow rapidly, with primary gains concentrated in urban areas. The U.S. Census Bureau lists fourteen metropolitan areas in the state. The population of the Atlanta metropolitan area added 1.23 million people (24%) between 2000 and 2010, and Atlanta rose in rank from the eleventh-largest metropolitan area in the United States to the ninth-largest. Metropolitan Atlanta is the cultural and economic center of the Southeast; its official population in 2020 was over 6 million, or 57% of Georgia's total population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe United States Census Bureau reported Georgia's official population to be 10,711,908 as of the 2020 United States census. This was an increase of 1,024,255, or 10.57% over the 2010 figure of 9,687,653 residents. The state made up 3.14% of the total US population in 2010 and 3.23% in 2020.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], the number of illegal immigrants living in Georgia more than doubled to 480,000 from January 2000 to January 2009, according to a federal report. That gave Georgia the greatest percentage increase among the 10 states with the biggest illegal immigrant populations during those years. Georgia has banned sanctuary cities.\nIn 2018, the top countries of origin for Georgia's immigrants were Mexico, India, Jamaica, Korea, and Guatemala.\nThere were 743,000 veterans in 2009.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 10,689 homeless people in Georgia.\nRace and ethnicity.\nIn the 1980 census, 1,584,303 people from Georgia claimed English ancestry out of a total state population of 3,994,817, making them 40% of the state, and the largest ethnic group at the time. Today, many of these same people claim they are of \"American\" ancestry, as do many of Scots-Irish descent; however, their families have lived in the state for so long, in many cases since the colonial period, that they choose to identify simply as having \"American\" ancestry or do not in fact know their own ancestry.\nHistorically, about half of Georgia's population was composed of African Americans who, before the American Civil War, were almost exclusively enslaved. The Great Migration of hundreds of thousands of blacks from the rural South to the industrial North from 1914 to 1970 reduced the African American population. However, the proportion of Georgia's population that is Black has increased since 1990 and today the state is third in percent of the total population that is African American (after Mississippi and Louisiana) and third in numeric Black population after New York and Florida.\nGeorgia had the second-fastest-growing Asian population growth in the U.S. from 1990 to 2000, more than doubling in size during the ten-year period. Indian people and Chinese people are the largest Asian groups in Georgia. Georgia also has a sizeable Hispanic population. Many are of Mexican descent.\nGeorgia is the state with the third-lowest percentage of older people (65 or older), at 12.8 percent (as of 2015[ [update]]). As of 2011[ [update]], 58.8% of Georgia's population younger than 1 were minorities (meaning they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white) compared to other states like California with 75.1%, Texas with 69.8%, and New York with 55.6%.\nThe colonial settlement of large numbers of Scottish American, English American and Scotch-Irish Americans in the mountains and Piedmont, and coastal settlement by some English Americans and African Americans, have strongly influenced the state's culture in food, language and music. The concentration of African slaves repeatedly \"imported\" to coastal areas in the 18th century from rice-growing regions of West Africa led to the development of Gullah-Geechee language and culture in the Low Country among African Americans. They share a unique heritage in which many African traditions of food, religion and culture were retained. In the creolization of Southern culture, their foodways became an integral part of Low Country cooking. Sephardic Jews, French-speaking Swiss people, Moravians, Irish convicts, Piedmont Italians and Russian people immigrated to the state during the colonial era.\nThe largest European ancestry groups as of 2011 were: English 8.1%, Irish 8.1%, and German 7.2%.\nLanguages.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], (8,711,102) of Georgia residents age5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while (795,646) spoke Spanish, and (666,849) spoke languages other than English or Spanish at home, with the most common of which were Vietnamese, Chinese, and Korean. In total, (1,462,495) of Georgia's population age5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.\nReligion.\nAccording to the Pew Research Center, the composition of religious affiliation in Georgia was 67% Protestant, 9% Catholic, 1% Mormon, 1% Jewish, 0.5% Muslim, 0.5% Buddhist, and 0.5% Hindu. Atheists, deists, agnostics, and other unaffiliated people make up 18% of the population. Overall, Christianity was the dominant religion in the state, as part of the Bible Belt.\nAccording to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2010, the largest Christian denominations by number of adherents were the Southern Baptist Convention with 1,759,317; the United Methodist Church with 619,394; and the Roman Catholic Church with 596,384. Non-denominational Evangelical Protestant had 566,782 members, the Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee) has 175,184 members, and the National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc. has 172,982 members. The Presbyterian Church (USA) is the largest Presbyterian body in the state, with 300 congregations and 100,000 members. The other large body, Presbyterian Church in America, had at its founding date 14 congregations and 2,800 members; in 2010 it counted 139 congregations and 32,000 members. The Roman Catholic Church is noteworthy in Georgia's urban areas, and includes the Archdiocese of Atlanta and the Diocese of Savannah. Georgia is home to the second-largest Hindu temple in the United States, the BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Atlanta, located in the Atlanta suburb Lilburn. The state also has a minority Sikh population and 4 gurudwaras. Georgia is home to several historic synagogues including The Temple (Atlanta), Congregation Beth Jacob (Atlanta), and Congregation Mickve Israel (Savannah). Chabad and the Rohr Jewish Learning Institute are also active in the state.\nBy the 2022 Public Religion Research Institute's study, 71% of the population were Christian; throughout its Christian population, 60% were Protestant and 8% were Catholic. Jehovah's Witnesses and Mormons collectively made up 3% of other Christians according to the study. Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism collectively formed 4% of the state's non-Christian population; New Age spirituality was 2% of the religious population. Approximately 23% of the state was irreligious.\nNative American tribes.\nTribes which historically lived in what is now Georgia include the Muscogee (including the Hitchiti subgroup), the Cherokee, the Oconi, the Guale, the Yamasee and the Apalachee. Other tribes which at various times lived in or migrated through Georgia include the Apalachicola, the Chatot, the Yuchi, the Chiaha, the Chickasaw, the Okmulgee, the Shawnee and the Timucua. Today there are no federally recognized tribes in Georgia, but there are three state-recognized tribes. Many inhabitants of Georgia identify as being Native American alone (32,151 people in 2010 census and 50,618 in 2020) or Native American in combination with one or more other races (51,873 people in 2010 census and 163,423 in 2020). Many Georgians also reported belonging to various Native American tribes in 2010 census, the largest of which was the Cherokee (21,525 people). Other tribes reported in Georgia in 2010 included for example the Muscogee (2,370 people), the Choctaw (1,419), the Sioux (1,027), the Seminole (664) and more.\nEconomy.\nGeorgia's 2018 total gross state product was $602 billion. For years Georgia as a state has had the highest credit rating by Standard &amp; Poor's (AAA) and is one of only 15 states with a AAA rating. If Georgia were a stand-alone country, it would be the 28th-largest economy in the world, based on data from 2005. As of 2025, Georgia has been noted by Area Development Magazine as the Top State for Doing Business for 12 consecutive years.\n4,034,309\n253,729\nThere are many Fortune 500 companies with headquarters in Georgia, including Home Depot, UPS, Coca-Cola, TSYS, Delta Air Lines, Aflac, Southern Company, and Elevance Health. In addition, there are also many Fortune 1000 companies.\nAtlanta boasts the world's busiest airport, as measured both by passenger traffic and by aircraft traffic. In addition, the Port of Savannah is the fourth-largest seaport and fastest-growing container seaport in North America, importing and exporting a total of 2.3 million TEUs per year.\nAtlanta has a significant effect on the state of Georgia, the Southeastern United States, and beyond. It has been the site of growth in finance, insurance, technology, manufacturing, real estate, service, logistics, transportation, film, communications, convention and trade show businesses and industries, while tourism is important to the economy. Atlanta is a global city, also called \"world city\" or sometimes \"alpha city\" or \"world center\", as a city generally considered to be an important node in the global economic system.\nFor the five years through November 2017, Georgia has been ranked the top state (number1) in the nation to do business, and has been recognized as number1 for business and labor climate in the nation, number1 in business climate in the nation, number1 in the nation in workforce training and as having a \"Best in Class\" state economic development agency.\nIn 2016, Georgia had a median annual income per person of between $50,000 and $59,999, which is in inflation-adjusted dollars for 2016. The U.S. median annual income for the entire nation is $57,617. This lies within the range of Georgia's median annual income.\nA 2024 study listed Georgia in the top 20 of states for an affordable cost of living. However, studies for 2025 have shown Georgia is the leading state for personal loan searches, with nearly twice the volume of most other states.\nManufacturing.\nWhile many textile jobs moved overseas, there is still a textile industry located around the cities of Rome, Columbus, Augusta, Macon and along the I-75 corridor between Atlanta and Chattanooga, Tennessee. Historically it started along the fall line in the Piedmont, where factories were powered by waterfalls and rivers. It includes the towns of Cartersville, Calhoun, Ringgold and Dalton.\nIn November 2009, the South Korean automaker Kia Corporation began production in Georgia. The first Kia plant built in the U.S., Kia Motors Manufacturing Georgia, is located in West Point. Rivian, an electric vehicle manufacturer, plans to begin production at a facility in Social Circle in 2024.\nIndustrial products include textiles and apparel, transportation equipment, food processing, paper products, chemicals and products, and electric equipment.\nAgriculture.\nWidespread farms produce peanuts, corn, and soybeans across middle and south Georgia. The state is the number one producer of pecans in the world, thanks to Naomi Chapman Woodroof regarding peanut breeding, with the region around Albany in southwest Georgia being the center of Georgia's pecan production. Georgia produces the most chickens for poultry of any state; Gainesville, in northeast Georgia, touts itself as the \"Poultry Capital of the World\". Georgia is in the top five blueberry producers in the United States.\nFilm.\nThe Georgia Film, Music and Digital Entertainment Office promotes filming in the state. Since 1972, over eight hundred films and 1,500 television shows have been filmed on location in Georgia. Georgia overtook California in 2016 as the state with the most feature films produced on location. In the fiscal year 2017, film and television production in Georgia had an economic impact of $9.5 billion. Atlanta has been called the \"Hollywood of the South\". Television shows like \"Stranger Things\", \"The Walking Dead\", and \"The Vampire Diaries\" are filmed in the state. Movies such as \"Passengers\", \"Forrest Gump\", \"Contagion\", \"Hidden Figures\", \"Sully\", \"Baby Driver\", ', ', \"Black Panther\", \"Birds of Prey\", and many more, were filmed around Georgia.\nEnergy.\nGeorgia's electricity generation and consumption are among the highest in the United States, with natural gas being the primary electrical generation fuel, followed by coal. The state also has two nuclear power facilities, Plant Hatch and Plant Vogtle, which contribute almost one fourth of Georgia's electricity generation, and two additional nuclear reactors are being built at Vogtle as of 2022. In 2013, the generation mix was 39% gas, 35% coal, 23% nuclear, 3% hydro and other renewable sources. The leading area of energy consumption is the industrial sector because Georgia \"is a leader in the energy-intensive wood and paper products industry\". Solar generated energy is becoming more in use with solar energy generators currently installed ranking Georgia 15th in the country in installed solar capacity. In 2013, $189 million was invested in Georgia to install solar for home, business and utility use representing a 795% increase over the previous year.\nMajor products in the mineral industry include a variety of clays, stones, sands and the clay palygorskite, known as attapulgite.\nLogistics.\nIn 2017, Georgia ranked second among all states for infrastructure and global access by \"Area Development\" magazine.\nThe Georgia Ports Authority owns and operates four ports in the state: Port of Savannah, Port of Brunswick, Port Bainbridge, and Port Columbus. The Port of Savannah is the third-busiest seaport in the United States, importing and exporting a total of 4.9 million TEUs for 2023. The Port of Savannah's Garden City Terminal is the largest single container terminal in North America. Several major companies including Target, IKEA, and Heineken operate distribution centers in close proximity to the Port of Savannah.\nHartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport moves over 650,000 tons of cargo annually through three cargo complexes ( of floor space). It has nearby cold storage for perishables; it is the only airport in the Southeast with USDA-approved cold-treatment capabilities. Delta Air Lines also offers an on-airport refrigeration facility for perishable cargo, and a 250-acre Foreign Trade Zone is located at the airport.\nGeorgia is a major railway hub, has the most extensive rail system in the Southeast, and has the service of two Class I railroads, CSX and Norfolk Southern, plus 24 short-line railroads. Georgia is ranked the No. 3 state in the nation for rail accessibility. Rail shipments include intermodal, bulk, automotive and every other type of shipment.\nGeorgia has an extensive interstate highway system including of interstate highway and of federal and state highways that facilitate the efficient movement of more than $620 billion of cargo by truck each year. Georgia's six interstates connect to 80 percent of the U.S. population within a two-day truck drive. More than $14 billion in funding has been approved for new roadway infrastructure.\nMilitary.\nSouthern Congressmen have attracted major investment by the U.S. military in the state. The several installations include Moody Air Force Base, Fort Stewart, Hunter Army Airfield, Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay, Fort Benning, Robins Air Force Base, Fort Gordon, Marine Corps Logistics Base Albany, Dobbins Air Reserve Base, Coast Guard Air Station Savannah and Coast Guard Station Brunswick. These installations command numerous jobs and business for related contractors.\nTourism.\nIn the Atlanta area, World of Coke, Georgia Aquarium, Zoo Atlanta and Stone Mountain are important tourist attractions. Stone Mountain is Georgia's \"most popular attraction\"; receiving more than four million tourists per year. The Georgia Aquarium, in Atlanta, was the largest aquarium in the world in 2010 according to Guinness World Records.\nCallaway Gardens, in western Georgia, is a family resort. The area is also popular with golfers.\nThe Savannah Historic District attracts more than eleven million tourists each year.\nThe Golden Isles is a string of barrier islands off the Atlantic coast of Georgia near Brunswick that includes beaches, golf courses and the Cumberland Island National Seashore.\nSeveral sites honor the lives and careers of noted American leaders: the Little White House in Warm Springs, which served as the summer residence of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt while he was being treated for polio; President Jimmy Carter's hometown of Plains and the Carter Presidential Center in Atlanta; the Martin Luther King Jr. National Historical Park in Atlanta, which is the final resting place of Martin Luther King Jr. and Coretta Scott King; and Atlanta's Ebenezer Baptist Church, where King preached.\nTaxes.\nGeorgia has a progressive income tax structure with six brackets of state income tax rates that range from 1% to 6%. In 2009, Georgians paid 9% of their income in state and local taxes, compared to the U.S. average of 9.8% of income. This ranks Georgia 25th among the states for total state and local tax burden. The state sales tax in Georgia is 4% with additional percentages added through local options (e.g. special-purpose local-option sales tax or SPLOST), but there is no sales tax on prescription drugs, certain medical devices, or food items for home consumption.\nThe state legislature may allow municipalities to institute local sales taxes and special local taxes, such as the 2% SPLOST tax and the 1% sales tax for MARTA serviced counties. Excise taxes are levied on alcohol, tobacco, and motor fuel. Owners of real property in Georgia pay property tax to their county. All taxes are collected by the Georgia Department of Revenue and then properly distributed according to any agreements that each county has with its cities.\nHousing.\nIn 2025, all states were ranked on housing affordability and future housing construction. Out of 50 states, Georgia was in the top 10 for housing purchase affordability and was in the top seven that accounted for more than 50% of all 2024 construction permits to build homes. Georgia is one of the top ten states that are \"striking a balance between both affordability and robust homebuilding efforts\", Realtor.com reported.\nCulture.\nFine and performing arts.\nGeorgia's major fine art museums include the High Museum of Art and the Michael C. Carlos Museum, both in Atlanta; the Georgia Museum of Art on the campus of the University of Georgia in Athens; Telfair Museum of Art and the SCAD Museum of Art in Savannah; and the Morris Museum of Art in Augusta.\nThe state theatre of Georgia is the Springer Opera House located in Columbus.\nThe Atlanta Opera brings opera to Georgia stages. The Atlanta Symphony Orchestra is the most widely recognized orchestra and largest arts organization in the southeastern United States.\nThere are a number of performing arts venues in the state, among the largest are the Fox Theatre, and the Alliance Theatre at the Woodruff Arts Center, both on Peachtree Street in Midtown Atlanta as well as the Cobb Energy Performing Arts Centre, located in Northwest Atlanta.\nFilms and literature.\nTwo movies, both set in Atlanta, won Oscars for Best Picture: \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) and \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1989). Other films set in Georgia include \"Deliverance\" (1972), \"Parental Guidance\" (2012), and \"Vacation\" (2015).\nAuthors have grappled with Georgia's complex history. Popular novels related to this include Margaret Mitchell's \"Gone with the Wind\", Olive Ann Burns' \"Cold Sassy Tree\", and Alice Walker's \"The Color Purple\". A number of noted authors, poets and playwrights have lived in Georgia, such as James Dickey, Flannery O'Connor, Sidney Lanier, Frank Yerby and Lewis Grizzard.\nMusic.\nA number of notable musicians in various genres of popular music are from Georgia. Among them are Ray Charles (whose many hits include \"Georgia on My Mind\", now the official state song), and Gladys Knight (known for her Georgia-themed song, \"Midnight Train to Georgia\").\nRock groups from Georgia include the Atlanta Rhythm Section, The Black Crowes, and The Allman Brothers.\nThe city of Athens sparked an influential rock music scene in the 1980s and 1990s. Among the groups achieving their initial prominence there were R.E.M., Widespread Panic, and the B-52's.\nSince the 1990s, various hip-hop and R&amp;B musicians have included top-selling artists such as Outkast, Usher, Ludacris, TLC, B.o.B., and Ciara. Atlanta is mentioned in a number of these artists' tracks, such as Usher's \"A-Town Down\" reference in his 2004 hit \"Yeah!\" (which also features Atlanta artists Lil Jon and Ludacris), Ludacris' \"Welcome to Atlanta\", Outkast's album \"ATLiens\", and B.o.B.'s multiple references to Decatur, Georgia, as in his hit song \"Strange Clouds\".\nTelevision.\nWell-known television shows set in Atlanta include, from Tyler Perry Studios, \"House of Payne\" and \"Tyler Perry's Meet the Browns\", \"The Real Housewives of Atlanta\", the CBS sitcom \"Designing Women\", \"Matlock\", the popular AMC series \"The Walking Dead\", FX comedy drama \"Atlanta\", Lifetime's \"Drop Dead Diva\", \"Rectify\" and numerous HGTV original productions.\n\"The Dukes of Hazzard\", a 1980s TV show, was set in the fictional Hazzard County, Georgia. The first five episodes were shot on location in Conyers and Covington, Georgia as well as some locations in Atlanta. Production was then moved to Burbank, California.\nAlso filmed in Georgia was \"The Vampire Diaries\", using Covington as the setting for the fictional Mystic Falls.\nSports.\nSports in Georgia include professional teams in nearly all major sports, Olympic Games contenders and medalists, collegiate teams in major and small-school conferences and associations, and active amateur teams and individual sports. The state of Georgia has teams in four major professional leagues\u2014the Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball, the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League, the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association, and Atlanta United FC of Major League Soccer.\nThe Georgia Bulldogs (Southeastern Conference), Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets (Atlantic Coast Conference), Georgia State Panthers and Georgia Southern Eagles (Sun Belt Conference) are Georgia's NCAA Division I FBS football teams, having won multiple national championships between them. The Georgia Bulldogs and the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets have a historical rivalry in college football known as Clean, Old-Fashioned Hate, and the Georgia State Panthers and the Georgia Southern Eagles have recently developed their own rivalry.\nThe 1996 Summer Olympics took place in Atlanta. The stadium that was built to host various Olympic events was converted to Turner Field, home of the Atlanta Braves through 2016. Atlanta will serve as a host city for the 2026 FIFA World Cup.\nThe Masters golf tournament, the first of the PGA Tour's four \"majors\", is held annually the second weekend of April at the Augusta National Golf Club.\nThe RSM Classic is a golf tournament on the PGA Tour, played in the autumn in Saint Simons Island, Georgia.\nThe Atlanta Motor Speedway hosts the Dixie 500 NASCAR Cup Series stock car race and Road Atlanta the Petit Le Mans endurance sports car race.\nAtlanta's Georgia Dome hosted Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994 and Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000. The dome has hosted the NCAA Final Four Men's Basketball National Championship in 2002, 2007, and 2013. It hosted WWE's WrestleMania XXVII in 2011, an event which set an attendance record of 71,617. The venue was also the site of the annual Chick-fil-A Peach Bowl post-season college football games. Since 2017, they have been held at the Mercedes-Benz Stadium along with the FIRST World Championships.\nProfessional baseball's Ty Cobb was the first player inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. He was from Narrows, Georgia and was nicknamed the \"Georgia Peach\".\nThe Mercedes-Benz Stadium hosted Super Bowl LIII in 2018 and the CFP National Championship in the same year, the SEC Championship Game in 2017, the MLS All-Star Game in 2018, the MLS Cup in 2018, and the record-setting friendly fixture between Mexico Men's National Football Team and Honduras Men's National Football Team.\nWWE Hall of Famer Hulk Hogan is from Augusta, Georgia, and State Farm Arena is to host RAW on January 27, 2025. Atlanta has also hosted WrestleMania XXVII and the 2002 and 2010 Royal Rumble. State Farm Arena also hosted Bad Blood (2024).\nEducation.\nGeorgia county and city public school systems are administered by school boards with members elected at the local level. As of 2013[ [update]], all but 19 of 181 boards are elected from single-member districts. Residents and activist groups in Fayette County sued the board of commissioners and school board for maintaining an election system based on at-large voting, which tended to increase the power of the majority and effectively prevented minority participation on elected local boards for nearly 200 years. A change to single-member districts has resulted in the African-American minority being able to elect representatives of its choice.\nGeorgia high schools (grades nine through twelve) are required to administer a standardized, multiple choice End of Course Test, or EOCT, in each of eight core subjects: algebra, geometry, U.S. history, economics, biology, physical science, ninth-grade literature and composition, and American literature. The official purpose of the tests is to assess \"specific content knowledge and skills\". Although a minimum test score is not required for the student to receive credit in the course, completion of the test is mandatory. The EOCT score accounts for 15% of a student's grade in the course. The \"Georgia Milestone\" evaluation is taken by public school students in the state. In 2020, because of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the Georgia State BOE agreed to state superintendent Richard Woods' proposal to change the weight of the EOCT test to only count for 0.01% of the Student's course grade. This change is currently only in effect for the 2020\u201321 school year.\nGeorgia has 85 public colleges, universities, and technical colleges in addition to more than 45 private institutes of higher learning. Among Georgia's public universities is the flagship research university, the University of Georgia, founded in 1785 as the country's oldest state-chartered university and the birthplace of the American system of public higher education. The University System of Georgia is the presiding body over public post-secondary education in the state. The System includes 26 institutions of higher learning and is governed by the Georgia Board of Regents. Georgia's workforce of more than 6.3\u00a0million is constantly refreshed by the growing number of people who move there along with the 90,000 graduates from the universities, colleges and technical colleges across the state, including the highly ranked University of Georgia, Georgia Institute of Technology, Georgia State University, Kennesaw State University, Spelman College, and Emory University.\nThe HOPE Scholarship, funded by the state lottery, is available to all Georgia residents who have graduated from high school or earned a General Educational Development certificate. The student must maintain a 3.0 or higher grade point average and attend a public college or university in the state.\nThe Georgia Historical Society, an independent educational and research institution, has a research center located in Savannah. The research center's library and archives hold the oldest collection of materials related to Georgia history in the nation.\nMedia.\nThe Atlanta metropolitan area is the ninth largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research. The state's other top markets are Savannah (95th largest), Augusta (115th largest), and Columbus (127th largest).\nThere are 48 television broadcast stations in Georgia including TBS, TNT, TCM, Cartoon Network, CNN and Headline News, all founded by notable Georgia resident Ted Turner. The Weather Channel also has its headquarters in Atlanta.\nBy far, the largest daily newspaper in Georgia is the Atlanta Journal-Constitution with a daily readership of 195,592 and a Sunday readership of 397,925. Other large dailies include \"The Augusta Chronicle\", the \"Columbus Ledger-Enquirer\", \"The Telegraph\" (formerly \"The Macon Telegraph\") and the \"Savannah Morning News\".\nWSB-AM in Atlanta was the first licensed radio station in the southeastern United States, signing on in 1922. Georgia Public Broadcasting has been in service since 1984 and broadcasts daily on several FM stations across the state. The Atlanta area is additionally served by WABE public radio.\nWSB-TV in Atlanta is the state's oldest television station, having begun operations in 1948. WSB the first television service in Georgia, and the South.\nGovernment.\nState government.\nAs with all other U.S. states and the federal government, Georgia's government is based on the separation of legislative, executive, and judicial power. Executive authority in the state rests with the governor, currently Brian Kemp (Republican). Both the Governor of Georgia and lieutenant governor are elected on separate ballots to four-year terms of office. Unlike the federal government, but like many other U.S. States, most of the executive officials who comprise the governor's cabinet are elected by the citizens of Georgia rather than appointed by the governor.\nLegislative authority resides in the General Assembly, composed of the Senate and House of Representatives. The Lieutenant Governor presides over the Senate, while members of the House of Representatives select their own Speaker. The Georgia Constitution mandates a maximum of 56 senators, elected from single-member districts, and a minimum of 180 representatives, apportioned among representative districts (which sometimes results in more than one representative per district); there are currently 56 senators and 180 representatives. The term of office for senators and representatives is two years. The laws enacted by the General Assembly are codified in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.\nState judicial authority rests with the state Supreme Court and Court of Appeals, which have statewide authority. In addition, there are smaller courts which have more limited geographical jurisdiction, including Superior Courts, State Courts, Juvenile Courts, Magistrate Courts and Probate Courts. Justices of the Supreme Court and judges of the Court of Appeals are elected statewide by the citizens in non-partisan elections to six-year terms. Judges for the smaller courts are elected to four-year terms by the state's citizens who live within that court's jurisdiction.\nLocal government.\nGeorgia consists of 159 counties, second only to Texas, with 254. Georgia had 161 counties until the end of 1931, when Milton and Campbell were merged into the existing Fulton. Some counties have been named for prominent figures in both American and Georgian history, and many bear names with Native American origin. Counties in Georgia have their own elected legislative branch, usually called the Board of Commissioners, which usually also has executive authority in the county. Several counties have a sole commissioner form of government, with legislative and executive authority vested in a single person. Georgia is the only state with current Sole Commissioner counties. Georgia's Constitution provides all counties and cities with \"home rule\" authority. The county commissions have considerable power to pass legislation within their county, as a municipality would.\nGeorgia recognizes all local units of government as cities, so every incorporated town is legally a city. Georgia does not provide for townships or independent cities, though there have been bills proposed in the Legislature to provide for townships; it does allow consolidated city-county governments by local referendum. All of Georgia's second-tier cities except Savannah have now formed consolidated city-county governments by referendum: Columbus (in 1970), Athens (1990), Augusta (1995), and Macon (2012). (Augusta and Athens have excluded one or more small, incorporated towns within their consolidated boundaries; Columbus and Macon eventually absorbed all smaller incorporated entities within their consolidated boundaries.) The small town of Cusseta adopted a consolidated city-county government after it merged with unincorporated Chattahoochee County in 2003. Three years later, in 2006, the town of Georgetown consolidated with the rest of Quitman County.\nThere is no true metropolitan government in Georgia, though the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) and Georgia Regional Transportation Authority do provide some services, and the ARC must review all major land development projects in the Atlanta metropolitan area.\nElections.\nGeorgia voted Republican in six consecutive presidential elections from 1996 to 2016, a streak that was broken when the state went for Democratic candidate Joe Biden in 2020.\nUntil 1964, Georgia's state government had the longest unbroken record of single-party dominance, by the Democratic Party, of any state in the Union. This record was established largely due to the disenfranchisement of most blacks and many poor whites by the state in its constitution and laws in the early 20th century. Some elements, such as requiring payment of poll taxes and passing literacy tests, prevented blacks from registering to vote; their exclusion from the political system lasted into the 1960s and reduced the Republican Party to a non-competitive status in the early 20th century.\nWhite Democrats regained power after Reconstruction due in part to the efforts of some using intimidation and violence, but this method came into disrepute. In 1900, shortly before Georgia adopted a disfranchising constitutional amendment in 1908, blacks comprised 47% of the state's population.\nThe whites dealt with this problem of potential political power by the 1908 amendment, which in practice disenfranchised blacks and poor whites, nearly half of the state population. It required that any male at least 21 years of age wanting to register to vote must also be of good character and able to pass a test on citizenship, be able to read and write provisions of the U.S. and Georgia constitutions, or own at least forty acres of land or $500 in property. Any Georgian who had fought in any war from the American Revolution through the Spanish\u2013American War was exempted from these additional qualifications. More importantly, any Georgian descended from a veteran of any of these wars also was exempted. Because, by 1908, many white Georgia males were grandsons of veterans or owned the required property, the exemption and the property requirement basically allowed only well-to-do whites to vote. The qualifications of good character, citizenship knowledge, literacy (all determined subjectively by white registrars), and property ownership were used to disqualify most blacks and poor whites, preventing them from registering to vote. The voter rolls dropped dramatically. In the early 20th century, Progressives promoted electoral reform and reducing the power of ward bosses to clean up politics. Their additional rules, such as the eight box law, continued to effectively close out people who were illiterate. White one-party rule was solidified.\nFor more than 130 years, from 1872 to 2003, Georgians nominated and elected only white Democratic governors, and white Democrats held the majority of seats in the General Assembly. Most of the Democrats elected throughout these years were Southern Democrats, who were fiscally and socially conservative by national standards. This voting pattern continued after the segregationist period.\nLegal segregation was ended by passage of federal legislation in the 1960s. According to the 1960 census, the proportion of Georgia's population that was African American was 28%; hundreds of thousands of blacks had left the state in the Great Migration to the North and Midwest. New white residents arrived through migration and immigration. Following support from the national Democratic Party for the civil rights movement and especially civil rights legislation of 1964 and 1965, most African-American voters, as well as other minority voters, have largely supported the Democratic Party in Georgia.\nIn 2002, incumbent moderate Democratic Governor Roy Barnes was defeated by Republican Sonny Perdue, a state legislator and former Democrat. While Democrats retained control of the State House, they lost their majority in the Senate when four Democrats switched parties. They lost the House in the 2004 election. Republicans then controlled all three partisan elements of the state government.\nEven before 2002, the state had become increasingly supportive of Republicans in Presidential elections. It has supported a Democrat for president only four times since 1960. In 1976 and 1980, native son Jimmy Carter carried the state; in 1992, the former Arkansas governor Bill Clinton narrowly won the state; and in 2020, Joe Biden narrowly carried the state. Generally, Republicans were strongest in the predominantly white suburban (especially the Atlanta suburbs) and rural portions of the state. Many of these areas were represented by conservative Democrats in the state legislature well into the 21st century. One of the most conservative of these was U.S. Congressman Larry McDonald, former head of the John Birch Society, who died when the Soviet Union shot down KAL 007 near Sakhalin Island. Democratic candidates have tended to win a higher percentage of the vote in the areas where black voters are most numerous, as well as in the cities among liberal urban populations (especially Atlanta and Athens), and the central and southwestern portion of the state.\nThe ascendancy of the Republican Party in Georgia and in the South in general resulted in Georgia U.S. House of Representatives member Newt Gingrich being elected as Speaker of the House following the election of a Republican majority in the House in 1994. Gingrich served as Speaker until 1999, when he resigned in the aftermath of the loss of House seats held by members of the GOP. Gingrich mounted an unsuccessful bid for president in the 2012 election, but withdrew after winning only the South Carolina and Georgia primaries.\nIn 2008, Democrat Jim Martin ran against incumbent Republican Senator Saxby Chambliss. Chambliss failed to acquire the necessary 50 percent of votes due to a Libertarian Party candidate receiving the remainder of votes. In the runoff election held on December 2, 2008, Chambliss became the second Georgia Republican to be reelected to the U.S. Senate.\nIn the 2018 elections, the governorship remained under control by a Republican (by 54,723 votes against a Democrat, Stacey Abrams), Republicans lost eight seats in the Georgia House of Representatives (winning 106), while Democrats gained ten (winning 74), Republicans lost two seats in the Georgia Senate (winning 35 seats), while Democrats gained two seats (winning 21), and five Democrat U.S. Representatives were elected with Republicans winning nine seats (one winning with just 419 votes over the Democratic challenger, and one seat being lost).\nIn the three presidential elections up to and including 2016, the Republican candidate has won Georgia by approximately five to eight points over the Democratic nominee, at least once for each election being narrower than margins recorded in some states that have flipped within that timeframe, such as Michigan, Ohio and Wisconsin. This trend led to the state narrowly electing Democrat Joe Biden for president in 2020, and it coming to be regarded as a swing state.\nIn a 2020 study, Georgia was ranked as 49th on the \"Cost of Voting Index\" with only Texas ranking higher. In 2022, Georgia swung substantially back to the right towards Republicans with incumbent Republican Governor Brian Kemp winning reelection by 7.5% over Democrat Stacey Abrams with a raw vote margin of over 300,000 votes in the 2022 Georgia gubernatorial election; the largest amount since the early 2000s, and every other Republican statewide getting elected by a 5\u201310% margin of victory.\nPolitics.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, Georgia made significant changes in civil rights and governance. As in many other states, its legislature had not reapportioned congressional districts according to population from 1931 to after the 1960 census. Problems of malapportionment in the state legislature, where rural districts had outsize power in relation to urban districts, such as Atlanta's, were corrected after the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in \"Wesberry v. Sanders\" (1964). The court ruled that congressional districts had to be reapportioned to have essentially equal populations.\nA related case, \"Reynolds v. Sims\" (1964), required state legislatures to end their use of geographical districts or counties in favor of \"one man, one vote\"; that is, districts based upon approximately equal populations, to be reviewed and changed as necessary after each census. These changes resulted in residents of Atlanta and other urban areas gaining political power in Georgia in proportion to their populations. From the mid-1960s, the voting electorate increased after African Americans' rights to vote were enforced under civil rights law.\nEconomic growth through this period was dominated by Atlanta and its region. It was a bedrock of the emerging \"New South\". From the late 20th century, Atlanta attracted headquarters and relocated workers of national companies, becoming more diverse, liberal and cosmopolitan than many areas of the state.\nIn the 21st century, many conservative Democrats, including former U.S. Senator and governor Zell Miller, decided to support Republicans. The state's then-socially conservative bent resulted in wide support for measures such as restrictions on abortion. In 2004, a state constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriages was approved by 76% of voters. However, after the United States Supreme Court issued its ruling in \"Obergefell v. Hodges\", all Georgia counties came into full compliance, recognizing the rights of same-sex couples to marry in the state.\nIn presidential elections, Georgia voted solely Democratic in every election from 1900 to 1960. In 1964, it was one of only a handful of states to vote for Republican Barry Goldwater over Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson. In 1968, it did not vote for either of the two parties, but rather the American Independent Party and its nominee, Alabama Governor George Wallace. In 1972, the state returned to Republicans as part of a landslide victory for Richard Nixon. In 1976 and 1980, it voted for Democrat and former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter. The state returned to Republicans in 1984 and 1988, before going Democratic once again in 1992. For every election between that year and 2020, Georgia voted heavily Republican, in line with many of its neighbors in the Deep South. In 2020, it voted Democratic for the first time in 28 years, carried by Joe Biden by 11,779 votes in his national defeat of incumbent Republican Donald Trump.\nThough Republicans had continued to regularly win state and federal elections, in the years prior to 2020, their margins of victory tended to decrease, and that year, many election forecasts ranked Georgia as a swing state. Concurrent with the 2020 presidential election were elections for both of Georgia's United States Senate seats; when no candidate in either race received a majority of the vote, both went to run-offs, which Democrats Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock won. Ossoff is the state's first Jewish senator, and Warnock is the state's first Black senator. The Democratic wins were attributed to the rapid diversification of the suburbs of Atlanta and increased turnout of younger African-American voters, particularly around the suburbs of Atlanta and in Savannah.\nHowever, Republicans rebounded as Governor Brian Kemp won re-election in 2022 by a comfortable margin, and Donald Trump carried the state by 115,000 votes as part of his victory in the 2024 presidential election.\nParks and recreational activities.\nThere are 48 state parks, 15 historic sites, and numerous wildlife preserves under supervision of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. Other historic sites and parks are supervised by the National Park Service and include the Andersonville National Historic Site in Andersonville; Appalachian National Scenic Trail; Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area near Atlanta; Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park at Fort Oglethorpe; Cumberland Island National Seashore near St. Marys; Fort Frederica National Monument on St. Simons Island; Fort Pulaski National Monument in Savannah; Jimmy Carter National Historic Site near Plains; Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park near Kennesaw; Martin Luther King Jr. National Historical Park in Atlanta; Ocmulgee National Monument at Macon; Trail of Tears National Historic Trail; and the Okefenokee Swamp in Waycross, Georgia.\nOutdoor recreational activities include hiking along the Appalachian Trail; Civil War Heritage Trails; rock climbing and whitewater kayaking. Other outdoor activities include hunting and fishing.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nTransportation in Georgia is overseen by the Georgia Department of Transportation, a part of the executive branch of the state government. Georgia's major Interstate Highways are I-20, I-75, I-85, and I-95. On March 18, 1998, the Georgia House of Representatives passed a resolution naming the portion of Interstate 75, which runs from the Chattahoochee River northward to the Tennessee state line the Larry McDonald Memorial Highway. Larry McDonald, a Democratic member of the House of Representatives, had been on Korean Air Lines Flight 007 when it was shot down by the Soviets on September 1, 1983.\nGeorgia's primary commercial airport is Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport (ATL), the world's busiest airport. In addition to Hartsfield\u2013Jackson, there are eight other airports serving major commercial traffic in Georgia. Savannah/Hilton Head International Airport is the second-busiest airport in the state as measured by passengers served, and is the only additional international airport. Other commercial airports (ranked in order of passengers served) are located in Augusta, Columbus, Albany, Macon, Brunswick, Valdosta, and Athens.\nThe Georgia Ports Authority manages two deepwater seaports, at Savannah and Brunswick, and two river ports, at Bainbridge and Columbus. The Port of Savannah is a major U.S. seaport on the Atlantic coast.\nThe Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) is the principal rapid transit system in the Atlanta metropolitan area. Formed in 1971 as strictly a bus system, MARTA operates a network of bus routes linked to a rapid transit system consisting of of rail track with 38 train stations. MARTA operates almost exclusively in Fulton and DeKalb counties, with bus service to two destinations in Cobb county and the Cumberland Transfer Center next to the Cumberland Mall, and a single rail station in Clayton County at Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport. MARTA also operates a separate paratransit service for disabled customers. As of 2009[ [update]], the average total daily ridership for the system (bus and rail) was 482,500 passengers.\nHealthcare.\nThe state has 151 general hospitals, more than 15,000 doctors and almost 6,000 dentists. The state is ranked forty-first in the percentage of residents who engage in regular exercise.\nNotable people.\nJimmy Carter, from Plains, Georgia, was President of the United States from 1977 to 1981. Martin Luther King Jr. was born in Atlanta in 1929. He was a civil rights movement leader who protested for equal rights and against racial discrimination. He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964. Blake R. Van Leer played an important role in the civil rights movement, Georgia's economy and was president of Georgia Tech. Mordecai Sheftall, the highest ranking Jewish officer in the American Revolution, was born and lived his life in Georgia. Naomi Chapman Woodruff, originally from Idaho, was responsible for developing a peanut breeding program in Georgia which led to a harvest of nearly five times the typical amount.\nReference: Georgia Symbols\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48832", "revid": "1941367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48832", "title": "High german", "text": ""}
