{"id": "56963", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56963", "title": "Telecommunications in Portugal", "text": " \nPortugal has a modern and flexible telecommunications market and a wide range of varied media organisations. The regulatory body overseeing communications is called ANACOM.\nThe country has one of the highest mobile phone penetration rates in the world (the number of operative mobile phones already exceeds the population). This network also provides wireless mobile Internet connections as well, and covers the entire territory. As of 2023, 94% of households had high-speed Internet services and 97% of companies had Internet access. Most Portuguese watch television through fibre-optic (2023: 66.2% of households). Paid Internet connections are available at many caf\u00e9s, as well as many post offices. One can also surf on the Internet at hotels, conference centres and shopping centres, where special areas are reserved for this purpose. Free Internet access is also available to Portuguese residents at \"Espa\u00e7os de Internet\" across the country.\nBroadband overview.\nPortugal has a mid-sized but advanced telecoms market, with a steadily growing broadband subscriber base well served by cable, DSL and the emerging FTTx platforms. Mobile penetration is far above the European Union average, while the development of digital TV services has progressed under cautious regulatory guidance. The progressive liberalisation of the Portuguese market began at the beginning of the 1990s through the creation of the Portuguese Institute for Communications (ICP). Through a combination of specific deadlines for liberalisation and entry mechanisms for new market players, Portugal's telecoms scene was successfully opened up to competition.\nThe country's broadband market showed accelerated growth in 2010 not least due to its widespread cable and DSL networks, but also due to aggressive fibre deployment. Broadband services with up to 100\u00a0Mbit/s, 200\u00a0Mbit/s and even 1\u00a0Gbit/s speeds were launched in 2009. The country's leading telecom operators have partnered up to build high speed next generation networks.\nThe government's broadband initiative for 2009-2010 had the following two aims: (i) the connection of up to 1.5 million homes and businesses to the new fibre networks enabling them to benefit from improvements in high-speed Internet, TV and voice services; (ii) the achievement of 50 per cent broadband penetration among households by 2010. Both aims were reached.\nAt the end of 2023, the number of households connected to the fibre-optic networks (FTTH/B) by all operators stood at 3.24 million. The number of households with access by cable totalled 1.3 million. Nearly the totality of family households now have access to at least one high-speed network.\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n5.5million (2024)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n13.6million (2023)\nCell Networks(2G/3G/3.5G/4G):\nMEO - (2G to 4G licence); UZO (Virtual Carrier, owned by MEO); Moche (Virtual Carrier, runs under MEO prefix);\nVodafone (2G to 4G licence); Yorn (Virtual Carrier, runs under Vodafone prefix);\nNOS (2G to 4G licence); WTF (Virtual Carrier, runs under NOS prefix); Phone-ix (Virtual carrier owned by CTT and operated by the MEO network) and Continente Mobile (operated by Optimus and hypermarket chain, Continente).\nTelephone system:\n\"general assessment:\"\nPortugal's telephone system has achieved a state-of-the-art network with broadband, high-speed capabilities and a main line telephone density of 53%\n\"domestic:\"\nintegrated network of coaxial cables, open-wire, microwave radio relay, and domestic satellite earth stations\n\"international:\"\n6 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), NA Eutelsat; tropospheric scatter to Azores; note - an earth station for Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region) is planned\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations:\n346 AM and FM (many are repeaters) (2024)\nRadios:\n3.02 million (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n170 (plus repeaters) (2024)\nTelevision paid subscriptions:\n4.6 million (2023)\nFree-to-air television networks:\nR\u00e1dio e Televis\u00e3o de Portugal:\nFree-to-air national coverage stations:\nRegional Stations:\nInternational:\nAnalog TV system:\nDigital TV system:\nNOTE: Most TV Networks/stations have specific interactive TV(cable) oriented services.\nInternet.\nInternet Users: 8.84million (2024)\nInternet Hosts:\n1.858million (2007)\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\n4 (2024)\nCountry code (Top level domain): .pt\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56964", "revid": "35502160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56964", "title": "Transport in Portugal", "text": " \nTransport in Portugal is diversified. Portugal has a network of roads, of which almost are part of a 44 motorways system. Brisa is the largest highway management concessionaire. With 89,015\u00a0km2, Continental Portugal has 4 international airports located near Lisbon, Porto, Faro and Beja. The national railway system service is provided by Comboios de Portugal. The major seaports are located in Leix\u00f5es, Aveiro, Figueira da Foz, Lisbon, Set\u00fabal, Sines and Faro.\nRoads.\nIn 1972, Brisa was to construct of roadways by the end of 1981. The first priority was a highway designated as A1, a stretch reaching from the capital of Lisbon north to Porto, Portugal's second-largest city. This highway would become a crucial link to the industrial activity in the north of the country and experience the highest traffic volumes in Brisa's network. Construction also began on the A2, which was projected to reach from Lisbon to resort areas on the southern coast.\nTwo years after the establishment of Brisa, the right wing dictatorship was overthrown by a leftist revolution. The new regime included Brisa in a program of nationalization, first taking control of 40 percent of the company and eventually gaining a 90 percent share. Road construction continued stretch by stretch under socialist control. As the first highway sections were completed on the A1 and A2, the government concession was expanded to include adjoining stretches. In addition, concessions were granted for expansions to the network: the A3 would extend the north\u2013south highway from Porto up to the Spanish border, the A4 would reach east from Porto to the city of Amarante, and the A5 was to reach from Lisbon about west to the coast. However, during the first years of democratic government, the combined length of the network never exceeded through the 1980s. Transportation was seen as a priority in the 1990s, pushed by the growing use of automobiles and mass consumption.\nIn 1985, a new government led by the center-right Social Democrats headed by Prime Minister An\u00edbal Cavaco Silva, came to power in Portugal and began loosening the state's control over economic activity. After years of slow progress, the government began an extensive investment program to bring the transportation infrastructure up to date. While some funds were earmarked for railroad and subway companies, the largest share went to highways. Brisa received a direct capital injection of PTE 17.7 billion in 1990. The investment was urgently needed, since traffic volume in Portugal was growing at a faster rate than any other country in the European Union. Average daily traffic volume increased at a rate about 4.5 percent more than the gross domestic product each year between 1990 and 1996. The government kept up its intensive program of annual investments, allowing Brisa's network to grow from in 1990 to in 1995.\nRailways.\nNational rail system.\nThe principal train operator in Portugal is Comboios de Portugal. Rail infrastructure is maintained by Infraestruturas de Portugal.\nUrban mass transit.\nThe two largest metropolitan areas have subway systems: Lisbon Metro and Metro Transportes do Sul in the Lisbon metropolitan area and Porto Metro in the Porto Metropolitan Area, each with more than of lines. In Portugal, Lisbon tram services have been supplied by the \"Companhia de Carris de Ferro de Lisboa\" (Carris), for over a century. In Porto, a tram network, of three lines, began construction on 12 September 1895, the first in the Iberian Peninsula. All major cities and towns have their own local urban transport network, as well as taxi services.\nAirports.\nLisbon's geographical position makes it a stopover point for many foreign airlines at airports all over the country. The government decided to build a new airport outside Lisbon, in Montijo, to replace Lisbon Portela Airport. Currently, the most important airports are in Lisbon, Porto, Faro, Funchal (Madeira) and Ponta Delgada (Azores). The national airline is TAP Air Portugal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56966", "revid": "49589087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56966", "title": "Portuguese Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Portugal\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces () are the military of Portugal. They include the General Staff of the Armed Forces, the other unified bodies and the three service branches: Portuguese Navy, Portuguese Army and Portuguese Air Force.\nThe President of the Republic is the head of the Portuguese military, with the title of \"Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces\" (\"Comandante Supremo das For\u00e7as Armadas\"). The management of the Armed Forces and the execution of the national defense policy is however done by the government (chaired by the Prime Minister) via its Minister of National Defense. The highest-ranking officer in the military is the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, which has operational control of the Armed Forces during peacetime and assumes their full control when a state of war exists.\nThe Armed Forces are charged with protecting Portugal as well as supporting international peacekeeping efforts when mandated by North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the United Nations or the European Union.\nPortugal was ranked the 3rd most peaceful country in the World in the Global Peace Index 2017, presently not having significant national security issues. The Portuguese Armed Forces have been thus focused in non-military public service activities and in external military operations. Recent external operations include anti-piracy action in the Gulf of Aden, the conflicts in the Central African Republic and in Afghanistan, the peacekeeping missions in East-Timor, Lebanon, Kosovo and Bosnia-Herzegovina, and the air policing of Iceland and the Baltic States.\nMilitary units and other bodies are stationed all throughout Portuguese territory, including Continental Portugal, Madeira and the Azores.\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces were opened to women during the early-1990s. Portugal had mandatory conscription for all able-bodied men until November 2004.\nGeneral principles.\nThe national defense.\nThe national defense is the activity whose objectives are to guarantee the State sovereignty, the national independence and the territorial integrity of Portugal, as well as to assure the liberty and security of the populations and the protection of the fundamental values of the constitutional order against any external threat or aggression. The national defense also assures the fulfillment of the international military agreements of the State, accordingly with the national interest.\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces are responsible for the military defense, which is the military component of the national defense.\nThe Armed Forces.\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces are an essential pillar of the national defense and are the structure of the State that has as its main mission the military defense of the Republic. They obey to the competent bodies of sovereignty, accordingly with the Constitution and the law, being integrated in the State direct administration through the Ministry of National Defense. The bodies of State directly responsible for the national defense and the Armed Forces are the following:\nThe Minister of National Defense is the politician responsible for the elaboration and execution of the military component of the national defense policy, for the administration of the Armed Forces and for the results of their employment.\nSystem of forces.\nThe system of forces defines the set of capacities that should exist for the fulfillment of the missions of the Armed Forces. It encompasses the set of systems of forces of all branches of the Armed Forces. The system of forces includes two components:\nStructure of the armed forces.\nThe Portuguese armed forces' structure includes:\nGuidelines.\nThe Armed Forces activity is mainly defined and oriented by the following strategic guidelines:\nCurrent deployments.\nThe national deployed forces (\"for\u00e7as nacionais destacadas\" or FND) are units or teams deployed by the Portuguese Armed Forces in foreign missions, mostly in the scope of NATO, the United Nations or the European Union. Currently, the Portuguese Armed Forces maintain 1775 military personnel, 7 Military vessels and 9 aircraft in forces or elements deployed in the following international missions:\nExercises.\nSome of the exercises organized by the Portuguese Armed Forces annually are:\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe history of the Portuguese military itself begins in the 12th century with the creation of the Kingdom of Portugal. Since the early beginning, the Kingdom had naval and ground forces. The Portuguese Navy exists as a permanent force since 1317, however non-permanent naval forces existed already before, with their first known naval engagement occurring in 1180. The Portuguese ground forces were established as a standing army in 1570, however they had existed since the 12th century, as the non-permanent \"hoste\". The Navy and the Army would remain independent from each other for hundreds of years.\nBy the early 20th century, some joint military and national defense bodies had been created but these had mostly mere political coordination responsibilities. The administration of the several forces of the military remained in charge of separate government departments, respectively the Navy Ministry for the Navy (\"Marinha\"), the War Ministry for the Metropolitan Army (\"Ex\u00e9rcito Metropolitano\") and the Colonies Ministry for the Colonial Military Forces (\"For\u00e7as Militares Coloniais\"). Operationally, the service branches were also completely independent from each other, with totally separated chains of command.\nDuring the 1930s, plans were laid to merge all of the previously mentioned ministries under a single defense ministry. However, the service branches lobbies for the maintenance of their autonomy \u2013 represented by their separate government departments \u2013 politically opposed and were able to block this reorganization for the next couple of decades.\nNevertheless, the need to defend the Overseas Empire against possible foreign aggression during World War II, did lead to a significant step being taken during this period for an increased integration of the several military services, when the Colonial Military Forces were placed under the dependency of the War Ministry, which then became in charge of all Portuguese ground forces (metropolitan and colonial).\nEstablishment of the unified Armed Forces.\nLessons learned from World War II, the start of the Cold War and the creation of NATO (which Portugal integrated as a founding member) partially ended the objections for the creation of a joint command for the military forces. In 1950, the roles of Minister of National Defense and of Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces (CEMGFA) are created. To the CEMGFA were given almost all the responsibilities until then assigned to the majors-generals of the Navy and of the Army (service branches military commanders), whose roles were at the same time extinct. This can be considered the beginning of the existence of the Portuguese Armed Forces as an unified organization.\nHowever, opposition from both of the then existing military branches prevented the formation of a single ministry for the military. The political solution for this was to keep the existing Navy and Army ministries and to create the role of Minister of National Defense but without its own ministry, instead integrating the Government's Presidency Office. The Minister of National Defense directed an umbrella organization, named the National Defense Department which included the CEMGFA, the General Secretariat of National Defense (SGDN, \"Secretariado-Geral da Defesa Nacional\") and the Under-Secretariat of State of the Aeronautics (\"Subsecretariado de Estado da Aeron\u00e1utica\"). As the Navy and Army ministers continued to exist and to administer their own branches, the Minister of Defense had merely coordinating roles regarding the Navy and the Army. The SGDN served as the Defense staff support organization, being headed by the CEMGFA. It was foreseen to be remodeled in order to be transformed in the general staff and joint management body of the Armed Forces, but this transformation would only occur in 1974, when the SGDN became the General Staff of the Armed Forces (EMGFA).\nDespite all the challenges, the operational integration of the Armed Forces rapidly progressed in the 1950s. As part of this integration, the role of commander-in-chief was established in each of the Overseas territories, as a permanent unified commander of the local forces of the three branches. Mainly during the Overseas War, these commanders-in-chief would assume increasing responsibilities, until achieving full operational command of all forces assigned to their theater of operations, leaving the territorial service branch leadership with mere logistical responsibilities.\nThe Military Aeronautics (Army aviation branch) \u2013 which already had a high degree of autonomy since 1937 \u2013 becomes an entirely separate branch of service of the Armed Forces in 1952, at the same time starting to control the Portuguese Naval Aviation (Navy aviation service). This third branch of the Armed Forces would soon become officially designated \"Portuguese Air Force\" (\"For\u00e7a A\u00e9rea Portuguesa\"), with the fully integration of the previous Naval Aviation becoming complete in 1958. Unlike the other services which had their own separate ministries, the Air Force was under the fully dependency of the Minister of National Defense via the Under-Secretariat of State of the Aeronautics. In 1961, the status of this department would be upgraded, it becoming the Secretariat of State of the Aeronautics.\nIn 1953, the National Republican Guard ceased policing the military, with the establishment of the Military Police by the Army. Later, the other service branches would create their respective military police type forces: the Air Police for the Air Force and the Naval Police for the Navy.\nOverseas conflicts.\nBetween 1961 and 1974, the Portuguese Armed Forces would be engaged against emerging nationalist movements in several of the Portuguese African provinces. These set of conflicts are collectively referred as the Overseas War in Portugal. In the scope of the Cold War, it was a decisive ideological struggle and armed conflict in African (Portuguese Africa and surrounding nations) and Portuguese European mainland scenarios. Unlike other European nations, the Portuguese regime did not leave its African overseas provinces during the 1950s and 1960s. Several armed independence movements, most prominently led by communist parties who cooperated under the CONCP umbrella and pro US groups became active in these areas (especially in Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea).\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces were able to maintain a large military campaign for 13 years, in these three different theaters of operations, thousands of kilometers apart from each other and from the European mainland. This was achieved with almost no external support, in contrast with the nationalist movements which were backed by communist countries and even by some western ones. The Army suffered the majority of the casualties with 8290 soldiers killed in action while the Air Force lost 346 airmen and the Navy lost 195 sailors.\nDuring the conflict, in each theater of operations, the operational command of the forces of the navy, army and air force was successively transferred from each territorial service branch command to joint commands, led by the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces in that specific theater. Thus the three branches of the military were able to achieve a high level of operational integration, allowing for an effective cooperation between them, the optimization of their scarce assets and the ability to fight as a single cohesive force. The logistics side however was not able to reach such high levels of integration, mainly because each service branch continued to be administered by its own government department with its own supply chain and different standards.\nDue to the nature of the conflict, commando-type forces achieved great importance. With the war's evolution, these assumed almost all of the mobile and offensive operations, with the more conventional forces remaining responsible mainly for the defensive assignments. By 1961, each service branch had created its own light infantry force oriented for asymmetric warfare. The Air Force created the Parachute Rifles (\"Ca\u00e7adores P\u00e1raquedistas\") in 1956, the Army first raised the Special Rifles (\"Ca\u00e7adores Especiais\") in 1960 which were later replaced by the Commandos (\"Comandos\") in 1962 and the Navy deployed the Marines (\"Fuzileiros\"), a force reactivated in 1961. The Portuguese military also counted with a number of paramilitary forces, including the Special Groups (\"Grupos Especiais\") and the Arrows (\"Flechas\").\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces were also involved in a brief conventional armed conflict with the Indian military, when the latter invaded the Portuguese India in December 1961. Facing overwhelmingly superior forces and after 36 hours of combat, the Portuguese India Commander-in-Chief, General Vassalo e Silva, surrendered to the Indian Forces. Portuguese forces suffered 30 dead and 57 wounded, with almost 3500 personnel being taken as prisoners of war, these being released six months later. The Indian Armed Forces officially recognized to have suffered 76 casualties during the invasion.\nDemocratic Republic.\nOn the morning of 25 April 1974, the Armed Forces Movement (MFA, \"Movimento das For\u00e7as Armadas\") \u2013 consisting mostly of junior officers of the three service branches \u2013 launched a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\", known as the Carnation Revolution, which would bring an end to the New State regime and shortly the Overseas War. While the revolt included several military units located on the mainland, the forces that departed from the Cavalry School located in Santar\u00e9m, led by captain Salgueiro Maia, were the ones that managed to obtain the surrender of prime-minister Marcelo Caetano after a stand-off at the National Republican Guard headquarters in Lisbon, where he and some other members of the Government had taken refuge.\nHowever, after the revolution and for about a year and a half, the Portuguese military would become highly politicized and split into several factions. By the summer of 1975, the tension between these was so high, that the country was on the verge of civil war. The forces connected to the extreme left-wing launched a further \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" on 25 November but the Group of Nine, a moderate military faction, immediately initiated a counter-coup. The main episode of this confrontation was the successful assault on the barracks of the left-wing dominated Military Police Regiment by the moderate forces of the Commando Regiment, resulting in three soldiers killed in action. The Group of Nine emerged victorious, thus preventing the establishment of a communist state in Portugal and ending the period of political instability in the country.\nThe Ministry of National Defense would be created during this period of instability. However this ministry had no power over the Armed Forces, his role was simply to act as a connection between the military and the Government. It was the Revolution Council \u2013 created in 1975, consisting only of military officers and chaired by the President of the Republic \u2013 that had the full control over the Armed Forces, which meant these were completely independent from the civilian administration. The Government military departments (Navy Ministry, Army Ministry and Secretariat of State of the Aeronautics) were disbanded, with each service branch chief of staff assuming the roles of the former ministers, under the coordination of the CEMGFA, to whom was given a status equivalent to that of the Prime Minister of Portugal. This organization would remain in place until 1982, when the Revolution Council was disbanded after the first revision to the 1976 Constitution. The Armed Forces were again placed under the subordination of the civilian administration, more specifically being integrated in the Ministry of National Defense.\nWith the decolonization and the end of the Overseas War, the Portuguese military would change from an asymmetric war oriented force to a conventional war oriented force, focused in defense of Western Europe from a possible Soviet invasion.\nMeanwhile, the 1980s would see the creation of special operations, namely the Army's Special Operations Forces and the Navy's Special Actions Detachment. In 1990, the Air Force would create Combat Rescue teams (\"Resgate em Combate\" or \"RESCOM\") for CSAR operations but in 2006 these were extinct and replaced by the Force Protection Unit (\"Unidade de Protec\u00e7\u00e3o da For\u00e7a\" or \"UPF\") whose mission is to provide security for the Air Force elements deployed on international missions.\nCurrent.\nThe collapse of the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact triggered a deep transformation of the Armed Forces. They transited from being a conscription based and defensive oriented Armed Forces to gradually becoming a fully professional and expeditionary warfare oriented force, starting to participate in international missions, most of them under the mandate of the United Nations, the European Union and the NATO, besides organizing some unilateral missions abroad on their own.\nThe conscription was gradually reduced since the early 1990s, with almost no conscripts serving the Armed Forces by the end of that decade. The formal abolishment of the conscription in time of peace for all men was however only implemented in 2004.\nIn 1993, the Portuguese Army deployed a communications battalion to Mozambique, as part of the UNOMOZ, this being the first participation of the Portuguese Armed Forces in international missions, with a complete military unit. After Mozambique, the Portuguese Military deployed forces to international missions in a number of countries, including Angola, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Lebanon, Afghanistan and Lithuania, besides deploying military observers and other individual elements to other countries. Recent Defense policy confirmed the assumption that most considerable operations would be undertaken under international organizations mandates, with Portugal not entering alone in a major military engagement since the 1961\u20131974 overseas conflict.\nNonetheless, the Portuguese Military have also conducted a number of unilateral and independent peace-enforcing and humanitarian military missions, namely in Guinea-Bissau (1990, 1998, and 1999) and in Angola (1992). The Operation Crocodile conducted in Guinea-Bissau in 1998 was notable, by evidencing the capacity of the Portuguese Armed Forces \u2013 despite its small size and limitation of means \u2013 to rapidly mount a military operation abroad in a scale that is typically only achievable by major military powers. This operations was mainly aimed at the rescuing of thousands of Portuguese and other foreign nationals caught in the middle of the civil conflict that erupted in Guinea-Bissau and included the deployment of naval and air forces, the landing and occupation of the Port of Bissau by Portuguese Marines, amphibious and helicopter landings in several places of the Guinean coast for the rescuing of civilians, medical and humanitarian aid to the civil population and the support to the peace talks between the two antagonizing parties.\nA Military Program Law (\"Lei de Programa\u00e7\u00e3o Militar\") was launched in 2002 to start the complete modernization of the Armed Forces. Considerable re-equipment of the military started in 2003, led by Defense Minister Paulo Portas, who managed to launch a series of re-equipment programs, including those of new submarines (\"Tridente\"-class), frigates (\"Bartolomeu Dias\"-class) and off shore patrol ships (Project NPO 2000 / \"Viana do Castelo\" class) for the Navy, of armored vehicles (Pandur) for the Army and of heavy helicopters (EH-101) for the Air Force. Ironically one of the most basic challenges \u2013 the replacement of the 7.62\u00d751mm battle rifles by 5.56\u00d745mm assault rifles \u2013 failed during his mandate due to the soldiers clinging onto their cheap and highly reliable locally made FBP G3.\nSome important re-equipment programs were however later canceled or suspended mainly due to cuts in the Defense budget, including the building of a multipurpose amphibious ship (Project NavPoL), the building of coastal patrol ships (Project NPC 2000) and the acquisition of helicopters (EC635 and NH90) for the Army Light Aviation Unit. Another important challenge faced, in terms of equipment, is the lack of funds for the replacement of the Alouette III helicopters and the Alpha Jet advanced trainer jets of the Air Force, which, if not addressed in due course, may compromise the future capacity of the Armed Forces to continue to do the complete training of their own aircraft pilots.\nDespite the financial cuts in Defense, all international missions assigned to the Portuguese military have been fulfilled without limitations.\nRecently purchased equipment include new main battle tanks (Leopard 2A6) in 2008 and new coastal patrol vessels (\"Tejo\"-class) in 2014. The process acquisition of the ex-French amphibious assault ship \"Siroco\" \u2013 as an alternative to the suspended NavPoL \u2013 failed in 2015, with the Portuguese Armed Forces continuing not having an asset which allows them to easily deploy forces to abroad on a larger scale, enhancing its expeditionary capacity.\nIn the 2010s, the Portuguese Armed Forces created the Immediate Reaction Force (FRI, \"For\u00e7a de Rea\u00e7\u00e3o Imediata\"), aimed at providing an autonomous national response capability to intervene abroad in complex situations to conduct operations as the possible of evacuation of Portuguese citizens from countries under crisis or tension. The FRI includes naval, ground, air and special operations components. Its initial core has an operational readiness of 48 hours and has permanently assigned assets of the three branches of the Armed Forces.\nFuture.\nIn April 2013, the Portuguese Government approved a structural reform of the National Defense, named \"Defesa 2020\" (\"Defense 2020\"). It was done with the objective of defining the level of ambition of the Armed Forces by establishing the guidance parameters for strategic planning, reinforcing the leading responsibility of the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces in the execution of the approved military strategy, reducing human resources while at the same time improving their management and enhancing the coordination between the General Staff of the Armed Forces, the branches of the Armed Forces and the Ministry of National Defense.\n\"Defesa 2020\" establishes the existence of three sets of force:\nFuture equipment programs are also in course. In May 2019, a new \"Military Programming Law\" was published, which will regulate the founding of the military investments programs until 2030. Some of the main next military investments present in this document are:\nOrganization.\nGeneral Staff of the Armed Forces.\nThe General Staff of the Armed Forces (EMGFA, \"Estado-Maior-General das For\u00e7as Armadas\") is the superior military body and supreme headquarters of the Portuguese Armed Forces. It is responsible for planning, directing and controlling the usage of the three service branches in their fulfillment of assigned missions and tasks. The EMGFA is headed by the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces and includes:\nThe EMGFA also has under its dependency the following bodies:\nChief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces.\nThe Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces (CEMGFA, \"Chefe do Estado-Maior-General das For\u00e7as Armadas\") is the principal military adviser of the Minister of National Defense and is the chief with the highest authority in the hierarchy of the Portuguese Armed Forces.\nThe CEMGFA is an admiral or a general (four star rank) of one of the branches of service, appointed by the President of the Republic by proposal of the Government. Before being proposed to the President, the nominee has to be presented by the Minister of National Defense to the Council of Chiefs of Staff for a previous hearing. If the nominee is refused by the President, the Government has to present another option. Traditionally, there is a rotation of the branch of service that provides the CEMGFA, but this is not mandatory and not always happens.\nThe CEMGFA is responsible for the planning and implementation of the operational military strategy, having under his hierarchic dependency the chiefs of staff of the branches of service for the matters that evolve the preparedness, the employment and the sustainment of the forces and assets of the operational component of the system of forces and responding before the Government \u2013 through the Minister of National Defense \u2013 for the military response capacity of the Armed Forces. He/she is the operational commander of the Armed Forces, being responsible for the employment of all forces and assets of the operational component of the system of forces in operational missions. The sustainment of the forces and assets referred before is under the branches of service responsibility, with the respective chiefs of staff being under the CEMGFA dependency for that.\nThe branch of service chief of staff who is longer in the function replaces the CEMGFA, in case of his absence or impediment.\nBranches of the Armed Forces.\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces include three branches, these being the Navy, the Army and the Air Force. Created centuries ago, the Navy and the Army are much older than the integrated Armed Forces themselves. The Air Force is however younger, being created as a separate branch already after the establishment of the integrated Armed Forces. The branches of service have as their principal mission to participate, in an integrated form, in the defense of the Republic, in the terms defined by the Constitution and the law, being mainly aimed for the generation, preparation and sustainment of the forces of the operational component of the system of forces. The branches also guarantee their own specific missions established by particular laws and also guarantee the operational missions given to them by the CEMGFA.\nThe increasing integration and standardization of the different branches of service meant that their organizations gradually approached. Presently, all the three branches have an identical organizational model that includes: \nThe chiefs of staff serve as the branch commanders. The staffs are the bodies for planning and decision support of the respective chiefs of staff, being able also to assume roles of management, control, advisement or inspection. The central bodies of administration and management have a functional character and are intended to guarantee the management and execution in specific fundamental areas and activities as the human, material, financial, information and infrastructures resources management. The component commands (naval, land and air) are intended to support the chiefs of staff in their command roles. The component commands can be put under the direct dependency of the CEMGFA for the exercise of his command roles. The bodies of advisement are intended to support the decision of the chiefs of staff in special and important matters regarding the preparedness, discipline and administration of the branch. The bodies of inspection are intended to support the control and evaluation function of the chiefs of staff. The base bodies are those aimed at the training, the sustainment and the general support of the branch. The elements of the operational component of the system of forces are the forces and assets of the branch intended for the accomplishment of the operational missions.\nBesides the above referred standard bodies, the Navy also includes the Hydrographic Institute and the Maritime Search and Rescue Service, while the Air Force also includes the Air Search and Rescue Service.\nUntil recently, the Navy also included the National Maritime Authority. Statutorily, the Maritime Authority is now an entirely separate legal entity, but it continues to be headed by the Chief of Staff of the Navy and continues to be mainly administered, supported and staffed by the Navy. The same happens with the National Aeronautic Authority in relation to the Air Force, the difference being that this Authority was already created as a separate legal entity.\nChiefs of staff of the branches.\nThe chiefs of staff of the Navy, of the Army and of the Air Force command their respective branches, being the military chiefs with the higher authority in each of the branches hierarchy and being the principal advisors of the Minister of National Defense and of the CEMGFA in all matters related with their branches. Inside each branch, the respective chief of staff is the only officer with a four-star rank (admiral in the Navy and general in the other two branches).\nThe chiefs of staff are part of the operational command structure of the Armed Forces, serving as deputy commanders of the CEMGFA. While they report to the CEMGFA in the operational, military intelligence and security, military higher learning, military health and other joint matters, they report directly to the Minister of National Defense in the matters related with the current management of their branches resources.\nThe chiefs of staff of the branches are appointed by the President of the Republic, by government proposal, in an analogous process of that of the CEMGFA appointment. The CEMGFA must be heard before a name is proposed to the President.\nMilitary bodies of advisement.\nThe military bodies of advisement of the armed forces are the Council of Chiefs of Staff and the higher councils of the several branches.\nThe Council of Chiefs of Staff is the principal military coordinating body, being also the body of advisement of the CEMGFA. It is presided over by the CEMGFA and also includes the chiefs of staff of the three branches of service. Other military entities may be invited to participate in their meetings, but without voting rights.\nIn each of the branches, there is a higher council presided by the respective chief of staff. These are the Council of the Admiralty, the Higher Council of the Army and the Higher Council of the Air Force. The branches may have other advisement bodies like the military careers councils (the councils of class in the Navy, the councils of arm or service in the Army and the councils of specialty in the Air Force).\nBranches of the armed forces.\nNavy.\nThe Navy (\"Marinha\", with its armed branch also being referred as the \"Armada\") is the naval component of the Portuguese Armed Forces. It includes around 8000 military personnel (including around 1500 marines), 40 commissioned ships and 50 auxiliary vessels. Unlike the other service branches that have an almost purely military role, the Navy historically has had a wide scope of non-military activities, namely serving as the Portuguese maritime administration, and being responsible for the tutelage over of the merchant marine, fisheries, maritime authority and maritime research affairs. The responsibility over the non-military maritime activities has however been gradually transferred to other organizations since the disbandment of the Navy Ministry in 1974, with only a few \u2013 as the maritime authority and the hydrographic survey \u2013 remaining now under the Navy tutelage.\nThe Portuguese Navy is one of the oldest in the world, with its first known naval engagement occurring in 1180. A permanent Navy exists since 1317, when the role of Admiral of Portugal was created.\nThe Navy is headed by the Chief of Staff of the Navy and includes the Navy Staff, the Personnel, the Material, the Finance and the Information Technologies superintendences, the Naval Command (naval component command, with five subordinate maritime zone commands), the Council of the Admiralty and the Inspection-General of the Navy. The base bodies of the branch include the Lisbon Naval Base, the Support Unit of the Central Facilities of the Navy, the Naval School, the technical schools (Marines, Hydrography and Oceanography, Divers and Naval Technologies), the Integrated Center of Naval Training and Evaluation and the squadrons (Surface Ships, Submarines and Helicopters). The elements of the operational component of the system of forces of the Navy include the Marine Corps Command, the naval and marine forces, the operational naval, marine and divers assets and units, the command centers and posts and the operations support centers. The Navy includes the Marine Corps (\"Corpo de Fuzileiros\"), which is a naval infantry force that serves in the roles of naval force protection, amphibious force projection and maritime special operations. The Marines themselves include the Special Actions Detachment, which is the special operations unit of the Navy. The Sappers Divers Group is the combat divers unit of the Navy. The Navy further includes the Hydrographic Institute, the Maritime Search and Rescue Service and the International Maritime Law Commission.\nArmy.\nThe Army (\"Ex\u00e9rcito\") is the land component of the Portuguese Armed Forces and its larger branch. Presently, it includes around 14 000 military personnel. The principal equipment of the Army includes 37 main battle tanks (Leopard 2A6), 300 tracked APCs (M113), 188 wheeled APCs (Pandur II), 139 tactical vehicles (URO VAMTAC), 100 other armored vehicles and 80 field artillery weapons. In 2019, the FN SCAR assault rifle was chosen as the principal infantry weapon, gradually replacing the 7.62mm HK G3 and the several models of 5.56mm rifles used by paratroopers and other special troops.\nThe Portuguese Army can be considered one of the oldest armies of the world, with its origins going back to the Royal \"Hoste\" of the 12th century, in the early period of the Kingdom of Portugal. The foundations of a standing army were established in 1570, with the creation of the \"Ordenan\u00e7as\". In the middle of the 17th century, the Portuguese land forces started to be referred as the \"Ex\u00e9rcito\".\nThe Army is headed by the Chief of Staff of the Army and includes the Army Staff, the Personnel and the Logistics commands, the Directorate of Finance, the Land Forces Command (land component command, with two subordinate military zone commands) and the Inspection-General of the Army. The base bodies of the branch are divided by the scopes of obtainment and administration of human resources (including psychology, recruiting and selection centers and offices), of readying of forces (including 21 regiments of several arms, the Special Operations Troops Centre and the Army Intelligence and Military Security Center), of logistical support (including the Army Geospatial Intelligence Center, two service support regiments, the Army Material General Support Unit and two health centers), of teaching and training (including the Military Academy, the School of the Arms, the School of the Services, the Army Sergeants School, the Military College and the Army Pupils Institute) and of divulgation and preservation of military culture (including military museums, archives, the Army Band and the Army Fanfare). The Army includes also bodies that support other branches of the Armed Forces, including the Military Prison Establishment, the Military Laboratorial Unit of Biological and Chemical Defense and the Military Unit of Veterinary Medicine. The elements of the operational component of the system of forces of the Army include the Land Forces Command, the formations and operational units commands, the military zones commands and the general support and emergency military support forces. The formations include the Rapid Reaction Brigade, the Mechanized Brigade and the Intervention Brigade. The special troops of the Army include the Paratroopers, the Commandos and the Special Operations Troops, whose units are now all integrated in the Rapid Reaction Brigade.\nTraditionally, the Army used to be divided in branches that were designated \"arms\" if they had a mainly combatant role and designated \"services\" if their role was logistical. The main branches were the arms of cavalry, infantry, artillery, engineering and communications and the services of health, military administration, materiel and transportation. Each branch constituted an organization that usually included a branch directorate, a branch school, units and a cadre of personnel. As organizations, these branches were abolished in 1993, but they still exist as occupational groups. Also, most of the Army units continue to be associated to a branch, which in most cases correspond to the main role of the respective unit.\nAir Force.\nThe Air Force (\"For\u00e7a A\u00e9rea\") is the air component of the Portuguese Armed Forces and its younger branch. It includes around 6000 personnel and 100 aircraft.\nThe Portuguese Air Force was established as an independent branch of service in 1952, when the Military Aeronautics arm was completely separated from the Army, at the same time starting to control the Naval Aviation that was part of the Navy.\nThe Air Force is headed by the Chief of Staff of the Air Force and includes the Air Force Staff, the Air Force Personnel and the Air Force Logistics commands, the Air Force Directorate of Finance, the Air Command (air component command, with two subordinate air zone commands) and the Inspection-General of the Air Force. The base bodies of the branch include the Air Force Academy, the Military and Technical Training Center of the Air Force, five air bases, two maneuver aerodromes, a transit aerodrome and four radar stations. The elements of the operational component of the system of forces of the Air Force include the operational planning bodies, the Air Command and Control System, the flying units and the anti-aircraft intervention units. The flying units include two training squadrons (TB 30 Epsilon and Alpha-Jet), one fighter squadron (F-16 AM), one attack squadron (F-16 AM), three transport squadrons (C-130, C-295M, Falcon 900 and Falcon 50), two helicopter squadrons (EH-101 and AW119), two maritime patrol squadron (Lockheed P-3C and C-295M Persuader) and one Air Force Academy squadron (ASK-21, OGMA Chipmunk Mk 20 (modif) and L-23 Super Blan\u00edk). The \"Pol\u00edcia A\u00e9rea\" (Air Police) is the ground combat force of the Air Force, which serves as its military police, force protection and ground anti-aircraft defense element, including a special forces unit, this being the Tactical Operations of Protection Core (NOTP).\nThe National Republican Guard.\nThe Nacional Republican Guard (GNR, \"Guarda Nacional Republicana\") is a special corps of troops that has the special feature of being a military force that is not part of the Armed Forces.\nIt is a gendarmerie type security force, made up of around 26 000 military personnel, that is part of the internal security system. It is responsible for the preventive policing of most of the rural areas of the country, the patrolling of the major highways, the customs enforcement and the coastal control. It also performs some special missions like the providing of ceremonial military State honor guards, the security of the Presidential, Parliament and Foreign Ministry palaces, the environment and nature protection and the rescue and forest firefighting. In time of peace, the GNR is subordinated to the minister of Internal Administration, except in the scope of uniforms, military doctrine, equipment and armament within which is subordinated to the minister of National Defense.\nAlthough not being part of the Armed Forces, the GNR can be placed under the operational command of the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces in the cases foreseen in the statutes governing the National Defense, the Armed Forces, the state of siege and the state of emergency. In the scope of its military missions, the GNR is specially adapted for the fulfillment of military operations other than war. Forces of the GNR have been deployed in international missions in high conflict countries that did not fit with the use of a civilian police force, but where it was not considered politically appropriate to deploy units of the Armed Forces. These international deployments may be done in the scope of the multinational specialized units (MSU) of the European Gendarmerie Force, as it happened with the GNR deployment in Iraq.\nSpecial forces.\nThe Portuguese Armed Forces include a number of different types of special forces, distributed by its three branches.\nIn the Army, these are generically referred as the \"special troops\" or the \"light infantry\" and represent more than 20% of the total strength of the branch. The Army special troops include the Paratroopers, the Commandos and the Special Operations Troops. The Paratroopers are a mainly parachute light infantry force, that however also include some non-infantry specialized units. The Paratroopers in turn include the Air-Land Pathfinders Company, which is a special parachute reconnaissance unit. The Commandos are a light assault infantry force, specialized in conducting high risk conventional operations. The Special Operations Troops is the Army unit specialized in unconventional warfare.\nThe Navy has the Marines Corps (\"Corpo de Fuzileiros\") as its special forces. These are a light naval infantry force, specialized in amphibious landings, base and ship security, high seas boarding and naval military police. The Marines include the Special Actions Detachment which is the Navy's special operations unit dedicated to the unconventional warfare in naval and coastal environment. The Marines also include the PelBoard (Boarding Platoon) teams, that are specialized in high risk visit, board, search, and seizure (VBSS) actions. The Sappers Divers Group is the Navy's specialized combat divers unit, which however is not usually considered a special forces unit.\nThe present special forces unit of the Air Force is the Tactical Operations of Protection Core (NOTP). This unit is part of the Air Police and is mainly dedicated to the protection of the forces and assets of the Air Force deployed in high risk areas.\nPersonnel.\nCurrently, the Portuguese Armed Forces include 32,992 military personnel, of which 12% are women. The majority of the personnel is in the Army (54%), followed by the Navy (26%) and the Air Force (20%). Conscription in time of peace was fully abolished in 2004 and, since then, 100% of the military personnel is professional.\nMilitary service.\nThe defense of the Fatherland is a right and a duty of all the Portuguese. The Portuguese citizens have military obligations from the age of 18 years to the age of 35 years.\nThe military service include the following situations:\nIn time of war, the military obligations age limits can be changed by law.\nCareer and voluntary personnel.\nIn time of peace, the military personnel falls in two main groups: career personnel (permanent personnel) and volunteer (temporary personnel). In case of war, these two groups are added with conscript personnel.\nCareer personnel (QP, \"Quadro Permanente\") includes the persons who choose the military profession as their permanent life career. Admission to this career requires the graduation in one of the higher education service academies for officers or in one of the military technical schools for non-officers. QP personnel only includes officers and sergeants in the Army and the Air Force, but it also includes other ranks in the Navy. Other ranks in the Army and the Air Force are entirely volunteer.\nVolunteer personnel includes the persons who usually have a civilian profession, but volunteer to serve temporarily in the military. They might serve in roles related specifically with their civilian professions (e.g.: engineers, legals, psychologists or medics) or in general military roles. They include officers, sergeants and other ranks. Volunteer personnel are further subdivided in two groups: contract regime (RC, \"Regime de Contrato\") and volunteer regime (RV, \"Regime de Voluntariado\"). While RC personnel serves for between two and six years, RV personnel serves only for 12 months. Special RC regimes with the duration of up to 20 years are foreseen to be created for roles whose training and technical demands make desirable long periods of service. Personnel in RV can apply to serve in RC after their termination of their period of service.\nRanks and categories.\nAccordingly, with their level of responsibility and authority, Portuguese military personnel are divided in three categories: officers (\"oficiais\"), sergeants (\"sargentos\") and other ranks (\"pra\u00e7as\"). Officers are further divided in three subcategories: general officers (\"oficiais generais\"), senior officers (\"oficiais superiores\") and junior officers (\"oficiais subalternos\").\nOccupational groups.\nAccordingly, with their training and role, each member of the Portuguese Armed Forces is part of an occupational group, to each of which corresponds a career and a particular list of promotion. These occupational groups have different specific designations in each branch of service.\nThe Navy occupational groups are named \"classes\". For the officers, the classes are navy (M), naval engineers (EN), naval administration (AN), marines (FZ), naval physicians (MN), naval senior technicians (TSN), technical service (ST), health technicians (TS) and musicians (MUS). For the enlisted, the classes are administrative (L), communications (C), auto mechanics-drivers (V), electro mechanics (EM), electro technicians (ET), marines (FZ), maneuvers (M), naval machinists (MQ), divers (U), musicians (B), operations (O), stewards (T) and weapons technicians (A).\nThe Army occupational groups are designated \"corps of general officers\", \"arms\" and \"services\". The corps of general officers include all generals, who may originate from the arms or from some of the services officer careers, but with only those originating from the arms being able to achieve the ranks above that of major-general. The arms are mostly careers associated with combatant roles while the services are mostly careers associated with logistical roles. For the officers, the arms are infantry (INF), artillery (ART), cavalry (CAV), engineering (ENG) and communications (TM) and the services are military administration (ADMIL), materiel (MAT), medicine (MED), pharmacy (FARM), veterinary (VET), dentistry (DENT), nursery, diagnostic and therapeutic technicians (TEDT), chiefs of music band (CBMUS), communications exploration technicians (TEXPTM), communications maintenance technicians (TMANTM), materiel maintenance technicians (TMANMAT), personnel and secretariat technicians (TPESSECR), transportations technicians (TTRANS), Army general service (SGE) and parachutist general service (SGPQ). For the sergeants, the arms are infantry (INF), artillery (ART), cavalry (CAV), engineering (ENG), communications (TM) and parachutists (PARAQ) and the services are military administration (AM), materiel (MAT), medicine (MED), pharmacy (FARM), veterinary (VET), music (MUS), clarions (CLAR), personnel and secretariat (PESSECR), transportations (TRANS), Army general service (SGE) and amanuensis (AMAN).\nThe Army volunteers occupational groups are analogous to the arms and services, but correspond to more specific qualifications. They include functional areas subdivided in specialties for officers and sergeants and specialties for other ranks. The functional areas for the officers and sergeants are mechanized/motorized infantry (AF01), light infantry (AF02), field artillery (AF03), anti-aircraft artillery (AF04), cavalry (AF05), Army police (AF06), communications (AF10), transportation (AF18), materiel (AF21), administration (AF22), personnel and secretariat (AF23), engineering (AF24), senior support technicians (AF25), health \u2013 medicine (AF26), health \u2013 nursery (AF26), health \u2013 nursery, diagnostic and therapeutic (AF27), dental health (AF28), veterinary health (AF29) and pharmacy. The specialties for the other ranks are field (Esp-01), mechanics (Esp-02), auto mechanics (Esp-03), engineering equipment mechanics (Esp-04), panel beater mechanics (Esp-05), auto body painter mechanics (Esp-06), services (Esp-07), audiovisual-multimedia (Esp-08), audiovisual-graphics (Esp-09), services saddler-upholstery (Esp-10), services psychometric laboratory operator (Esp-11), engineering sapper (Esp-12), NBC sapper (Esp-13), military light vehicles driving (Esp-14), military heavy vehicles driving (Esp-15), Army police (Esp-16), communications (Esp-17), music (Esp-18), health (Esp-19), paratroopers (Esp-20), special operations (Esp-21), commandos (Esp-22), construction (Esp-23), plumbing (Esp-24), construction carpenter (Esp-25), construction electrician (Esp-26), engineering heavy equipment operator (Esp-27), metalworking (Esp-28), farrier (Esp-29), catering (Esp-30), bakery (Esp-31) and rescue and assistance systems operator (Esp-32).\nThe Air Force occupational groups are designated \"specialties\". The officers specialties include pilots-aviators (PILAV), aeronautic engineers (ENGAER), aerodromes engineers (ENGAED), electrical engineers (ENGEL), physicians (MED), aeronautical administration (ADMAER), jurists (JUR), psychologists (PSI), navigators (NAV), communications and cryptography operations technicians (TOCC), meteorology operations technicians (TOMET), air circulation and traffic radar operations technicians (TOCART), interception conduct operations technicians (TOCI), air materiel maintenance technicians (TMMA), ground materiel maintenance technicians (TMMT), electrical materiel maintenance technicians (TMMEL), armament and equipment maintenance technicians (TMAEQ), infrastructures maintenance technicians (TMI), supply technicians (TABST), IT technicians (TINF), personnel and administrative support technicians (TPAA), health technicians (TS), air police (PA) and chiefs of music band (CHBM). The enlisted personnel specialties include communications operators (OPCOM), meteorology operators (OPMET), air circulation and traffic radar operators (OPCART), detection radar operators (OPRDET), IT operators (OPINF), assistance and aid systems operators (OPSAS), air materiel mechanics (MMA), ground materiel mechanics (MMT), electricity mechanics (MELECT), electronics mechanics (MELECA), aircraft electricity and instruments mechanics (MELIAV), armament and equipment mechanics (MARME), supply (ABS), infrastructure construction and maintenance (CMI), air police (PA), secretariat and service support (SAS) and musicians (MUS).\nUniforms and insignia.\nAs is usual in most of the Armed Forces in the world, each branch has its own uniform regulation which is distinct from those of the other service branches. The traditional color of the Portuguese military uniforms, since the middle of the 18th century, was the \"azul ferrete\" (very dark blue). This is still the color of the full dress uniforms of the three service branches.\nThe service dress uniform colors are the navy blue (Winter) or white (Summer) for the Navy, grey for the Army and air force blue for the Air Force. The 2019 Army uniform regulation abolished the olive green No.2 Army service dress uniform.\nAll the three branches have a camouflaged battledress uniform in the DPM pattern (from 1998 to 2010, the Air Force used instead the U.S. Woodland pattern). These camouflage patterns replaced the traditional Portuguese vertical lizard pattern that was in use in the three service branches from the early 1960s to the late 1990s. In the latte 2018, the Portuguese Army started to experiment the \"Sistemas de Combate do Soldado\" (Soldier's Combat Systems) individual equipment system for the dismounted soldiers, which includes the new \"Multiterreno\" camouflage pattern of the Multicam-style. The \"Multiterreno\" became the official camouflage pattern for the Army field and garrison uniforms in 2019.\nThe members of most of the branches, units or specialties of the three branches of the Armed Forces are identified by the wearing of berets whose colors are emerald green (Paratroopers), black (Army generic), navy blue (Marines), air force blue (Air Police), red (Commandos), moss green (Special Operations) and blue (Navy generic). The 2019 Army uniform regulation abolished the traditional brown beret, with black becoming the generic color of the Army berets. Until then, black berets were reserved for use by the Cavalry.\nOn the contrary of the uniforms, there is a standard common model of rank insignia used in the uniforms of the three service branches. The existence of a common rank insignia system has been in force since 1761, when the Portuguese Army and Navy become one of the first militaries in the world to establish a rank insignia regulation, that was common for the two existing branches at the time. The present system of rank insignia was established in 1911 and is an evolution of the previous ones. Its generic rank devices consists in stars for the general officers, in stripes for the rest of the officers, in Portuguese shields for the senior sergeants and in chevrons for the rest of the sergeants and the other ranks. There is a specific rank insignia for the admirals or generals invested in the office of Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, consisting in four golden stars, which differ from the silver stars worn by the rest of the four-star rank officers (chiefs of staff of the service branches).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56967", "revid": "50815372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56967", "title": "Foreign relations of Portugal", "text": "Foreign relations of Portugal are linked with its historical role as a major player in the Age of Discovery and the holder of the now defunct Portuguese Empire. Portugal is a European Union member country and a founding member of NATO. It is a committed proponent of European integration and transatlantic relations. Paulo Rangel is the current Minister of Foreign Affairs of Portugal.\nHistorical.\nHistorically, the focus of Portuguese diplomacy has been to preserve its independence, \"vis-\u00e0-vis\", the danger of annexation by Spain, and the maintenance of the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance, which officially came into being in 1386, and with the United Kingdom as a successor to England, it is still in place today.\nOther goals have also been constant such as the political stability of the Iberian Peninsula and the affirmation of Portuguese interests in Europe and the Atlantic (also in the Indian and Pacific Oceans throughout different moments in history).\nInternational organizations.\nPortugal was a founding member of NATO (1949), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (1961), and European Free Trade Area (1960); it left the latter in 1986 to join the European Economic Community, which would become the European Union (EU) in 1993. In 1996, it co-founded the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP). The country is a member state of the United Nations since 1955.\nRecently, the primacy of the United States and inter-governmental organizations such as NATO and the United Nations have also been paramount in the affirmation of Portugal abroad.\nPortugal has been a significant beneficiary of the EU. It was among the top beneficiaries of the EU-15 between 1995 and 2004 (only behind Spain and Greece in absolute terms, and behind Ireland and Greece in a per capita basis). Portugal is a proponent of European integration and held the presidency of the European Union for the second time during the first half of 2000, and again in the second half of 2007. Portugal used its term to launch a dialogue between the EU and Africa and to begin to take steps to make the European economy dynamic and competitive. In 2002, the euro began to circulate as Portugal's currency. Jos\u00e9 S\u00f3crates, as Prime Minister of Portugal, presided over the rotative Presidency of the Council of the European Union for the period July\u2013December 2007. In this post, S\u00f3crates and his team focused on the EU-Brazil (1st EU-Brazil summit) and EU-African Union (2007 Africa-EU Summit) relations, as well as in the approval of the Treaty of Lisbon.\nPortugal was a founding member of NATO; it is an active member of the alliance by, for example, contributing proportionally large contingents in Balkan peacekeeping forces. Portugal proposed the creation of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP) to improve its ties with other Portuguese-speaking countries. Additionally, Portugal has participated, along with Spain, in a series of Ibero-American Summit. Portugal held the chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) for the year 2002. The chairman-in-office was Portuguese Foreign Minister Ant\u00f3nio Martins da Cruz.\nDisputes.\nPortugal holds claim to the disputed territory of Oliven\u00e7a on the Portugal-Spain border.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Portugal maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56968", "revid": "49116891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56968", "title": "Telecommunications in Yemen", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Yemen provides information about the telephone, Internet, radio, and television infrastructure in Yemen.\nInfrastructure.\nSince unification in 1990, efforts have been made to create a national telecommunications network.\nThe infrastructure of the domestic system consists of microwave radio relay, cable, tropospheric scatter, GSM, and CDMA. Fixed-line and mobile-cellular teledensity remains low by regional standards.\nThe international network consists of three Intelsat (two Indian Ocean, and one Atlantic Ocean), one Intersputnik, and two Arabsat satellite earth stations, and a microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and Djibouti. Yemen is a landing point for the international submarine cable Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe (FLAG).\nIn 2005 TeleYemen announced it would invest in the FALCON high-capacity loop cable system, which will improve Internet access, including broadband capability, and also expand international call accessibility.\nRadio and television.\nThe state-run Republic of Yemen Television and Republic of Yemen Radio operate the country's television and radio networks, respectively. There are two state-run TV stations; two state-run national radio stations and five local stations; stations from Oman and Saudi Arabia can be accessed (2007).\nInternet usage.\nYemen had 2.349 million Internet users in 2011, up from 295,232 in 2008, and 270,000 in 2006. These low numbers are attributed to the high cost of computer equipment and connections in combination with the population's low level of income, as well as to the restricted bandwidth available on Yemen's outdated telephone network. There were 33,206 Internet hosts in 2012.\nThere are five Internet service providers in Yemen.\nThe top-level domain for Yemen is .ye.\nProviders.\nTeleYemen is the exclusive provider of international telecommunications for Yemen\u2014fixed-line and wireless mobile companies, telex, and Internet services\u2014and is one of the mobile-phone operators. In 2003 the government-owned Public Telecommunications Corporation assumed full control of TeleYemen, and a year later it awarded a five-year management contract to France Telecom.\nIn 2001 two private companies won 15-year licenses to provide mobile phone services. The growth of the companies' networks has resulted in coverage of about 60 percent of the population, but threats to internal security coupled with poor consumer payment history remain obstacles to future growth. In August 2005, the government awarded a contract to a joint venture between China Mobile and a group of Yemeni investors to take a 55 percent stake in Yemen's third mobile network; the government will retain a 25 percent share. In August 2006, the same conglomerate was awarded a contract for a fourth mobile network. The four mobile network providers currently present in the mobile phone market are Yemeni Omani United (YOU, previously MTN Yemen), Sabafon, Yemen Mobile, and Y (Y Telecom).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56969", "revid": "45211637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56969", "title": "Transport in Yemen", "text": " \nAs a direct consequence of the country's poverty, Yemen compares unfavorably with its Middle Eastern neighbors in terms of transportation infrastructure and communications network. The roads are generally poor, although several projects are planned to upgrade the system. There is no rail network, efforts to upgrade airport facilities have languished, and telephone and Internet usage and capabilities are limited. The Port of Aden has shown a promising recovery from a 2002 attack; container throughput increased significantly in 2004 and 2005. However, the expected imposition of higher insurance premiums for shippers in 2006 may result in reduced future throughput. The announcement in summer 2005 that the port's main facility, Aden Container Terminal, would for the next 30 or more years be run by Dubai Ports International brings with it the prospect of future expansion.\nRoads.\nConsidering Yemen's size, its road transportation system is extremely limited. Yemen has 71,300\u00a0kilometers of roads, only 6,200\u00a0kilometers of which are paved. In the north, roads connecting Sanaa, Taizz, and Al Hudaydah are in good condition, as is the intercity bus system. In the south, on the other hand, roads are in need of repair, except for the Aden\u2013Taizz road.\nIn November\u00a02005, the World\u00a0Bank approved a US$40\u00a0million project to upgrade 200\u00a0kilometers of intermediate rural roads and 75\u00a0kilometers of village-access roads as part of a larger effort to strengthen Yemen's rural-road planning and engineering capabilities. Plans are underway to build an estimated US$1.6\u00a0billion highway linking Aden (in the south) and Amran (in the north). The road will include more than 10\u00a0tunnels and halve the travel time between the southern coast and the northern border with Saudi Arabia.\nTravel by road in Yemen is often unsafe. Within cities, minivans and small buses ply somewhat regular routes, picking up and dropping off passengers with little regard for other vehicles. Taxis and public transportation are available but often lack safety precautions. Despite the presence of traffic lights and traffic policemen, the U.S.\u00a0Embassy advises drivers to exercise extreme caution, especially at intersections.\nWhile traffic laws do exist, they are not always enforced. Drivers sometimes drive on the left side of the road, although right-hand driving is specified by Yemeni law. No laws mandate the use of seat belts or car seats for children. The maximum speed for private cars is 100\u00a0kilometers per hour (62.5\u00a0miles per hour), but speed limits are rarely enforced. Furthermore, there are many underage drivers in Yemen. Many vehicles are in poor repair and lack basic parts such as functional turn signals, headlights, and taillights. Pedestrians, especially children, and animals are a hazard in both rural and urban areas. Beyond main intercity roads, which are usually paved, the rural roads generally necessitate four-wheel-drive vehicles or vehicles with high clearance.\nThe British government has a clear warning for their military and civilian employees, or British tourists, about using the roads in Yemen: \u201cIn the event of a breakdown of law and order access routes in and out of major cities may be blocked. If you wish to drive outside Sana\u2019a you will need prior permission from the Yemen Tourist Police. Travel permits may take at least 24 hours to be issued and are easiest to obtain through a travel agent. Travel without such permission is likely to result in detention and possible deportation. You should be aware that the consular assistance we can offer outside Sana\u2019a is limited due to restrictions on travel. There have been disturbances in Aden, Lahij and al-Dhali\u2019, which have resulted in closures of the Aden-Sana\u2019a road. These have been short-lived but if you intend to travel by road you should check that the road is open before starting your journey. You can drive in Yemen on an International Driving Permit. Driving standards are poor and mountain roads hazardous. You should avoid all road travel outside the main cities at night. Care should also be taken to avoid minefields left over from Yemen's civil wars. Travelling off well-used tracks without an experienced guide could be extremely hazardous, particularly in parts of the south and the central highlands.\"\nRailways.\nYemen does not have any railways, despite several proposals. At the beginning of the 20th\u00a0century, the Ottoman Empire suggested that the Hejaz railway be extended to Yemen, but this never materialized. In 1916 the Royal Engineers built a metre gauge railway from Ma'alla in Aden to Sheikh 'Othman. This was later extended to El Khudad, a total distance of . The line was operated by the North Western Railway of India until it closed in 1929. More recently, in\u00a02005, the Yemeni government began to investigate rail connections as part of an overall initiative to upgrade its transportation infrastructure. In\u00a02008 the Gulf Cooperation Council announced that it had agreed to include Yemen in plans for an integrated regional rail system and launched feasibility studies. Yemen has expressed preference for a coastal route beginning in Aden.\nPorts and merchant marine.\nYemen's main ports are Aden, Al Hudaydah, Mukalla, and Mocha; Aden is the primary port. In addition, Ras Isa serves as the loading point for oil exports, and a small amount of cargo passes through Nishtun.\nFacilities at Aden consist of the Maalla Terminal and the Aden Container Terminal (ACT), which opened in March 1999. The port can handle ro-ro ships, container ships, cargo ships, as well as tankers. In November 2003, following the October 2002 bombing of the French supertanker Limburg off the Yemen coast and the resultant dramatic drop in throughput at the Aden port, the Port of Singapore Authority sold its majority stake in the ACT back to the Yemeni government. In June 2005, Dubai Ports International was selected to manage and operate the ACT (and possibly Maalla Terminal) under a 30-year or longer contract; the Yemeni government will remain a minority shareholder. The Port of Aden has recovered well from the 2002 bombing. In 2004 it had annual traffic of approximately 2,000 vessels and 318,901 twenty-foot-equivalent units of containers, mostly handled by the ACT. For 2005, the port handled 317,897 twenty-foot-equivalent units of containers, more than double the amount for 2003. For the first seven months of 2006, the port handled 207, 687 twenty-foot-equivalent units of containers. However, in May 2006 the London insurance market's Joint War Committee placed Yemen on its list of \u201careas of perceived enhanced risk,\u201d which is expected to add a war-risk insurance premium to ships operating in the country's coastal waters. This added premium, coupled with the availability of more secure ports in neighboring countries, will likely result in reduced throughput in Yemen's ports in the near future.\nThere are 3 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT) (one cargo ship and 2 petroleum tankers) (1999 est.).\nThe International Maritime Bureau reports offshore waters in the Gulf of Aden are high risk for piracy; numerous vessels, including commercial shipping and pleasure craft, have been attacked and hijacked both at anchor and while underway; crew, passengers, and cargo are held for ransom; the presence of several naval task forces in the Gulf of Aden and additional anti-piracy measures on the part of ship operators reduced the incidence of piracy in that body of water by more than half in 2010.\nThe Yemen Coast Guard was established in 2002. According to the US Coast Guard website, they helped the Yemen Coast Guard with their patrol boats: \u201cUS Coast Guard Awards Contract to Build Two 87-foot Protector-class Coastal Patrol Boats for the Yemen Coast Guard. September 11, 2009. The Coast Guard awarded a $28.2 million contract to Bollinger Shipyards, Inc., in Lockport, La., on September 11, 2009, to build two 87-foot Protector-class Coastal Patrol Boats for the Yemen Coast Guard. The Office of International Acquisition (CG-922) at the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) received a request from the Navy International Programs Office (IPO) to procure these boats on May 13, 2009. The USCG anticipates the delivery to Yemen in August 2011. This procurement is the latest in a series of projects, which further strengthen the longstanding relationship between the US Coast Guard and the Yemen Coast Guard. Since 2003, the USCG has delivered eight 44-foot Motor Life Boats, twelve 25-foot Defender Response Boats, and four 42-foot Fast Response Boats (SPC-NLB) to the Yemen Coast Guard. The USCG has also provided 26 mobile training team visits and 54 resident training slots in USCG schools to the Yemen Coast Guard.\u201d\nYemen also has some lighthouses that are maintained for sea navigation by the Yemen Ports Authority, an extension of the \u201cPort of Aden.\u201d\nInland Waterways.\nYemen has no waterways of any significant length.\nCivil Aviation and Airports.\nYemen has 57\u00a0airports, 17\u00a0of which have paved runways. Of the 57\u00a0airports, 5\u00a0are international: Aden International, Sanaa International, Taizz, Rayyan, and Al Hudaydah. A major reconstruction and expansion of Aden International was completed in\u00a02001, including a new runway that can handle large, long-haul aircraft. Plans to make that airport a regional cargo hub, with an \"air cargo village\" by\u00a02004 appear to have failed. Although construction began in January\u00a02003, by the end of the year the managing company had dissolved.\nYemenia is the national airline; in\u00a01996 it absorbed South Yemen, the former national carrier. It is expected that Yemenia, which is currently 49\u00a0percent owned by the Saudi Arabian government and 51\u00a0percent owned by the Yemen government, will eventually be privatized, but there has been resistance from the Saudis. In\u00a02001 the airline carried 858,000\u00a0passengers. Because the airline's existing fleet of 12\u00a0airplanes is rapidly becoming outdated, in\u00a02002 three new aircraft were leased for eight years, and in early\u00a02006 the airline announced plans to acquire six new aircraft, with options for an additional four, beginning in\u00a02012.\nAirports - with paved runways.\n\"total:\"\n17\n&lt;br&gt; and over:\n4\n&lt;br&gt;:\n9\n&lt;br&gt;:\n3\n&lt;br&gt;:\n1 (2012)\nAirports - with unpaved runways.\n\"total:\"\n40\n&lt;br&gt; and over:\n3\n&lt;br&gt;:\n5\n&lt;br&gt;:\n7\n&lt;br&gt;:\n16\n&lt;br&gt;under :\n9 (2012)\nPipelines.\nAccording to the U.S. government, as of 2010 Yemen had a total of 1,262 kilometers of pipeline. This total includes pipeline designed for gas (88 kilometers) and oil (1,174 kilometers).\n&lt;br&gt;\"oil\" 1367\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"gas\" 423\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"petroleum products:\" 22\u00a0km\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56971", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56971", "title": "Southern and Northern dynasties", "text": ""}
{"id": "56972", "revid": "32527418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56972", "title": "Communications in Wallis and Futuna", "text": ""}
{"id": "56973", "revid": "32527418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56973", "title": "Transportation in Wallis and Futuna", "text": ""}
{"id": "56975", "revid": "50833690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56975", "title": "Geography of the Netherlands", "text": " \nThe geography of the European Netherlands is unusual in that much of its land has been reclaimed from the sea and is below sea level, protected by dikes. It is a small country with a total area of and ranked 131st. With a population of 17.4 million and density of makes it the second most densely populated member of the European Union after Malta, and the 12th most densely populated country in the world, behind only three countries with a population over 16 million. Consequently, the Netherlands is highly urbanized, concentrated in the so-called Randstad which makes up 20% of the land area but almost half of the total population.\nStatistics.\nGeographic coordinates: \nThe Dutch RD coordinate system (\"Rijksdriehoeksmeting\") is also in common use. For transformation to and from geographical coordinates there is an official procedure RDNAPTRANS and approximate as well as precise tools available. The west\u2013east coordinate is between 0 and 280\u00a0km, and the south\u2013north coordinate between 300 and 620\u00a0km.\nThe central point is the \"Onze-Lieve-Vrouwentoren\" (Our Lady's Tower) in Amersfoort, with RD coordinates (155,000.00, 463,000.00 m) and geographic coordinates approximately .\nArea:\n\"total:\" \n\"land:\" \n\"water:\" \nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\" \n\"border countries:\"\nCoastline: \nMaritime claims:\n\"territorial sea:\" \n\"contiguous zone:\" \n\"exclusive economic zone:\" with \nClimate: temperate; marine; cool summers and mild winters (European mainland), tropical (Caribbean islands)\nTerrain: mostly coastal lowland and reclaimed land (polders); some hills in southeast\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\" Zuidplaspolder (Nieuwerkerk aan den IJssel) , \"below\" sea level.\n\"highest point on European mainland:\" Vaalserberg above sea level.\n\"highest point (including the Caribbean islands):\" Mount Scenery on Saba above sea level.\nNatural resources: natural gas, petroleum, peat, limestone, iodised salt, sand and gravel, arable land\nLand use: (2011)\n\"arable land:\" 25.08%\n\"permanent crops:\" 0.88%\n\"other:\" 74.04%\nIrrigated land (2007): \nTotal renewable water resources (2011): \nNatural hazards: flooding by sea and rivers is a constant danger. The extensive system of dikes, dams, and sand dunes protect nearly one-half of the total area from being flooded during the heavy autumn storms from the north-west.\nEnvironment \u2013 current issues: water pollution in the form of heavy metals, organic compounds, and fertilisers such as nitrates and phosphates; air pollution from vehicles and refining activities; acid rain\nEnvironment \u2013 international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling\n\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nnone\nLandscape.\nThe country can be split into two areas: the low and flat lands in the west and north, and the higher lands with minor hills in the east and south. The former, including the reclaimed polders and river deltas, make up about half of its surface area and are less than above sea level, much of it actually below sea level. An extensive range of seawalls and coastal dunes protect the Netherlands from the sea, and levees and dikes along the rivers protect against river flooding. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,025\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in the Netherlands, making it the 31st ranked country in terms of tidal flat area. The rest of the country is mostly flat; only in the extreme south of the country does the land rise to any significant extent, in the foothills of the Ardennes mountains. This is where Vaalserberg is located, the highest point on the European part of the Netherlands at above sea level. The highest point of the entire country is Mount Scenery (870 metres or 2,854\u00a0ft), which is located outside the European part of the Netherlands, on the island of Saba in the Caribbean. \nThe Netherlands is located at mouths of three major European rivers (Rhine, Maas or Meuse, and Scheldt).\nIn November 2016, the Netherlands and Belgium agreed to cede small, uninhabited parcels of land to reflect a change in course of the river Meuse (or Maas, in Dutch). The land swap is to take effect as of 2018.\nUrbanization.\nThe Netherlands does not have a single large metropolis, but the four largest cities are concentrated in the western provinces of North Holland, South Holland, and Utrecht. Between and around these lies a ring of medium-sized towns, which together form the so-called Randstad. About 45% of the Dutch population is concentrated here in this small area (makes up 20% of the total land), around a relatively open space, the so-called Groene Hart (Green Heart). This area is highly densely populated with over 1000 inhabitants per km2. The rest of the country is much less dense. Between 70-85% of the Netherlands total land area is described as rural (Dutch: platteland, landelijk).\nLargest cities.\nWith their provinces in November 2019:\nEcosystems per province.\nThis table describes the size and distributions of ecosystems in the Netherlands in 2021, broken down into 10 ecosystem types and by province. (Source: CBS).\nClimate.\nThe predominant wind direction in the European Netherlands is southwest, which causes a mild maritime climate, with moderately warm summers and cool winters, and typically high humidity. This is especially true close to the Dutch coastline, where the difference in temperature between summer and winter, as well as between day and night is noticeably smaller than it is in the southeast of the country.\nIce days\u2014maximum temperature below \u2014usually occur from December until February, with the occasional rare ice day prior to or after that period. Freezing days\u2014minimum temperature below \u2014occur much more often, usually ranging from mid-November to late March, but not rarely measured as early as mid-October and as late as mid-May. If one chooses the height of measurement to be above ground instead of , one may even find such temperatures in the middle of the summer. On average, snow can occur from November to April but sometimes occurs in May or October too.\nWarm days\u2014maximum temperature above \u2014are usually found in April to October, but in some parts of the country these warm days can also occur in March, or even sometimes in November or February (usually not in De Bilt, however). Summer days\u2014maximum temperature above \u2014are usually measured in De Bilt from May until September, tropical days\u2014maximum temperature above \u2014are rare and usually occur only in June to August.\nPrecipitation throughout the year is distributed relatively equally each month. Summer and autumn months tend to gather a little more precipitation than the other months, mainly because of the intensity of the rainfall rather than the frequency of rain days (this is especially the case in summer when lightning is also much more frequent).\nThe number of sunshine hours is affected by the fact that because of the geographical latitude, the length of the days varies between barely eight hours in December and nearly 17 hours in June.\nThe following table is based on mean measurements by the KNMI weather station in De Bilt between 1991 and 2020. The highest recorded temperature was , reached on 25 July 2019 in Gilze-Rijen. The lowest temperature in the Netherlands was recorded at Winterswijk on 27 January 1942, when the temperature dropped to .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56976", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56976", "title": "Federal Energy Regulatory Commission", "text": "Independent agency of the US federal government\nThe Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is an independent agency of the United States government that regulates the interstate transmission and wholesale sale of electricity and natural gas and regulates the prices of interstate transport of petroleum by pipeline. FERC also reviews proposals to build interstate natural gas pipelines, natural gas storage projects, and liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminals, in addition to licensing non-federal hydropower projects.\nFERC was created in 1977 by the U.S. Congress in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis. FERC is an independent agency, even though it is part of the U.S. Department of Energy. It is headed by five commissioners who are nominated by the U.S. president and confirmed by the U.S. Senate. There may be no more than three commissioners of one political party serving on the commission at any given time.\nPrimary duties.\nThe responsibilities of FERC include the following:\nJurisdiction and authorities.\nFERC is a large independent regulatory agency, within the United States Department of Energy, that participates in business oversight. The President and Congress do not generally review FERC decisions, but the decisions are reviewable by the federal courts. FERC is self-funding, in that Congress sets its budget through annual and supplemental appropriations and FERC is authorized to raise revenue to reimburse the United States Treasury for its appropriations, through annual charges to the natural gas, oil, and electric industries it regulates.\nFERC is independent of the Department of Energy political structure because FERC activities \"shall not be subject to further view by the Secretary [of Energy] or any officer or employee of the Department\". The Department of Energy can, however, participate in FERC proceedings as a third party.\nFERC has promoted voluntary formation of regional transmission organizations (RTOs) and Independent System Operators (ISOs) to eliminate the potential for undue discrimination in access to the electric grid; it has made key decisions expanding its own power in regional and interregional transmission planning and cost allocation through the landmark Order Nos. 1000, 1920, 1977, and 2023.\nFERC investigated the alleged manipulation of electricity market by Enron and other energy companies, and their role in the California electricity crisis. FERC has collected more than $6.3 billion from California electric market participants through settlements. Since passage of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, FERC has imposed, through settlements and orders, more than $1 billion in civil penalties and disgorgement of unjust profits to address violations of its anti-market manipulation and other rules.\nFERC regulates approximately 1,600 hydroelectric projects in the U.S. It is largely responsible for permitting construction of a large network of interstate natural gas pipelines. FERC also works closely with the United States Coast Guard to review the safety, security, and environmental impacts of proposed LNG terminals and associated shipping.\nCommissioners.\nFERC is composed of up to five commissioners who are appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate to staggered five-year terms. The President appoints one of the commissioners to be the chairman of FERC, the administrative head of the agency. FERC is a bipartisan body; no more than three commissioners may be of the same political party. Commissioners may continue in office past the end of their term if a successor has not yet been confirmed, up to the end of the current session of Congress. The commissioners as of \u00a027, 2025[ [update]] are:\nHistory.\nFederal Power Commission.\nThe Federal Power Commission (FPC), which preceded FERC, was established by Congress in 1920 to allow cabinet members to coordinate federal hydropower development.\nIn 1935, the FPC was transformed into an independent regulatory agency with five members nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. The FPC was authorized to regulate both hydropower and interstate electricity.\nNatural Gas Act of 1938.\nIn 1938, the Natural Gas Act gave FPC jurisdiction over interstate natural gas pipelines and wholesale sales. In 1942, this jurisdiction was expanded to cover the licensing of more natural gas facilities. In 1954, the Supreme Court decision in \"Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Wisconsin\" extended FPC jurisdiction over all wellhead sales of natural gas in interstate commerce.\nBirth of DOE; FPC Becomes FERC.\nIn response to the 1973 oil crisis, Congress passed the Department of Energy Organization Act in 1977, to consolidate various energy-related agencies into a Department of Energy. Congress insisted that a separate independent regulatory body be retained, and the FPC was renamed the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), preserving its independent status within the department. Its most basic mandate was to \"determine whether wholesale electricity prices were unjust and unreasonable and, if so, to regulate pricing and order refunds for overcharges to ratepayers.\" FERC was also given added responsibility to hear appeals of DOE oil price control determinations and to conduct all \"on the record\" hearings for DOE. As a result, DOE does not have any administrative law judges. As a further protection, when the Department of Energy proposes a rule, it must refer the proposal to FERC, and FERC can take over the proceeding if FERC determines that the rulemaking \"may significantly affect\" matters in its jurisdiction. The DOE Act also transferred the regulation of interstate oil pipelines from the Interstate Commerce Commission to FERC. However, the FERC lost some jurisdiction over the imports and exports of gas and electricity.\nIn 1978, FERC was given additional responsibilities for harmonizing the regulation of wellhead gas sales in both the intrastate and interstate markets. FERC also administered a program to foster new cogeneration and small power production under the Public Utilities Regulatory Policy Act of 1978, which was passed as part of the National Energy Act of 1978. The National Energy Act included the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, which reduced the scope of federal price regulation, to bring greater competition to both the natural gas and electric industry.\nIn 1989, Congress ended federal regulation of wellhead natural gas prices, with the passage of the Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act of 1989.\nOrder Nos. 888 and 889.\nIn 1996, FERC issued Order No. 888, which spurred the creation of regional transmission organizations in the United States. This would impact existing electric power pools by rebranding themselves as independent transmission operators. Electric utilities in some regions began to spin off their generation units as separate companies that would compete in a wholesale electric market administered by the RTOs.\nOnce FERC had created the framework for Regional Transmission Organizations with Order No. 888, several such RTOs were approved. The pre-existing multi-state power pool called PJM (Pennsylvania, Jersey, Maryland), the New York Independent System Operator (NYISO), and the Independent Sysoperator New England (ISO-NE) were early adopters. California, with the backing of its state and Congressional policymakers, sought approval of a controversial scheme to set up its ISO, called California Independent System Operator, based near Sacramento, CA. FERC approved it without changes because California had warned that it would not accept any changes. Enron charged one of its policy analysts to figure out how to make the most of the flawed rules put in place for the California electricity market. Enron had success with its fraudulent market transactions.\nOrder No. 888 mandated that transmission operators open market access to all power generators, including both vertically integrated utility companies and \"qualifying facilities\" that are independent of those trusts, while Order No. 889 mandated that these generators tie into transmission markets via data portals called \"Open Access Same-Time Information Systems\".\nOrder No. 2003.\nIn 2003, FERC issued Order No. 2003, which required utilities to standardize their interconnection procedures (linking power plants to the grid) and issue credits to power generators as reimbursement for upfront interconnection costs, over a long time period.\nEnergy Policy Act of 2005.\nIn 2001, the George W. Bush administration sought to give the authority of eminent domain to FERC to circumvent state and local bureaucratic processes which often slowed the siting of new transmission projects. This expansion of power was most fiercely opposed by Bush's own Republican party as being an expansion of federal power. Legal battles over the issue ended with the 2005 Energy Bill (Energy Policy Act of 2005) which was passed with approval of Democrats and Republicans.\nThe Energy Policy Act of 2005 expanded FERC's authority to protect the reliability and cybersecurity of the bulk power system through the establishment and enforcement of mandatory standards, as well as greatly expanding FERC authority to impose civil penalties on entities that manipulate the electricity and natural gas markets. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 also gave FERC additional responsibilities and authority. Among the many provisions of the law, FERC was given what is known as \"backstop\" siting authority which allows FERC to overrule any denial of transmission projects by a state within established corridors of transmission congestion \"to expand transmission in limited regions of the country facing transmission constraints.\"\nOrder No. 1000.\nIn 2010, FERC issued Order No. 1000, which required RTOs to create regional transmission plans and identify transmission needs based on public policy. Cost allocation reforms were included, possibly to reduce barriers faced by non incumbent transmission developers.\nOrder No. 841.\nIn February 2018, FERC issued Order No. 841, which required wholesale markets to open up to individual storage installations, regardless of interconnection point (transmission, distribution or behind-the-meter). The Order was challenged in court by the state public utility commissions via the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC), the American Public Power Association, and others who claimed that FERC overstepped its jurisdiction by regulating how local electric distribution and behind-the-meter facilities are administered, i.e., in not providing an opt out of wholesale market access for energy storage facilities located at the distribution level or behind-the-meter. A United States courts of appeals court (the D.C. Circuit) issued an order in July 2020 that upheld Order 841 and dismissed the petitioners' complaints.\nOrder No. 2222.\nFERC issued Order No. 2222 on September 17, 2020, enabling distributed energy resources such as batteries and demand response to participate in regional wholesale electricity markets. Market operators submitted initial compliance plans by early 2022. The Supreme Court had ruled in 2016 in \"FERC v. Electric Power Supply Ass'n\" that the agency had the authority to regulate demand response transactions.\nOrder No. 2023.\nOn July 28, 2023, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission issued Order No. 2023, which regulates the interconnection process that ties renewables projects into the large-scale grid. Among other provisions, the rule requires transmission planners to consolidate projects into 'clusters' for regulatory approval purposes on a 'first-ready, first-served' basis that prioritizes the most well-studied and fully financed projects, spread grid upgrade costs over multiple projects, forecast advanced technologies, and allow for multiple projects to share a new single interconnection point. It also \"imposes firm deadlines and penalties if transmission providers fail to complete interconnection studies on time\".\nOn March 21, 2024, FERC issued Order No. 2023-A, an amendment clarifying certain provisions in the order, such as compliance filing requirements, the deadline for utilities to edit interconnect requests upon submission, the role of substation use in determining cost allocation, and the use of surety bonds in financing.\nOrder Nos. 1920 and 1977.\nOn May 13, 2024, FERC issued Order Nos. 1920 and 1977. The former order requires utilities to plan 20 years in advance to anticipate future regional (though not interregional) transmission needs, with five-year updates, and to cooperate in creating a default cost-sharing plan to deliver to state regulators. It \"provides for cost-effective expansion of transmission that is being replaced, when needed, known as 'right-sizing' transmission facilities\", and it allows states more opportunities to cooperate with utility companies and energy project developers, while preventing states that benefit from regional transmission projects from not paying for them. FERC Order No. 1920-A, an amendment to it passed unanimously the following November, allows state regulators even more opportunities to provide input on interstate grid projects, adds six months to the cost allocation negotiating process, and gives utilities more leeway to forecast additional needs scenarios.\nThe latter order affirms FERC's siting authority in National Interest Electric Transmission Corridors if a state regulatory agency denies any of its own siting responsibility thereof. The order creates an Applicant Code of Conduct to encourage proper landowner outreach, and adds air quality, environmental justice and tribal engagement reports to the list of requirements for project applicants.\nCriticism.\nFERC has been subject to criticism and increasing activism by people from communities affected by its decisions approving pipeline and related projects. They contend that FERC \"blithely greenlights too many pipelines, export terminals and other gas infrastructure\" and that FERC's structure in which it recovers its annual operating costs directly from the entities it regulates creates bias in favor of the issuance of pipeline certificates. Some of the critics have disrupted several regular open meetings of the Commission and staged a couple of week-long blockades of FERC's headquarters in Washington, D.C., to make their points. \"Pipelines are facing unprecedented opposition,\" Commissioner LaFleur remarked to the National Press Club in a 2015 speech. \"We have a situation here.\"\nFERC's decisions in those cases are often upheld by the courts. In a July 1, 2014, decision, \"No Gas Pipeline v. Federal Energy Regulatory Commission\", the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (D.C. Circuit) said that pipeline applicants are not likely to pursue many certificates that are hopeless. \"The fact that they generally succeed in choosing to expend their resources on applications that serve their own financial interests does not mean that an agency which recognizes merit in such applications is biased,\" the court said. Others have directly disputed FERC's critics by pointing out, \"FERC is a creature of law. It follows a careful administrative path to regulate only a portion of natural gas such as interstate pipelines and LNG import and export terminals. That regulation includes extensive environmental review, driven by many federal laws enacted by Congress, signed by the president, and reviewed and upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court. If the agency were to adopt the path [suggested by these critics], FERC's decisions would routinely be overturned by the federal courts.\"\nThe United States District Court for the District of Columbia also dismissed a case involving allegations of structural bias on the part of FERC. The plaintiffs contended that the Omnibus Budget Act of 1986 funding mechanism requires the commission to recover its budget through proportional charges on regulated entities, therefore making FERC biased in favor of the industry from which it gets its funding. But in an order issued March 22, 2017, the court said the plain language of the statute indicates that FERC does not have control over its own budget. \"The Commission's budget cannot be increased by approving pipelines; rather, [the statute] requires the Commission to make adjustments to 'eliminate any overrecovery or underrecovery.' If Plaintiffs are unhappy with Congress's chosen appropriations to the Commission..., Plaintiffs' recourse lies with their legislative representatives.\"\nIn New Jersey, the FERC approval of the PennEast Pipeline was met with widespread criticism by environmental groups, which called the decision highly partisan. \"FERC has once again demonstrated its tremendous bias for, and partnership with, the pipeline industry,\" said Maya van Rossum, leader of the Delaware Riverkeeper Network. Doug O'Malley, president of Environment New Jersey, called the FERC approval of the pipeline a \"disaster.\" David Pringle, state campaign director of Clean Water Action and 2018 Congressional candidate, suggested the FERC was serving a partisan interest over the interests of the people of New Jersey, suggesting \"The FERC needs to remember it works for the people of the United States not PennEast.\"\nThese criticisms were unfounded as the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals on July 10, 2018, rejected the Delaware Riverkeeper Network and Maya Van Rossum's claim that FERC has an incentive to award pipeline certificates because it collects its operating expenses from regulated parties. Upholding a lower court ruling, the D.C. Circuit also rejected the Delaware Riverkeeper Network's challenge to FERC's use of tolling orders to meet its statutory deadlines for acting on rehearing applications.\nHowever, the D.C. Circuit has provided additional guidance concerning Commission procedures, stating that in one case FERC failed to consider the cumulative environmental impact of four projects that had been separately proposed by the same pipeline. The D.C. Circuit held that the projects were not financially independent and were \"a single pipeline\" that was \"linear and physically interdependent,\" so the cumulative environmental impacts should have been considered concurrently. In a separate decision, the D.C. Circuit later sustained the commission's conduct of separate environmental assessments when it clarified that the \"critical\" factor was that all of the pipeline's projects were either under construction or pending before FERC for environmental review at the same time, noting that the projects lacked temporal overlap. Furthermore, in another case, the D.C. Circuit sustained the commission's use of a separate environmental assessment when it reasoned that the projects in dispute were \"unrelated\" and did not depend on one another for their justification. This guidance has allowed FERC to address additional claims of improper segmentation.\nFERC's leaders have stressed many times since the onset of the increased activism that the proper way to oppose a proposed new infrastructure project is by participating in the related proceeding by submitting comments and participating in public comment sessions, site visits and scoping meetings, since FERC decisions can be appealed up to the Supreme Court.\nFederal versus state authority.\nThere are regions of the country where the state public utility commission and the FERC regulated Regional Transmission Organization operate in identical footprints (such as in New York State). Where this occurs, state policy makers and FERC frequently clash as to the extent of federal power and influence within the state.\nThe planning and siting of public policy and renewable power plants and merchant transmission lines can be contentious, because the planning process must proceed through both entities. For example, in New York State, any large (more than 20 MW for the NYISO or 2 MW for the state Siting Committee) generation or merchant transmission facility must proceed through both the planning process of the NYISO, which operates on a two-year cycle at minimum with an inclusive class year pool of new projects evaluated simultaneously, and the siting process of the state Board on Electric Siting and the Environment. Prior to the formation of the NYISO, the planning process was determined mostly by the state siting board (although the utilities' power pool might have had its own closed door planning session) and large generation projects were developed by the utilities themselves. The dual planning process provides an opportunity for other market participants to drag out the process legally, not including the other state and/or federal environmental, trade (if an international connection with Canada is requested), and local certification and regulation processes that need to be met.\nThe controversy similarly applies to various electric wholesale-market issues within the RTO, when a state public utility commission asserts that its retail ratepayers (under state regulation) will be impacted by wholesale-market stakeholder decisions and reforms (under federal-level regulation). In contrast, prior to the formation of the NYISO in 1999 in New York, wholesale energy prices were set within a utility's state rate case proceeding. Examples of contentious issues in New York include the NYISO's development of buyer-side mitigation (price floors) in its capacity market, proxy peaking-unit specifications during the demand-curve reset (that helps set capacity market prices), the state's granting of zero-emissions credits to wholesale-market participating nuclear power plants, and the creation of a new capacity zone amidst state and transmission owner policy initiatives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56977", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56977", "title": "Economy of Mayotte", "text": "The economy of Mayotte is based primarily on the agricultural sector, including fishing and livestock raising. The island of Mayotte is not self-sufficient and must import a large portion of its food requirements, mainly from Metropolitan France. The economy and future development of the island are heavily dependent on French financial assistance, an important supplement to GDP. Mayotte's remote location is an obstacle to the development of tourism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56978", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56978", "title": "Song dynasty", "text": "Chinese imperial dynasty from 960 to 1279\nThe Song dynasty ( ) was a unifying imperial dynasty of China that ruled from 960 to 1279. The dynasty was founded by Emperor Taizu of Song, who usurped the throne of the Later Zhou dynasty and went on to conquer the rest of the Ten Kingdoms, ending the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. The Song often came into conflict with the contemporaneous Liao, Western Xia and Jin dynasties in northern China. After retreating to southern China following attacks by the Jin dynasty, the Song was eventually conquered by the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty.\nThe dynasty's history is divided into two periods: during the Northern Song (; 960\u20131127), the capital was in the northern city of Bianjing (now Kaifeng) and the dynasty controlled most of what is now East China. The Southern Song (; 1127\u20131279) comprise the period following the loss of control over the northern half of Song territory to the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty in the Jin\u2013Song wars. At that time, the Song court retreated south of the Yangtze and established its capital at Lin'an (now Hangzhou). Although the Song dynasty had lost control of the traditional Chinese heartlands around the Yellow River, the Southern Song Empire contained a large population and productive agricultural land, sustaining a robust economy. In 1234, the Jin dynasty was conquered by the Mongols, who took control of northern China, maintaining uneasy relations with the Southern Song. M\u00f6ngke Khan, the fourth Great Khan of the Mongol Empire, died in 1259 while besieging the mountain castle Diaoyucheng in Chongqing. His younger brother Kublai Khan was proclaimed the new Great Khan and in 1271 founded the Yuan dynasty. After two decades of sporadic warfare, Kublai Khan's armies conquered the Song dynasty in 1279 after defeating the Southern Song in the Battle of Yamen, and reunited China under the Yuan dynasty.\nTechnology, science, philosophy, mathematics, and engineering flourished during the Song era. The Song dynasty was the first in world history to issue banknotes or true paper money and the first Chinese government to establish a permanent standing navy. This dynasty saw the first surviving records of the chemical formula for gunpowder, the invention of gunpowder weapons such as fire arrows, bombs, and the fire lance. It also saw the first discernment of true north using a compass, first recorded description of the pound lock, and improved designs of astronomical clocks. Economically, the Song dynasty was unparalleled with a gross domestic product three times larger than that of Europe during the 12th century. China's population doubled in size between the 10th and 11th centuries. This growth was made possible by expanded rice cultivation, use of early-ripening rice from Southeast and South Asia, and production of widespread food surpluses. The Northern Song census recorded 20\u00a0million households, double that of the Han and Tang dynasties. It is estimated that the Northern Song had a population of 90\u00a0million people, and 200\u00a0million by the time of the Ming dynasty. This dramatic increase of population fomented an economic revolution in pre-modern China.\nThe expansion of the population, growth of cities, and emergence of a national economy led to the gradual withdrawal of the central government from direct intervention in the economy. The lower gentry assumed a larger role in local administration and affairs. Song society was vibrant, and cities had lively entertainment quarters. Citizens gathered to view and trade artwork, and intermingled at festivals and in private clubs. The spread of literature and knowledge was enhanced by the rapid expansion of woodblock printing and the 11th-century invention of movable type printing. Philosophers such as Cheng Yi and Zhu Xi reinvigorated Confucianism with new commentary, infused with Buddhist ideals, and emphasized a new organization of classic texts that established the doctrine of Neo-Confucianism. Although civil service examinations had existed since the Sui dynasty, they became much more prominent in the Song period. Officials gaining power through imperial examination led to a shift from a military-aristocratic elite to a scholar-bureaucratic elite.\nHistory.\nNorthern Song, 960\u20131127.\nAfter usurping the throne of the Later Zhou dynasty, Emperor Taizu of Song (r.\u2009960\u00a0\u2013\u00a0976) spent sixteen years conquering the rest of China proper, reuniting much of the territory that had once belonged to the Han and Tang empires and ending the upheaval of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. In Kaifeng, he established a strong central government over the empire. The establishment of this capital marked the start of the Northern Song period. He ensured administrative stability by promoting the civil service examination system of drafting state bureaucrats by skill and merit (instead of aristocratic or military position) and promoted projects that ensured efficiency in communication throughout the empire. In one such project, cartographers created detailed maps of each province and city that were then collected in a large atlas. Emperor Taizu also promoted groundbreaking scientific and technological innovations by supporting works like the astronomical clock tower designed and built by the engineer Zhang Sixun.\nThe Song court maintained diplomatic relations with Chola India, the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt, Srivijaya, the Kara-Khanid Khanate in Central Asia, the Goryeo Kingdom in Korea, and other countries that were also trade partners with Japan. Chinese records even mention an embassy from the ruler of \"Fu lin\" (\u62c2\u83fb, i.e. the Byzantine Empire), Michael VII Doukas, and its arrival in 1081. However, China's closest neighbouring states had the greatest impact on its domestic and foreign policy. From its inception under Taizu, the Song dynasty alternated between warfare and diplomacy with the ethnic Khitans of the Liao dynasty in the northeast and with the Tanguts of the Western Xia in the northwest. The Song dynasty used military force in an attempt to quell the Liao dynasty and to recapture the Sixteen Prefectures, a territory under Khitan control since 938 that was traditionally considered to be part of China proper (most parts of today's Beijing and Tianjin). Song forces were repulsed by the Liao forces, who engaged in aggressive yearly campaigns into Northern Song territory until 1005, when the signing of the Shanyuan Treaty ended these northern border clashes. The Song were forced to provide tribute to the Khitans, although this did little damage to the Song economy since the Khitans were economically dependent upon importing massive amounts of goods from the Song. More significantly, the Song state recognized the Liao state as its diplomatic equal. The Song created an extensive defensive forest along the Song\u2013Liao border to thwart potential Khitan cavalry attacks.\nThe Song dynasty managed to win several military victories over the Tanguts in the early 11th century, culminating in a campaign led by the polymath scientist, general, and statesman Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095). However, this campaign was ultimately a failure due to a rival military officer of Shen disobeying direct orders, and the territory gained from the Western Xia was eventually lost. The Song fought against the Vietnamese kingdom of \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t twice, the first conflict in 981 and later a significant war from 1075 to 1077 over a border dispute and the Song's severing of commercial relations with \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t. After the Vietnamese forces inflicted heavy damages in a raid on Guangxi, the Song commander Guo Kui (1022\u20131088) penetrated as far as Th\u0103ng Long (modern Hanoi). Heavy losses on both sides prompted the Vietnamese commander Th\u01b0\u1eddng Ki\u1ec7t (1019\u20131105) to make peace overtures, allowing both sides to withdraw from the war effort; captured territories held by both Song and Vietnamese were mutually exchanged in 1082, along with prisoners of war.\nDuring the 11th century, political rivalries divided members of the court due to the ministers' differing approaches, opinions, and policies regarding the handling of the Song's complex society and thriving economy. The idealist Chancellor, Fan Zhongyan (989\u20131052), was the first to receive a heated political backlash when he attempted to institute the Qingli Reforms, which included measures such as improving the recruitment system of officials, increasing the salaries for minor officials, and establishing sponsorship programs to allow a wider range of people to be well educated and eligible for state service.\nAfter Fan was forced to step down from his office, Wang Anshi (1021\u20131086) became Chancellor of the imperial court. With the backing of Emperor Shenzong (1067\u20131085), Wang Anshi severely criticized the educational system and state bureaucracy. Seeking to resolve what he saw as state corruption and negligence, Wang implemented a series of reforms called the New Policies. These involved land value tax reform, the establishment of several government monopolies, the support of local militias, and the creation of higher standards for the Imperial examination to make it more practical for men skilled in statecraft to pass.\nThe reforms created political factions in the court. Wang Anshi's \"New Policies Group\" (\"Xin Fa\"), also known as the \"Reformers\", were opposed by the ministers in the \"Conservative\" faction led by the historian and Chancellor Sima Guang (1019\u20131086). As one faction supplanted another in the majority position of the court ministers, it would demote rival officials and exile them to govern remote frontier regions of the empire. One of the prominent victims of the political rivalry, the famous poet and statesman Su Shi (1037\u20131101), was jailed and eventually exiled for criticizing Wang's reforms.\nThe continual alternation between reform and conservatism had effectively weakened the dynasty. This decline can also be attributed to Cai Jing (1047\u20131126), who was appointed by Emperor Zhezong (1085\u20131100) and who remained in power until 1125. He revived the New Policies and pursued political opponents, tolerated corruption and encouraged Emperor Huizong (1100\u20131126) to neglect his duties to focus on artistic pursuits. Later, a peasant rebellion broke out in Zhejiang and Fujian, headed by Fang La in 1120. The rebellion may have been caused by an increasing tax burden, the concentration of landownership and oppressive government measures.\nWhile the central Song court remained politically divided and focused upon its internal affairs, alarming new events to the north in the Liao state finally came to its attention. The Jurchen, a subject tribe of the Liao, rebelled against them and formed their own state, the Jin dynasty. The Song official Tong Guan (1054\u20131126) advised Emperor Huizong to form an alliance with the Jurchens, and the joint military campaign under this Alliance Conducted at Sea toppled and completely conquered the Liao dynasty by 1125. During the joint attack, the Song's northern expedition army removed the defensive forest along the Song\u2013Liao border.\nHowever, the poor performance and military weakness of the Song army was observed by the Jurchens, who immediately broke the alliance, beginning the Jin\u2013Song Wars of 1125 and 1127. Because of the removal of the previous defensive forest, the Jin army marched quickly across the North China Plain to Kaifeng. In the Jingkang Incident during the latter invasion, the Jurchens captured not only the capital, but the retired Emperor Huizong, his successor Emperor Qinzong, and most of the Imperial court.\nThe remaining Song forces regrouped under the self-proclaimed Emperor Gaozong (1127\u20131162) and withdrew south of the Yangtze to establish a new capital at Lin'an (modern Hangzhou). The Jurchen conquest of North China and shift of capitals from Kaifeng to Lin'an was the dividing line between the Northern and Southern Song dynasties.\nAfter their fall to the Jin, the Song lost control of North China. Now occupying what has been traditionally known as \"China proper\", the Jin regarded themselves the rightful rulers of China. The Jin later chose earth as their dynastic element and yellow as their royal color. According to the theory of the Five Elements (wuxing), the earth element follows the fire, the dynastic element of the Song, in the sequence of elemental creation. Therefore, their ideological move showed that the Jin considered Song reign in China complete, with the Jin replacing the Song as the rightful rulers of China proper.\nSouthern Song, 1127\u20131279.\nAlthough weakened and pushed south beyond the Huai River, the Southern Song found new ways to bolster its strong economy and defend itself against the Jin dynasty. The government sponsored massive shipbuilding and harbor improvement projects, and the construction of beacons and seaport warehouses to support maritime trade abroad, including at the major international seaports, such as Quanzhou, Guangzhou, and Xiamen, that were sustaining China's commerce. There were able military officers such as Yue Fei and Han Shizhong.\nTo protect and support the multitude of ships sailing into the East China Sea and Yellow Sea (to Korea and Japan), Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, and the Red Sea, it was necessary to establish an official standing navy. The Song dynasty therefore established China's first permanent navy in 1132, with a headquarters at Dinghai. With a permanent navy, the Song were prepared to face the naval forces of the Jin on the Yangtze River in 1161, in the Battle of Tangdao and the Battle of Caishi. During these battles the Song navy employed swift paddle wheel-driven naval vessels armed with traction trebuchet catapults aboard the decks that launched gunpowder bombs. Although the Jin forces commanded by Wanyan Liang (the Prince of Hailing) boasted 70,000 men on 600 warships, and the Song forces only 3,000 men on 120 warships, the Song dynasty forces were victorious in both battles due to the destructive power of the bombs and the rapid assaults by paddlewheel ships. The strength of the navy was heavily emphasized following these victories. A century after the navy was founded it had grown in size to 52,000 fighting marines.\nThe Song government confiscated portions of land owned by the landed gentry in order to raise revenue for these projects, an act which caused dissension and loss of loyalty amongst leading members of Song society but did not stop the Song's defensive preparations. Financial matters were made worse by the fact that many wealthy, land-owning families\u2014some of which had officials working for the government\u2014used their social connections with those in office in order to obtain tax-exempt status.\nAlthough the Song dynasty was able to hold back the Jin, a new foe came to power over the steppe, deserts, and plains north of the Jin dynasty. The Mongols, led by Genghis Khan (r. 1206\u20131227), initially invaded the Jin dynasty in 1205 and 1209, engaging in large raids across its borders, and in 1211 an enormous Mongol army was assembled to invade the Jin. The Jin dynasty was forced to submit and pay tribute to the Mongols as vassals; when the Jin suddenly moved their capital city from Beijing to Kaifeng, the Mongols saw this as a revolt. Under the leadership of \u00d6gedei Khan (r.1229\u20131241), both the Jin dynasty and Western Xia dynasty were conquered by Mongol forces in 1233/34.\nThe Mongols were allied with the Song, but this alliance was broken when the Song recaptured the former imperial capitals of Kaifeng, Luoyang, and Chang'an at the collapse of the Jin dynasty. After the first Mongol invasion of Vietnam in 1258, Mongol general Uriyangkhadai attacked Guangxi from Hanoi as part of a coordinated Mongol attack in 1259 with armies attacking in Sichuan under Mongol leader M\u00f6ngke Khan and other Mongol armies attacking in modern-day Shandong and Henan. On August 11, 1259, M\u00f6ngke Khan died during the siege of Diaoyu Castle in Chongqing.\nHis successor Kublai Khan continued the assault against the Song, gaining a temporary foothold on the southern banks of the Yangtze. By the winter of 1259, Uriyangkhadai's army fought its way north to meet Kublai's army, which was besieging Ezhou in Hubei. Kublai made preparations to take Ezhou, but a pending civil war with his brother Ariq B\u00f6ke\u2014a rival claimant to the Mongol Khaganate\u2014forced Kublai to move back north with the bulk of his forces. In Kublai's absence, the Song forces were ordered by Chancellor Jia Sidao to make an immediate assault and succeeded in pushing the Mongol forces back to the northern banks of the Yangtze. There were minor border skirmishes until 1265, when Kublai won a significant battle in Sichuan.\nFrom 1268 to 1273, Kublai blockaded the Yangtze River with his navy and besieged Xiangyang, the last obstacle in his way to invading the rich Yangtze River basin. Kublai officially declared the creation of the Yuan dynasty in 1271. In 1275, a Song force of 130,000 troops under Chancellor Jia Sidao was defeated by Kublai's newly appointed commander-in-chief, general Bayan. By 1276, most of the Song territory had been captured by Yuan forces, including the capital Lin'an.\nIn the Battle of Yamen on the Pearl River Delta in 1279, the Yuan army, led by the general Zhang Hongfan, finally crushed the Song resistance. The last remaining ruler, the 13-year-old emperor Zhao Bing, committed suicide, along with Prime Minister Lu Xiufu and approximately 1300 members of the royal clan. On Kublai's orders, carried out by his commander Bayan, the rest of the former imperial family of Song were unharmed; the deposed Emperor Gong was demoted, being given the title 'Duke of Ying', but was eventually exiled to Tibet where he took up a monastic life. The former emperor would eventually be forced to commit suicide under the orders of Kublai's great-great-grandson, Gegeen Khan, out of fear that Emperor Gong would stage a coup to restore his reign. Other members of the Song imperial family continued to live in the Yuan dynasty, including Zhao Mengfu and Zhao Yong.\nCulture and society.\nThe Song dynasty was an era of administrative sophistication and complex social organization. Some of the largest cities in the world were found in China during this period (Kaifeng and Hangzhou had populations of over a million). People enjoyed various social clubs and entertainment in the cities, and there were many schools and temples to provide the people with education and religious services. The Song government supported social welfare programs including the establishment of retirement homes, public clinics, and paupers' graveyards. The Song dynasty supported a widespread postal service that was modeled on the earlier Han dynasty (202 BCE \u2013 CE 220) postal system to provide swift communication throughout the empire. The central government employed thousands of postal workers of various ranks to provide service for post offices and larger postal stations. In rural areas, farming peasants either owned their own plots of land, paid rents as tenant farmers, or were serfs on large estates.\nAlthough women were on a lower social tier than men according to Confucian ethics, they enjoyed many social and legal privileges and wielded considerable power at home and in their own small businesses. As Song society became more and more prosperous and parents on the bride's side of the family provided larger dowries for her marriage, women naturally gained many new legal rights in ownership of property. Under certain circumstances, an unmarried daughter without brothers, or a surviving mother without sons, could inherit one-half of her father's share of undivided family property. There were many notable and well-educated women, and it was a common practice for women to educate their sons during their earliest youth. The mother of the scientist, general, diplomat, and statesman Shen Kuo taught him essentials of military strategy. There were also exceptional women writers and poets, such as Li Qingzhao (1084\u20131151), who became famous even in her lifetime.\nThe Song Dynasty used the term \u201cjijian\u201d to characterize male homosexual practices, where the \u201cji\u201d in the term was used to characterize a man receiving sexual acts. Such a term was derogatory by virtue of its connection with animals deemed inferior to humans. Song Dynasty observed a few cultural pushbacks\u2014led by the Neo-Confucian movement from the dynasty\u2014against homosexual or bisexual practices as urbanization prompted growing male prostitution and other sex work economies. Significantly, the Song government passed laws prohibiting male prostitution, although many other cultural and literary works attested to the continued existence and prominence of men in sex work.\nReligion in China during this period had a great effect on people's lives, beliefs, and daily activities, and Chinese literature on spirituality was popular. The major deities of Daoism and Buddhism, ancestral spirits, and the many deities of Chinese folk religion were worshipped with sacrificial offerings. Tansen Sen asserts that more Buddhist monks from India traveled to China during the Song than in the previous Tang dynasty (618\u2013907). With many ethnic foreigners travelling to China to conduct trade or live permanently, there came many foreign religions; religious minorities in China included Middle Eastern Muslims, the Kaifeng Jews, and Persian Manichaeans.\nThe populace engaged in a vibrant social and domestic life, enjoying such public festivals as the Lantern Festival and the Qingming Festival. There were entertainment quarters in the cities providing a constant array of amusements. There were puppeteers, acrobats, theatre actors, sword swallowers, snake charmers, storytellers, singers and musicians, prostitutes, and places to relax, including tea houses, restaurants, and organized banquets. People attended social clubs in large numbers; there were tea clubs, exotic food clubs, antiquarian and art collectors' clubs, horse-loving clubs, poetry clubs, and music clubs. Like regional cooking and cuisines in the Song, the era was known for its regional varieties of performing arts styles as well. Theatrical drama was very popular amongst the elite and general populace, although Classical Chinese\u2014not the vernacular language\u2014was spoken by actors on stage. The four largest drama theatres in Kaifeng could hold audiences of several thousand each. There were also notable domestic pastimes, as people at home enjoyed activities such as the go and xiangqi board games.\nCivil service examinations and the gentry.\nDuring this period greater emphasis was laid upon the civil service system of recruiting officials; this was based upon degrees acquired through competitive examinations, in an effort to select the most capable individuals for governance. Selecting men for office through proven merit was an ancient idea in China. The civil service system became institutionalized on a small scale during the Sui and Tang dynasties, but by the Song period, it became virtually the only means for drafting officials into the government. The advent of widespread printing helped to widely circulate Confucian teachings and to educate more and more eligible candidates for the exams. This can be seen in the number of exam takers for the low-level prefectural exams rising from 30,000 annual candidates in the early 11th century to 400,000 candidates by the late 13th century. The civil service and examination system allowed for greater meritocracy, social mobility, and equality in competition for those wishing to attain an official seat in government. Using statistics gathered by the Song state, Edward A. Kracke, Sud\u014d Yoshiyuki, and Ho Ping-ti supported the hypothesis that simply having a father, grandfather, or great-grandfather who had served as an official of state did not guarantee one would obtain the same level of authority. Robert Hartwell and Robert P. Hymes criticized this model, stating that it places too much emphasis on the role of the nuclear family and considers only three paternal ascendants of exam candidates while ignoring the demographic reality of Song China, the significant proportion of males in each generation that had no surviving sons, and the role of the extended family. Many felt disenfranchised by what they saw as a bureaucratic system that favored the land-holding class able to afford the best education. One of the greatest literary critics of this was the official and famous poet Su Shi. Yet Su was a product of his times, as the identity, habits, and attitudes of the scholar-official had become less aristocratic and more bureaucratic with the transition of the periods from Tang to Song. At the beginning of the dynasty, government posts were disproportionately held by two elite social groups: a founding elite who had ties with the founding emperor and a semi-hereditary professional elite who used long-held clan status, family connections, and marriage alliances to secure appointments. By the late 11th century, the founding elite became obsolete, while political partisanship and factionalism at court undermined the marriage strategies of the professional elite, which dissolved as a distinguishable social group and was replaced by a multitude of gentry families.\nDue to Song's enormous population growth and the body of its appointed scholar-officials being accepted in limited numbers (about 20,000 active officials during the Song period), the larger scholarly gentry class would now take over grassroots affairs on the vast local level. Excluding the scholar-officials in office, this elite social class consisted of exam candidates, examination degree-holders not yet assigned to an official post, local tutors, and retired officials. These learned men, degree-holders, and local elites supervised local affairs and sponsored necessary facilities of local communities; any local magistrate appointed to his office by the government relied upon the cooperation of the few or many local gentry in the area. For example, the Song government\u2014excluding the educational-reformist government under Emperor Huizong\u2014spared little amount of state revenue to maintain prefectural and county schools; instead, the bulk of the funds for schools was drawn from private financing. This limited role of government officials was a departure from the earlier Tang dynasty (618\u2013907), when the government strictly regulated commercial markets and local affairs; now the government withdrew heavily from regulating commerce and relied upon a mass of local gentry to perform necessary duties in their communities.\nThe gentry distinguished themselves in society through their intellectual and antiquarian pursuits, while the homes of prominent landholders attracted a variety of courtiers, including artisans, artists, educational tutors, and entertainers. Despite the disdain for trade, commerce, and the merchant class exhibited by the highly cultured and elite exam-drafted scholar-officials, commercialism played a prominent role in Song culture and society. A scholar-official would be frowned upon by his peers if he pursued means of profiteering outside of his official salary; however, this did not stop many scholar-officials from managing business relations through the use of intermediary agents.\nLaw, justice, and forensic science.\nThe Song judicial system retained most of the legal code of the earlier Tang dynasty, the basis of traditional Chinese law up until the modern era. Roving sheriffs maintained law and order in the municipal jurisdictions and occasionally ventured into the countryside. Official magistrates overseeing court cases were not only expected to be well-versed in written law but also to promote morality in society. Magistrates such as the famed Bao Zheng (999\u20131062) embodied the upright, moral judge who upheld justice and never failed to live up to his principles. Song judges specified the guilty person or party in a criminal act and meted out punishments accordingly, often in the form of caning. A guilty individual or parties brought to court for a criminal or civil offense were not viewed as wholly innocent until proven otherwise, while even accusers were viewed with a high level of suspicion by the judge. Due to costly court expenses and immediate jailing of those accused of criminal offenses, people in the Song preferred to settle disputes and quarrels privately, without the court's interference.\nShen Kuo's \"Dream Pool Essays\" argued against traditional Chinese beliefs in anatomy (such as his argument for two throat valves instead of three); this perhaps spurred the interest in the performance of post-mortem autopsies in China during the 12th century. The physician and judge known as Song Ci (1186\u20131249) wrote a pioneering work of forensic science on the examination of corpses in order to determine cause of death (strangulation, poisoning, drowning, blows, etc.) and to prove whether death resulted from murder, suicide, or accidental death. Song Ci stressed the importance of proper coroner's conduct during autopsies and the accurate recording of the inquest of each autopsy by official clerks.\nMilitary and methods of warfare.\nThe Song military was chiefly organized to ensure that the army could not threaten Imperial control, often at the expense of effectiveness in war. Northern Song's Military Council operated under a Chancellor, who had no control over the imperial army. The imperial army was divided among three marshals, each independently responsible to the Emperor. Since the Emperor rarely led campaigns personally, Song forces lacked unity of command. The imperial court often believed that successful generals endangered royal authority, and relieved or even executed them (notably Li Gang, Yue Fei, and Han Shizhong).\nAlthough the scholar-officials viewed soldiers as lower members in the hierarchic social order, a person could gain status and prestige in society by becoming a high-ranking military officer with a record of victorious battles. At its height, the Song military had one million soldiers divided into platoons of 50 troops, companies made of two platoons, battalions composed of 500 soldiers. Crossbowmen were separated from the regular infantry and placed in their own units as they were prized combatants, providing effective missile fire against cavalry charges. The government was eager to sponsor new crossbow designs that could shoot at longer ranges, while crossbowmen were also valuable when employed as long-range snipers. Song cavalry employed a slew of different weapons, including halberds, swords, bows, spears, and 'fire lances' that discharged a gunpowder blast of flame and shrapnel.\nMilitary strategy and military training were treated as sciences that could be studied and perfected; soldiers were tested in their skills of using weaponry and in their athletic ability. The troops were trained to follow signal standards to advance at the waving of banners and to halt at the sound of bells and drums.\nThe Song navy was of great importance during the consolidation of the empire in the 10th century; during the war against the Southern Tang state, the Song navy employed tactics such as defending large floating pontoon bridges across the Yangtze River in order to secure movements of troops and supplies. There were large ships in the Song navy that could carry 1,000 soldiers aboard their decks, while the swift-moving paddle-wheel craft were viewed as essential fighting ships in any successful naval battle.\nIn a battle on January 23, 971, massive arrow fire from Song dynasty crossbowmen decimated the war elephant corps of the Southern Han army. This defeat not only marked the eventual submission of the Southern Han to the Song dynasty, but also the last instance where a war elephant corps was employed as a regular division within a Chinese army.\nThere was a total of 347 military treatises written during the Song period, as listed by the history text of the \"Song Shi\" (compiled in 1345). However, only a handful of these military treatises have survived, which includes the \"Wujing Zongyao\" written in 1044. It was the first known book to have listed formulas for gunpowder; it gave appropriate formulas for use in several different kinds of gunpowder bombs. It also provided detailed descriptions and illustrations of double-piston pump flamethrowers, as well as instructions for the maintenance and repair of the components and equipment used in the device.\nArts, literature, philosophy, and religion.\nThe visual arts during the Song dynasty were heightened by new developments such as advances in landscape and portrait painting. The gentry elite engaged in the arts as accepted pastimes of the cultured scholar-official, including painting, composing poetry, and writing calligraphy. The poet and statesman Su Shi and his associate Mi Fu (1051\u20131107) enjoyed antiquarian affairs, often borrowing or buying art pieces to study and copy. Poetry and literature profited from the rising popularity and development of the ci poetry form. Enormous encyclopedic volumes were compiled, such as works of historiography and dozens of treatises on technical subjects. This included the universal history text of the \"Zizhi Tongjian\", compiled into 1000 volumes of 9.4\u00a0million written Chinese characters. The genre of Chinese travel literature also became popular with the writings of the geographer Fan Chengda (1126\u20131193) and Su Shi, the latter of whom wrote the 'daytrip essay' known as \"Record of Stone Bell Mountain\" that used persuasive writing to argue for a philosophical point. Although an early form of the local geographic gazetteer existed in China since the 1st century, the matured form known as \"treatise on a place\", or \"fangzhi\", replaced the old \"map guide\", or transl.\u2009zho\u00a0\u2013 transl.\u2009tujing, during the Song dynasty.\nThe imperial courts of the emperor's palace were filled with his entourage of court painters, calligraphers, poets, and storytellers. Emperor Huizong was the eighth emperor of the Song dynasty and he was a renowned artist as well as a patron of the art and the catalogue of his collection listed over 6,000 known paintings. A prime example of a highly venerated court painter was Zhang Zeduan (1085\u20131145) who painted an enormous panoramic painting, \"Along the River During the Qingming Festival\". Emperor Gaozong of Song initiated a massive art project during his reign, known as the \"Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute\" from the life story of Cai Wenji (b. 177). This art project was a diplomatic gesture to the Jin dynasty while he negotiated for the release of his mother from Jurchen captivity in the north.\nIn philosophy, Chinese Buddhism had waned in influence but it retained its hold on the arts and on the charities of monasteries. Buddhism had a profound influence upon the budding movement of Neo-Confucianism, led by Cheng Yi (1033\u20131107) and Zhu Xi (1130\u20131200). Mahayana Buddhism influenced Fan Zhongyan and Wang Anshi through its concept of ethical universalism, while Buddhist metaphysics deeply affected the pre\u2013Neo-Confucian doctrine of Cheng Yi. The philosophical work of Cheng Yi in turn influenced Zhu Xi. Although his writings were not accepted by his contemporary peers, Zhu's commentary and emphasis upon the Confucian classics of the Four Books as an introductory corpus to Confucian learning formed the basis of the Neo-Confucian doctrine. By the year 1241, under the sponsorship of Emperor Lizong, Zhu Xi's Four Books and his commentary on them became standard requirements of study for students attempting to pass the civil service examinations. The neighbouring countries of Japan and Korea also adopted Zhu Xi's teaching, known as the Shushigaku (\u6731\u5b50\u5b78, School of Zhu Xi) of Japan, and in Korea the Jujahak (\uc8fc\uc790\ud559). Buddhism's continuing influence can be seen in painted artwork such as Lin Tinggui's \"Luohan Laundering\". However, the ideology was highly criticized and even scorned by some. The statesman and historian Ouyang Xiu (1007\u20131072) called the religion a \"curse\" that could only be remedied by uprooting it from Chinese culture and replacing it with Confucian discourse. The Chan sect experienced a literary flourishing in the Song period, which saw the publication of several major classical koan collections which remain influential in Zen philosophy and practice to the present day. A true revival of Buddhism in Chinese society would not occur until the Mongol rule of the Yuan dynasty, with Kublai Khan's sponsorship of Tibetan Buddhism and Drog\u00f6n Ch\u00f6gyal Phagpa as the leading lama. The Christian sect of Nestorianism, which had entered China in the Tang era, would also be revived in China under Mongol rule.\nCuisine and clothing.\nSumptuary laws regulated the food that one consumed and the clothes that one wore according to status and social class. Clothing was made of hemp or cotton cloths, restricted to a color standard of black and white. Trousers were the acceptable attire for peasants, soldiers, artisans, and merchants, although wealthy merchants might choose to wear more ornate clothing and male blouses that came down below the waist. Acceptable apparel for scholar-officials was rigidly defined by the social ranking system. However, as time went on this rule of rank-graded apparel for officials was not as strictly enforced. Each official was able to display his awarded status by wearing different-colored traditional silken robes that hung to the ground around his feet, specific types of headgear, and even specific styles of girdles that displayed his graded-rank of officialdom.\nWomen wore long dresses, blouses that came down to the knee, skirts, and jackets with long or short sleeves, while women from wealthy families could wear purple scarves around their shoulders. The main difference in women's apparel from that of men was that it was fastened on the left, not on the right.\nThe main food staples in the diet of the lower classes remained rice, pork, and salted fish. In 1011, Emperor Zhenzong of Song introduced Champa rice to China from Vietnam's Kingdom of Champa, which sent 30,000 bushels as a tribute to Song. Champa rice was drought-resistant and able to grow fast enough to offer two harvests a year instead of one.\nSong restaurant and tavern menus are recorded. They list entrees for feasts, banquets, festivals, and carnivals. They reveal a diverse and lavish diet for those of the upper class. They could choose from a wide variety of meats and seafood, including shrimp, geese, duck, mussel, shellfish, fallow deer, hare, partridge, pheasant, francolin, quail, fox, badger, clam, crab, and many others. Dairy products were rare in Chinese cuisine at this time. Beef was rarely consumed since the bull was a valuable draft animal, and dog meat was absent from the diet of the wealthy, although the poor could choose to eat dog meat if necessary (yet it was not part of their regular diet). People also consumed dates, raisins, jujubes, pears, plums, apricots, pear juice, lychee-fruit juice, honey and ginger drinks, spices and seasonings of Sichuan pepper, ginger, soy sauce, vegetable oil, sesame oil, salt, and vinegar.\nEconomy.\nThe Song dynasty had one of the most prosperous and advanced economies in the medieval world. Song Chinese invested their funds in joint stock companies and in multiple sailing vessels at a time when monetary gain was assured from the vigorous overseas trade and domestic trade along the Grand Canal and Yangtze River. Both private and government-controlled industries met the needs of a growing Chinese population in the Song; prominent merchant families and private businesses were allowed to occupy industries that were not already government-operated monopolies. Economic historians emphasize this toleration of market mechanisms over population growth or new farming technologies as the major cause of Song economic prosperity. Artisans and merchants formed guilds that the state had to deal with when assessing taxes, requisitioning goods, and setting standard workers' wages and prices on goods.\nThe iron industry was pursued by both private entrepreneurs who owned their own smelters as well as government-supervised smelting facilities. The Song economy was stable enough to produce over of iron products per year. Large-scale deforestation would have continued if not for the 11th-century innovation of the use of coal instead of charcoal in blast furnaces for smelting cast iron. Much of this iron was reserved for military use in crafting weapons and armouring troops, but some was used to fashion the many iron products needed to fill the demands of the growing domestic market. The iron trade within China was advanced by the construction of new canals, facilitating the flow of iron products from production centres to the large market in the capital city.\nThe annual output of minted copper currency in 1085 reached roughly six billion coins. The most notable advancement in the Song economy was the establishment of the world's first government issued paper-printed money, known as Jiaozi (see also \"Huizi\"). For the printing of paper money, the Song court established several government-run factories in the cities of Huizhou, Chengdu, Hangzhou, and Anqi. The size of the workforce employed in paper money factories was large; it was recorded in 1175 that the factory at Hangzhou employed more than a thousand workers a day.\nThe economic power of Song China can be attested by the growth of the urban population of its capital city Hangzhou. The population was 200,000 at the start of the 12th century and increased to 500,000 around 1170 and doubled to over a million a century later. This economic power also heavily influenced foreign economies abroad. In 1120 alone, the Song government collected 18,000,000 ounces (510,000\u00a0kg) of silver in taxes. The Moroccan geographer al-Idrisi wrote in 1154 of the prowess of Chinese merchant ships in the Indian Ocean and of their annual voyages that brought iron, swords, silk, velvet, porcelain, and various textiles to places such as Aden (Yemen), the Indus River, and the Euphrates. Foreigners, in turn, affected the Chinese economy. For example, many West and Central Asian Muslims went to China to trade, becoming a preeminent force in the import and export industry, while some were even appointed as officers supervising economic affairs. Sea trade with the South-west Pacific, the Hindu world, the Islamic world, and East Africa brought merchants great fortune and spurred an enormous growth in the shipbuilding industry of Song-era Fujian. However, there was risk involved in such long overseas ventures. In order to reduce the risk of losing money on maritime trade missions abroad, wrote historians Ebrey, Walthall, and Palais:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Song era] investors usually divided their investment among many ships, and each ship had many investors behind it. One observer thought eagerness to invest in overseas trade was leading to an outflow of copper cash. He wrote, \"People along the coast are on intimate terms with the merchants who engage in overseas trade, either because they are fellow-countrymen or personal acquaintances. ... [They give the merchants] money to take with them on their ships for purchase and return conveyance of foreign goods. They invest from ten to a hundred strings of cash, and regularly make profits of several hundred percent\".\nScience and technology.\nGunpowder warfare.\nAdvancements in weapons technology enhanced by gunpowder, including the evolution of the early flamethrower, explosive grenades, firearms, cannons, and land mines, enabled the Song Chinese to ward off their militant enemies until the Song's ultimate collapse in the late 13th century. The \"Wujing Zongyao\" manuscript of 1044 was the first book in history to provide formulas for gunpowder and their specified use in different types of bombs. While engaged in a war with the Mongols, in 1259 the official Li Zengbo wrote in his \"Kezhai Zagao, Xugaohou\" that the city of Qingzhou was manufacturing one to two thousand strong iron-cased bombshells a month, dispatching to Xiangyang and Yingzhou about ten to twenty thousand such bombs at a time. In turn, the invading Mongols employed northern Chinese soldiers and used these same types of gunpowder weapons against the Song. By the 14th century the firearm and cannon could also be found in Europe, India, and the Middle East, during the early age of gunpowder warfare.\nMeasuring distance and mechanical navigation.\nAs early as the Han dynasty, when the state needed to accurately measure distances traveled throughout the empire, the Chinese relied on a mechanical odometer. The Chinese odometer was a wheeled carriage, its gearwork being driven by the rotation of the carriage's wheels; specific units of distance\u2014the Chinese li\u2014were marked by the mechanical striking of a drum or bell as an auditory signal. The specifications for the 11th-century odometer were written by Chief Chamberlain Lu Daolong, who is quoted extensively in the historical text of the \"Song Shi\" (compiled by 1345). In the Song period, the odometer vehicle was also combined with another old complex mechanical device known as the south-pointing chariot. This device, originally crafted by Ma Jun in the 3rd century, incorporated a differential gear that allowed a figure mounted on the vehicle to always point in the southern direction, no matter how the vehicle's wheels turned about. The concept of the differential gear that was used in this navigational vehicle is now found in modern automobiles in order to apply an equal amount of torque to a car's wheels even when they are rotating at different speeds.\nPolymaths, inventions, and astronomy.\nPolymaths such as the scientists and statesmen Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095) and Su Song (1020\u20131101) embodied advancements in all fields of study, including botany, zoology, geology, mineralogy, metallurgy, mechanics, magnetics, meteorology, horology, astronomy, pharmaceutical medicine, archeology, mathematics, cartography, optics, art criticism, hydraulics, and many other fields.\nShen Kuo was the first to discern magnetic declination of true north while experimenting with a compass. Shen theorized that geographical climates gradually shifted over time. He created a theory of land formation involving concepts accepted in modern geomorphology. He performed optical experiments with camera obscura just decades after Ibn al-Haytham was the first to do so. He also improved the designs of astronomical instruments such as the widened astronomical sighting tube, which allowed Shen Kuo to fix the position of the pole star (which had shifted over centuries of time). Shen Kuo was also known for hydraulic clockworks, as he invented a new overflow-tank clepsydra which had more efficient higher-order interpolation instead of linear interpolation in calibrating the measure of time.\nSu Song was best known for his horology treatise written in 1092, which described and illustrated in great detail his hydraulic-powered, tall astronomical clock tower built in Kaifeng. The clock tower featured large astronomical instruments of the armillary sphere and celestial globe, both driven by an early intermittently working escapement mechanism (similarly to the western verge escapement of true mechanical clocks appeared in medieval clockworks, derived from ancient clockworks of classical times). Su's tower featured a rotating gear wheel with 133 clock jack mannequins who were timed to rotate past shuttered windows while ringing gongs and bells, banging drums, and presenting announcement plaques. In his printed book, Su published a celestial atlas of five star charts. These star charts feature a cylindrical projection similar to Mercator projection, the latter being a cartographic innovation of Gerardus Mercator in 1569.\nThe Song Chinese observed supernovae, including SN 1054, the remnants of which would form the Crab Nebula. Moreover, the \"Soochow Astronomical Chart\" on Chinese planispheres was prepared in 1193 for instructing the crown prince on astronomical findings. The planispheres were engraved in stone several decades later.\nMathematics and cartography.\nThere were many notable improvements to Chinese mathematics during the Song era. Mathematician Yang Hui's 1261 book provided the earliest Chinese illustration of Pascal's triangle, although it had earlier been described by Jia Xian in around 1100. Yang Hui also provided rules for constructing combinatorial arrangements in magic squares, provided theoretical proof for Euclid's forty-third proposition about parallelograms, and was the first to use negative coefficients of 'x' in quadratic equations. Yang's contemporary Qin Jiushao (c.\u20091202\u20131261) was the first to introduce the zero symbol into Chinese mathematics; before this blank spaces were used instead of zeroes in the system of counting rods. He is also known for working with the Chinese remainder theorem, Heron's formula, and astronomical data used in determining the winter solstice. Qin's major work was the \"Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections\" published in 1247.\nGeometry was essential to surveying and cartography. The earliest extant Chinese maps date to the 4th century BCE, yet it was not until the time of Pei Xiu (224\u2013271) that topographical elevation, a formal rectangular grid system, and use of a standard graduated scale of distances was applied to terrain maps. Following a long tradition, Shen Kuo created a raised-relief map, while his other maps featured a uniform graduated scale of 1:900,000. A squared map of 1137\u2014carved into a stone block\u2014followed a uniform grid scale of 100 li for each gridded square, and accurately mapped the outline of the coasts and river systems of China, extending all the way to India. Furthermore, the world's oldest known terrain map in printed form comes from the edited encyclopedia of Yang Jia in 1155, which displayed western China without the formal grid system that was characteristic of more professionally made Chinese maps. Although gazetteers had existed since 52 CE during the Han dynasty and gazetteers accompanied by illustrative maps (Chinese: ) since the Sui dynasty, the illustrated gazetteer became much more common during the Song dynasty, when the foremost concern was for illustrative gazetteers to serve political, administrative, and military purposes.\nMovable type printing.\nThe innovation of movable type printing was made by the artisan Bi Sheng (990\u20131051), first described by the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo in his \"Dream Pool Essays\" of 1088. The collection of Bi Sheng's original clay-fired typeface was passed on to one of Shen Kuo's nephews, and was carefully preserved. Movable type enhanced the already widespread use of woodblock methods of printing thousands of documents and volumes of written literature, consumed eagerly by an increasingly literate public. The advancement of printing deeply affected education and the scholar-official class, since more books could be made faster while mass-produced, printed books were cheaper in comparison to laborious handwritten copies. The enhancement of widespread printing and print culture in the Song period was thus a direct catalyst in the rise of social mobility and expansion of the educated class of scholar elites, the latter which expanded dramatically in size from the 11th to 13th centuries.\nThe movable type invented by Bi Sheng was ultimately trumped by the use of woodblock printing due to the limitations of Chinese characters, yet movable type printing continued to be used and was improved in later periods. The Yuan scholar-official Wang Zhen (fl.\u20091290\u20131333) implemented a faster typesetting process, improved Bi's baked-clay movable type character set with a wooden one, and experimented with tin-metal movable type. The wealthy printing patron Hua Sui (1439\u20131513) of the Ming dynasty established China's first metal movable type (using bronze) in 1490. In 1638, the \"Peking Gazette\" switched their printing process from woodblock to movable type printing. Yet it was during the Qing dynasty that massive printing projects began to employ movable type printing. This includes the printing of sixty-six copies of a 5,020 volume long encyclopedia in 1725, the \"Complete Classics Collection of Ancient China\", which necessitated the crafting of 250,000 movable type characters cast in bronze. By the 19th century the European style printing press replaced the old Chinese methods of movable type, while traditional woodblock printing in modern East Asia is used sparsely and for aesthetic reasons.\nHydraulic and nautical engineering.\nThe most important nautical innovation of the Song period seems to have been the introduction of the magnetic mariner's compass, which permitted accurate navigation on the open sea regardless of the weather. The magnetized compass needle \u2013 known in Chinese as the \"south-pointing needle\" \u2013 was first described by Shen Kuo in his 1088 \"Dream Pool Essays\" and first mentioned in active use by sailors in Zhu Yu's 1119 \"Pingzhou Table Talks\".\nThere were other considerable advancements in hydraulic engineering and nautical technology during the Song dynasty. The 10th-century invention of the pound lock for canal systems allowed different water levels to be raised and lowered for separated segments of a canal, which significantly aided the safety of canal traffic and allowed for larger barges. There was the Song-era innovation of watertight bulkhead compartments that allowed damage to hulls without sinking the ships. If ships were damaged, the Chinese of the 11th century employed drydocks to repair them while suspended out of the water. The Song used crossbeams to brace the ribs of ships in order to strengthen them in a skeletal-like structure. Stern-mounted rudders had been mounted on Chinese ships since the 1st century, as evidenced by a preserved Han tomb model of a ship. In the Song period, the Chinese devised a way to mechanically raise and lower rudders in order for ships to travel in a wider range of water depths. The Song arranged the protruding teeth of anchors in a circular pattern instead of in one direction. David Graff and Robin Higham state that this arrangement \"[made] them more reliable\" for anchoring ships.\nStructural engineering and architecture.\nArchitecture during the Song period reached new heights of sophistication. Authors such as Yu Hao and Shen Kuo wrote books outlining the field of architectural layouts, craftsmanship, and structural engineering in the 10th and 11th centuries, respectively. Shen Kuo preserved the written dialogues of Yu Hao when describing technical issues such as slanting struts built into pagoda towers for diagonal wind bracing. Shen Kuo also preserved Yu's specified dimensions and units of measurement for various building types. The architect Li Jie (1065\u20131110), who published the \"Yingzao Fashi\" ('Treatise on Architectural Methods') in 1103, greatly expanded upon the works of Yu Hao and compiled the standard building codes used by the central government agencies and by craftsmen throughout the empire. He addressed the standard methods of construction, design, and applications of moats and fortifications, stonework, greater woodwork, lesser woodwork, wood-carving, turning and drilling, sawing, bamboo work, tiling, wall building, painting and decoration, brickwork, glazed tile making, and provided proportions for mortar formulas in masonry. In his book, Li provided detailed and vivid illustrations of architectural components and cross-sections of buildings. These illustrations displayed various applications of corbel brackets, cantilever arms, mortise and tenon work of tie beams and cross beams, and diagrams showing the various building types of halls in graded sizes. He also outlined the standard units of measurement and standard dimensional measurements of all building components described and illustrated in his book.\nGrandiose building projects were supported by the government, including the erection of towering Buddhist Chinese pagodas and the construction of enormous bridges (wood or stone, trestle or segmental arch bridge). Many of the pagoda towers built during the Song period were erected at heights that exceeded ten stories. Some of the most famous are the Iron Pagoda built in 1049 during the Northern Song and the Liuhe Pagoda built in 1165 during the Southern Song, though there were others. The tallest is the Liaodi Pagoda built in 1055 in Hebei, towering in total height. Some of the bridges reached lengths of , with many being wide enough to allow two lanes of cart traffic simultaneously over a waterway or ravine. The government also oversaw construction of their own administrative offices, palace apartments, city fortifications, ancestral temples, and Buddhist temples.\nThe professions of the architect, craftsman, carpenter, and structural engineer were not seen as professionally equal to that of a Confucian scholar-official. Architectural knowledge had been passed down orally for thousands of years in China, in many cases from a father craftsman to his son. Structural engineering and architecture schools were known to have existed during the Song period; one prestigious engineering school was headed by the renowned bridge-builder Cai Xiang (1012\u20131067) in medieval Fujian province.\nBesides existing buildings and technical literature of building manuals, Song dynasty artwork portraying cityscapes and other buildings aid modern-day scholars in their attempts to reconstruct and realize the nuances of Song architecture. Song dynasty artists such as Li Cheng, Fan Kuan, Guo Xi, Zhang Zeduan, Emperor Huizong of Song, and Ma Lin painted close-up depictions of buildings as well as large expanses of cityscapes featuring arched bridges, halls and pavilions, pagoda towers, and distinct Chinese city walls. The scientist and statesman Shen Kuo was known for his criticism relating to architecture, saying that it was more important for an artist to capture a holistic view of a landscape than it was to focus on the angles and corners of buildings. For example, Shen criticized the work of the painter Li Cheng for failing to observe the principle of \"seeing the small from the viewpoint of the large\" in portraying buildings.\nThere were also pyramidal tomb structures in the Song era, such as the Song imperial tombs located in Gongxian, Henan. About from Gongxian is another Song dynasty tomb at Baisha, which features \"elaborate facsimiles in brick of Chinese timber frame construction, from door lintels to pillars and pedestals to bracket sets, that adorn interior walls.\" The two large chambers of the Baisha tomb also feature conical-shaped roofs. Flanking the avenues leading to these tombs of officials, tomb guardians, animals, and legendary creatures.\nArchaeology.\nIn addition to the Song gentry's antiquarian pursuits of art collecting, scholar-officials during the Song became highly interested in retrieving ancient relics from archaeological sites, in order to revive the use of ancient vessels in ceremonies of state ritual. Scholar-officials of the Song period claimed to have discovered ancient bronze vessels that were created as far back as the Shang dynasty (1600\u20131046 BCE), which bore the oracle bone script of the Shang era. Some attempted to recreate these bronze vessels by using imagination alone, not by observing tangible evidence of relics; this practice was criticized by Shen Kuo in his work of 1088. Yet Shen Kuo had much more to criticize than this practice alone. Shen objected to the idea of his peers that ancient relics were products created by famous \"sages\" in lore or the ancient aristocratic class; Shen rightfully attributed the discovered handicrafts and vessels from ancient times as the work of artisans and commoners from previous eras. He also disapproved of his peers' pursuit of archaeology simply to enhance state ritual, since Shen not only took an interdisciplinary approach with the study of archaeology, but he also emphasized the study of functionality and investigating what was the ancient relics' original processes of manufacture. Shen used ancient texts and existing models of armillary spheres to create one based on ancient standards; Shen described ancient weaponry such as the use of a scaled sighting device on crossbows; while experimenting with ancient musical measures, Shen suggested hanging an ancient bell by using a hollow handle.\nDespite the gentry's overriding interest in archaeology simply for reviving ancient state rituals, some of Shen's peers took a similar approach to the study of archaeology. His contemporary Ouyang Xiu (1007\u20131072) compiled an analytical catalogue of ancient rubbings on stone and bronze which pioneered ideas in early epigraphy and archaeology. During the 11th century, Song scholars discovered the ancient shrine of Wu Liang (78\u2013151 CE), a scholar of the Han dynasty; they produced rubbings of the carvings and bas-reliefs decorating the walls of his tomb so that they could be analyzed elsewhere. On the unreliability of historical works written after the fact, the epigrapher and poet Zhao Mingcheng (1081\u20131129) stated \"... the inscriptions on stone and bronze are made at the time the events took place and can be trusted without reservation, and thus discrepancies may be discovered.\" Historian R.C. Rudolph states that Zhao's emphasis on consulting contemporary sources for accurate dating is parallel with the concern of the German historian Leopold von Ranke (1795\u20131886), and was in fact emphasized by many Song scholars. The Song scholar Hong Mai (1123\u20131202) heavily criticized what he called the court's \"ridiculous\" archaeological catalogue \"Bogutu\" compiled during the Huizong reign periods of Zheng He and Xuan He (1111\u20131125). Hong Mai obtained old vessels from the Han dynasty and compared them with the descriptions offered in the catalogue, which he found so inaccurate he stated he had to \"hold my sides with laughter.\" Hong Mai pointed out that the erroneous material was the fault of Chancellor Cai Jing, who prohibited scholars from reading and consulting written histories.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56979", "revid": "50869804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56979", "title": "Battle of Adrianople (1205)", "text": "Bulgarian victory over the Latin Empire\nThe Battle of Adrianople occurred around Adrianople on April 14, 1205, between Bulgarians, Cumans and Vlachs under the command of Tsar Kaloyan of Bulgaria, and Crusaders under Baldwin I, who only months before had been crowned Emperor of Constantinople, allied with Venetians under Doge Enrico Dandolo. The battle was won by the Bulgarian Empire after a successful ambush.\nBackground.\nIn 1204, financial difficulties led the armies of the Fourth Crusade to deviate from their intended goal of Jerusalem. Instead, they captured and sacked Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire. The Byzantine government was driven out of the city, and a Latin Empire established in its place. At first this new power controlled only the environs of Constantinople and the province of Thrace, but eventually it expanded into Bithynia, Thessaly and central and southern Greece.\nAround the same time, Tsar Kaloyan, the Tsar of Bulgaria, successfully completed negotiations with Pope Innocent III. The Bulgarian ruler was recognized as \"rex\", i.e. emperor (tsar), while the Bulgarian archbishop regained the title \"primas\", equal to that of patriarch. This might have made for good relations between Tsar Kaloyan and the new Western European conquerors, but immediately after settling in Constantinopole the Latins stated their pretensions on Bulgarian lands. Knights began crossing the border to pillage Bulgarian towns and villages. These belligerent actions convinced the Bulgarian Emperor to abandon the prospect of a Latin alliance, turning instead to the Greeks in the unconquered regions of Thrace. In the winter of 1204-1205 messengers of the local Greek aristocracy visited Kaloyan and an alliance was formed.\nIn the spring of 1205, Didymoteicho and Adrianople revolted, followed soon after by the entirety of Thrace. Emperor Baldwin I marched his army north and reached Adrianople by the end of March.\nSiege.\nThe Latins did not attack the castle head on; rather, they began a prolonged siege, in order to tire the defenders. By surrounding the city with siege machinery and digging mines under the walls, they greatly weakened the defences and patiently waited for an opening. The main forces of Latin knights created well-structured guarded camps around the city to spot and ward off any aid that may have come. In front of each gate of the castle walls a unit was placed, which notably included a Venetian contingent led by Doge Enrico Dandolo.\nHonouring his obligations to the rebellious Greeks, Tsar Kaloyan arrived with his army and encamped approximately 25 kilometers northeast of the city on April 10, 1205. According to Geoffrey of Villehardouin, a French historian and knight who had accompanied the Crusaders to the Balkans, the army consisted of up to 54,000 men.\nLocation of the battle.\nNumerous researchers pinpoint the location of the battle north of Adrianople and near the keep of - K. Jire\u010de, V. Guzelev, St. Boyadjiev - yet there is no conclusive evidence.\nAccording to Niketas Choniates, a Byzantine historian, in the day of the battle Tsar Kaloyan chose the place of the ambush in the following manner: \"After which Yoan and his army hid in the ravines, entered the precipice and through those steep places crept to the highlands, making sure their opponents did not notice they were there\". In other scriptures, it reads \"...and hid in the narrows in the shadowy forests\".\nTricked by the Cuman cavalry, the knights chased them for at least two leagues before reaching the place of the ambush, which is between 7 and 9 kilometers, depending on which French league Geoffrey of Villehardouin was using. According to Alberic of Trois-Fontaines, the location of the battle was \"plentiful with water marshes\".\nNowadays, the most common site that is pointed as the place of the battle are the meanders of the T\u00f9ndzha river.\nForces.\nArmy of Tsar/King Kaloyan.\nAccording to the French historian Geoffrey of Villehardouin, the Bulgarian army numbered around 54,000 strong. Within that army was the light cavalry of the Cumans, which, at that time, were allies or mercenaries of Kaloyan, as the Tsar himself was married to the Cuman princess Anna. The French historian points out that there were about 14,000 of them and that \"... they were not christened\". Nonetheless, their cavalry played a key role in the battle. \nThe Vlachs \u2014ancestors of modern Romanians - dispersed across much of the Balkan Peninsula \u2014formed a significant component of the Bulgarian army. Their close alliance with the Bulgarians had developed during the joint uprising of 1185\u20131186, which led to the restoration of the Bulgarian Empire.\nArmy of the Latin Empire and Venice\nThe Latin army at Adrianople had about 300 knights. They were accompanied by a number of cavalry and infantry (likely no more than 1000-1500 soldiers) and the Venetian forces, which, according to some sources, also numbered 1000-1500. The total number of troops was no greater than four thousand, yet it is not clear how many soldiers took part in the battle and how many stayed under the walls to continue the siege.\nGeoffrey of Villehardouin points out that the majority of the knights, each with his own unit, as well as all the Venetians chased after the Cumans and Vlachs and directly into the Bulgarian ambush. Many names of knights who fought in the battle are mentioned: Emperor Baldwin I, Louis I, Count of Blois, Bishop Peter of Bethlehem, Stephen of Perche, Reno of Mentimirel, Robert of Ronsoa, Ustas of Umont, Count Jerar of Lombardy, Jan of Mazerol and others. According to the same historian, the entirety of the Venetian forces takes part in the battle, being led by Doge Enrico Dandolo himself.\nForces of Adrianople and Thrace.\nAlthough they do not take part in the battle itself, all of the Byzantine rebels from East Thrace had gathered at Adrianopole and stood bravely to defend its wall from the conquerors. Their numbers are unknown.\nBattle.\nThe battle was fought for two days, one week after the Orthodox Easter celebration.\nFirst day, 13 April 1205.\nOn 13 April Kaloyan sent the Cuman cavalry to scout and to make a \"test attack\" against the knights. The Cumans landed a surprise attack on Emperor Baldwin I, then pretended to flee from the knights' skillful counter-attack. A long chase ensued, luring the knights out of their camps. At its conclusion the Cumans turned sharply around and began firing arrows at the stampeding enemy, killing many people and war horses. Realizing their own foolishness, the knights decided to stand their ground and wait for the attack of the Bulgarians. Baldwin made the decision to wait for all of the remaining knights and soldiers to gather and prepare for a proper battle, which would take place after the upcoming Easter celebrations.\nDuring the preparation for the ambush, the Bulgarians dug \"trous de loup\" or \"wolf pits\", in order to create obstacles for the movement and battle formation of the heavy cavalry knights. Kaloyan placed the infantry first in the ambush with the heavy cavalry in reserve, ready to intervene if the foot soldiers began to give in to the Latins. The light Cuman cavalry was given the order to lead the knights to the trap.\nThe same night Baldwin called a meeting with all of the present barons and leaders of the Fourth Crusade. They decided that, in the case of a new attack by the Cumans, the army must not follow, instead making a battle line formation in front of the camp.\nSecond day, 14 April 1205.\nOn Thursday, 14 April 1205, during the celebration of Catholic Easter, the Cuman light cavalry made a sweeping attack on the camp of the knights with arrows, loud yells and ringing of steel. Outraged by this sacrilege, the knights armed, mounted, and got into battle formation. Count Louis I of Blois disregarded the plan made the night before and led his unit after the Cumans, and the other soldiers, already blinded by anger, followed his lead. The Cuman cavalry outpaced the Latins, and was obliged several times to stop and wait for the enemy to catch up, after which they had a mock fight and fled again. This lasted until they reached the ambush, located in a ravine among hills.\nOn the far side of the wolf pits the Cumans turned around, apparently offering a serious fight. The knights charged in with their characteristic formation, but were checked when many horses and riders fell into the pits. In the ensuing turmoil the Bulgarian infantry emerged from ambush and completely surrounded the knights. Baldwin soon arrived with the rest of the 200 knights, but was unable to break through the encirclement and free Count Louis. Seeing this, Kaloyan attacked and surrounded Baldwin with his heavy cavalry, isolating the Latins in two small groups. Bulgarian soldiers used ropes and hooked polearms to unhorse the knights, who were then finished off with swords, hammers and axes. Despite their broken formation and inability to coordinate, the surrounded Latins put up a hard fight which lasted until late in the evening. At its conclusion the main part of the Latin army had been annihilated and Baldwin I captured. He was taken to Veliko Tarnovo and imprisoned at the top of a tower in the Tsarevets fortress.\nAftermath.\nThe capture of the supposedly impregnable city of Constantinople had added to the knights' aura of invincibility. News of Adrianople broke this illusion, and within a year the Latin Empire had declined.\nEnd of Emperor Baldwin I.\nAfter his capture by the Bulgarians, the fate of Emperor Baldwin I was unknown to his subjects; his brother Henry of Flanders assumed regency in his absence. Whilst it is known that Baldwin died in captivity, the precise circumstances are unknown. Apparently treated at first as a valuable prisoner, he was later left to die in one of the towers of Tsarevets. There are many legends regarding his demise, the most famous being that he was condemned to death after trying to seduce Kaloyan's wife. The historian George Acropolites reports that the Tsar had Baldwin's skull made into a drinking cup, as had happened to Nikephoros I almost four hundred years before, but no evidence has been found to confirm this. Kaloyan informed both Pope Innocent III and Baldwin's court of the Emperor's death in prison. A tower of the Tsarevets fortress is still called Baldwin's Tower.\nKaloyan the Roman-slayer.\nTwo years after the battle of Adrianople, Kaloyan set out to burn other Latin cities and cities of Byzantine rebels, who had begun to conspire against him. Even though it was a bloody deed, the Byzantian historian George Akropolites gives the following explanation as to why the tsar gave the orders: \"He was exacting revenge, as they say, for the evil, which Basil II did against the Bulgarians; and, as he said, as Basil dubbed himself the Bulgarian-slayer, he named himself the Roman-slayer...\"\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56980", "revid": "50330604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56980", "title": "Liu Song dynasty", "text": "Chinese ruling dynasty from 420 to 479\nSong, known as Liu Song (), Former Song (\u524d\u5b8b) or Song of (the) Southern dynasties (\u5357\u671d\u5b8b) in historiography, was an imperial dynasty of China and the first of the four Southern dynasties during the Northern and Southern dynasties period. It succeeded the Eastern Jin dynasty and preceded the Southern Qi dynasty.\nThe dynasty was founded by Liu Yu (Emperor Wu; 363\u2013422 CE), whose surname together with \"Song\" forms the common name for the dynasty, the \"Liu Song\". This appellation is used to distinguish it from a later dynasty of the same name, the Song dynasty (960\u20131279 CE, ruled by the House of Zhao). Although the Liu Song has also at times been referred to as the \"Southern Song\", the name is now mainly used to refer to the Song dynasty after 1127 CE.\nThe Liu Song was a time when there was much internal turmoil. A number of emperors were incompetent and/or tyrannical, which at least partially led to many military revolts. These rulers include Liu Shao, Emperor Xiaowu, Liu Ziye, Emperor Ming, and Liu Yu. Emperor Ming was especially vicious, murdering many of his brothers, nephews, and other male relatives \u2014 many of them children. Such internal instability eventually led to the dynasty's destruction. However, its founder Emperor Wu was considered one of the greatest generals during the Northern and Southern dynasties period, and the reign of its third emperor, Emperor Wen, is known for its political stability and capable administration, not only of its emperor but its strong and honest officials. This is known as the Reign of Yuanjia (425\u2013453) and one of the relative golden ages for the Southern Dynasties.\nHistory.\nRise of Liu Yu.\nLiu Yu was born in poverty. He joined the army at a young age, quickly distinguished himself in the army. In 399, he joined a campaign against a Five Pecks of Rice rebellion led by Sun Tai (\u5b6b\u6cf0) and Sun En (\u5b6b\u6069). In 404, Liu Yu was instrumental in fighting an usurpation by the general Huan Xuan. After Huan Xuan's fall, Liu Yu was quickly promoted to the command of an army, the Beifu corps. He then led the Jin army during the conquests of Southern Yan and Later Qin.\nCampaigns of Liu Yu.\nRegarded as one of the best generals of the Northern and Southern dynasties, Liu Yu started off by reclaiming much of the territory the Chinese had lost during the Sixteen Kingdoms era. He started off his career by campaigning against Southern Yan, which bordered Jin to the north and had adopted a policy of aggression and kidnapping citizens from the Jin. By spring of 410, he had captured the southern Yan capital at Guanggu, ending Southern Yan.\nAfterwards, he campaigned against western Shu in modern Sichuan. Using a brilliant military manoeuver mentioned in the Art of War, Liu Yu instructed his generals to attack the capital of Shu by the Min River rather than the short route by the Fu river. Surprising the Shu forces, he quickly captured Chengdu and re-annexed that area back into Jin.\nFollowing the death of the Later Qin Emperor Yao Xin, Liu Yu attacked the state of Later Qin, which controlled the valuable lands of Guanzhong, lands which had once housed the capital of the Qin, Han and Jin dynasties before the barbarian uprisings. After defeating the Later Qin army in several battles, as well as an army of Northern Wei troops which had crossed to assist the Later Qin, Liu Yu recaptured the vital cities of Chang'an and Luoyang, the former capitals of the Jin Empire. It is recorded that he engaged the Wei army by the use of spears launched by crossbows, panicking the Wei cavalry and allowing him to score a decisive victory.\nAfter this success, it seemed that Jin would exterminate the remaining barbarian states in the north and reunify China. However, fortunes began to change for the Jin forces. Liu Mengzhi died and in order to secure his power, Liu Yu left for Jiankang (present-day Nanjing), abandoning the management of the North to his general Wang Zhen'e. After his departure, the state of Xia attacked Guanzhong and reoccupied it, and the loss of these lands prescribed Jin's frontier at the Yellow River. However, Jin retained its former eastern capital, Luoyang, as well as most of the Chinese heartland.\nIn 419, following his return to Jiankang, Liu Yu had Emperor An of Jin strangled and replaced by his brother Sima Dewen, posthumously known as Emperor Gong. Finally, in 420, Sima Dewen abdicated in favour of Liu Yu, who declared himself the ruler of the new Song dynasty. The name of the dynasty was taken from Liu's fief, which occupied roughly the same territory as the Spring &amp; Autumn era State of Song. The Book of Song does not mention whether the Liu family had any blood relationship to the ancient state's ruling House of Zi, or by extension to the Shang dynasty. It is in any case noteworthy that Liu did not frame his new regime as a restoration of the Han dynasty, despite being demonstrably related to the Han imperial family. Liu died in 422 CE, and was succeeded by the incompetent Shaodi, who was quickly removed. His eventual successor would be his third son, Wendi.\nReign of Emperor Wen.\nUnder Emperor Wen, the Liu Song economy prospered during the rule of Yuanjia (), a period noted for its prosperity in the 400 years of conflict between the Han and Tang dynasties. However, the emperor's martial abilities were not equal to his father, and his inability to crush the remaining barbarian states allowed Northern Wei to complete the unification of the North, to the detriment of Liu Song. Afterwards, Northern Wei would remain a grave and permanent threat to the Liu Song.\nWar with Northern Wei.\nEmperor Wen continued the campaigns of his father; nevertheless, he was unsuccessful. In 422 CE, the first year of his reign, he lost three commanderies to Wei. Under the able general Dao Yanzhi, however, Liu Song recovered the four cities of Luoyang, Hulao, Huatai and Qiao'ao south of the Yellow River. However, the emperor's unwillingness to advance past this line caused the destruction of the empire's ally, Xia, by the Wei. The emperor was to repeat this mistake as several barbarian states who had offered to ally with Liu Song against Wei were declined, eventually leading to Wei's unification of the North in 439 CE, to the detriment of the Chinese.\nTowards the later part of his reign, Emperor Wen was less than able. He wrongfully executed the general Tan Daoji, who had hitherto commanded the Song armies, and took charge himself. The empire's decline was shown in 450 CE, where the emperor attempted to destroy the Northern Wei himself, and launched a massive invasion. Although initially successful, the campaign turned into a disaster. The Wei lured the Liu Song to cross the Yellow River, and then flanked them, destroying the Eastern army. As the Liu Song armies retreated, the provinces south of the Yellow River were devastated by the Wei army. Only Huatai, a fortified city, held out against the Wei. However, the economic damage was immense. The barbarian troops laid waste to the provinces they had temporarily occupied, as described by Sima Guang: \nThe Wei forces laid South Yan, Xu, North Yan, Yu, Qing, and Ji Provinces to waste. The Song deaths and injuries were innumerable. When Wei forces encountered Song young men, the forces quickly beheaded them or cut them in half. The infants were pierced through with spears, and the spears were then shaken so that the infants would scream as they were spun, for entertainment. The commanderies and counties that Wei forces went through were burned and slaughtered, and not even grass was left. When sparrows returned in the spring, they could not find houses to build nest on, so they had to do so in forests. Wei soldiers and horses also suffered casualties of more than half, and the Xianbei people were all complaining.\nSima Guang also pointed out the cause of Liu Song's disaster:\n Every time Emperor Wen sent generals out on battles, he required them to follow the complete battle plans that he had drafted, and even the dates for battles needed approval from the emperor. Therefore, the generals all hesitated and could not make independent decisions. Further, the non-regular troops that he conscripted were not trained, and they rushed to advance when they were victorious and scattered when they were defeated. These were the two reasons why he failed, and from this point on, the state was in recession, and the Reign of Yuanjia was in decline.\nAnother historian, Shen Yue, pointed out Emperor Wen was said to model his command on the great general Emperor Guangwu of Han, but he lacked the latter's command abilities.\nEmperor Wen made another attempt to destroy Northern Wei in 452, but failed again. On returning to the capital, he was assassinated by the heir apparent, Liu Shao.\nReign of Emperor Xiaowu and Qianfei.\nLiu Shao's assassination of his father in 453 CE raised indignation across the empire, as it disobeyed one of Confucianism's fundamental principles, that of filial piety. Quickly, his brother Liu Jun rose against him, defeated him, and beheaded him. Once Liu Shao was killed. Liu Jun ascended to the throne and became Emperor Xiaowu. However, he was regarded as immoral and committed incest with his cousins and sisters, and reputed to have even done so with his mother. Nevertheless, his reign was a relatively peaceful one.\nFollowing his death in 464 CE, Liu Jun passed his throne to his son, Liu Ziye, who was generally regarded as a tyrant. He disrespected his father and was suspicious of his uncles, putting several of them to death. He continued the incestuous streak of his father, adopting several of his aunts and cousins as concubines. He was reputed to have ordered all of the princesses to come to his palace and have sexual intercourse with him. When one of his aunts refused, he executed her three sons. He also put to death a lady-in-waiting who bore a resemblance to a woman who cursed him in a dream. Eventually, one of his uncles could not bear it, rose up, and assassinated him.\nLiu Zixun's rebellion.\nThe man who assassinated Qianfei quickly became emperor himself and declared himself emperor Ming. He ordered Liu Ziye's brother Liu Zishang and sister Liu Chuyu, who were reputed to have participated in the late emperor's sexual immorality and tyrannical governance, to commit suicide. However, his claim to the throne was not accepted by Liu Zixun, one of his nephews, who then rose against him.\nThe civil war at first was a great success for Liu Zixun, who quickly overran nearly the entire empire. However, he moved too slowly. Emperor Ming quickly sent an army westward, captured Kuaiji, a vital food supply. Another of his generals captured Qianxi and cut off Liu Zixun's supplies. Starving, his troops collapsed and Liu Zixun was killed, aged just 10.\nHowever, Emperor Ming grew arrogant and refused to grant a pardon to those who had supported Liu Ziye. This action was extremely detrimental to Liu Song and its successors, as the governors of the northern commandries, fearing their lives, surrendered to Wei rather than face execution at Jiankang. This resulted in the loss of the Chinese heartland and the most fertile and cultivated lands at that time. This loss would eventually lead to the destruction of the southern regime, and resulted in North China languishing under a barbarian yoke for another 150 years. Although Emperor Ming attempted to recover them, his attempts were defeated.\nEmperor Ming's later reign was extremely brutal. Suspicious of his nephews, he had them all executed. Afraid of usurpation from rival members of the royal family, he executed thousands of members of the royal family, which was greatly weakened. Upon his death, his son had to be assisted by the general Xiao Daocheng, as nearly all of Emperor Ming's brothers and nephews had been killed.\nFall of Liu Song.\nThe successor to the emperor Ming, emperor Houfei, was resentful of the control Xiao Daocheng had over him and announced openly several times he would kill him. Fearful of his demise, Xiao had him assassinated and placed Emperor Shun on his throne. In 479, Xiao took the throne himself and declared himself Emperor of Qi, ending Liu Song. The ex-emperor Shun and his clan were soon put to the sword.\nLiu Hui (\u5218\u8f89) was a descendant of Liu Song royalty who fled north to the Xianbei Northern Wei in exile and married the Xianbei Princess Lanling (\u862d\u9675\u516c\u4e3b), daughter of the Xianbei Emperor Xiaowen of Northern Wei. More than half of Tuoba Xianbei princesses of the Northern Wei were married to Han Chinese men, and half of those men are members of prominent clans or royal members of the southern courts who defected to the north.\nLiterature and culture.\nDespite, and certainly to some extent because of, the chaotic warfare between the Northern and Southern dynasties, the Liu Song produced much poetry (\"shi\" \u8a69) notably the rhapsody, \"fu\" \u8ce6. The imperial house sponsored many literary works, and many wrote themselves. The court of Emperor Wen was especially active in literary circles, with Liu supporting the compilation of a large collection of short prose anecdotes, \"A New Account of the Tales of the World\" (\"Shishuo Xinyu\"). The \"Three Giants of Yuanjia,\" Bao Zhao (\u9b91\u7167) (d. 466), Xie Lingyun (\u8b1d\u970a\u904b) (385\u2013433 CE), and Yan Yanzhi (\u984f\u5ef6\u4e4b) (384\u2013456 CE) are among the best known poets of the Song, each of them being credited as the originators of the three major literary trends to follow.\nScientists and astronomers were also active during periods of relative peace. Buddhism also began to be better understood and more widely practised at this time, and some officials such as Xie Lingyun, were Buddhists.\nLiu Song sculptors may have created a number of spirit way ensembles, generally characteristic of the Six Dynasties era, for the tombs of the dynasty's emperors and other dignitaries. However, according to a survey of the extant Six Dynasties' sculpture in the Nanjing and Danyang areas, only one of the extant Six Dynasties' tomb sculptural groups has been securely identified as belonging to the Liu Song: the Chuning Tomb of the first emperor of the dynasty. Two \"qilin\" statues of this tomb survive in the appropriately named Qilin Town in Nanjing's suburban Jiangning District.\nIn 440 CE, the dynasty changed its official religion to Taoism, replacing Buddhism.\nScience.\nZu Chongzhi, a noted astronomer, lived during the Liu Song period. He was noted for calculating pi to seven decimal places and as the author of a variety of other astronomical theories.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56982", "revid": "39769597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56982", "title": "Anita O'Day", "text": "American jazz singer (1919\u20132006)\nAnita Belle Colton (October 18, 1919 \u2013 November 23, 2006), known professionally as Anita O'Day, was an American jazz singer and self-proclaimed \u201csong stylist\u201d widely admired for her sense of rhythm and dynamics, and her early big band appearances that shattered the traditional image of the \"girl singer\". Refusing to pander to any female stereotype, O'Day presented herself as a \"hip\" jazz musician, wearing a band jacket and skirt as opposed to an evening gown. She changed her surname from Colton to O'Day, pig Latin for \"dough\", slang for money.\nEarly career.\nAnita Belle Colton (who later took the surname \"O'Day\") was born to Irish parents, James and Gladys M. (n\u00e9e Gill) Colton in Kansas City, Missouri, and raised in Chicago, Illinois, during the Great Depression. Colton took the first chance to leave her unhappy home when, at age 14, she became a contestant in the popular Walk-a-thons as a dancer. She toured with the Walk-a-thons circuits for two years, occasionally being called upon to sing. In 1934, she began touring the Midwest as a marathon dance contestant.\nIn 1936, she left the endurance contests, determined to become a professional singer. She started out as a chorus girl in such Uptown venues as the Celebrity Club and the Vanity Fair, and then found work as a singer and waitress at the Ball of Fire, the Vialago, and the Planet Mars. At the Vialago, O'Day met the drummer Don Carter, who introduced her to music theory; they wed in 1937. Her first big break came in 1938 when \"DownBeat\" editor Carl Cons hired her to work at his new club at 222 North State Street, the Off-Beat, which became a popular hangout for musicians. Also performing at the Off-Beat was the Max Miller Quartet, which backed O'Day for the first ten days of her stay there. While performing at the Off Beat, she met Gene Krupa, who promised to call her if Irene Daye, then his vocalist, ever left his band. In 1939, O'Day was hired as vocalist for Miller's Quartet, which had a stay at the Three Deuces club in Chicago.\nWork with Krupa, Herman, and Kenton.\nThe call from Krupa came in early 1941. Of the 34 sides she recorded with Krupa, it was \"Let Me Off Uptown\", a novelty duet with Roy Eldridge, that became her first big hit. The same year, \"DownBeat\" named O'Day \"New Star of the Year\". In 1942, she appeared with the Krupa band in two \"soundies\" (short musical films originally made for jukeboxes), singing \"Thanks for the Boogie Ride\" and \"Let Me Off Uptown\". The same year, \"DownBeat\" magazine readers voted her into the top five big band singers. O'Day came in fourth, with Helen O'Connell first, Helen Forrest second, Billie Holiday third, and Dinah Shore fifth. O'Day married golf professional and jazz fan, Carl Hoff, in 1942.\nWhen Krupa's band broke up, after he was arrested in 1943 for marijuana possession, O'Day joined Woody Herman for a month-long gig at the Hollywood Palladium, followed by two weeks at the Orpheum. Unwilling to tour with another big band, she left Herman after the Orpheum engagement, and finished out the year as a solo artist. Despite her initial misgivings about the compatibility of their musical styles, she joined Stan Kenton's band in April 1944. During her 11 months with Kenton, O'Day recorded 21 sides, both transcription and commercial, and appeared in a Universal Pictures short \"Artistry in Rhythm\" (1944). \"And Her Tears Flowed Like Wine\" (1944) became a huge seller and put Kenton's band on the map. She also appeared in one soundie with Kenton, performing \"I'm Going Mad for a Pad\" and \"Tabby the Cat\". O'Day later said \"My time with Stanley helped nurture and cultivate my innate sense of chord structure.\" In 1945, she rejoined Krupa's band and stayed almost a year. The reunion yielded 10 sides. After leaving Krupa late in 1946, O'Day again became a solo artist.\nPost-war work and drug arrests.\nDuring the late 1940s, O'Day was trying to achieve popular success without sacrificing her identity as a jazz singer. During this period she recorded two dozen sides, mostly for small labels. Among the more notable recordings from this time are \"Hi Ho Trailus Boot Whip\", \"Key Largo\", \"How High the Moon\", \"I Told Ya I Love Ya, Now Get Out\", and \"Malaguena\". While living with husband Carl Hoff in Los Angeles in March 1947, two undercover policemen came to their home, during a party at which Dizzy Gillespie was playing from the branches of a tree in their front yard. They found a small bag of marijuana, for which Anita and Carl were arrested. On August 11, Judge Harold B. Landreth found them guilty, and handed down 90-day sentences. After her jail stint, she performed with Woody Herman's Herd and the Stan Kenton Artistry In Rhythm Orchestra. Her career was back on the upswing in September 1948 when she sang with Count Basie at the Royal Roost in New York City, resulting in five airchecks. What secured O'Day's place in the jazz pantheon, however, were the 17 albums she recorded for Norman Granz's Norgran and Verve labels between 1952 and 1962.\nHer first album, \"Anita O'Day Sings Jazz\" (reissued as \"The Lady Is a Tramp\"), was recorded in 1952 for the newly established Norgran Records (it was also the label's first LP). The album was a critical success and boosted her popularity. In February 1953, she was in court again for another marijuana charge, this time for smoking a joint while riding in a car. The case was dismissed by a jury for lack of evidence, but while awaiting her trial, O'Day was introduced to sniffing heroin by Harry the Hipster. She had switched from marijuana to alcohol after her second arrest, and her first thought on feeling the effects of heroin was, \"Oh good, now I don't have to drink.\" Within a month, she allegedly was framed on a heroin charge and was facing six years in prison. Soon after her release from jail on February 25, 1954, she began work on her second album, \"Songs by Anita O'Day\" (reissued as \"An Evening with Anita O'Day\"). She recorded steadily throughout the 1950s, accompanied by small combos and big bands. In person, O'Day generally was backed by a trio that included John Poole, the drummer with whom she would work for the next 40 years.\nAs a live performer, O'Day began performing in festivals and concerts with musicians such as Louis Armstrong, Oscar Peterson, Dinah Washington, George Shearing, Cal Tjader and Thelonious Monk. She appeared in the documentary \"Jazz on a Summer's Day\", filmed at the 1958 Newport Jazz Festival, which increased her popularity. She admitted later that she was probably high on heroin during the concert. \nThe following year, O'Day made a cameo appearance in \"The Gene Krupa Story\", singing \"Memories of You\". Late in 1959, she toured Europe with Benny Goodman to great personal acclaim. O'Day wrote in her 1981 autobiography that when Goodman's attempts to upstage her failed to diminish the audience's enthusiasm, he cut all but two of her numbers from the show.\nO'Day went back to touring as a solo artist and appeared on such TV specials as the \"Timex All-Star Jazz Show\" and \"The Swingin' Years\" hosted by Ronald Reagan. She recorded infrequently after the expiration of her Verve contract in 1962, and her career seemed over when she nearly died of a heroin overdose in 1968. During this time, her working trio included Chicagoan George Finley on drums, father of performance artist Karen Finley. After kicking the habit, she made a comeback at the 1970 Berlin Jazz Festival. She also appeared in the films \"Zig Zag\" a.k.a. \"False Witness\" with George Kennedy (1970) and \"The Outfit\" (1974) with Robert Duvall. She resumed making live and studio albums under the new management of Alan Eichler, many recorded in Japan, and several were released on Emily Records, owned by Anita O'Day and John Poole.\nMemoir and later life.\nIn November 1980, she was a headliner along with Clark Terry, Lionel Hampton and Ramsey Lewis, during the opening two-week ceremony performances celebrating the short-lived resurgence of the Blue Note Lounge at the Marriott O'Hare Hotel near Chicago. O'Day spoke candidly about her drug addiction in her 1981 memoir \"High Times, Hard Times\", which led to a string of TV appearances on \"60 Minutes\", \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\", \"The Today Show\" with Bryant Gumbel, \"The Dick Cavett Show\", \"Over Easy\" with Hugh Downs, \"The Tomorrow Show\" with Tom Snyder, and several others. She toured Europe and performed a 50th Anniversary Concert (1985) at Carnegie Hall, which resulted in the 2010 release of \"Anita O'Day \u2013 Big Band at Carnegie Hall\" (Emily Productions).\nFollowing a life-threatening fall down a staircase at the end of 1996, she made a comeback in 1999, resuming her career with the help of long-time manager Alan Eichler. In 2005, her version of the standard \"Sing, Sing, Sing\" was remixed by RSL and was included in the compilation album \"Verve Remixed 3\". The following year, she released \"Indestructible!\", her first album in 13 years and her last studio album. During this period pianist John Colianni was her accompanist for numerous club appearances and special gigs (Colianni also plays on \"Indestructible!\").\nOne of her better known late-career audio performances is \"Is You Is or Is You Ain't My Baby\", which opens the film \"Shortbus\" (2006) by John Cameron Mitchell.\nIn November 2006, Robbie Cavolina (her last manager) entered her into a West Hollywood convalescent hospital while she recovered from pneumonia. Two days before her death, she had demanded to be released from the hospital. On November 23, 2006, at age 87, O'Day died in her sleep. The official cause of death was cardiac arrest.\nThe feature-length documentary \"\", directed by Robbie Cavolina and Ian McCrudden, premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 30, 2007.\nStyle.\nO'Day cited Martha Raye as the primary influence on her vocal style, also expressing admiration for Mildred Bailey, Ella Fitzgerald, and Billie Holiday. She always maintained that the accidental excision of her uvula during a childhood tonsillectomy left her incapable of vibrato, and unable to maintain long phrases. That botched operation, she claimed, forced her to develop a more percussive style based on short notes and rhythmic drive. However, when she was in good voice she could stretch long notes with strong crescendos and a telescoping vibrato, e.g. her live version of \"Sweet Georgia Brown\" at the 1958 Newport Jazz Festival, captured in Bert Stern's film \"Jazz on a Summer's Day\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56986", "revid": "15122211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56986", "title": "Jiankang", "text": "Former capital city to several dynasties, now within Nanjing, China\nJiankang (), or Jianye (), as it was originally called, was the capital city of the Eastern Wu (229\u2013265 and 266\u2013280 CE), the Eastern Jin dynasty (317\u2013420 CE) and the Southern Dynasties (420\u2013552), including the Chen dynasty (557\u2013589 CE). Its walls are extant as ruins in the modern municipal region of Nanjing. Jiankang was an important city of the Song dynasty. Its name was changed to Nanjing during the Ming dynasty. \nHistory.\nBefore the Eastern Jin the city was known as Jianye, and it was the capital of the kingdom of Wu during the Three Kingdoms period. It was renamed Jiankang during the Jin dynasty, in order to observe the naming taboo for Emperor Min of Jin. \nRenamed Jiankang in 313 CE, it served as the capital of the Eastern Jin, following the retreat from the north due to Xiongnu raids. Jiankang remained the capital of the Southern Dynasties: Liu Song (420\u2013479), Southern Qi (479\u2013502), Liang (502\u2013557) and Chen (557\u2013589). It rivaled Luoyang in population and commercial activity, and at its height, in the sixth century, it was home to around one million people. In 549 CE, during the rebellion of Hou Jing, Jiankang was captured after a year-long siege that devastated the city: most of the population were killed or starved to death. During the reunification under the Sui dynasty it was almost completely destroyed, and was renamed Jiangzhou () and then Danyang Commandery (). Under the Tang dynasty, the city regained its prosperity and the name became Jinling (). Jinling was the capital of the Southern Tang from 937 to 975. \nBy the end of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period it was called Jiangning (); during the Southern Song dynasty the name of Jiankang was revived.\nWhen Zhu Yuanzhang, the Hongwu Emperor, founded the Ming dynasty in 1368, he made Jiankang the capital of China, renaming it Nanjing, \"Southern Capital\".\nSix Dynasties.\nThe Tang historian Xu Song (\u8a31\u5d69, X\u01d4 S\u014dng), in his work \"Jiankang Shilu\" (\u5efa\u5eb7\u5be6\u9304, Ji\u00e0nk\u0101ng Sh\u00edl\u00f9), coined the term \"Six Dynasties\" for the various regimes that had centred their power on the site:\nIn the 6th century, Jiankang may well have been the largest city in the world, with a population of probably more than one million people. At that time, Rome had a population of less than 100,000, Constantinople had about 500,000, and Luoyang had more than 500,000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56987", "revid": "40982560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56987", "title": "Paul Lynde", "text": "American comedian and actor (1926\u20131982)\nPaul Edward Lynde (; June 13, 1926\u00a0\u2013\u00a0January 10, 1982) was an American comedian, actor, and game-show panelist. A character actor with a distinctively campy and snarky persona that often poked fun at his closeted homosexuality, Lynde was well known for his roles as Uncle Arthur on \"Bewitched,\" as the befuddled father Harry MacAfee in \"Bye Bye Birdie\", and as a regular \"center square\" panelist on the game show \"The Hollywood Squares\" from 1968 to 1981. He also voiced animated characters for five Hanna-Barbera productions.\nLynde regularly topped audience polls of most-liked TV stars and was routinely admired and recognized by his peers during his lifetime. Mel Brooks once described Lynde as being capable of getting laughs by reading \"a phone book, tornado alert, or seed catalogue\". Lynde once said that while he would rather be recognized as a serious actor, \"we live in a world that needs laughter and I've decided if I can make people laugh, I'm making a more important contribution.\"\nEarly life.\nPaul Lynde was born in Mount Vernon, Ohio, the son of Sylvia Bell Lynde (n\u00e9e\u00a0Doup) and Hoy Corydon Lynde, who owned and operated a meat market. Fifth-born among six siblings, Lynde had older sisters, Grace and Helen, older brothers, Richard Hoy and Coradon (\"Cordy\") George and younger brother, John (\"Johnny\"). His favorite brother, Coradon, died in 1944 at the age of 21, in the Battle of the Bulge in World War II. In 1949, his parents died within three months of each other.\nLynde graduated in 1944 from Mount Vernon High School, where he played the bass drum in the high school band. He then studied speech and drama at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, where his classmates included Cloris Leachman, Charlotte Rae, Patricia Neal, Jeffrey Hunter, and Claude Akins. He was active in the school's theatrical productions, and joined the Upsilon chapter of the fraternity Phi Kappa Sigma. He is listed among its most famous members. He graduated in 1948.\nCareer.\nAfter graduating from college, Lynde moved to New York City, taking odd jobs while looking for his show-business break. His first appearance as a comic was at the famed supper club Number One Fifth Avenue. He made his Broadway debut in the hit revue \"New Faces of 1952\" in which he co-starred with fellow newcomers Eartha Kitt, Robert Clary, Alice Ghostley, and Carol Lawrence. In his monologue from that revue, the \"Trip of the Month Club\", Lynde portrayed a man on crutches recounting his misadventures on the African safari trip he took with his late wife. The show was filmed and released as \"New Faces\" in 1954.\nAfter the revue's run, Lynde co-starred in the short-lived 1956 sitcom \"Stanley\" opposite Buddy Hackett and Carol Burnett, both of whom were also starting their careers in show business. That year, he guest-starred on NBC's sitcom \"The Martha Raye Show\".\nLynde returned to Broadway in 1960, when he was cast as Harry MacAfee, the father in \"Bye Bye Birdie\". He also played the role in the 1963 film adaptation. That year, he recorded a live album, \"Recently Released\", issued as an LP. He wrote all six tracks. Once he could afford writers, he rarely used his own material until his tenure on \"The Hollywood Squares\" years later.\nLynde was in great demand in the 1960s. During the 1961\u201362 television season, he was a regular on NBC's \"The Perry Como Show\" as part of the Kraft Music Hall players with Don Adams, Kaye Ballard, and Sandy Stewart. He was a familiar face on many sitcoms, including \"The Phil Silvers Show\", \"The Farmer's Daughter\", \"The Patty Duke Show\", \"The Munsters\", \"The Flying Nun\", \"Gidget\", \"I Dream of Jeannie\", and \"F Troop\", and on variety shows such as \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" and \"The Dean Martin Show\". He also was featured in several 1960s films, including \"Send Me No Flowers\" and \"The Glass Bottom Boat\", both starring Doris Day.\n\"Bewitched\".\nIn 1965, Lynde made his debut appearance on \"Bewitched\" during the first-season episode \"Driving is the Only Way to Fly\" (air date March 25, 1965). His role as mortal Harold Harold, Samantha Stephens' nervous driving instructor, was well received by viewers. Lynde also impressed series star Elizabeth Montgomery and her husband, director/producer William Asher, who created a recurring role for Lynde as Endora's practical-joking brother Uncle Arthur. Lynde made 10 appearances on \"Bewitched\" as the beloved character, the first being \"The Joker is a Card\" (air date October 14, 1965). His final appearance in the sitcom was in \"The House That Uncle Arthur Built\" (February 11, 1971) in the series' seventh season. Paul Lynde, Elizabeth Montgomery, and William Asher became good friends and were regularly seen together off the set.\nTelevision pilots.\nLynde starred in four failed television pilots in the 1960s:\nOf the four shows, only the Victorian detective spoof \"Sedgewick Hawk-Styles: Prince of Danger\" was initially picked up by ABC, only to be canceled at the last minute. William Asher commented in the A&amp;E \"Biography\" episode on Lynde that ABC had reservations about Lynde, most notably his increasingly erratic offscreen behavior and the persistent rumors of his homosexuality.\n\"The Hollywood Squares\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Q: \"Why do motorcyclists wear leather?\"\n Lynde: \"Because chiffon wrinkles.\" (the first \"Hollywood Squares\" zinger)\nQ: \"You're the world's most popular fruit. What are you?\"\n Lynde: \"Humble.\"\nQ: \"How many men on a hockey team?\"\n Lynde: \"About half.\"\nQ: \"Who's generally better looking, a fairy or a pixie?\"\n Lynde: \"Looks aren't everything! (pause) I'll go for the fairy.\"\nQ: \"Is it against the law in Texas to call a Marine a 'sissy'?\"\n Lynde: \"I guess I'll have to take the law into my own hands.\"\nQ: \"What unusual thing do you do if you have something called 'the gift of tongues'?\"\n Lynde: \"I wouldn't tell the grand jury. Why should I tell you?\"\nQ: \"The great writer George Bernard Shaw once wrote, 'It's such a wonderful thing, what a crime to waste it on children.' What is it?\"\n Lynde: \"A whipping.\"\nQ: \"...when a man falls out of your boat and into the water, you should yell 'Man overboard!' Now, what should you yell if a woman falls overboard?\"\n Lynde: \"Full speed ahead!\"\nQ: \"The Tin Man wanted a heart and the Lion wanted courage. What did the Straw Man want?\"\n Lynde: \"He wanted the Tin Man to notice him.\"\nQ: \"At what famous place in America will you find couples strolling arm-in-arm along Flirtation Walk and smooching at a place called Kissing Rock?\"\n Lynde: \"Oh, Leavenworth prison.\"\nQ: \"In what state was Abraham Lincoln born?\"\n Lynde: \"Well, like all of us; naked and screaming!\"\nQ: \"The worst time for sex is right after what?\"\n Lynde: \"Surgery.\"\nQ: \"Is it difficult to train an ostrich to become a sheepdog?\"\n Lynde: \"Yes it is; they can't lift their leg without tippin' over.\"\nQ: \"What is the major cause of itching in old folks?\"\n Lynde: \"Oh, Eating shredded wheat in bed.\"\nQ: \"Why was Daniel thrown into the den of lions?\"\n Lynde: \"For jay walking in Jerusalem.\"\nQ: \"In ancient times it was illegal to park your chariot in certain places in the biblical city of Nineveh. What was the penalty if you did so?\"\n Lynde: \"They'd let the air out of your horse!\"\nQ: \"Who determines the sex of a child?\"\n Lynde: \"I say let the child make up its own mind!\"\nQ: \"According to the Bible, King David was not allowed to build a temple because he sinned; what was Moses not allowed to do because of his sin?\"\n Lynde: \"Build a shopping center near the temple.\"\nQ: \"What do we call a gelded rooster?\"\n Lynde: \"Is that the one that just goes \"a-doodle-doo\"?\"\nQ: \"Paul, true or false...Your teeth are about the same size and shape as a pig's.\"\n Lynde: \"Look who's talking, beaver face!\"\nPaul Lynde (Zingers (jokes) from \"The Hollywood Squares\")\nIn 1966, Lynde debuted on the fledgling game show \"The Hollywood Squares\" and quickly became its iconic guest star. Eventually, he assumed a permanent spot as the \"center square\", a move that ensured that he would be called upon by contestants at least once in almost every round. Despite an urban legend claiming Lynde's contract guaranteed him the center square, he remained in the center at the producers' discretion. On \"The Hollywood Squares\", Lynde was best able to showcase his comedic talents with short, salty one-liners, spoken in his signature snickering delivery. Many gags were thinly veiled allusions to his homosexuality. Other jokes relied on double entendre or an alleged fondness for deviant behaviors, or dealt with touchy subject matter for 1970s television.\nAppearing in 1,083 episodes, Lynde garnered considerable fame and wealth from the series. He eventually became disenchanted with being what he called \"boxed in\" to \"The Hollywood Squares\" and he departed the series in 1979. In 1980, \"The Hollywood Squares\" experienced a downward trend in Nielsen ratings and Lynde was approached about returning to the program. He initially declined, but changed his mind when told he would receive co-star billing with host Peter Marshall. He returned to the series in the spring of 1980, and remained with the show until its cancellation in February 1981.\nVoice acting.\nBetween 1969 and 1974, Lynde did extensive voice work on animated cartoons, particularly for Hanna-Barbera Productions. His most notable roles include:\nLynde's sardonic inflections added a dimension to such lines as the sly, drawn-out whine, \"What's in it for \"meeee?\"\" His distinctive voice remains popular among impressionists. Although it is sometimes assumed that actress Alice Ghostley based her speech patterns and mannerisms on Lynde's, according to actress Kaye Ballard, \"It was Paul who was influenced by Alice.\"\n\"The Paul Lynde Show\" and \"Temperatures Rising\".\nIn 1972, Lynde starred in a short-lived ABC sitcom, \"The Paul Lynde Show\". The series was a contractual fulfillment to ABC in place of an aborted ninth season of \"Bewitched\".\nLynde starred as Paul Simms, an uptight attorney, and father who was at odds with his liberal-minded son-in-law. The family included wife Martha (Elizabeth Allen), daughters Sally (Pamelyn Ferdin) and Barbara (Jane Actman), Barbara's husband Howie (John Calvin) and Howie's parents (Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara).\nCritics considered the show to be derivative of \"All in the Family,\" television's then most-popular primetime program, although many admitted the writing was excellent and that the sexual innuendoes gave it an extra note of spice. Lynde was nominated for a Best Actor Golden Globe for the show. Scheduled opposite the first half of the top-30 hit \"The Carol Burnett Show\" on CBS and the top-20 hit \"Adam-12\" on NBC, the series garnered low ratings and was canceled after one season.\nContemporaneous media reports showed that viewers liked Lynde, but not \"The Paul Lynde Show\" and liked another ABC show, \"Temperatures Rising\", but disliked co-star James Whitmore. Unhappy himself, Whitmore left the show and ABC moved Lynde to \"Temperatures Rising\" for the 1973\u201374 season. This move came despite the objections of William Asher, producer of both shows, who also quit in protest of ABC's meddling.\nRatings for \"The New Temperatures Rising\" were even lower than the previous season, in part because Asher's replacements shifted the show's tone to a much darker one than the previous season. ABC canceled the show and its time slot was taken by mid-season replacement \"Happy Days\".\nABC later decided to resuscitate the program, with additional cast changes (most notably, Alice Ghostley, who replaced Sudie Bond in the role of Lynde's sister, Edwina). ABC also convinced Asher, who admitted Lynde's presence likely saved the series, to come back. Seven further episodes were produced for summer 1974 airings, after which the series was permanently canceled.\nSummer stock theater.\nLynde was a fixture on the Kenley Players summer stock theater circuit, appearing in \"Don't Drink the Water\" (1970, 1979), \"The Impossible Years\" (1969, 1978), \"Mother is Engaged\" (1974), \"My Daughter is Rated X\" (1973), \"Plaza Suite\" (1971), and \"Stop, Thief, Stop!\" (a retitled production of the play \"Three Goats and a Blanket,\" 1975). In all he appeared in nine Kenley Players productions, more than any other headliner. In the summer of 1980 Lynde toured the United States and Canada, headlining three one-act plays of \"California Suite\", \"Plaza Suite\", and \"Last of the Red Hot Lovers\", entitled 'Neil Simon's Suite', with cast members Beverly Sanders, friend and bodyguard Paul Barresi, and Kristie Siverson.\nTelevision specials and variety shows.\nLynde's continuing popularity led to his being signed by ABC to host a series of specials from 1975 to 1979, including:\nLynde was a regular guest on the variety show \"Donny &amp; Marie\" between 1976 and 1978, until he lost his guest-starring role due to very public, drunken arguments with police officers.\nGuest appearances and film roles.\nActing jobs continued to be scarce for Lynde, although whether or not this was related to his alcoholism, which made him difficult to work with, is unclear. As demand for his services declined, he accepted a wider variety of job offers.\nIn 1978, he appeared as a guest weatherman for WSPD-TV in Toledo, Ohio, to publicize both \"The Hollywood Squares\" and a summer-stock performance.\nIn the 1979 comedy \"The Villain\" (released as \"Cactus Jack\" in the UK), he appeared as Indian chief Nervous Elk alongside former \"Bye Bye Birdie\" co-star Ann-Margret. It was his final film role.\nIn November 1980, the Beaux Arts Society, Inc. (founded in 1857) designated Paul Lynde \"King\" of the Beaux Arts Ball, with Kitty Carlisle designated as \"Queen\". Paul Lynde remained a life member of the Beaux Arts Society from 1980 until his untimely death.\nAwards.\nIn 1976, at the Sixth Annual American Guild of Variety Artists (AGVA) \"Entertainer of the Year Awards\", Lynde received an award for being voted the funniest man of the year. Lynde immediately turned his award over to host Jackie Gleason, citing him as \"the funniest man ever\". The unexpected gesture shocked Gleason.\nPersonal life.\nDespite his campy and flamboyant television persona, Lynde's private life and sexual orientation were not directly acknowledged or discussed on television or in other media during his lifetime. According to an essay on the website for The Biography Channel, in the 1970s, entertainment journalists did not investigate the private lives of performers who were best known as game-show regulars.\nA 1976 \"People\" article on Lynde included text about Stan Finesmith, who was described as Lynde's hairstylist, \"suite mate\", and \"chauffeur-bodyguard\". The magazine included one photograph of Lynde as Finesmith styled his hair. During Lynde's lifetime, this was as close as the media came to hinting at his homosexuality. Cathy Rudolph, a friend of Lynde's who published a 2013 book \"Paul Lynde: A Biography\u00a0\u2013\u00a0His Life, His Love(s) and His Laughter\", stated in a 2018 interview that \"being gay and having to hide it frustrated him.\"\nWith the wealth Lynde had earned working on \"Hollywood Squares\", he bought Errol Flynn's Hollywood mansion and spent an enormous amount of money on renovations and d\u00e9cor. He lived there with his beloved dog, Harry MacAfee, until Harry died in 1977. Afterward, Lynde could not stay in the house without him and later bought a new home.\nLynde suffered from weight problems, weighing when he graduated from high school. He was honored by Weight Watchers in 1977.\nStruggles with alcohol.\nLynde struggled with alcoholism and had numerous run-ins with the law, including frequent arrests for public intoxication. Peter Marshall and Kaye Ballard confirmed that Lynde, when inebriated, became very cruel, sometimes violent, and would sometimes ridicule his friends.\nOn July 18, 1965, Lynde was involved in an incident in which a friend, another actor, accidentally fell to his death from the window of their hotel room in San Francisco's Sir Francis Drake Hotel. Lynde and 24-year-old James \"Bing\" Davidson had been drinking for hours when Davidson, while \"horsing around\", according to an Associated Press report, slipped and fell eight stories.\nIn October 1977, Lynde was involved in an incident at his alma mater, Northwestern University, when he was the grand marshal for homecoming. At a fast food restaurant near the campus after the homecoming parade, he made racist remarks and gestures to black NU professor JamesP. Pitts. Lynde blamed his behavior on fatigue and inebriation.\nIn January 1978, while in Salt Lake City to record a segment for the TV variety show \"Donny &amp; Marie\", Lynde was arrested outside a tavern and charged with interfering with a police officer. Lynde's vehicle had been broken into and his valuables stolen while he was inside the tavern. The arresting officer had been investigating a different car burglary and claimed Lynde kept insisting that he \"attend to Lynde's complaint\", instead. The complaint was later dropped.\nDetermined to get his life back on track, Lynde became sober and drug-free in early 1980.\nDeath.\nOn January 10, 1982, after Lynde failed to attend a birthday celebration, his friend, actor/model Paul Barresi, became concerned. When Barresi and another friend, actor Dean Dittman, could not get an answer after calling Lynde on the phone and knocking on Lynde's door, Barresi broke into the side entrance to Lynde's home in Beverly Hills, California, and found Lynde dead in his bed in the early morning hours of January 11, 1982. Lynde was 55 years old.\nStories circulated suggesting that Lynde had a visitor at the time of his death who fled the scene, but evidence indicated the stories were false. Lynde regularly activated his house alarm before retiring for the evening. When Barresi broke in, the alarm blared, indicating that Lynde had been alone at the time of his death and that he had died in his sleep. Contrary to other reports that Lynde was found naked, Barresi said, \"Not so. Paul was in his pajamas and wearing a robe.\"\nThe coroner ruled the death was caused by a heart attack. Lynde's cremated remains are interred at Amity Cemetery, in Amity, Knox County, Ohio, next to those of his brother Johnny and his sister Helen. His mother, father, and veteran brother, Coradon, are buried at the same cemetery.\nLegacy.\nA biography was published in 2005, titled \"Center Square: The Paul Lynde Story\". Authors Steve Wilson and Joe Florenski described Lynde as \"Liberace without a piano\" and that to most 1970s-era viewers, he was \"a frustrated bit player and character actor on a daytime game show\". To the homosexual community, his reputation was less than stellar: \"In some ways, he came to symbolize what's perceived to be a self-loathing era for gay culture.\"\nLynde's distinctive vocal delivery has also been widely imitated:\nFilmography.\nFilm.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnsold pilots.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56989", "revid": "49920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56989", "title": "Hollywood Squares", "text": "American television game show\nHollywood Squares (originally The Hollywood Squares, later stylized as H2: Hollywood Squares) is an American game show in which two contestants compete in a game of tic-tac-toe to win cash and prizes. The show originally aired as a pilot on NBC in 1965, and debuted on NBC as a regular series in October 1966. The board for the game is a 3 \u00d7 3 vertical stack of open-faced cubes, each occupied by a celebrity seated at a desk facing the contestants. The stars are asked questions by the host and the contestants judge the truth of their answers to gain squares in the right pattern to win the game.\nThough \"Hollywood Squares\" was a legitimate game show, the game largely acted as the background for the show's comedy in the form of joke answers (commonly called \"zingers\" by the production staff), often given by the stars prior to their real answer. The show's writers usually supplied the jokes. In addition, the stars were given the questions' subjects and bluffs prior to the show. The show was scripted in this sense, but the gameplay was not. The original host Peter Marshall explained at the beginning of the Secret Square game, \"the celebrities were briefed before the show to help them with bluff answers, but they are hearing the actual questions for the first time.\"\nMarshall hosted the original version of \"Hollywood Squares\" that aired on NBC from 1966 to 1980, as well as a nighttime syndicated version that ran from 1971 to 1981. It then returned to NBC in 1983 as part of a 60-minute hybrid series with \"Match Game\", featuring Jon Bauman hosting the \"Hollywood Squares\" portion of that show. Following Marshall's retirement, the show has since been revived twice in syndication: a version hosted by John Davidson from 1986 to 1989, and another hosted by Tom Bergeron from 1998 to 2004. Three revivals were run in the 2010s with a different title all on Paramount cable channels; in 2012, \"Hip Hop Squares\" on MTV2 with Peter Rosenberg, and from 2017 to 2019 on VH1 with DeRay Davis, in 2019, \"Nashville Squares\" on CMT with Bob Saget, and in 2023, \"Celebrity Squares\" on VH1 with John \"DC Young Fly\" Whitfield.\nIn 2013, \"TV Guide\" ranked it at No. 7 in its list of the 60 greatest game shows ever. Internationally, there have been multiple versions produced under a variety of names (see International versions below). When combined with two spinoffs of the franchise, the show has been produced for seven different decades.\nIn May 2024, it was announced that the show would be revived by CBS (which has owned the rights to the program since 2000, when it acquired format owner King World), with Drew Barrymore as a co-executive producer and center square, and Nate Burleson as host. The series premiered on January 16, 2025. On February 24, 2025, the revival was renewed for a second season.\nOn November 28, 2025, it was announced that the second half of the revival's first season (labeled season 1B) is expected to premiere on January 7, 2026.\nBasic rules.\nWith some variations in the rules and prizes, gameplay was largely the same through the show's run. Two contestants compete in every match, with one playing the letter X and the other the letter O (referred to as \"circle\") in a game of tic-tac-toe. The tic-tac-toe board features nine celebrities, each seated behind a square of a three-by-three grid game board.\nTaking turns, each contestant selects a square. The celebrity in that square is asked a question and gives an answer, typically preceded by a comedic response known as a \"zinger\". The contestant may then choose to agree or disagree with the answer given by the celebrity. Correctly agreeing or disagreeing awards the contestant's symbol, while doing so incorrectly awards the opponent's symbol, unless doing so would result in an automatic win for the opponent. As in the regular game of tic-tac-toe, the objective is to create three in a row of the same symbol vertically, horizontally, or diagonally. Should a game develop in such a way that it is impossible to achieve three in a row, the round is won by whichever contestant is able to place their letter in at least five squares (a majority of the board).\n1966\u20131981.\nBert Parks hosted the 1965 pilot of \"Hollywood Squares,\" which was taped at CBS Television City. A second pilot was taped with comedian Sandy Baron as host. Neither Parks nor Baron were considered to host the series, partly because NBC was \"looking for a complete non-entity\", and partly because Baron was considered \"too New Yorky\". NBC acquired the rights to the show, which debuted on October 17, 1966, with Peter Marshall as host, a job he held for 15 years. Marshall agreed to host because he did not want rival Dan Rowan to host. \"Hollywood Squares\" was the final addition to a short-lived game show powerhouse block on NBC, which for the next two years also included \"Concentration\", \"Jeopardy!\", \"You Don't Say!\", \"Let's Make a Deal\", \"Match Game\" and others. During most of its daytime run, NBC broadcast \"The Hollywood Squares\" at 11:30\u00a0a.m. Eastern/10:30\u00a0a.m. Central; it dominated the ratings until 1976 when it made the first of several time slot moves. The daytime show aired its 3,536th and last episode on June 20, 1980, when it was canceled to make way for a talk show with David Letterman that would become a precursor to his \"Late Night\" and \"Late Show\" programs.\nThe show also ran at night, first on NBC from January 12 to September 13, 1968, as a mid-season replacement for the short-lived sitcom \"Accidental Family\". A nighttime syndicated program ran from November 1, 1971, until May 22, 1981. Initially airing once weekly, the syndicated \"Squares\" added a second airing in 1972 and began airing daily or nightly in September 1980, the show's final season. \nThe daytime series was played as a best two-out-of-three match between a returning champion and an opponent, with each game worth $200/$400 per match (originally $100 for each game and an additional $300 for the match that totaled $500). Originally, a five-match champion retired with an additional $2,500, the Secret Square prize package (if not yet won), and a new car; the cash bonus was increased through the years. By 1976, the prize for a five-day champion included additional cash ($5,000 or $10,000), two new cars, and a luxury vacation, with a total value of somewhere between $20,000 and $25,000. In September 1976, an endgame was added after each match with the champion simply selecting a star, each of whom held an envelope with a prize; the top prize was $5,000, with additional prizes ranging from small kitchen appliances to items worth up to about $2,000.\nThe night time versions featured the same two contestants playing for the entire half-hour with each completed game worth $300 (NBC prime time) or $250 (syndicated). On the syndicated version, if time ran out with a game still in progress (interrupted by a loud horn that the host called \"the tacky buzzer\"), each X or O on the board at that point was worth an additional $50 to the contestants, with each contestant guaranteed at least $100 in total winnings. The contestant with the most money at the end of the show won a bonus prize, which for the first seven years of the syndicated series was a car. From 1978 to 1980, the endgame described above was used with each prize worth at least $5,000 including a new car; cash prizes of $5,000 and $10,000 were also available. If the match ended in a tie, one final question was played with the star of one contestant's choosing; if the contestant agreed or disagreed correctly, they won the match; otherwise, the match went to the opponent. The nighttime syndicated version's episodes were self-contained, unlike the daytime version where games could straddle.\nFor the final (1980\u20131981) season, the syndicated series left NBC's Burbank, California studio and moved to the Riviera Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Nevada. During the final season, games were no longer scored. Instead, the winner of each game won a prize, and if time ran out before a game could be completed, the prize went to the player with the most squares on the board. Additionally, eight of the season's winning contestants were invited back to play in a Grand Championship tournament at the end of the season. The final $100,000 Grand Championship Tournament was played in 1980 and won by Eric Lloyd Scott of Denver, Colorado. Prizes that year included a Geodesic Dome Home from Domes America, a Botany 500 wardrobe, a 50-day cruise on Delta Line, the first Apple II computer system, the original Sony Betamax, a camper trailer, a motorhome and $20,000 in cash.\nCast of stars.\nMany celebrities became recognized as regulars on the show. Some regulars were frequently asked questions pertaining to a certain topic or category. For instance, Paul Lynde was frequently asked questions related to history or relationships, to which he would first respond with a clever zinger to get a laugh (usually a wrong answer but funny joke/punch line) before providing his answer. Cliff Arquette (in character as \"Charley Weaver\"), a history buff, excelled at American history questions; Rich Little almost always received questions about other celebrities, which allowed him to do an impression of that individual; Wally Cox was also given a lot of celebrity questions for which he usually gave the wrong answer; Roddy McDowall usually gave correct answers about the plays of Shakespeare; Rose Marie often received questions on dating and relationships, playing off her lovelorn comic persona; and Demond Wilson often responded with mock anger to questions that were carefully worded to play upon African-American stereotypes.\nLynde was featured in the tactically important center square throughout most of the show's original run. In 1968, after the first two years on the show, Lynde became the regular center square. Lynde's outrageous jokes earned him three consecutive Daytime Emmy Award nominations from 1972 to 1974. He left the series after taping the August 20\u201324, 1979, week of shows and was replaced by Wayland Flowers; Lynde returned when the series relocated to Las Vegas for the 1980\u20131981 season.\nSecret Square.\nThe Secret Square game is played as the first game on a given broadcast (or the first complete game, if a show began with a game already in progress) during the daytime series. In this game, a randomly selected Secret Square is shown only to the home audience by the shot of the television camera. A contestant who picked that square during the game won a bonus prize package if they correctly agreed or disagreed with the star. Secret Square prize packages added cash on the daytime edition, which started at around $1,000 for the 1966 episodes; the base amount increased in the later years from 1967 to 1980, by which time a new Secret Square package was worth around $3,500 to $4,500. The package grew daily until won. The question for the star was sealed in a special envelope and was almost always multiple-choice.\nFor the 1968 NBC primetime series, the first two games were the Secret Square games. One Secret Square offered a trip and the other Secret Square offered a car or occasionally a boat. If not won, the prize offered in the first round carried over to the second round, with a second prize added. If not won in the second round, the Secret Square prize package went unclaimed.\nDuring the first two seasons of the syndicated series (1971\u20131973), the first two games were Secret Square games, with the prize packages generally worth about $2,500. If no one claimed the prizes offered in the first round, they were carried over to the second round, and if still not won went unclaimed. Beginning in 1973 and ending in 1978, the first three games had a Secret Square, with each game offering different prize packages, usually worth between $2,000 and $7,000. From 1978 to 1980, the Secret Square games were cut to game numbers two and three (the first two games early on). The Secret Square was not used during the 1980\u20131981 daily syndicated version.\n\"Storybook Squares\" (1969 and 1976\u20131977).\nHosted by Peter Marshall and announced by Kenny Williams, \"Storybook Squares\", a children's version of \"Hollywood Squares\", aired briefly on Saturday mornings on NBC from January 4 to August 30, 1969, and featured stars dressed as various fictional characters from television and fairy tales as well as historical figures from the past. NBC later brought the concept back to the daytime series in the 1976\u20131977 season with a slight retooling, where instead of children playing entire families played.\nIn an interview with E!'s \"True Hollywood Story\" on March 30, 2003 (episode 7.21), Marshall lauded the concept, but lamented that by the time each of the characters was introduced, very little of the show's half-hour format was left for actual gameplay.\n\"The Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour\" (1983\u20131984).\nIn 1983, several years after Orion Pictures acquired \"Hollywood Squares\" rights owner Filmways, NBC decided to attempt a revival of the series. What resulted was an effort produced by Mark Goodson Productions that combined the \"Hollywood Squares\" program, under license from Orion, with a revival of the Goodson-produced \"Match Game\". The 60-minute program was dubbed \"The Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour\" and debuted on October 31, 1983, at 3\u00a0p.m. Eastern, replacing the Peter Marshall\u2013hosted series \"Fantasy\". Jon Bauman (appearing as himself without his \"Bowzer\" persona from \"Sha Na Na\") hosted the \"Hollywood Squares\" portion of the show. The only regular panelist on this version was Gene Rayburn, who reprised his role as host of \"Match Game\"; he always occupied the lower left square during \"Hollywood Squares\", which Bauman also occupied during \"Match Game\" segments. Most of the semi-regulars were previously better known for \"Match Game\" (only on two weeks of episodes did a regular from the previous \"Hollywood Squares\", George Gobel, appear on the panel). The announcer for this version was Gene Wood but was also sub-announced by either Rich Jefferies or Johnny Olson.\n\"Hollywood Squares\" was always played as the second (middle) segment of the show, and featured the winner of the \"Match Game\" match played in the first half of the program playing O and the show's returning champion playing X, regardless of the player's genders (all other versions had women playing O and men playing X with exceptions, as noted above). This version of \"Hollywood Squares\" saw several different variations on the gameplay. First, the panelists were not given bluff answers or briefed. Second, the questions followed either a multiple-choice or true/false format. Third, for each square a contestant claimed $25 was added to their score with each game win starting at $100 for the first and increasing by that amount for subsequent games until time ran out and a winner was declared. In contrast to the original version of the show, players could win games by default if the opposing player incorrectly agreed/disagreed with a celebrity whose square gave the other player a completed row or five-square win. On all other versions of \"Squares\", the player had to earn the winning celebrity's square on their own. The winner played the Super Match from \"Match Game\" for a cash prize.\nThe \"Match Game\" segment featured six panelists, as it had from 1973 to 1982; for the \"Hollywood Squares\" portion, a third tier was added to the panel seating area, with three more celebrities being introduced to the proceedings at the show's midpoint. All nine celebrities could play the Super Match.\n\"The Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour\" was not a success and NBC announced its cancellation in the spring of 1984, with the final episode airing on July 27, 1984. It was replaced the following Monday with the soap opera \"Santa Barbara\", which ran for nine years.\n1986\u20131989.\nTwo years after the cancellation of \"The Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour\", a new \"Hollywood Squares\" series was put into production. Referred to throughout its run as \"The New Hollywood Squares\", the program debuted on September 15, 1986, and was produced by Century Towers Productions with Rick Rosner serving as executive producer, Ernie De Massa as producer, Paul Ruffino as Location Manager for remote productions, and Orion Television as a distributor (Century Towers was a subdivision of Orion formed to produce game shows, specifically this series and the 1987\u201388 syndicated revival of \"High Rollers\"; the name was in reference to the street that Orion was headquartered at the time).\nJohn Davidson, who was a semi-regular panelist on the original \"Hollywood Squares\", hosted the series. Shadoe Stevens was the announcer for the series and, beginning late in the first season, he also became a regular panelist occupying the bottom center square. Starting with episode #100, Stevens temporarily left the show to film the movie \"Traxx\", and his brother Richard took over as announcer; Stevens returned for the final two weeks of the first season and remained until the series' end. After one season of rotating center squares, former \"Hollywood Squares\" panelist Joan Rivers joined the series as the permanent center square. Comic actor Jim J. Bullock also became the series' third regular panelist, usually in the upper-left square. All three took turns as guest hosts for Davidson; Howard Stern replaced Stevens as announcer/panelist during his week as host. All music for the program was composed by Stormy Sacks.\nThe game used the original version's rule that games could not be won due to an opponent's error. For the first season, each game was worth $500 with a bonus of $100 per square if time ran out in the middle of a game. Beginning in season two, the third and subsequent games were worth $1,000 (or $200 per square). If time had run out with the contestants tied, one more question was asked to one celebrity; if the contestant agreed or disagreed correctly, they won the money for one square and the match. If not, their opponent automatically won. The single-question format was also used on occasions where there was not enough time remaining for a proper third round. The contestant who finished with the most money won the match and went on to the bonus round. Contestants wore name tags on all episodes of this version except for the premiere.\nThis version lasted three seasons, ending on June 16, 1989. At the end of the final episode, a video clip from the first week of shows was run, introducing the celebrities who had appeared that week. Davidson, the panelists, the audience, and the crew then sang \"Happy Trails\" under the credits, with the crew members sitting in the squares and holding up signs that displayed their names and titles. The song continued under a montage of audio clips from the show's run as everyone faded away and the lights gradually went out, leaving only the squares illuminated, and the credits sequence ended on a freeze frame of balloons being showered onto the stage before the final fade to black.\nSecret Square.\nThe second game of each show was a Secret Square game. As with the original version, the Secret Square was revealed to the home audience at the start of this game; if a contestant chose that square, a school bell sounded and if the contestant agreed or disagreed correctly, they won a prize (usually a trip, if it was won, Davidson would tell the contestant to \"Pack your bags!\"). The prize did not increase in value from one show to the next if it was not collected.\nBonus round.\nThe first two seasons of this version of the series employed a bonus round that was similar to the one used on the 1970s game show \"Split Second\". Five cars, each of the same brand/make, were displayed on the stage for the entire week. The champion chose one of five keys in a bowl held by Davidson and then chose the car they thought the key would start. The contestant also chose at least one celebrity to stand beside the car or sit in it with them for good luck; at times the entire panel congregated near the car, especially on Friday shows or when a champion reached a fifth win and automatically retired with the car.\nIf the chosen key started the car, the contestant won it and retired; otherwise, the contestant returned the next day with that car eliminated should they return to the bonus game. After a fifth victory, the contestant automatically won the only car still in play at that point and retired. Every broadcast week started with a new set of five cars; if a champion's reign carried over from the preceding week, one car was eliminated for each of their victories to that point, in ascending order of price.\nFor the final season, the champion first chose a car, then one of the nine celebrities. Each held a key; five of them had the correct keys, while the other four had keys that would not start any car. If the champion failed to win the chosen car, it remained available after subsequent victories instead of being eliminated. The five-day limit was removed, allowing champions to remain on this show until they either won a car or were defeated.\n1998\u20132004.\nIn 1991, as part of Orion Pictures' bankruptcy, its intellectual properties were auctioned off. King World Productions bid for and won the rights to the \"Hollywood Squares\" format; six years later, a revival series began development. Whoopi Goldberg was brought in to be the executive producer, with John Moffitt and Pat Tourk Lee as producers. The venture was to be a co-production of Moffitt-Lee Productions and Goldberg's One Ho Productions, in association with Columbia TriStar Television and King World, who would also be responsible for distributing the revival; this differed from Columbia-TriStar and King World's other collaborations, \"Wheel of Fortune\" and \"Jeopardy!\", where King World had no stake in production.\nOn September 14, 1998, the revival debuted with Tom Bergeron, who was also appearing as an anchor on \"Good Morning America\" at the time, as its host; former Nickelodeon host Marc Summers was also considered. In addition to her production duties, Whoopi Goldberg served as the permanent center square, with series head writer Bruce Vilanch, Gilbert Gottfried, Martin Mull and Caroline Rhea as regular panelists and Brad Garrett, Bobcat Goldthwait, Jeffrey Tambor, George Wallace, Kathy Griffin and various others as semi-regular panelists. Shadoe Stevens returned as an announcer but unlike the previous series, he was not a panelist on this version.\nAfter the 2001\u20132002 season, Goldberg left the series and Moffitt and Lee were fired. Vilanch also left his writing position and Rhea moved to New York to host \"The Caroline Rhea Show\", a daytime variety series launched to replace \"The Rosie O'Donnell Show\"; O'Donnell had decided to leave her namesake show before the end of the 2001\u201302 season and Rhea, who was chosen by O'Donnell to be her replacement, served as guest host for most of the last season. Stevens also left his role as announcer.\nThe 2002\u20132003 season launched with Henry Winkler and his production partner Michael Levitt as the new executive producers and Jeffrey Tambor as the announcer (in addition to retaining his semi-regular appearance). Winkler guest announced for several weeks during the season. Some changes were made to the overall production with the show adopting a new logo that referred to the show as \"H2\". The set was given a new makeover where the contestant desks were replaced with podiums with LED screens inside and a rewritten version of the Teena Marie song \"Square Biz\" became the theme song.\nAfter Goldberg's departure, at first, the show did not feature a traditional permanent center square. Instead, a new celebrity was in the center square each week. Ellen DeGeneres, Alec Baldwin and Simon Cowell were among those who played center square, as well as Peter Marshall, who appeared during a special theme week in 2002. Martin Mull was eventually chosen as the permanent center square for the 2003\u20132004 season (though some guests continued to appear as center square during a few theme weeks of that season).\nFor most of the first five seasons of this \"Hollywood Squares\" series, the first and second games were worth $1,000 to the winner. The third game was worth $2,000, and every subsequent game until time ran out was worth $4,000. If a contestant did not win anything in the main game, $500 was given to them as a consolation prize. In the early episodes of the first season, contestants only played for half the money; $500 was won for each of the first two games, with $1,000 for the third and $2,000 for all subsequent games, and $250 was given as a consolation prize for failing to win a game. The consolation prize amount also was used for each contestant's square if time ran out during a game and was counted towards their cash total to determine the day's champion.\nThe tiebreaker was the same as the previous versions except that the contestant who had won the most games, most squares overall, or won the last game played (whichever came first) had the option to play the question or pass it to their opponent, with a miss by either contestant giving their opponent the win by default.\nFor the first season of this \"Hollywood Squares\" series, two new contestants competed on each episode. A coin toss determined who would begin the first game during this time. Beginning in the second season, the returning champion rule was reinstated; a contestant could stay on for a maximum of five days. With this change, the incoming challenger began the first game of a match. The show ended on June 4, 2004.\nSecret Square.\nThe first season also saw up to two Secret Square games. In the earliest episodes of the series, two Secret Square games were played on each show with a different prize offered for each game. The Secret Square was played in both the second and third games of the day, but after two weeks the Secret Square prize only carried over to the third game if neither contestant had claimed it by the second game. From the second season forward, the Secret Square was only played in the second game.\nBeginning in the second season and continuing until the end of the fifth season, the Secret Square game was played for an accumulating jackpot of prizes that Bergeron referred to as the \"Secret Square stash.\u201d A new prize was added to the jackpot each day until someone claimed it.\nBonus round.\nThe Bergeron \"Hollywood Squares\" employed three different bonus games during its six seasons on air.\nFirst version.\nOriginally, the show used the same \"pick a star, win a prize\" format the Marshall version had used during its last few years on the air. Each of the nine squares hid a different prize, with $10,000 cash ($15,000 in season 3) and a car being the two most expensive. The day's winner simply picked the celebrity they wanted and won whatever prize was in an envelope that the star was holding. As noted by Bergeron at the start of the bonus round for each episode, the prizes totaled over $100,000.\nBeginning partway through the first season and continuing until partway through season four, the champion could only win the prize by correctly agreeing/disagreeing with the response that the chosen celebrity gave to a Secret Square-style question. A champion who failed to do so was awarded a consolation prize of $2,500 cash in the first season; this award was dropped once returning champions were reinstated in the second season. However, during theme weeks in which contestants only played once, the $2,500 was given for a miss.\nBig money round.\nBeginning approximately two months into season four and continuing until the end of that season in June 2002, \"Hollywood Squares\" instituted a new high-stakes round in response to the recent trend of quiz shows offering big cash prizes.\nThe champion faced a general knowledge trivia round with their choice of any of the nine celebrities. Again, each of the celebrities held envelopes with varying dollar amounts hidden inside, ranging from $1,000 to $5,000 (increments of $500). If the champion picked a square that contained more than one person, the champion selected only one person from that square. The champion was given 60 seconds to answer as many multiple-choice questions as possible and was allowed to consult their celebrity partner for help; however, only the champion's answers were accepted. Each correct answer was worth the amount in the envelope, which was revealed at the start of the round.\nAt the end of the 60 seconds, the champion was given a choice to either quit with the money earned in the round or attempt to go double-or-nothing on an open-ended final question, with the category given to the contestant before they decided to play on.\nKeys.\nAs part of the overhaul done for the fifth season of \"Hollywood Squares\", a new bonus round was conceived. Taking a cue from the 1980s syndicated series, the round involved contestants using keys to try to win prizes.\nTo start the round, a 30-second speed round was played. One at a time, the champion chose a celebrity and Bergeron would read a statement about them. The champion had to either agree or disagree with the statement.\nOnce the 30 seconds were up, Bergeron and the champion moved from the contestant area to the stage floor where the day's prize awaited. For each correct answer the champion gave in the speed round, one key was blacked out on a grid of nine. After the speed round, the champion chose one of the remaining keys. If the key performed the desired action, the champion won the prize.\nIf the champion did not win the prize on a particular show, they received $1,000 for each correct answer given during the speed round as a consolation prize. For each subsequent attempt on winning the same prize, one free key was blacked out at the outset of the round.\nOnce the champion won a prize, a new prize would be available for them to try for if they returned to the bonus round the next day. The procedure for each new prize was the same.\nFor season five, the prize levels and the methods to win them were as follows:\nOn occasion, a gift certificate to an upscale merchant was placed inside the safe instead of the designated cash prize. This was usually done for special theme weeks or tournaments.\nAlso, for theme weeks, each match's winner would have one extra key removed at the start of the round since they would only play once.\nFinal season changes.\nFor the 6th and last season of \"Hollywood Squares\", more changes were made to the series. First, John Moschitta Jr. replaced Jeffrey Tambor as the announcer and Bruce Vilanch returned to the series as an occasional panelist. Second, the game format was scrapped in favor of returning to the best-two-of-three match format last seen on the NBC series in 1980. Each game was worth $1,000 and the first player to win the necessary two games won the match. The Secret Square was still played during the second game but the accumulating jackpot of prizes was discarded in favor of playing for one prize per match, regardless of whether or not the previous match's prize was won. Third, the format change resulted in the show no longer being self-contained, as matches could and often did straddle episodes.\nThe bonus round format from the previous season remained but with several changes. All nine keys were in play every time a contestant played the bonus round regardless of whether they had won the prize in the previous round or not. Each correct answer in the first half of the round was now worth $500 if the prize is not won.\nThe prize structure was also changed, with the objectives the same as noted above. The new structure was as follows:\nSeason 6 theme weeks used the game format from the first five seasons, with each match played to time and the bonus round serving as the final segment. The winners of these matches played the bonus round for $10,000 cash or a car, and had one key eliminated at the outset before eliminating any additional keys.\n\"Hip Hop Squares\" (2012, 2017\u20132019).\n\"Hip Hop Squares\" aired on MTV2 from May 22, 2012, until December 18, 2012, and was hosted by Peter Rosenberg; while the announcer was DJ Ms. Nix (a.k.a. Nicole Lyn). The show returned five years later on VH1 and was hosted by DeRay Davis (who was previously a panelist in the original MTV2 version) while the announcer was executive producer Ice Cube. The second edition ran from May 13, 2017, until September 17, 2019. While the MTV2 version played much like the original, the VH1 version featured celebrities as contestants playing for a member of the studio audience.\n\"The West Virginia Squares\" (2014).\nFrom June 23\u201324, 2014, as part of an event called \"FestivAll\"; a one-off limited live stage version dubbed \"The West Virginia Squares\" streamed on local television station WVPB's official YouTube channel and on wvpublic.org in West Virginia only. Hosted by the original \"Hollywood Squares\" host (and local native) Peter Marshall reprising his role while the announcer was Bob Brunner. The trivia questions were mainly focused on the music and history of its state, for only four episodes were taped at the Clay Center. The celebrities that were seen in this version were: Larry Groce, Landau Eugene Murphy Jr., Bil Lepp, Donnie Davidson, Charlie McCoy, Autumn Blair, Joyce DeWitt (also a local West Virginia native), Charisse Hailsop, Danny Jones, Steve Bishop, Billy Edd Wheeler, and Michael Cerveris. DeWitt was also a panelist on the original version and (like Marshall) was a West Virginia native. No bonus round was played.\n\"Nashville Squares\" (2019).\nA country music themed version called \"Nashville Squares\" hosted by Bob Saget aired on CMT from November 1 until November 29, 2019. Similarly to \"Hip Hop Squares\" (2017 version), celebrities played for a member of the studio audience.\n\"Hollywood Museum Squares\" (2021).\nIn 2021, The Hollywood Museum announced a limited-run revival of the series as a fundraiser for the organization. Dubbed \"Hollywood Museum Squares\", each episode is introduced by Marshall and announced by Shadoe Stevens and Harvey (One Episode), with Davidson, Bergeron, Vilanch, Pat Finn and Marc Summers each hosting one of the episodes. The panelists for the game included Loni Anderson, Alison Arngrim, Rico E. Anderson, Gilbert Gottfried, Rich Little, Glenn Scarpelli, Jerry Mathers, Donna Mills, Judy Tenuta and Lindsay Wagner, among others.\nAll participants appeared via videoconferencing over a 3D computer simulation of the 1986-89 set designed by Dustin James.\nWriters included Louis Virtel from \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\" and Jason Antoniewicz, a writer from \"Match Game\", \"College Bowl\" and \"Tug of Words\", to name a few.\nThe programs were directed by Steve Grant and Bob Loudin, who directed many television programs including the Davidson \"Squares\".\nJohn Ricci Jr. and Philip Berman served as the executive producers.\n\"Celebrity Squares\" (2023).\nOn September 25, 2023, it was announced that a Black culture\u2013themed version called \"Celebrity Squares\", hosted by D.C. Young Fly (who was a frequent panelist on the 2017 version of \"Hip Hop Squares\"), would premiere on VH1 on October 17, 2023.\nCBS revival (2025).\nA new version of \"Hollywood Squares\" premiered in January 2025, as part of CBS's midseason primetime schedule. Drew Barrymore serves as a co-executive producer, and as the center square. Nate Burleson is the host. Originally scheduled to premiere on January 9, 2025, the premiere was delayed to January 16, 2025, being seen as sensitive due to the ongoing wildfires in Los Angeles and surrounding areas. CBS also scheduled an episode to air after its coverage of an NFL divisional playoff game on January 19. During the week of January 27, 2025, the four episodes that had aired to that point received extra airings in the daytime.\nThe first season of twenty half-hour episodes presented as ten hour-long broadcasts, concluded on May 9, 2025.\nThe revival was renewed for a second season.\nMain game.\nThe gameplay still remains similar to its predecessors: pick a star for the host to ask a question to them, correctly agree or disagree with their response in order to capture the square, getting 3 in a row either across, up and down, or diagonally, or earning five squares. The winning square must be earned by the contestant themselves and cannot be earned on an unsuccessful block attempt. The game win structure amounts have changed though. R1 is $1,000, R2 is $2,500, and R3 is $5,000 for the win. Though most of the episodes have wrapped up during or at the end of 2 rounds (round 3 was rarely played during the first season).\nAny ties when match is tied are resolved with a sudden death question which decides the champion who advances to the bonus round. Otherwise whoever won the most money advanced to it.\nSecret Square.\nThe Secret Square Star is now revealed at the beginning before round 1 and remains the same throughout the game until they are picked, or in the event of not being found the host will reveal who it was. During this revival run, they are playing for a trip rather than random prizes as in previous iterations. However, just as in its previous versions, the Secret Square has no bearing on the final totals to determine the winner of the game.\nBonus game.\nThe Bonus game on the front end plays very similar to the 2002\u20132004 version of the Bergeron years. The contestant will run through the 9 celebrities within 60 seconds by agree or disagree to a statement read about them. Unlike the Bergeron version, the host automatically starts with the celebrity in the upper left hand corner moving right, until they either run out of time or reach the celebrity in the lower right hand square. After the front half has been run through, the 2nd half of the bonus game is different from the Bergeron version. Instead of keys, all the squares have an envelope in them, eight containing solid blue cards and one containing the prize of $25,000 on it. If one of the celebrities captured in the front half of the bonus round has the $25,000 card in their envelope, or if all nine celebrities are captured, the contestant wins the prize. If it happens to be in one of the squares they got incorrect, then they leave with just their winnings from the main game.\nInternational versions.\nColor Key:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 Currently airing \u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 No longer airing \u00a0\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 Upcoming or returning version \u00a0\nHome versions and merchandise.\nWatkins-Strathmore produced the first two home versions of the show in 1967. Both versions featured a game board that allowed for writing in the celebrities' names under each square (using crayon, soft lead pencil, or a similar wipe-off medium). Each version included four decks of 45 question cards, one of which was marked with asterisks as the \"Secret Square\" question, which earned the player an extra $100 if answered correctly. Rules allowed for a 3-game match to be played, with $200 awarded for each game (just as the daytime rules specified).\nIdeal issued a version of the game in 1974 with a picture of Peter Marshall on the box. Marshall was the original host of the television version throughout its entire first run. This was the first of the adaptations to feature humorous names for the celebrities. A similar board game based on the UK version under the title \"Celebrity Squares\" was released by Buckingham Toys five years later in 1979 with a picture of host Bob Monkhouse on the cover. It did not specify a \"Secret Square\" rule. Matches were best two-out-of-three with no money awards specified.\nAlso in 1974, Event Records released a compilation album entitled \"Zingers from The Hollywood Squares\" (along with two companion books) on vinyl LP and cassette, containing the audio of what were considered to be some of the show's funniest moments. A CD of the album was included in Peter Marshall's 2002 book \"Backstage with the Original Hollywood Square\".\nMilton Bradley produced two home versions, first in 1980 with a game loosely based on the Marshall version, then in 1986 for the Davidson version, with a 3-D board and twelve \"celebrities\" to insert into the board. Both versions specified that there was no \"Secret Square\" rule, and like the Ideal version, matches were best two-out-of-three with no money awards specified.\nParker Brothers released a similar 3-D board/12 celebrity inserts version in 1999, based on the Bergeron version. Early printings did not specify a \"Secret Square\" rule, but this was later revised so that every question card with a number ending in \"5\" was a \"Secret Square\" question worth $1,000 in bonus cash. Games were played until one player/team won $5,000. Alternate rules allowed for timed play (suggesting a 30-minute \"as if you were on TV\" game), with the player/team ahead once time expired being declared the winner.\nGameTek released a version of \"Hollywood Squares\" in 1988 for MS-DOS, Commodore 64, and Apple II computers and later for the Nintendo Entertainment System based on the Davidson version. In 1999, Tiger Electronics released an electronic LCD handheld game based on the Bergeron version. In 2002, the official \"Hollywood Squares\" website had an online version of the show using the celebrities that were on that week. In 2010, Ludia released their version of \"Hollywood Squares\" for the PC, Wii, iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch and on PlayStation 3's PSN downloadable service from November 15, 2011; the games were based upon the 2002\u20132004 format and featured the voice of host Tom Bergeron and video clips of celebrities Brad Garrett, Kathy Griffin, Jeffrey Tambor and Martin Mull as the center square.\nEpisode status and reruns.\nOf the over 3,000 episodes of the original series, \"no one has an exact count\" of how many still exist. A substantial number, mostly from the daytime run, may have been destroyed in accordance with NBC policy of the era.\nGame Show Network previously reran a package of 130 episodes from Marshall's hosting run, the majority of which came from the syndication run during the 1970s. At least 13 episodes from the 1968 NBC primetime run are also known to have been part of the Game Show Network rerun package. It was noted at the time that substantially more Marshall episodes than the 130 that GSN aired are believed to exist, but for a number of reasons (including political correctness concerns and personality rights clearance issues) have never been rerun. UCLA has a handful of NBC daytime episodes in their film and television archive.\nThe \"Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour\" episodes exist in their entirety and, barring a few skipped episodes, have been airing on the digital television network Buzzr, which is owned by Fremantle (the successor in interest to Mark Goodson Productions) since 2019.\nThe 1986\u20131989 syndicated series aired as part of USA Network's afternoon game show rerun package from September 11, 1989, to June 25, 1993. This version has not been seen on television since USA stopped airing them.\nThe 1998 syndicated series has been rerun on Game Show Network in the past, and every season except one (including the final season) has been carried by the network over the years. Episodes were also rerun on GameTV in Canada. In July 2023, a \"Hollywood Squares\" channel was added to Pluto TV, featuring episodes from the final two Bergeron seasons. The channel was removed from the lineup in March 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56990", "revid": "16849003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56990", "title": "Tower of Hanoi", "text": "Mathematical puzzle game\nThe Tower of Hanoi (also called The problem of Benares Temple, Tower of Brahma or Lucas's Tower, and sometimes pluralized as Towers, or simply pyramid puzzle) is a mathematical game or puzzle consisting of three rods and a number of disks of various diameters, which can slide onto any rod. The puzzle begins with the disks stacked on one rod in order of decreasing size, the smallest at the top, thus approximating a conical shape. The objective of the puzzle is to move the entire stack to one of the other rods, obeying the following rules:\nWith three disks, the puzzle can be solved in seven moves. The minimum number of moves required to solve a Tower of Hanoi puzzle is 2\"n\" \u2212 1, where \"n\" is the number of disks.\nOrigins.\nThe puzzle was invented by the French mathematician \u00c9douard Lucas, first presented in 1883 as a game discovered by \"N. Claus (de Siam)\" (an anagram of \"Lucas d'Amiens\"), and later published as a booklet in 1889 and in a posthumously-published volume of Lucas's \"R\u00e9cr\u00e9ations math\u00e9matiques\". Accompanying the game was an instruction booklet, describing the game's purported origins in Tonkin, and claiming that according to legend, Brahmins at a temple in Benares have been carrying out the movement of the \"Sacred Tower of Brahma\", consisting of 64 golden disks, according to the same rules as in the game, and that the completion of the tower would lead to the end of the world. Numerous variations on this legend exist, regarding the ancient and mystical nature of the puzzle.\nAt a rate of one move per second, the minimum amount of time it would take to complete the 64 disks would be 264\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 seconds or 585 billion years, roughly 42 times the estimated current age of the universe.\nThere are many variations on this legend. For instance, in some back stories, the temple is a monastery, and the priests are monks. The temple or monastery may be in various locales including Hanoi, and may be associated with any religion. In some versions, other elements are introduced, such as the fact that the tower was created at the beginning of the world, or that the priests or monks may make only one move per day.\nSolution.\nThe puzzle can be played with any number of disks, although many toy versions have around 7 to 9 of them. The minimum number of moves required to solve a Tower of Hanoi puzzle with \"n\" disks is 2\"n\" \u2212 1.\nIterative solution.\nA simple solution for the toy puzzle is to alternate moves between the smallest piece and a non-smallest piece. When moving the smallest piece, always move it to the next position in the same direction (to the right if the starting number of pieces is even, to the left if the starting number of pieces is odd). If there is no tower position in the chosen direction, move the piece to the opposite end, but then continue to move in the correct direction. For example, if you started with three pieces, you would move the smallest piece to the opposite end, then continue in the left direction after that. When the turn is to move the non-smallest piece, there is only one legal move. Doing this will complete the puzzle in the fewest moves.\nSimpler statement of iterative solution.\nThe iterative solution is equivalent to repeated execution of the following sequence of steps until the goal has been achieved:\nFollowing this approach, the stack will end up on peg B if the number of disks is odd and peg C if it is even.\nRecursive solution.\nThe key to solving a problem recursively is to recognize that it can be broken down into a collection of smaller sub-problems, to each of which \"that same general solving procedure that we are seeking\" applies, and the total solution is then found in some \"simple\" way from those sub-problems' solutions. Each of these created sub-problems being \"smaller\" guarantees that the base case(s) will eventually be reached. For the Towers of Hanoi:\nAssuming all \"n\" disks are distributed in valid arrangements among the pegs; assuming there are \"m\" top disks on a \"source\" peg, and all the rest of the disks are larger than \"m\", so they can be safely ignored; to move \"m\" disks from a source peg to a \"target\" peg using a \"spare\" peg, without violating the rules:\nThe full Tower of Hanoi solution then moves \"n\" disks from the source peg A to the target peg C, using B as the spare peg.\nThis approach can be given a rigorous mathematical proof with mathematical induction and is often used as an example of recursion when teaching programming.\nLogical analysis of the recursive solution.\nAs in many mathematical puzzles, finding a solution is made easier by solving a slightly more general problem: how to move a tower of \"h\" (height) disks from a starting peg \"f\" = A (from) onto a destination peg \"t\" = C (to), B being the remaining third peg and assuming \"t\" \u2260 \"f\". First, observe that the problem is symmetric for permutations of the names of the pegs (symmetric group \"S\"3). If a solution is known moving from peg A to peg C, then, by renaming the pegs, the same solution can be used for every other choice of starting and destination peg. If there is only one disk (or even none at all), the problem is trivial. If \"h\" = 1, then move the disk from peg A to peg C. If \"h\" &gt; 1, then somewhere along the sequence of moves, the largest disk must be moved from peg A to another peg, preferably to peg C. The only situation that allows this move is when all smaller \"h\" \u2212 1 disks are on peg B. Hence, first all \"h\" \u2212 1 smaller disks must go from A to B. Then move the largest disk and finally move the \"h\" \u2212 1 smaller disks from peg B to peg C. The presence of the largest disk does not impede any move of the \"h\" \u2212 1 smaller disks and can be temporarily ignored. Now the problem is reduced to moving \"h\" \u2212 1 disks from one peg to another one, first from A to B and subsequently from B to C, but the same method can be used both times by renaming the pegs. The same strategy can be used to reduce the \"h\" \u2212 1 problem to \"h\" \u2212 2, \"h\" \u2212 3, and so on until only one disk is left. This is called recursion. This algorithm can be schematized as follows.\nIdentify the disks in order of increasing size by the natural numbers from 0 up to but not including \"h\". Hence disk 0 is the smallest one, and disk \"h\" \u2212 1 the largest one.\nThe following is a procedure for moving a tower of \"h\" disks from a peg A onto a peg C, with B being the remaining third peg:\nBy mathematical induction, it is easily proven that the above procedure requires the minimum number of moves possible and that the produced solution is the only one with this minimum number of moves. Using recurrence relations, the exact number of moves that this solution requires can be calculated by: formula_1. This result is obtained by noting that steps 1 and 3 take formula_2 moves, and step 2 takes one move, giving formula_3.\nNon-recursive solution.\nThe list of moves for a tower being carried from one peg onto another one, as produced by the recursive algorithm, has many regularities. When counting the moves starting from 1, the ordinal of the disk to be moved during move \"m\" is the number of times \"m\" can be divided by 2. Hence every odd move involves the smallest disk. It can also be observed that the smallest disk traverses the pegs \"f\", \"t\", \"r\", \"f\", \"t\", \"r\", etc. for odd height of the tower and traverses the pegs \"f\", \"r\", \"t\", \"f\", \"r\", \"t\", etc. for even height of the tower. This provides the following algorithm, which is easier, carried out by hand, than the recursive algorithm.\nIn alternate moves:\nFor the very first move, the smallest disk goes to peg \"t\" if \"h\" is odd and to peg \"r\" if \"h\" is even.\nAlso observe that:\nWith this knowledge, a set of disks in the middle of an optimal solution can be recovered with no more state information than the positions of each disk:\nBinary solution.\nDisk positions for an \"n\"-disk puzzle can be determined directly from the binary representation of the move number, \"m\". For example, all the details for move \"m\"=216 of an 8-disk Tower of Hanoi can be computed without any iteration or recursion, and without reference to any previous moves or distribution of disks. Conversely, given a legal disk distribution, the move number to achieve that distribution can be computed.\nLet the disks be labeled \"n\", \"n\"-1,\u2026,1, in decreasing size. Let the pegs A, B, and C be labeled 0, 1, and 2 respectively, with 0 always being the starting peg and 2 always being the ending peg. Further, let the bases for the pegs upon which the disks are stacked be labeled \"n\"+1, \"n\"+2, and \"n\"+3, for pegs 0, 1, and 2 respectively.\nThe disk positions after move \"m\" can be mapped from the binary representation of \"m\" by the following rules:\nFor example, in 8-disk Tower of Hanoi:\nThe source and destination pegs for the \"m\"th move (excluding move 0) can be found elegantly from the binary representation of \"m\" using bitwise operations. To use the syntax of the C programming language, move \"m\" is:\nfrom pegcodice_1 to peg codice_2.\nAnother formulation for this is:\nfrom peg codice_3 to peg codice_4. \nThese hold for odd \"n\" puzzles. For even \"n\" puzzles, the output references to pegs 1 and 2 need to be reversed.\nFurthermore, the single disk to be moved for any specific move is determined by the number of times the move count (\"m\") can be divided by 2 (i.e. the number consecutive zero bits at the right of \"m\"), and then adding 1. In the example above for move 216, with 3 right hand 0s, disk 4 (3 + 1) is moved from peg 2 to peg 1.\nGray-code solution.\nThe binary numeral system of Gray codes gives an alternative way of solving the puzzle. In the Gray system, numbers are expressed in a binary combination of 0s and 1s, but rather than being a standard positional numeral system, the Gray code operates on the premise that each value differs from its predecessor by only one bit changed.\nIf one counts in Gray code of a bit size equal to the number of disks in a particular Tower of Hanoi, begins at zero and counts up, then the bit changed each move corresponds to the disk to move, where the least-significant bit is the smallest disk, and the most-significant bit is the largest.\nCounting moves from 1 and identifying the disks by numbers starting from 0 in order of increasing size, the ordinal of the disk to be moved during move \"m\" is the number of times \"m\" can be divided by 2.\nThis technique identifies which disk to move, but not where to move it to. For the smallest disk, there are always two possibilities. For the other disks there is always one possibility, except when all disks are on the same peg, but in that case either it is the smallest disk that must be moved or the objective has already been achieved. Luckily, there is a rule that does say where to move the smallest disk to. Let \"f\" be the starting peg, \"t\" the destination peg, and \"r\" the remaining third peg. If the number of disks is odd, the smallest disk cycles along the pegs in the order \"f\" \u2192 \"t\" \u2192 \"r\" \u2192 \"f\" \u2192 \"t\" \u2192 \"r\", etc. If the number of disks is even, this must be reversed: \"f\" \u2192 \"r\" \u2192 \"t\" \u2192 \"f\" \u2192 \"r\" \u2192 \"t\", etc.\nThe position of the bit change in the Gray code solution gives the size of the disk moved at each step: 1, 2, 1, 3, 1, 2, 1, 4, 1, 2, 1, 3, 1, 2, 1, ... (sequence in the OEIS), a sequence also known as the ruler function, or one more than the power of 2 within the move number. In the Wolfram Language, codice_5 gives moves for the 8-disk puzzle.\nGraphical representation.\nThe game can be represented by an undirected graph, the nodes representing distributions of disks and the edges representing moves. For one disk, the graph is a triangle:\nThe graph for two disks is three triangles connected to form the corners of a larger triangle.\nA second letter is added to represent the larger disk. Clearly, it cannot initially be moved.\nThe topmost small triangle now represents the one-move possibilities with two disks:\nThe nodes at the vertices of the outermost triangle represent distributions with all disks on the same peg.\nFor h + 1 disks, take the graph of h disks and replace each small triangle with the graph for two disks.\nFor three disks the graph is:\nThe sides of the outermost triangle represent the shortest ways of moving a tower from one peg to another one. The edge in the middle of the sides of the largest triangle represents a move of the largest disk. The edge in the middle of the sides of each next smaller triangle represents a move of each next smaller disk. The sides of the smallest triangles represent moves of the smallest disk.\nIn general, for a puzzle with \"n\" disks, there are 3\"n\" nodes in the graph; every node has three edges to other nodes, except the three corner nodes, which have two: it is always possible to move the smallest disk to one of the two other pegs, and it is possible to move one disk between those two pegs \"except\" in the situation where all disks are stacked on one peg. The corner nodes represent the three cases where all the disks are stacked on one peg. The diagram for \"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01 disks is obtained by taking three copies of the \"n\"-disk diagram\u2014each one representing all the states and moves of the smaller disks for one particular position of the new largest disk\u2014and joining them at the corners with three new edges, representing the only three opportunities to move the largest disk. The resulting figure thus has 3\"n\"+1 nodes and still has three corners remaining with only two edges.\nAs more disks are added, the graph representation of the game will resemble a fractal figure, the Sierpi\u0144ski triangle. It is clear that the great majority of positions in the puzzle will never be reached when using the shortest possible solution; indeed, if the priests of the legend are using the longest possible solution (without re-visiting any position), it will take them 364\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 moves, or more than 1023 years.\nThe longest non-repetitive way for three disks can be visualized by erasing the unused edges:\nIncidentally, this longest non-repetitive path can be obtained by forbidding all moves from \"a\" to \"c\".\nThe Hamiltonian cycle for three disks is:\nThe graphs clearly show that:\nThis gives \"N\"\"h\" to be 2, 12, 1872, 6563711232, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nVariations.\nLinear Hanoi.\nIf all moves must be between adjacent pegs (i.e. given pegs A, B, C, one cannot move directly between pegs A and C), then moving a stack of \"n\" disks from peg A to peg C takes 3\"n\" \u2212 1 moves. The solution uses all 3n valid positions, always taking the unique move that does not undo the previous move. The position with all disks at peg B is reached halfway, i.e. after (3\"n\" \u2212 1) / 2 moves.\nCyclic Hanoi.\nIn Cyclic Hanoi, we are given three pegs (A, B, C), which are arranged as a circle with the clockwise and the counterclockwise directions being defined as A \u2013 B \u2013 C \u2013 A and A \u2013 C \u2013 B \u2013 A, respectively. The moving direction of the disk must be clockwise. It suffices to represent the sequence of disks to be moved. The solution can be found using two mutually recursive procedures:\nTo move \"n\" disks counterclockwise to the neighbouring target peg:\nTo move \"n\" disks clockwise to the neighbouring target peg:\nLet C(n) and A(n) represent moving n disks clockwise and counterclockwise, then we can write down both formulas:\nThe solution for the Cyclic Hanoi has some interesting properties:\nWith four pegs and beyond.\nAlthough the three-peg version has a simple recursive solution long been known, the optimal solution for the Tower of Hanoi problem with four pegs (called Reve's puzzle) was not verified until 2014, by Bousch.\nHowever, in case of four or more pegs, the Frame\u2013Stewart algorithm is known without proof of optimality since 1941.\nFor the formal derivation of the exact number of minimum moves required to solve the problem by applying the Frame\u2013Stewart algorithm (and other equivalent methods), see the following paper.\nFor other variants of the four-peg Tower of Hanoi problem, see Paul Stockmeyer's survey paper.\nThe so-called Towers of Bucharest and Towers of Klagenfurt game configurations yield ternary and pentary Gray codes.\nFrame\u2013Stewart algorithm.\nThe Frame\u2013Stewart algorithm is described below:\nThe algorithm can be described recursively:\nThe entire process takes formula_17 moves. Therefore, the count formula_7 should be picked for which this quantity is minimum. In the 4-peg case, the optimal formula_7 equals formula_20, where formula_21 is the nearest integer function. For example, in the UPenn CIS 194 course on Haskell, the first assignment page lists the optimal solution for the 15-disk and 4-peg case as 129 steps, which is obtained for the above value of \"k\".\nThis algorithm is presumed to be optimal for any number of pegs; its number of moves is 2\u0398(\"n\"1/(\"r\"\u22122)) (for fixed \"r\").\nGeneral shortest paths and the number 466/885.\nA curious generalization of the original goal of the puzzle is to start from a given configuration of the disks where all disks are not necessarily on the same peg and to arrive in a minimal number of moves at another given configuration. In general, it can be quite difficult to compute a shortest sequence of moves to solve this problem. A solution was proposed by Andreas Hinz and is based on the observation that in a shortest sequence of moves, the largest disk that needs to be moved (obviously one may ignore all of the largest disks that will occupy the same peg in both the initial and final configurations) will move either exactly once or exactly twice.\nThe mathematics related to this generalized problem becomes even more interesting when one considers the \"average\" number of moves in a shortest sequence of moves between two initial and final disk configurations that are chosen at random. Hinz and Chan Tat-Hung independently discovered (see also\n) that the average number of moves in an n-disk Tower is given by the following exact formula:\nformula_22\nFor large enough \"n\", only the first and second terms do not converge to zero, so we get an asymptotic expression: formula_23, as formula_24. Thus intuitively, we could interpret the fraction of formula_25 as representing the ratio of the labor one has to perform when going from a randomly chosen configuration to another randomly chosen configuration, relative to the difficulty of having to cross the \"most difficult\" path of length formula_26 which involves moving all the disks from one peg to another. An alternative explanation for the appearance of the constant 466/885, as well as a new and somewhat improved algorithm for computing the shortest path, was given by Romik.\nMagnetic Hanoi.\nIn Magnetic Tower of Hanoi, each disk has two distinct sides North and South (typically colored \"red\" and \"blue\").\nDisks must not be placed with the similar poles together\u2014magnets in each disk prevent this illegal move.\nAlso, each disk must be flipped as it is moved.\nBicolor Towers of Hanoi.\nThis variation of the famous Tower of Hanoi puzzle was offered to grade 3\u20136 students at \"2\u00e8me Championnat de France des Jeux Math\u00e9matiques et Logiques\" held in July 1988.\nThe rules of the puzzle are essentially the same: disks are transferred between pegs one at a time. At no time may a bigger disk be placed on top of a smaller one. The difference is that now for every size there are two disks: one black and one white. Also, there are now two towers of disks of alternating colors. The goal of the puzzle is to make the towers monochrome (same color). The biggest disks at the bottom of the towers are assumed to swap positions.\nTower of Hanoy.\nA variation of the puzzle has been adapted as a solitaire game with nine playing cards under the name Tower of Hanoy. It is not known whether the altered spelling of the original name is deliberate or accidental.\nApplications.\nThe Tower of Hanoi is frequently used in psychological research on problem-solving. There also exists a variant of this task called Tower of London for neuropsychological diagnosis and treatment of disorders of executive function.\nZhang and Norman used several isomorphic (equivalent) representations of the game to study the impact of representational effect in task design. They demonstrated an impact on user performance by changing the way that the rules of the game are represented, using variations in the physical design of the game components. This knowledge has impacted on the development of the TURF framework for the representation of human\u2013computer interaction.\nThe Tower of Hanoi is also used as a backup rotation scheme when performing computer data backups where multiple tapes/media are involved.\nThe Tower of Hanoi is also used as a test by neuropsychologists trying to evaluate frontal lobe deficits.\nIn 2010, researchers published the results of an experiment that found that the ant species \"Linepithema humile\" were successfully able to solve the 3-disk version of the Tower of Hanoi problem through non-linear dynamics and pheromone signals.\nIn 2014, scientists synthesized multilayered palladium nanosheets with a Tower of Hanoi-like structure.\nIn 2025, Apple Inc. researchers used the Tower of Hanoi and other puzzles to test the reasoning ability of LLM Generative AI programs. The researchers found that the leading AI models, including ChatGPT, Claude, and Deepseek, struggled with solving a Tower of Hanoi at the level of 7 rings, getting less than 80% accuracy, and failing completely to solve a Tower of Hanoi with 8 rings. Even in instances in which the researchers gave the AI models the solution algorithm, they still failed. Based on this performance, the researchers concluded that AI systems collapse when complexity rises, indicating that they're unable to handle tasks that push them beyond the distribution of their training data, which also casts doubt on the ability of those models to advance to the level of AGI.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the science fiction story \"Now Inhale\", by Eric Frank Russell, a human is held prisoner on a planet where the local custom is to make the prisoner play a game until it is won or lost before his execution. The protagonist knows that a rescue ship might take a year or more to arrive, so he chooses to play Towers of Hanoi with 64 disks. This story makes reference to the legend about the Buddhist monks playing the game until the end of the world.\nIn the 1966 \"Doctor Who\" story \"The Celestial Toymaker\", the eponymous villain forces the Doctor to play a ten-piece, 1,023-move Tower of Hanoi game entitled The Trilogic Game with the pieces forming a pyramid shape when stacked.\nIn 2007, the concept of the Towers Of Hanoi problem was used in \"Professor Layton and the Diabolical Box\" in puzzles 6, 83, and 84, but the disks had been changed to pancakes. The puzzle was based around a dilemma where the chef of a restaurant had to move a pile of pancakes from one plate to the other with the basic principles of the original puzzle (i.e. three plates that the pancakes could be moved onto, not being able to put a larger pancake onto a smaller one, etc.)\nIn the 2011 film \"Rise of the Planet of the Apes\", this puzzle, called in the film the \"Lucas Tower\", is used as a test to study the intelligence of apes.\nThe puzzle is featured regularly in adventure and puzzle games. Since it is easy to implement, and easily recognised, it is well suited to use as a puzzle in a larger graphical game (e.g. \"\" and \"Mass Effect\"). Some implementations use straight disks, but others disguise the puzzle in some other form. There is an arcade version by Sega.\nA 15-disk version of the puzzle appears in the game \"Sunless Sea\" as a lock to a tomb. The player has the option to click through each move of the puzzle in order to solve it, but the game notes that it will take 32,767 moves to complete. If an especially dedicated player does click through to the end of the puzzle, it is revealed that completing the puzzle does not unlock the door.\nThis was first used as a challenge in \"Survivor\" Thailand in 2002 but rather than rings, the pieces were made to resemble a temple. Sook Jai threw the challenge to get rid of Jed even though Shii-Ann knew full well how to complete the puzzle.\nThe problem is featured as part of a reward challenge in a . Both players (Ozzy Lusth and Benjamin \"Coach\" Wade) struggled to understand how to solve the puzzle and are aided by their fellow tribe members.\nIn 2025, the puzzle also appears in the beginning of the \"Mega Duel\" in the Love Island Games season 2 Finale. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56992", "revid": "1530685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56992", "title": "Fred Gwynne", "text": "American actor and author (1926\u20131993)\nFrederick Hubbard Gwynne (July 10, 1926 \u2013 July 2, 1993) was an American actor, artist, and author, who is widely known for his roles in the 1960s television sitcoms \"Car 54, Where Are You?\" (as Francis Muldoon) and \"The Munsters\" (as Herman Munster), as well as his later film roles in \"The Cotton Club\" (1984), \"Pet Sematary\" (1989), and \"My Cousin Vinny\" (1992).\nEarly life.\nGwynne was born on July 10, 1926, in New York City, the son of Frederick Walker Gwynne, a partner in the securities firm Gwynne Brothers, and his wife Dorothy Goddard (n\u00e9e Ficken) Gwynne, who, before her marriage, was a successful illustrator , known for the \"first cereal mascot\",&lt;ref name=\"mishpacha/food-mascots\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; the \"Sunny Jim\" advertising character for the breakfast cereal, \"Force\", for the advertising agent Earnest Elmo Calkins.&lt;ref name=\"vam/O74356\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He had at least two siblings, Dorothy Gwynne and Bowers Gwynne, both of whom died young. His paternal grandfather, Walker Gwynne, was an Anglican priest, born c. 1846 in Camus, County Tyrone, Ireland, who married American Helen Lea Bowers. His maternal grandfather, H. Edwards Ficken, was a British immigrant who married the American Josephine (or Josephina) Preston Hubbard. Although Gwynne partially grew up in Tuxedo Park, New York, he spent most of his childhood in South Carolina, Florida, and Colorado because his father traveled extensively.\nFollowing his father's death, his mother sent him to boarding school at Groton School, where he graduated in 1944 and may have set the school record for disciplinary black marks. He was president of the drama club and made his first stage appearance in a school production of \"Henry V\". Forty years later, he used his drawing skills to pen the school's official campus map.\nHaving attended high school during World War II, Gwynne joined the United States Navy after graduation, serving as a radioman on submarine chaser USS \"Manville\" (PC-581).\nAfter the war, Gwynne attended art school at the Phoenix School of Design (now affiliated with the Pratt Institute) in New York, with \"the dream of doing \"Saturday Evening Post\" covers.\" He found that the work was not right for him, and transferred to Harvard College in 1948, graduating in 1951. He was a member of the Fly Club, served as president of the \"Harvard Lampoon\" (and as an in-house cartoonist), sang with the Harvard Krokodiloes a cappella group, and acted for the Hasty Pudding Theatricals. He was affiliated with Adams House. During his tenure as \"Lampoon\" president, the Middlesex County District Attorney once attempted to ban the publication of the \"Lampoon\"'s parody magazine for obscenity. In response, Gwynne joked that \"This just proves what we already knew \u2013 moral standards in New England are higher than elsewhere in the country.\"\nIn the 1940s, Gwynne was a summertime swimming instructor at the Duxbury Yacht Club pool in Duxbury, Massachusetts.\nCareer.\nGwynne joined the Brattle Theatre Repertory Company after his 1951 graduation, then moved to New York City. To support himself, Gwynne worked as a copywriter for the J.\u00a0Walter Thompson advertising agency, resigning in 1952 upon being cast in his first Broadway role, a gangster in a comedy called \"Mrs. McThing\" starring Helen Hayes. Another early role was a New York City Drama Company production at City Center of Shakespeare's \"Love's Labour's Lost\" in 1953, in the role of Dull, a constable. Gwynne preferred theater to film and television, and maintained that if the United States had a national theater mounting year-round productions, he would rather work there.\nIn 1954, he made his first cinematic appearance playing \u2013 in an uncredited role \u2013 the laconic character Slim in the Oscar-winning film \"On the Waterfront\". Shortly afterwards, Phil Silvers sought him for his television show because he had been impressed by Gwynne's comedic work in \"Mrs. McThing\". As a result, Gwynne made a memorable appearance on \"The Phil Silvers Show\" in the episode \"The Eating Contest\" as the character Corporal Ed Honnergar, whose depressive eating binges are exploited in an eating contest.\nGwynne's second appearance on \"The Phil Silvers Show\" (in the episode \"It's for the Birds\") and appearances on many other shows led writer-producer Nat Hiken to cast him in the sitcom \"Car 54, Where Are You?\" as Patrolman Francis Muldoon.\nGwynne was 6\u00a0ft\u00a05\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m) tall, an attribute that contributed to his being cast as Herman Munster, a goofy parody of Frankenstein's monster, in the sitcom \"The Munsters\". For his role, he had to wear 40 or 50\u00a0lbs (18 or 23\u00a0kg) of padding, makeup, and 5-inch asphalt-spreader boots. His face was painted a bright violet because it captured the most light on the black-and-white film. Gwynne was known for his sense of humor and retained fond recollections of Herman, saying in later life, \"I might as well tell you the truth. I love old Herman Munster. Much as I try not to, I can't stop liking that fellow.\"\nAfter his iconic role in \"The Munsters\", Gwynne found himself typecast, unable to gain new film roles for over two years. In 1969, he was cast as Jonathan Brewster in a television production of \"Arsenic and Old Lace.\" The Brewster character was originally played by Boris Karloff, who also played Frankenstein's monster on which Gwynne's Herman Munster character was based, in the Broadway production of the play. Gwynne then found success as a stage actor in regional state productions across the United States while maintaining a low Hollywood profile.\nA talented vocalist, Gwynne sang in a \"Hallmark Hall of Fame\" television production \"The Littlest Angel\" (1969), and went on to perform in a variety of roles on stage and screen. In 1974, drawing upon his own Southern roots, he appeared in the role of Big Daddy Pollitt in the Broadway revival of \"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof\" with Elizabeth Ashley, Keir Dullea and Kate Reid. In 1975, he played the Stage Manager in \"Our Town\" at the American Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford, Connecticut.\nFrom 1975 to 1982, Gwynne appeared in 83 episodes in different roles on the popular radio drama series, the \"CBS Radio Mystery Theater\", produced and directed by Himan Brown. He returned to Broadway in 1976 as Colonel J.C. Kinkaid in two parts of \"A Texas Trilogy\". In 1984, Gwynne auditioned for the part of Henry on the sitcom \"Punky Brewster\", then withdrew in frustration when a director identified him as Herman Munster rather than by his real name. The role of Henry went to George Gaynes. In 1987, Gwynne starred in the short-lived TV series \"Jake's M.O.\", where he played an investigative reporter.\nGwynne's performance as Jud Crandall in \"Pet Sematary\" was based on author Stephen King, who is only an inch shorter than the actor, and uses a similarly thick Maine dialect. The character's likeness and accent, as played by Gwynne, have been used in a number of episodes of the animated show \"South Park\", beginning in 2001 and as recently as 2019. Gwynne also had roles in the movies \"Simon\", \"On the Waterfront\", \"So Fine\", \"Disorganized Crime\", \"The Cotton Club\", \"Captains Courageous\", \"The Secret of My Success\", \"Water\", \"Ironweed\", \"Fatal Attraction\", and \"The Boy Who Could Fly\". Despite his misgiving about having been typecast, he agreed to reprise the role of Herman Munster for the 1981 TV reunion movie \"The Munsters' Revenge\". Gwynne performed the role of Judge Chamberlain Haller in his final film, the 1992 comedy \"My Cousin Vinny\".\nAs painter and illustrator.\nIn addition to his acting career, Gwynne sang professionally, painted, and wrote and illustrated children's books, including \"Best in Show\" (later titled \"It's Easy to See Why\"), \"Daddy Has a Mole on His Nose\", \"A Chocolate Moose for Dinner\", \"The King Who Rained\", \"Pondlarker\", \"The Battle of the Frogs and Mice\", and \"A Little Pigeon Toad\". Many of these efforts were based on children's frequent misperceptions of things they hear from adults, such as the \"chocolate moose for dinner\", illustrated as a moose seated at the dinner table. The other books on this theme were \"The King Who Rained\", \"A Little Pigeon Toad\" (in which a child's mother thus describes her father), and \"The Sixteen Hand Horse\". Initially the books did not achieve wider popularity because their format was geared to a very young audience, but the concept was more appealing to older children and adults. Eventually they achieved critical success and became regular bestsellers for their publisher. He also did his voice work for TV and radio commercials. Later in his career he held several shows of his artwork, the first in 1989.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1952, Gwynne married socialite Jean \"Foxy\" Reynard, a granddaughter of New York City mayor William Jay Gaynor. Before divorcing in 1980, the couple had five children: son Kieron (1953\u20131998); daughter Gaynor (b. 1954); son Evan (b. 1956); son Dylan (1962\u20131963, drowning); and daughter Madyn (b. 1965).\nIn 1988, Gwynne married his second wife, Deborah Flater. They remained married until his death in 1993.\nDeath.\nGwynne died of complications from pancreatic cancer, at his home in Taneytown, Maryland, on July 2, 1993, at age 66. He is buried in an unmarked grave at Sandy Mount United Methodist Church Cemetery in Finksburg, Maryland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56995", "revid": "50841935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56995", "title": "North American Electric Reliability Corporation", "text": "Non profit Electric Reliability Organization\nThe North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) is a nonprofit corporation based in Atlanta, Georgia, and formed on March 28, 2006, as the successor to the North American Electric Reliability Council (also known as NERC). The original NERC was formed on June 1, 1968, by the electric utility industry to promote the reliability and adequacy of bulk power transmission in the electric utility systems of North America. NERC's mission states that it \"is to assure the effective and efficient reduction of risks to the reliability and security of the grid\".\nNERC oversees six regional reliability entities and encompasses all of the interconnected power systems of Canada and the contiguous United States, as well as a portion of the Mexican state of Baja California.\nNERC's major responsibilities include working with all stakeholders to develop standards for power system operation, monitoring and enforcing compliance with those standards, assessing resource adequacy, and providing educational and training resources as part of an accreditation program to ensure power system operators remain qualified and proficient. NERC also investigates and analyzes the causes of significant power system disturbances in order to help prevent future events.\nNERC's standards for generating resources require that sufficient generating capacity be provided such that customers will need to be disconnected less often than once every ten years. These standards are mandatory for only some of the regional entities.\nOrigins.\nOriginally formed as a voluntary organization in 1968 by the electricity industry and called the National Electric Reliability Council, the name was changed to include \"North American\" in place of \"National\" in 1981 in recognition of Canada's participation and the broader scope of NERC's footprint. The name was changed from \"Council\" to \"Corporation\" in 2007.\nIn 2000, NERC established the Electricity Sector Information Sharing and Analysis Center, which provides industry with timely responses and alerts on cyber and physical security threats that have the potential to impact the bulk power system. The ES-ISAC, which changed its name in 2015 to Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center, shares timely information with industry through its secure web portal.\nIn August 2003, North America experienced its worst blackout to date, as 50million people lost power in the Northeastern and Midwestern United States and Ontario, Canada. A United States\u2013Canada Power System Outage Task Force was formed to investigate the causes of the blackout and to make recommendations to prevent future blackouts.\nThe Energy Policy Act of 2005 (US) called for the creation of an Electric Reliability Organization (ERO) to develop and enforce compliance with mandatory reliability standards in the United States. This non-governmental, \"self-regulatory organization\" was created in recognition of the interconnected and international nature of the bulk power grid.\nIn April 2006, NERC applied for and was granted the designation of the ERO by FERC in July 2006. NERC also filed the first set of mandatory Reliability Standards with FERC, as well as filing the same information with the Canadian provincial authorities in Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Quebec, Saskatchewan, and with the National Energy Board of Canada.\nAbout NERC.\nElectricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center.\nNERC also operates the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC). E-ISAC offers security services to bulk power system owners and operators across North America. E-ISAC services includes specific cyber and physical security threat intelligence, tailored cyber security knowledge and physical security collaboration. The E-ISAC, which NERC established at the request of the U.S. Department of Energy, works closely with NERC's Bulk Power System Awareness team in Atlanta to monitor real-time cyber and physical security threats to the grid.\nThe E-ISAC, through capabilities including its Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program (CRISP), works with critical asset owners and operators to analyze real-time cyber and physical security data for patterns of incidents with the potential to affect the bulk power system. NERC has a \"firewall\" separating the E-ISAC and NERC's compliance and enforcement activities. The separation extends to a physical separation of the E-ISAC from the rest of NERC.\nNERC authority.\nAs part of the fallout of the Northeast Blackout of 2003, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorized the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to designate a national Electric Reliability Organization (ERO). On July 20, 2006, FERC issued an order certifying NERC as the ERO for the United States.\nIn September 2018, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and NERC opened a joint investigation into a \"winter load event\" earlier in January that stressed the electrical grids in the Midwest. On January 17, Midwest and U.S. south central grid operators ordered emergency appeals for electricity conservation. This was due to high power demand caused by cold weather.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56996", "revid": "310363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56996", "title": "Absolutely Fabulous", "text": "British TV sitcom (1992\u20132012)\nAbsolutely Fabulous (often shortened to Ab Fab) is a British television sitcom created and written by Jennifer Saunders, which premiered in 1992. It is based on the 1990 \"French and Saunders\" sketch \"Modern Mother and Daughter\", created by Dawn French and Saunders.\nSaunders stars as Edina Monsoon, a heavy-drinking, drug-abusing PR mogul who spends her time failing to lose weight and chasing bizarre fads in a desperate attempt to stay young and \"hip.\" Edina's best friend is ex-model and magazine fashion director Patsy Stone (Joanna Lumley), whose drug abuse, alcohol consumption and desperate promiscuity far eclipse Edina's. Edina relies upon the support of her daughter Saffron (Julia Sawalha), a student and aspiring writer whose constant care of her immature mother has left her a bitter cynic. The series also stars June Whitfield as Edina's dotty, sarcastic and often thieving mother, and Jane Horrocks as Bubble, Edina's nearly-useless personal assistant.\nThe first three series of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" were broadcast on the BBC from 1992 to 1995, followed by a series finale in the form of a two-part special entitled \"The Last Shout,\" in 1996. In 2000, the show was ranked number 17 on the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes by the British Film Institute. It was revived for two more series and two one-hour specials from 2001 to 2004. Three new episodes, collectively titled ', were released in 2011\u20132012. Two sketches for charity specials were also released, for Comic Relief in 2005 and Sport Relief in 2012. A film continuation, ', was theatrically released in 2016, with many of the show's supporting cast returning.\nSaunders confirmed in 2016 that she is \"not doing anything more with \"Ab Fab\"\", as she wanted to focus on new projects. In October 2024, Saunders, Lumley, Sawalha and Horrocks appeared in the Documentary \"Absolutely Fabulous: Inside Out\", which was broadcast on Gold.\nPremise.\nEdina Monsoon (Saunders) is the middle-aged owner of a failing PR firm in London's tony Holland Park neighborhood. Her best friend is Patsy Stone (Lumley), an aging former fashion model who holds a sinecure position at a top British magazine. The two women use their considerable financial resources to indulge in cigarettes, alcohol (most notably Bollinger Champagne) and recreational drugs and to chase the latest fads in an attempt to maintain their youth and recapture their glory days as Mods in swinging London. The partnership is driven mainly by Patsy, who is both co-dependent and an enabler to Edina.\nTheir lifestyle inevitably leads to various personal crises, which are invariably resolved by Edina's daughter, Saffron Monsoon (Sawalha), whose constant involvement in their exploits has left her increasingly bitter and cynical. Edina's unnamed mother (Whitfield) visits the Monsoon home frequently to keep Saffron company, help with chores and, quite often, taking Edina's possessions to sell at off car boot sales. The relationship between Edina and mother is strained, as they disagree on virtually everything and are rarely alone together, a relationship with which they are both keen to antagonize each other. Meanwhile, Edina's affairs are handled, usually very badly, by Bubble (Horrocks), an incompetent, immature and neurotic personal assistant, whose antics frequently lead to further complications for Edina's business and personal life.\nCast and characters.\nSpecial guests.\nMany celebrities, mainly British or American, appeared in the series, most of them as themselves. They include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"Absolutely Fabulous\" evolved from a \"French and Saunders\" sketch called \"Modern Mother and Daughter\" (from series 3 episode 6), which starred Saunders as the mother, named Adrianna, and French as the daughter, named Saffron (as in the series). The sketch revolved around a middle-aged single mother who acted like a teenager and was reliant upon the emotional and financial support of her teenage daughter, who behaved like a middle-aged woman.\nIt has no connection, other than the character's name, to the earlier film, \"Eddie Monsoon: A Life?\", a comedy play written by Saunders' husband Adrian Edmondson in 1984 for the TV series, \"The Comic Strip Presents...\". The name \"Edina Monsoon\" is derived from Edmondson's name and \"Eddy Monsoon\" is a nickname of his.\nSaunders revealed in 2012 that she was inspired by pop band Bananarama, with whom she and Dawn French had become friends after their Comic Relief collaboration in 1989.\n\"The nights with Bananarama were some of the best nights of my life, and I got a lot of gags from Bananarama because they were big vodka drinkers...when I started doing AbFab, I remembered all of the falls that I saw Bananarama do. I once saw one of them coming out of a cab bottom first and hitting the road, and I thought 'that's class'\".\nAlthough \"Ab Fab\" was produced by Saunders and French's company, Saunders &amp; French Productions, Dawn French appeared on the show only once, in a cameo in the first-series episode \"Magazine\", before making a brief cameo in the 2016 film. French was originally intended to play Edina's daughter, Saffron, but a younger actress (Sawalha) was ultimately cast.\nThe first three series were broadcast on the BBC from 1992 to 1995, followed by a series finale in the form of a two-part television film entitled \"The Last Shout\" in 1996. Saunders revived the show for a fourth series in 2001 after writing and submitting a pilot entitled \"Mirrorball\", which recruited nearly all of the original cast in new roles. The pilot was intended to be turned into a series of episodes. However, Saunders felt the AbFab characters were too rich and interesting to put aside and were far better suited for her new story ideas. Instead of \"Mirrorball\", a new series of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" was proposed to the BBC, which later commissioned the fourth series in 2001. From 2001 to 2004, two series were produced, along with two one-off hour-long specials; \"Gay\" (retitled and issued as \"Absolutely Fabulous in New York\" for the United States) in 2002 and \"White Box\" (another series finale), which aired in 2004. A Comic Relief sketch was broadcast in 2005.\nIn November 2010, Lumley revealed to \"Playbill\" magazine that she had recently spoken to Saunders about possibly filming a new series. Lumley and Saunders reunited for the M&amp;S Christmas advert in 2009, along with other stars such as Twiggy and Stephen Fry.\nIn August 2011, Lumley confirmed the planned filming of three new episodes. In 2011, plans for a 20th-anniversary revival were welcomed in \"The Guardian\", which applauded the show as \"prophetic\". The first new special of \"\" was broadcast on 25 December with the second episode being shown on 1 January 2012. The third and final special, aired on 23 July 2012, coincided with the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, with Stella McCartney appearing in a cameo role. A sketch for Sport Relief was also broadcast in 2012. A film version of the series, \",\" was released to theatres in the summer of 2016.\nThree new specials were announced to celebrate the show's 20th anniversary, with the first special, \"Identity\", airing on 25 December 2011. Jon Plowman, executive producer and original producer of the series, said: \"Viewers have been fantastically loyal in their devotion to our show, so we're really thrilled to say that it's coming back for three new shows to celebrate our 20th anniversary. All of the originals who are back together again are still truly absolutely fabulous and the new adventures of Edina, Patsy, Saffy, Bubble and Mother, plus a few surprising guests, will be a real treat for viewers.\" Saunders announced in November 2011 that she had begun work on a film version of the series.\nIn the United States, the episodes were jointly co-produced by Logo and BBC America in the US. and aired in January 2012 for broadcast by both BBC America and Logo Channel. Both channels co-produced the 20th Anniversary episodes, although Logo removed some scenes for its airings. BBC America broadcast it in full. Both channels aired the episode in a 40-minute block to allow for commercial interruptions.\nOn 3 January 2012, following the success of the 20th anniversary specials, it was rumoured that Saunders was set to write another Christmas special for 2012. The BBC was rumoured to be urging her to write a sixth series for 2013. Saunders denied the reports of additional episodes via her Twitter account.\nEpisodes of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" were shot in front of a live studio audience.\nTheme song.\nThe theme song for \"Absolutely Fabulous\" is \"This Wheel's on Fire\", written by Bob Dylan and Rick Danko and performed by Julie Driscoll and Saunders' Comic Strip fellow and later husband, Adrian Edmondson. The song was also sung by Marianne Faithfull and P. P. Arnold for the two-part special, \"The Last Shout\", in 1996. Hermine Demoriane sang the theme song with a French accent over the closing credits of the series 4 episode \"Paris\" in 2001. At the end of the series 1 episode \"Birthday\", Edina and Patsy sang the song together on a karaoke machine. It was later performed by Debbie Harry and Edmondson in the 2002 Christmas special \"Gay\" (where Harry also guest-starred), as well as in series 5. For series 4, a line sung by David Bowie, \"Ziggy played guitar\", from his song \"Ziggy Stardust\", played at the end of each episode.\nDue to copyright issues, the theme song is missing from many US Region 1 DVDs, replaced by an instrumental version. Also excised from the US DVD release is the musical number from \"Chicago\" performed by Horrocks, Gaffney, and Ryan during a dream sequence in the series 5 episode \"Birthin'\".\nIn addition to the official theme song, in 1994, Pet Shop Boys recorded a song for \"Comic Relief\" using excerpts of dialogue from the series put to dance music. The single was attributed to \"Absolutely Fabulous produced by Pet Shop Boys\". It peaked at number six on the UK Singles Chart in July 1994. The music video featured clips from the show and specially recorded footage of the Pet Shop Boys with Patsy and Edina.\nOn 10 June 2016, Kylie Minogue released a cover version of \"This Wheel's on Fire\" for the soundtrack to \"Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie\", before the film's release in July 2016.\nConclusion.\nOn 29 November 2016, Jennifer Saunders confirmed that she was \"done\" with \"Absolutely Fabulous\" and that it would not return to television for another series or specials, nor would a sequel to the film be made. Saunders said she wished to focus on new projects and spend more time with her family. Even so, in 2018, Saunders, when asked about the prospect of reviving the programme yet again, did not entirely dismiss it, saying \"I am thinking at the moment of writing a little something. It has to be age-appropriate otherwise we\u2019d have to be in wheelchairs basically. I think Julia is old enough to be my mother now.\" Saunders said the prospect of writing new stories with those characters was \"always on [her] mind, always\".\nIn November 2020, Joanna Lumley was asked about the possibility of another revival and said that that would be up to Saunders. Lumley said it was unlikely, as Saunders did not want to work on new stories featuring the characters at that time. Lumley said that June Whitfield's death in December 2018 also meant it was less likely to happen, but said if Saunders wished to write new \"Ab Fab\" stories, she would be up for returning to play Patsy; she said \"wait and see\".\nInternational broadcast.\nEurope.\nIn Portugal, \"Ab Fab\" has been shown on RTP2. In Serbia, the first series was aired in 1998, through a network of local television stations. In 2004, the series was aired on B92, while in the Czech Republic, all episodes have been shown. In North Macedonia, all episodes have been shown several times on Sitel. In the Netherlands and Flanders, the series is popular, and it is still regularly re-broadcast by the VPRO and Canvas, respectively. In Sweden, all episodes were first broadcast by SVT, but reruns have later appeared on other channels. In Germany, it was broadcast by the Franco-German TV network Arte and gay-oriented channel TIMM. In France, before it was rerun on terrestrial TV arte, it was successively premiered on pay TV channel Canal +, cable channel Jimmy, and is now broadcast on France 4. In Finland, the series was broadcast by YLE TV1. In Estonia, the series was broadcast by ETV. In Poland, two series were broadcast by Wizja Jeden, later by TVP3, TVN7 and BBC Entertainment.\nAustralia/Oceania.\nIn Australia, all series were initially shown on the ABC and on cable on UK.TV, and moved to The Comedy Channel in 2007. Repeats of the first three series were also shown on the Seven network. ABC continues to show it sporadically, including Christmas specials and occasional repeats of series five episodes. ABC2 also shows repeats of the show. As of 6\u20137 August 2016, the series was shown on Nine Network's sister channel 9Gem to promote the upcoming film adaptation. All five series were broadcast in New Zealand on TVNZ. In India, all five series, including the specials, have been shown on BBC Entertainment.\nNorth America.\nIn the United States, \"Absolutely Fabulous\" premiered on 24 July 1994 on Comedy Central with a 12-episode marathon. Some public television stations have also broadcast it, but not as part of the PBS program offerings, in addition to BBC America, Oxygen Network, and as of 2011, Logo, a gay-oriented channel. In Canada, the programme has appeared on the BBC Canada, the CBC, The Comedy Network and VisionTV. In the United States in April 2021, the entire series is being included with Amazon\u2019s Prime streaming service; while listed slightly differently, e.g., \"Season 5\" adds the final three episodes from 2011 to the British series five from 2003 to 2004, all episodes are available with a Prime membership. It is also available on the Britbox streaming service.\nOther.\nIn Israel, some of the series was aired on Yes Plus and on BBC Entertainment. In Brazil, all episodes were aired on Eurochannel &amp; Multishow in the late 90s &amp; 2000s beginning, and in the 2010s at GNT.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nTim Gray of \"Variety\" magazine said that \"\"Absolutely Fabulous\", British sitcom about a rich, self-absorbed, falling-down-drunk woman, is not as funny as it intends to be, but it is absolutely unique, absolutely rude and absolutely politically incorrect\". He also said that \"\"AbFab\" offers no sense of justice, which may give viewers the heebie-jeebies, since Americans like to believe that the wicked, even if they are amusing, will get punished. But the characters are originals, and \"AbFab\" has the courage of its convictions, encouraging audiences to find humor in such recent comedic taboos as substance abuse or mistreated offspring.\"\nMichael Hogan of \"The Daily Telegraph\" gave the 20th Anniversary specials a negative review; following the \"Olympics\" episode, he commented, \"The special Olympic edition of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" [...] would have won no medals for comedy.\" He added, \"This was the last of three 20th anniversary specials, the first pair of which were shown over Christmas. Every single one of those 20 years showed on-screen during this torturous half-hour.\"\nIn a more favourable review, Meredith Blake of \"The A.V. Club\" stated, \"While longtime \"AbFab\" fans will enjoy this latest incarnation of the series, which has been reprised multiple times since its official end in 1995, 'Identity' most definitely isn't for \"AbFab\" neophytes, who will most likely be confused by the broad performances, the outr\u00e9 costumes, and the disembodied canned laughter.\"\nCultural impact.\nIn 2000, \"Absolutely Fabulous\" was ranked as the 17th greatest British television show of all time by the British Film Institute (BFI). In 1997, the pilot episode, \"Fashion\", was ranked #47 on \"TV Guide\"'s \"100 Greatest Episodes of All-Time\" list. A scene from the show was included in the \"TV's 100 Greatest Moments\" programme broadcast by Channel 4 in 1999. In 2004 and 2007, the show was ranked #24 and #29 on \"TV Guide\"'s \"Top Cult Shows Ever\" list. In 2019, the series ranked #9 in \"Radio Times\"' top 20 British sitcoms of all time. \"Absolutely Fabulous\" has a 96% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.\nFrom its earliest series, \"Absolutely Fabulous\" won a devoted cult status with gay audiences, which persists. There have been numerous tributes over the years, such as an \"Absolutely Fabulous\" drag show at Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, and the song \"Absolutely Fabulous\" by synth-pop duo Pet Shop Boys. Later series of the show leaned into its cult status, including more gay-related storylines, such as Edina's search for her estranged gay son and Edina and Patsy marrying each other in a same-sex commitment ceremony.\nAdaptations and related media.\nA proposed American remake that would have starred Carrie Fisher and Barbara Carrera was put into motion by Roseanne Barr but never materialised. However, Barr did incorporate many elements of the show into the ninth season of her eponymous show \"Roseanne\", in which her character wins the lottery: Saunders and Lumley reprised their characters Edina and Patsy, and Mo Gaffney also appeared in the episode, though not as her character Bo. Two later American sitcoms, \"Cybill\" and \"High Society\", also adapted elements of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" for the American audience.\nIt was announced on 7 October 2008 that an American version of the series was in the works. The series was tentatively called \"Ab Fab\" and relocated to Los Angeles. \"Saturday Night Live\" writer Christine Zander worked on the new scripts and would have been executive producer along with Saunders and BBC Worldwide's Ian Moffitt. Sony Pictures Television, BBC Worldwide, and indie Tantamount were producing the new series for Fox, which greenlighted the pilot as a possible Fall 2009 entry with Kathryn Hahn as Eddy and Kristen Johnston as Patsy. In May 2009, Fox decided not to commission a full series.\nThe stage for the kitchen in \"Ab Fab\" was subsequently used as the stage for the shop in the British comedy \"Miranda\". Miranda Hart, creator of the show, had previously appeared on \"Absolutely Fabulous\".\n\"Mirrorball\".\n\"Mirrorball\" was a pilot set in the London theatre scene, starring the cast of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" as alternative characters. While writing and filming the show, Saunders was inspired to revive \"Absolutely Fabulous\" for a fourth series, which resulted in her abandoning \"Mirrorball\". It was eventually aired as a television special and is included as a special feature on the fourth series DVD. Some original characters from Mirrorball feature in the fourth series.\n\"Absolument fabuleux\".\nA French film inspired by \"Absolutely Fabulous\", titled \"Absolument fabuleux\", was released in 2001. It was written and directed by Gabriel Aghion, and starred Josiane Balasko as Eddy and Nathalie Baye as Patsy. Saunders had a small cameo alongside Catherine Deneuve as a spectator at a fashion show. Amanda Lear was asked to play the part of Patsy but turned it down laughingly, saying she had \"already lived it\".\n\"Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie\".\nIn 2011, before the release of the new episodes for 2011/2012, \"Deadline Hollywood\" reported that Saunders planned to begin writing a script for a film of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" in 2012. The film would begin with Edina and Patsy waking up on an oligarch's deserted yacht, drifting in the ocean. Saunders later said that the film would be set on the French Riviera. In March 2012, Saunders confirmed that she was working on the script. She said of the film's plotline:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Eddy and Patsy are looking for what they imagine glamorous life should be. They're constantly searching for that perfect place to sit or that perfect pair of sunglasses. It's Shangri-La and it just might be round the next corner. In the meantime, they decide to take Saffy's (Julia Sawalha) daughter off her \u2013 she calls her Jane, I call her Lola \u2013 but then they lose her.\nSaunders also stated that now that she had announced plans for a feature, there was no going back. She would do it for no reason other than having her alter-ego and Patsy walk down the red carpet at the film's premiere. In April 2013, Saunders said on the \"Alan Carr Chatty Man\" show that she had doubts about the film as she felt the cast was \"too old\". She felt pressure to write it and did not want to commit herself to it at this early stage.\nOn 4 January 2014 whilst appearing on \"The Jonathan Ross Show\", Saunders officially confirmed that the movie will definitely be happening, as she felt obliged to write a script for a film adaptation after threatening it for so long. Saunders was quoted as saying: \"Joanna Lumley kept announcing it and saying, 'Yes she's going to do it,' and then Dawn French on our radio show at Christmas said, 'I bet \u00a3100,000 that you don't write it,' so now I have to write it, otherwise I have to pay her \u00a3100,000'\". In April 2014, Saunders again confirmed on BBC Breakfast that she was in the process of writing the film, and gave a prospective release date of sometime during 2015.\nPrincipal photography on the film began on 12 October 2015 in the south of France and it premiered in London on 29 June 2016.\nHome media.\n\"Absolutely Fabulous\" was initially released on VHS in the UK by BBC Video ending with the eight-VHS box set \"Series 1\u20134\" in November 2002. In the United States, series 1 and 2 were released together on Laserdisc by CBS/FOX in a boxed set in 1995, followed by series 3, released by CBS/FOX the following year and \"The Last Shout\" released by Image Entertainment in 1997. All episodes were later released on DVD, including a five-DVD box set titled \"The Complete DVD Collection: Series 1\u20134\" in 2002. BBC Video distributed all releases and 2 Entertain (post 2004) except for \"The Last Shout\" which was released by Vision Video and Universal Studios. The entire series is also available on demand on iTunes. When the first three series were re-released on DVD, they did not include corresponding cover photography to their series: Series 1 included an image from the Series 3 episode \"Jealous\", Series 2 had an image from the Series 3 episode \"Doorhandle\" and Series 3 is from the Series 2 episode \"Poor\". All other releases included imagery from the correct series, as do the original VHS releases.\nIn North America, all episodes have been released on DVD by BBC Video and Warner Home Video, including a complete collection named \"Absolutely Everything\". \"The Last Shout\" and \"Gay\" (released in the UK individually) were released as a collection called \"Absolutely Special\" in 2003. Another feature-length special \"White Box\" was released exclusively to the American market. It was eventually released in the United Kingdom on 15 November 2010 with its inclusion in the \"Absolutely Everything\" box set.\nOther releases include \"Absolutely Not\", a bloopers and outtakes collection, and \"Absolutely Fabulous: A Life\" (released as \"Ab Fab: Moments\" in the United States exclusively to VHS), a mockumentary including 15\u00a0minutes of new material interspersed with clips from the series. Both were only released on VHS in the UK; the latter was also released as a special feature on the box set release \"Absolutely Everything\" in America.\nSave for \"The Last Shout\" and the specials \"Gay\" (aka \"Absolutely Fabulous in New York\") and \"White Box\", the entire series is available to stream via Hulu. The series is also available on Netflix.\nUK VHS.\nIn the United Kingdom, VHS releases were distributed by BBC Video, except \"The Last Shout,\" which was released by Vision Video, with a final release in 2002.\nDVD releases.\nAll five series of \"Absolutely Fabulous\" have been released on DVD in individual series sets in Region 1, 2 &amp; 4 via BBC Video, 2Entertain and Roadshow Entertainment, respectively. The specials have also been made available, not all in individual sets; \"The Last Shout\" was handled through Via Vision on Region 2, Universal Studios Home Entertainment on Region 4, and it was included alongside \"Gay\" on Region 1 from BBC Video. \"Gay\u201d was only released individually on Region 2, while it was included with the fifth series Region 4 DVD. \"White Box\" was only made available individually on Region 1 &amp; 4. The 20th Anniversary DVD was released individually on all regions.\nA set comprising the first three series was released on Region 1 only. A series one to four set was made available on Region 2 &amp; 4. In 2006, Region 4 was the first region to release all five series; however, due to licensing rights, \"The Last Shout\" was omitted from the set, but \"Gay\" and \"White Box\" remained. It was re-released in 2011, including \"The Last Shout\". The same set was released prior on Region 1 in 2008 and on Region 2 in 2010, which, for the first time, included \"White Box\" in the UK, which was never available individually. A complete series set was released on all regions with the addition of the 20th Anniversary Specials.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56997", "revid": "13560851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56997", "title": "Rhododendron 'President Roosevelt'", "text": "Plant cultivar\n\"Rhododendron\" 'President Roosevelt' is a popular cultivar of \"Rhododendron\" with striking variegated leaves and trusses of bright red flowers that fade to white in the centre. It is named after the 26th president of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt. Height 150\u2013180 cm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "56999", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56999", "title": "Economy of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "57000", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57000", "title": "Economy of Tokelau", "text": ""}
{"id": "57001", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57001", "title": "Economy of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe", "text": "The economy of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, while traditionally dependent on cocoa, is experiencing considerable changes due to investment in the development of its oil industry in the oil-rich waters of the Gulf of Guinea.\nHistory.\nUnder Portuguese colonial rule, sugar plantations were set up, and the islands were used for the transshipment of slaves.\nOil reserves.\nGeologists estimate that the Gulf of Guinea zone (Niger Delta province) holds more than 10 billion barrels (1.6\u00a0km3) of oil, although no reserves have yet been proven. A joint oil project with Nigeria in 2005 is likely to contribute $50 million of revenues to the government from the exploration licence signing fees. This represents four times government revenues in 2004. S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 is optimistic that significant petroleum discoveries under the exploration licence are forthcoming, though no crude oil nor natural gas has been found as of 2021.\nAgriculture.\nSince the 1800s, the economy of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe has been based on plantation agriculture. At the time of independence, Portuguese-owned plantations occupied 90% of the cultivated area. After independence, control of these plantations passed to various state-owned agricultural enterprises. The dominant crop on S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 is cocoa, representing about 95% of exports. Other export crops include copra, palm kernels, and coffee.\nEconomic issues.\nThe government has an economic program that is supported by the IMF, via its Extended Credit Facility arrangement.\nData.\nGross domestic product:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $316.9 million (2010 est.), $214 million (2003 est.)\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate: 6% (2010 est.), 5% (2004 est.)\nGDP \u2013 per capita:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $1,800 (2010 est.), $1,200 (2003 est.)\nUnemployment rate: 12.2% in the formal business sector (2017 est.)\nBudget:\nIndustries: light construction, textiles, soap, beer; fish processing; timber\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, copra, cinnamon, pepper, coffee, bananas, papayas, beans; poultry; fish\nExports:\n$13 million (2010 est.)\nExports \u2013 commodities:\ncocoa 80%, copra, coffee, palm oil (2009)\nExports \u2013 partners:\nUnited Kingdom 32.99%, Netherlands 26.93%, Belgium 21.04%, Portugal 4.31% (2009)\nImports:\n$127.7 million (2017 est.)\nPetroleum \u2013 it needs to import all of its required petroleum\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttps://theodora.com/wfbcurrent/sao_tome_and_principe/sao_tome_and_principe_economy.html"}
{"id": "57002", "revid": "50862248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57002", "title": "Economy of the Marshall Islands", "text": "The government of the Marshall Islands is the largest employer, employing 30.6% of the work force, down by 3.4% since 1988. GDP is derived mainly from payments made by the United States under the terms of the amended Compact of Free Association. Direct U.S. aid accounted for 60% of the Marshall Islands' $90 million budget. \nThe main economic activities in the Marshall Islands are copra production and fisheries. Under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, Marshallese citizens can travel and work in the United States without visas, which has contributed to more than a 22% population decline over the period 2000\u20132021.\nThe Marshall Islands has no central bank. The official currency of the Marshall Islands is the US Dollar.\nPresident Donald Trump announced a 10% tariff on the Marshall Islands on 2 April 2025.\nSubsistence economy.\nThe subsistence economy consists of fishing and breadfruit, banana, taro, and pandanus cultivation. On the outer islands, production of copra and handicrafts provide cash income. The modern service-oriented economy is located in Majuro and Ebeye. It is sustained by government expenditures and the U.S. Army installation at Kwajalein Atoll. The airfield there also serves as a second national hub for international flights.\nModern economy.\nThe modern sector consists of wholesale and retail trade; restaurants; banking and insurance; offshore companies registration; construction, repair, and professional services; and copra processing. Company formation in the Marshall Islands is available for residents and non-residents. Non-residents enjoy privacy benefits and zero local taxes. Copra cake and oil are by far the nation's largest exports. A tuna processing plant employs 300 workers, mostly women, at $1.50 per hour. Copra production, the most important single commercial activity for the past 100 years, now depends on government subsidies. The subsidies, more a social policy than an economic strategy, help reduce migration from outer atolls to densely populated Majuro and Ebeye.\nMarine resources, including fishing, aquaculture, tourism development, and agriculture, are top government development priorities. The Marshall Islands sells fishing rights to other nations as a source of income. In recent years, the Marshall Islands has begun to offer ship registrations under the Marshall Islands flag. As a small nation, the Marshall Islands must import a wide variety of goods, including foodstuffs, consumer goods, machinery, and petroleum products.\nMarshall Islands has signed a bilateral trade agreement with Taiwan in 2019, this agreement has been approved in 2023 and will take effect at a future date.\nCoconut oil.\nPower authorities, private companies, and entrepreneurs are experimenting with coconut oil as an alternative to diesel fuel for vehicles, power generators, and ships. Coconut trees abound in the Pacific's tropical islands. One liter of oil can be produced from the copra of 6\u201310 coconuts.\nDigital Financial Initiatives.\nIn 2018, the Republic of Marshall Islands passed the Sovereign Currency Act, which was later repealed in August 2025. . This was intended to launch a sovereign cryptocurrency and certify it as legal tender.\nIn November 2025, the Ministry of Finance announced ENRA, a universal basic income program, for disbursements of funds to citizens. Eligible citizens have the option of receiving their disbursement through direct deposits, mailed checks and, through a dedicated citizen digital wallet designed specifically for the Marshallese, called Lomalo (which translates to \u201cshared\nwaters\u201d in English). Through Lomalo, qualified recipients can verify their eligibility status, receive benefits in real time,\nand manage their accounts. The Lomalo digital wallet will help overcome long-standing distribution barriers in the Neighboring Islands, where limited banking infrastructure has historically delayed government transfers.\nA digital disbursement channel is made possible by integration with USDM1, the RMI\u2019s Digital Sovereign Bond - a U.S. dollar-denominated sovereign security fully collateralized by short-dated US Treasuries and redeemable at par in U.S. dollars. Because USDM1 is issued and recorded digitally, it enables secure, low-cost electronic distribution of benefits across the Marshall Islands, while all settlements remain in U.S. dollars through existing financial channels. USDM1 is a sovereign obligation of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, supported by the U.S. Treasuries held as collateral by a Qualified Custodian in the United States under New York law. The Treasuries are purchased with proceeds from the issuance of each unit and maintained in a\nbankruptcy-remote reserve account. This structure mirrors the design of Brady Bonds, through which more than $150 billion of sovereign debt has been issued globally over the past three decades. USDM1 is recorded in digital, book-entry form on the blockchain, enabling transparent, real-time settlement and verification while preserving the legal and prudential safeguards of\ntraditional sovereign securities.\nGross domestic product.\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity - $150 million (2011 est.)\nGDP - real growth rate:\n3% (2011 est.)\nGDP - per capita:\npurchasing power parity - $2 500 (2011 est.)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\n22%\n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\n18%\n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\n60% (2008)\nThe islands have few natural resources, and their imports far exceed exports. According to the CIA, the value of exports in 2013 was approximately $53.7 million while estimated imports were $133.7 million. Agricultural products include coconuts, tomatoes, melons, taro, breadfruit, fruits, pigs and chickens. Industry is made up of the production of copra and craft items, tuna processing and tourism. The CIA estimates that the GDP in 2016 was an estimated $180 million, with a real growth rate of 1.7% while the GDP per capita was $3,300.\nMarshall Island productivity.\nPopulation below poverty line:\nNA%\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n5% (2007)\nLabor force:\nNA\nLabor force - by occupation:\nagriculture 48%, industry 12%, services 40% (2008)\nUnemployment rate:\n8% (2011 est.)\nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\"\n$169.5 million\n&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\"\n$112.1 million, including capital expenditures of $19.5 million (FY08/09 est.)\nIndustries:\ncopra, fish, tourism, craft items from shell, wood, and pearls, offshore banking (embryonic)\nIndustrial production growth rate:\nNA%\nElectricity - production:\n114 GWh (2008)\nElectricity - production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\nNA%\nElectricity - consumption:\n57 GWh (1994)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (1994)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (1994)\nAgriculture - products:\ncoconuts, cacao, taro, breadfruit, fruits; pigs, chickens\nExports:\n$132 million (f.o.b., 2008 est.)\nExports - commodities:\nfish, coconut oil, trochus shells\nExports - partners:\nUnited States, Japan, Australia, New Zealand\nImports:\n$125 million (f.o.b., 2008 est.)\nImports - commodities:\nfoodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels, beverages and tobacco\nImports - partners:\nUnited States, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Guam, Singapore\nDebt - external:\n$68 million (2008 est.)\nEconomic aid - recipient:\napproximately $40 million annually from the US\nCurrency:\n1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nUS currency is used\nFiscal year:\n1 October - 30 September\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57003", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57003", "title": "History of the Marshall Islands", "text": "Austronesian settlers arrived in the Marshall Islands in the 2nd millennium BC, but there are no historical or oral records of that period. Over time, the Marshallese people learned to navigate over long ocean distances by \"walap\" canoe using traditional stick charts.\nPrehistory.\nLinguistic and anthropological studies have suggested that the first Austronesian settlers of the Marshall Islands arrived from the Solomon Islands. Radiocarbon dating of \"um\" earth ovens, post holes, and trash pits at Bikini Atoll suggests that the atoll may have been continuously inhabited from 1200 BCE to at least 1300 CE, though samples may not have been collected from secure stratigraphic contexts and older driftwood samples may have affected results. Archaeological digs on other atolls have found evidence of human habitation dating around the 1st century CE, including earth ovens at the Laura village, Majuro, with a date range of 93 BCE to 127 CE and Kwajalein with a range of 140 BCE to 255 CE.\nThe Marshallese sailed between islands on proas made from breadfruit-tree wood and coconut-fiber rope. They navigated by using the stars for orientation and initial course setting, but also developed a unique piloting technique of reading disruptions in ocean swells to determine the location of low coral atolls below the horizon. The Marshallese recognized four different types of swells coming from the cardinal directions, and noticed that swells refracted around the undersea slope of atolls. When refracted swells from different directions met, they created noticeable disruption patterns, which Marshallese pilots could read to determine the direction of an island. When interviewed by anthropologists, some Marshallese sailors noted that they piloted their canoes by both sight and feeling changes in the motion of the boat. The Marshallese preferred to sail between July and October, because Pacific trade winds made the swells harder to read during the rest of the year. Sailors also invented stick charts to map the swell patterns, but unlike western navigational charts, the Marshallese stick charts were tools for teaching students and for consultation before embarking on a voyage; navigators did not take charts with them when they set sail. The Marshallese made three types of charts: mattang charts, which were instructional tools for teaching the principles of piloting, and meddo and rebbelib charts, which represented the relative positions of actual swells and islands.\nThe Austronesian settlers introduced Southeast Asian crops, including coconuts, giant swamp taro, and breadfruit, as well as domesticated chickens throughout the Marshall Islands. They possibly seeded the islands by leaving coconuts at seasonal fishing camps before permanently settling years later. The southern islands receive heavier rainfall than the north, so communities in the wet south subsisted on prevalent taro and breadfruit, while northerners were more likely to subsist on pandanus and coconuts. Southern atolls probably supported larger, more dense populations. Archaeological digs have found adzes and chisels made from tridacna and cassis shells as well as ornaments, jewelry, beads, fishhooks, and fishing lures made from shell and coral.\nWhen Russian explorer Otto von Kotzebue visited the Marshalls in 1817, the islanders still showed few signs of western influence, aside from a few scraps of metal and stories of passing ships. He observed that the Marshallese lived in thatched-roof huts, but their villages did not include the large-ornate meetinghouses found in other parts of Micronesia. They did not have furniture, except for woven mats, which they used for both floor coverings and clothing. The Marshallese had pierced ears and tattoos. Kotzebue noted that the Marshallese tried to keep women away from foreigners, similar to other Micronesians and unlike Polynesians. On the islands he visited, Kotzebue learned that Marshallese families practiced infanticide after the birth of a third child as a form of population planning due to frequent famines. He also noted that Marshallese iroij (chieftains) held considerable authority and rights to all property, though he had a more favorable view of the condition of Marshallese commoners than of Polynesian commoners. The Marshalls' two island groups, the Ratak and Ralik chains were each ruled by a paramount chief, or iroijlaplap, who held authority over the individual island iroij.\nEuropean exploration.\nSpanish exploration.\nSpanish explorer Alonso de Salazar led the first European expedition to see the Marshall Islands on August 21, 1526. While commanding the \"Santa Maria de la Victoria\", the only surviving vessel of the Loa\u00edsa Expedition, his crew sighted an atoll with a green lagoon, which may have been Taongi. The crew could not land on the island, because of strong currents and water too deep for the ship's anchor. Salazar named the island \"San Bartolom\u00e9,\" and the ship sailed for Guam on August 23.\nIn late December 1527, the Spanish ship \"Florida\" arrived in Marshall Islands as the expedition of \u00c1lvaro de Saavedra Cer\u00f3n crossed the Pacific from Mexico to the Maluku Islands. The expedition probably saw the Utirik, Toke, Rongelap, and Ailinginae atolls, though Francis Hezel suggests the islands could have also been Fais and Yap in the Caroline Islands. Saavedra named the island grouping \"\"Islas de los Reyes\" () due to the proximity of the Christian feast of the Epiphany. Canoes from the islands approached the ship but did not make contact with the Europeans. On January 2, 1528, the expedition landed on an uninhabited island in Ailinginae Atoll, where they resupplied and stayed for six days. Natives from a neighboring island briefly met the Spanish before fleeing. Saavedra's expedition sailed toward the Philippines on January 8. Saavedra made two unsuccessful attempts to recross the Pacific and return to Mexico. On September 21, 1529, on the second recrossing attempt, the expedition may have passed Ujelang Atoll, and on October 1, the ship anchored at Enewetak Atoll where the crew went ashore for eight days, exchanged gifts with the indigenous inhabitants and resupplied. Saavedra named the atoll \"Los Jardines\"\" ().\nOn December 26, 1542, a fleet of six Spanish ships commanded by Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos sighted an island in the Marshalls while sailing from Mexico to the Philippines. They landed and named the island \"Santisteban\" in honor of Saint Stephen's Day. The island was inhabited, though many of the people fled the Spanish landing. The Spaniards found some women and children hiding in the island's vegetation and gave them gifts. Before leaving the islands on January 6, 1543, Villalobos sighted islands that may have included Wotje, Erikub, Maloelap, Likiep, Kwajalein, Lae, Ujae, Wotho or Ujelang.\nMiguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi commanded a fleet of four Spanish ships that sailed from Mexico in November 1564 en route to the Philippines. The \"San Lucas\" under the command of Alonso de Arellano broke away from the others, possibly because pilot Lope Mart\u00edn and other crew members intended to engage in piracy in the East Indies, and sailed into the Marshall Islands in their attempt to avoid the fleet's other ships. The ship passed Likiep on January 5, 1565; Kwajalein on January 7, where they met two Native families; and Lib Island on January 8. Lib was heavily inhabited, and Arellano described the Natives as warlike and expert at throwing stones with slings, so the ship sailed on without landing. Meanwhile, Legazpi's other three ships arrived at Mejit on January 9, 1565. On the island, they found a settlement of one-hundred people who subsisted by fishing, farming root vegetables and millet-like grains, and raising poultry. Most of the inhabitants had fled into the interior, but the Spaniards had peaceful relations with an elderly couple and a woman who stayed behind. Legazpi named the island \"\"Los Barbudos\" (), because of the inhabitants' facial hair. On January 10, the Spaniards sighted Ailuk Atoll and Jemo Island, which they named \"Los Placeres\" () and \"Los Pajaros\"\" (). On January 12, they sighted Wotho Atoll, and on January 15, Ujelang, before sailing to the Philippines.\nThe \"San Lucas\" returned to Mexico on July 17, 1565, and one of Legazpi's other ships returned from the Philippines on September 18. On May 1, 1566, the \"San Jeronimo\" sailed from Acapulco to resupply Legazpi in the Philippines. Lope Mart\u00edn, who had returned to Mexico on the \"San Lucas\", served as pilot of the \"San Jeronimo\" and led a mutiny and executed the captain. While sailing through the Marshalls, the \"San Jeronimo\" nearly wrecked at Ujelang before anchoring in the atoll's lagoon on July 6. The mutineers spent several days resupplying on an island, which was inhabited though the residents had fled in canoes. On July 16, four loyalist crew members snuck back to the ship and took control from the mutineers aboard. Lope Mart\u00edn had taken the ships instruments and sails ashore. Unable to take back the ship, he negotiated to return of the ship's instruments in exchange for food and supplies. After regaining the sails, the loyalist crew members marooned Lope Mart\u00edn and twenty-six other mutineers on the island before sailing for Guam on July 21.\nBy the late 16th century, Spanish galleons sailing between the Americas and the Philippines kept to a sea lane thirteen degrees north and provisioned at Guam, avoiding the Marshalls, which Spanish sailors saw as unprofitable islands amid hazardous waters. One of the last known Spanish expeditions occurred when \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira's ships \"Los Reyes\" and \"Todos los Santos\" arrived at Namu Atoll on September 18, 1568, while searching for \"Terra Australis\". Menda\u00f1a named the atoll \"San Mateo\" shoals. They found many houses as well as a chisel made from a nail and pieces of rope, which may have been left behind by Villalobos or Lope Mart\u00edn. On October 20, the ships arrived at Wake Island, which Menda\u00f1a named \"San Francisco.\"\nLater European exploration.\nThe British ships \"Charlotte\" and \"Scarborough\" visited the islands in 1788 under the commands of captains Thomas Gilbert and John Marshall, respectively. The vessels had been part of the First Fleet taking convicts from England to Botany Bay in New South Wales, and were en route to Guangzhou when they passed through the Gilbert Islands and Marshall Islands. On June 25, 1788, the British ships traded with islanders at Mili Atoll; their meeting may have been the first contact between Europeans and Marshallese in over 200 years. Gilbert and Marshall also sighted Arno, Majuro, Aur, Maloelap, Wotje, and Ailuk atolls in late June, but made no further landings. Subsequent navigational charts and maps named the islands for John Marshall.\nBeginning in the 1790s, British East Indiamen began passing through the Marshall Islands en route to China and charted the islands they encountered. Most of the islands and atolls had been sighted and plotted on navigation charts by 1815, with the exception of a few northern islands.\nRussian explorer Otto von Kotzebue spent three months exploring the Ratak Chain in early 1817, and returned to explore the islands on two occasions in 1824 and 1825. According to Kotzebue's account, the Marshallese people showed few signs of western influence on his first visit in 1817. He gifted the islanders metal knives and hatchets and set up a temporary forge to craft fishhooks and harpoons. He also introduced new crops, including yams, as well as livestock, including pigs, goats, dogs, and cats. Kotzebue also noted that in 1817, Lamari, the iroij of Aur Atoll, had successfully conquered the other atolls of northern Ratak Chain and was preparing to go to war with Majuro Atoll. On his return trips in the 1820s, Kotzebue found that the Marshallese were still tending to crops that he had given them, but that the livestock and metal tools were concentrated among the island chieftains. He also found that the metal hatchets had played a decisive role in Lamari's victory over the people of Majuro; by the time of Kotzebue's second visit, Lamari was planning to further expand his power and begin making incursions into the Ralik Chain.\nEarly colonialism.\nIn February 1824, the American whaler \"Globe\" anchored at Mili Atoll after the crew mutinied and killed the ship's officers. While the mutineers were ashore, five dissenting crew members made off with the ship and marooned the mutineers. Two years later, the American navy schooner \"Dolphin\" arrived and found that mutineers had been massacred by the Marshallese due to their brutal treatment of the local women. The only survivors were two boys, who had been spared and adopted by the Marshallese.\nFrom the 1830s through the 1850s, the Marshallese Islanders became increasingly hostile to western vessels, possibly because of violent punishments that sea captains exacted for theft as well as the abduction of Marshallese people for sale into slavery on Pacific plantations. In 1833, the inhabitants of Ebon Atoll seized a dozen crew members of the British whaler \"Elizabeth\" when they went ashore. The sailors were never seen again. In 1834, the captain of a trading schooner and two of his crew members were killed at Bikini Atoll. Three vessels were sent to search for the captain, and when the Hawaiian brig \"Waverly\" discovered evidence of his death, the crew killed 30 Marshallese hostages in retaliation. In 1835, the inhabitants of Namdrik Atoll boarded the Massachusetts whaler \"Awashonks\", killing the captain and five crew members before their iroij was killed by a musket shot. The inhabitants of Mili Atoll attacked whalers in 1837 and 1844. In 1845, a fight broke out on the deck of the \"Naiad\" after the captain violently punished a native for stealing from the ship. Several Marshallese were killed and four crew members were seriously wounded. In 1850, two passengers of the \"William Melville\" were killed after going ashore at Kwajalein Atoll. In 1851 and 1852, the Marshallese attacked three ships and massacred their crews: the \"Glencoe\" at Ebon, the \"Sea Nymph\" at Jaluit Atoll, and an unnamed ship at Namdrik. There were no survivors from the \"Glencoe\", and only one \"Sea Nymph\" crew member escaped. By some accounts, both ships were abducting Marshallese women to sell to plantation owners in other parts of the Pacific.\nEuropean and American missionaries and traders had peaceful contact with the Marshallese beginning at Ebon Atoll in the mid-1850s. The atoll saw increased ship traffic and exposure to foreigners beginning, which also led to outbreaks of western diseases. In February 1859, an influenza outbreak killed several commoners on Ebon. In 1861, measles and influenza outbreaks occurred on the island, and in 1863, a typhoid fever outbreak killed several islanders.\nMissionary activity.\nIn 1855, American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions assigned George Pierson to its mission in Micronesia. He stopped at Ailinglaplap Atoll and met iroijlaplap Kaibuke before making his way to Kosrae, where we worked with 50 Marshallese castaways and learned the Marshallese language. In November 1857, Pierson, Edward Doane and their families returned to Marshalls to establish a mission at Ebon. The atoll's population fluctuated as Kaibuke's fleet came and went to exact tribute from his vassals; the frequent comings and goings from the atoll have helped to spread the missionaries' sermons to other islands. Within the first few years of the mission, the missionaries noticed social changes taking place on Ebon. Women were permitted to attend certain religious feasts for the first time, and traditional burial rites fell out of practice. While the Marshallese continued to practice tattooing, some felt guilty about the practice and stopped carrying out the rites publicly. Islanders also began to observe the Christian injunction against work on the weekly sabbath. By 1876, a traveller noted that most Marshallese women on Ebon wore western dresses and jumpers, and many men wore trousers instead of traditional grass skirts.\nPierson and his wife left Ebon for their health in 1859, and Doane left in 1863, having sent his family to Hawaii two years earlier. Both were replaced by Native Hawaiian missionaries, who ran a mission school and printed Marshallese-language bibles. Ten Ebon islanders were baptized in 1863, and the number increased to over 100 by 1870. By 1865, mission churches and schools had opened on Jaluit and Namdrik. Missions spread to Mili and Majuro in 1869, and to Arno and Maloelap Atolls by 1875, at which point more than 200 Marshall Islanders had been baptized. By the mid-1870s, most island churches were staffed by Marshall Islanders who had been trained in the mission schools.\nWhile the church was popular among commoners, the Marshallese nobles became increasingly hostile to Christianity after Kaibuke's death in the 1863 typhoid fever outbreak. Many of the chiefs stopped church services, and some retaliated against converts. One Marshallese noble woman burned the houses of converts. Francis Hezel speculates that the nobility may have seen increasing literacy and access to new information among the commoners as a threat to their authority, fueling increased hostility to Christianity, and notes an 1870 case in which a Christian commoner publicly chastised his island's chief for leading young girls astray and went unpunished.\nWestern commercial interests.\nIn 1859, the German firm Hoffschlaeger &amp; Stapenhorst sent two traders to establish a trading post at Ebon Atoll. In 1861, they built a coconut oil factory on the island. In 1863, the firm suffered serious financial setbacks and withdrew from the Marshall Islands, partially due to the sinking of one of its ships while leaving Ebon. One of the traders, Adolph Capelle, set up an independent trading firm on the island by partnering with Anton Jose DeBrum, a Portuguese whaler who arrived in 1864. Both men married local women and developed strong connections with both the Marshall Islanders and the missionaries. Their firm, Capelle &amp; Co., entered into an agreement to sell coconut copra to Godeffroy &amp; Son of Hamburg, a company which pioneered the production of copra in Samoa and Tonga and held a large share of Pacific copra trade. Godeffroy exported copra to Europe where it was processed into animal feed and coconut oil, which was used in soap and candle manufacturing. The German firms traded western goods to Marshallese chiefs in exchange for coconuts, which Marshallese commoners harvested as tribute for the chiefs.\nIn 1873, Capelle &amp; Co. moved its headquarters to Jaluit, which was the home of Kabua, a powerful iroij and disputed successor of Kaibuke. Godeffroy &amp; Son also established trading posts on five islands in 1873 with a main office on Jaluit, but the European stock market crash later that year caused the firm to cut back its operations. Capelle dominated the copra market in the early years, but in 1876, Hernsheim &amp; Co. and New Zealand merchant Thomas Farrell both began copra trading in the Marshall Islands. The increased competition set off a price war that disrupted the industry and proved advantageous for Marshallese suppliers. The firms also began selling the Marshallese previously prohibited goods, including alcohol, firearms, and munitions, despite the missionaries' complaints.\nBy 1878, Hernsheim &amp; Co. had emerged as the dominant firm in the copra trade. While Capelle &amp; Co. lost market share, Capelle and DeBrum purchased the entirety of Likiep Atoll as a copra plantation to control their buying price and supply of copra. Capelle &amp; Co. also diversified its interests to include shipbuilding and importing. Farrell went bankrupt in 1877, and his assets were acquired by Auckland firm Henderson &amp; Macfarlane. Godeffroy &amp; Son went bankrupt in 1879, and in 1880, its Pacific interests were acquired by the German Trading and Plantation Company of the South Sea Islands in Hamburg (), also known as DHPG. The world market price of copra dropped in 1882; Capelle &amp; Co. sold seven of its stations in the Marshalls to DHPG and made an agreement to exclusively sell copra to Hernsheim &amp; Co. By 1885, the German firms DHPG and Hernsheim &amp; Co. controlled two-thirds of the copra trade in the Marshall Islands, with the rest split between Henderson &amp; Macfarlane of Auckland, Crawford &amp; Co. of San Francisco, and the Pacific Navigation Company of Honolulu.\nBlackbirding.\nIn the 1870s, Marshall Islanders were coerced into working on plantations in other parts of the Pacific, a practice was known as \"blackbirding\". In 1871, the ships \"Eugene\" and \"Carl\" kidnapped men at Ailinglaplap and Mili Atolls, respectively. In 1872, trader William Henry \"Bully\" Hayes kidnapped women on Mili while pirating the stations of business rivals. Several blackbirding ships cruised the northern Marshalls specifically to obtain women that they could sell into sexual slavery in Fiji. Mortality rates among Micronesian laborers in Fiji and Samoa were high, and few returned home. The labor trade in Marshall Islands declined somewhat after the British government passed the Pacific Islander Protection Act 1872, but Jaluit continued to serve as a depot for transporting Gilbertese laborers and some Marshallese were transported to Hawaiian plantations as late as 1882.\nMarshallese politics.\nAfter the death of iroijlaplap Kaibuke during the typhoid outbreak of 1863, his two nephews Loiak and Kabua disputed who should succeed him as the paramount chief of the southern Ralik Chain. Loiak was the iroij of Ebon Atoll and the elder nephew, who traditionally would have succeeded his uncle, but Kabua, the iroij of Jaluit Atoll, married Kaibuke's widow, making him the step-uncle and guardian of his elder cousin. Both chiefs sought support from foreigners by befriending missionaries and working with German copra traders in order to maintain influence.\nThe dispute remained peaceful for twelve years, but in September 1876, the conflict nearly erupted into violence. While both chiefs were staying on Ebon, copra trader James Lyle Young reported witnessing a mob of Loiak's followers wielding muskets and preparing to attack Kabua's followers across the lagoon. Kabua fled to his land on Jaluit rather than engaging in battle. In the following months, rumors circulated that Kabua would return and start a war. Loiak staged frequent military drills on Ebon and stockpiled weapons in late 1876, but Kabua's invasion never occurred. In May 1880, Loiak's followers invaded Jaluit to challenge Kabua, who prospered from the copra trade and whom an 1878 German treaty had recognized as the \"King of the Ralik Islands.\" The two armies met and carried firearms but did not fight, and there were no casualties. Loiak's followers returned to Ebon several days later; Kabua fled to his home at Ailinglaplap Atoll, though he later returned to Jaluit.\nIn the late 1870s and 1880s, armed conflicts occurred between rival chiefs on both the Majuro and Arno Atolls. On Majuro, iroij Jebrik and Rimi fought over the paramount chieftainship for several years, leaving at least 10 islanders dead before Cyprian Bridge of the passing British warship HMS \"Espiegle\" mediated a peace treaty in 1883. In 1884, Bridge also negotiated an end to a conflict between iroij Lekman and Lijiwirak on Arno, which had been ongoing since 1878. Both conflicts had disrupted copra production and caused famines as war parties destroyed rivals' coconut groves and other property. Copra traders resorted to selling firearms and ammunition to maintain profits.\nWestern political interests.\nIn 1875, the British and German governments conducted a series of secret negotiations to divide the western Pacific in spheres of influence and counter American expansion in the region. Germany received northeastern New Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago, and several island groups of Micronesia, including the Marshall Islands. On November 26, 1878, the German warship SMS \"Ariadne\" anchored at Jaluit to begin treaty negotiations with the iroij of the Ralik Chain. During the second day of negotiations, Captain Bartholom\u00e4us von Werner ordered his men to give a military demonstration featuring a bayonet charge, a rapid firing demonstration, and use of artillery blanks, which he later said was intended to \"show the islanders, who have not seen anything like it before, the power of the Europeans.\" On November 29, Werner signed a treaty with Kabua and several other Ralik Chain iroij which granted the German Empire \"most favored nation\" status in the Ralik Chain and required iroij to guarantee the rights of German citizens. Germany secured a fuelling station at Jaluit and free use of the atoll's harbor for German vessels. The German authorities also recognized Kabua as the \"King of the Ralik Islands,\" though the treaty required that disputes between Marshallese and Germans would be arbitrated by German ship captains.\nThe German Empire established a consulate on Jaluit in 1880 with Franz Hernsheim, co-founder of Hernsheim &amp; Co., serving as the German consul to the Ralik Chain. The United States made Adolph Capelle its consul to protect the interests of American missionaries.\nGerman protectorate.\nFranz Hernsheim and other German business interests petitioned their government to annex the Marshall Islands into the German Empire. The United Kingdom was the primary naval power in the Pacific, and the British government agreed to German annexation of the Marshalls in exchange for German recognition of Britain's authority over the Gilbert and Ellice Islands. On August 29, 1885, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck authorized the creation of the German Protectorate of the Marshall Islands.\nOn October 13, 1885, the German corvette docked at Jaluit to obtain the signatures of iroij on a treaty of protection. On October 15, iroij Kabua, Loiak, Nelu, Lagajime, and Launa signed a treaty in German and Marshallese. While the Marshallese text made no distinction of rank between the five chiefs, the German text recognized Kabua as the King of the Marshall Islands, despite the ongoing dispute between Kabua and Loiak over the paramount chieftainship. A company of marines hoisted the flag of the German Empire over Jaluit, and the \"Nautilus\" performed similar ceremonies at seven other atolls in the Marshalls, obtaining the signatures of 18 iroij, most of whom were trading partners of Hernsheim. The language of the treaty framed the creation of protectorate as a request from the iroij to seek defense from colonization by other western powers and to continue German trade. Several pro-American iroij refused to recognize the German authority until threatened with naval force in mid-1886.\nIn April 1886, the Reichstag passed a law to create a legal foundation for colonial protectorates, giving the kaiser and his appointed governor the authority to make laws by ordinance which did not necessarily have to follow the imperial constitution. In September 1886, an imperial ordinance established the Protectorate of the Marshall Islands, and declared that German consular law would apply to all residents of the Marshall Islands, including indigenous Marshallese. The ordinance also gave the German chancellor the discretionary authority to apply extraconstitutional ordinances to the Marshallese.\nFollowing the 1886 Anglo-German Declarations, Nauru fell within the German sphere of influence in Western Pacific and was incorporated into the Marshall Islands protectorate on April 16, 1888.\nThe Jaluit Company.\nBismarck planned to leave the administration of colonies to chartered companies rather than having the German government directly administer overseas protectorates. Hernsheim &amp; Co. and DHPG both initially opposed administering the colony, but relented to the German government in December 1887 and merged their interests to create the joint-stock Jaluit Company. The new company began administering the colony in January 1888. The company had the right to be consulted on all new laws and ordinances and nominated all colonial administrative staff, subject to approval by the German chancellor. The protectorate's administrative staff consisted of a governor, a secretary, and six colonial police officers. The company was responsible for paying administrative expenses for the protectorate, and collected commercial license fees and an annual poll tax. The taxation system was built upon the precolonial tribute system; iroij collected the taxes in copra on the company's behalf and were entitled to one-third of the sum total.\nThe Jaluit Company was the longest-lasting and most profitable German colonial joint-stock company. Profit margins rose from 5% in 1892 to 12% in 1900 and 20% in 1906. The company's licensing fees pushed out American and British competition; Crawford &amp; Co. and Henderson &amp; Macfarlane sold their holdings to the Jaluit Company in 1893 and 1899, respectively. After acquiring the trading stations of the British Pacific Islands Company in 1901, the Jaluit Company held a monopoly in the region. Australian firm Burns, Philp &amp; Co. complained that the harbor fees it paid in Marshallese ports were excessive, and the British government protested the Jaluit Company's practices as a violation of the Anglo-German Declarations' free-trade provision. On March 31, 1906, the German government assumed direct control and reorganized the Marshall Islands and Nauru as part of the protectorate of German New Guinea. As compensation, the Jaluit Company received a 10% share of Pacific Phosphate Company, which began mining operations on Nauru that year. The company generated the largest dividends of any German company in the Pacific through the phosphate trade, rising from 30% in 1907 to 84% in 1913. Even after the monopoly ended, the company continued to dominate the Micronesian copra trade.\nLife in the protectorate.\nDuring the protectorate period, most islanders could read and write the Marshallese language and do arthimetic. In 1898, 25 mission schools operated in the islands and had 1,300 students. The German Catholic Missionaries of the Sacred Heart arrived at Jaluit in 1899, and while few Marshallese converted to Catholicism, the Catholic schools on Jaluit, Arno, and Likiep generated high demand. While Protestant missionary schools provided a three-year education, the Catholic schools gave six to eight years, including lessons in the German language.\nGerman accounts from the protectorate period note that aspects of pre-colonial Marshallese culture were being lost in all but the remote northern atolls with little missionary influence. Most women wore smocks or dresses instead of going bare chested and wearing skirts made from woven jaki-ed mats. Few men continued the practice of wearing their hair in a topknot. Traditional crafts such as sharkskin drums and stick charts fell out of use as western products because more readily available.\nIn 1900, Marshallese commoners staged a general strike to demand higher pay from the Jaluit Company. The iroij pressured most laborers to return to work, but church groups on Mejit and Namdrik organized staunch resistance to the company. The company lowered its buying price for copra from the islands, which led the islanders to cease production altogether. The German authorities arrested seven leaders of the strike and blockaded the islands from 1901 to 1904. The islanders held out, and the company doubled wages in 1904. Marshallese dockworkers on Jaluit staged a similarly successful strike in 1911 to double their wages.\nThe Marshallese population declined by more than 30% during the protectorate period, from 13,000-15,000 prior to annexation to 9,200 in 1908. A 1905 typhoon killed approximately 200 people on Jaluit, Arno, and Mili. Hundreds of islanders died in continued outbreaks of western diseases, such as dysentery outbreaks on Ebon which killed 150 people in 1907 and 400 in 1908. The western population remained small throughout the protectorate period. Approximately 180 westerners lived in the Marshall Islands in 1914, including 76 Germans.\nJapanese mandate.\nAt the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the United Kingdom and Empire of Japan were allies. Britain initially declined Japanese offers of naval assistance against Germany, because the British government wanted to prevent Japanese southward expansion into the Pacific. However, on August 7, the British Foreign Office requested that Japan help track down and destroy the German East Asia Squadron following reports of attacks on British ships. The request provided a pretext for the Imperial Japanese Navy to invade Germany's Pacific colonies in Micronesia and Shandong.\nJapanese troops under Admiral Yamaya Tanin arrived at Enewetak on September 29, 1914, and Jaluit on September 30. An occupation force of three officers and 100 Japanese troops were stationed on Jaluit on October 3. In October, the British and Japanese governments agreed that Japan would be responsible for operations north of the equator, while British, Australian and New Zealander forces operated south of the equator. The agreement placed most of German Micronesia under Japanese military control, while Nauru came under British control. In February 1917, the British and Japanese made a secret agreement that Japan would annex Micronesia after the Allied Powers won the war. Japan later made similar agreements with France, Italy, and Russia.\nIn January 1919, Japanese delegate Makino Nobuaki proposed that Japan annex Germany's Pacific island colonies at the Paris Peace Conference. United States President Woodrow Wilson opposed the annexation of German colonies by the Allied Powers and argued for a system of League of Nations mandates. The Australian delegates opposed Wilson's proposal, and the conference adopted a compromise under which mandates would be divided into classes based on size and level of development. Germany's Pacific colonies north of the equator became the Japanese South Seas Mandate, a Class C mandate, which due to small size, sparse population, remoteness, and low level of development was to be governed under Japanese laws as if it were an integral part of Japanese territory. Germany ceded the Marshall Islands to Japan with the signing of the Treaty of Versailles on June 28, 1919. In August 1919, a commission determined that mandates were also not to be militarized and that Japan was not to continue expanding its territory further into the Pacific.\nThe United States government and military opposed Japanese annexation of Germany's Micronesian colonies and were suspicious of a secret Japanese military build up in Micronesia. The government recruited some of the few American scientists in Micronesia to gather strategic information. In 1921, geologist William Herbert Hobbs gathered intelligence while on an expedition to collect coral and volcanic samples in the Marshall Islands. In 1922 and 1923, American intelligence officer Earl Hancock Ellis posed as a commercial traveler and undertook a reconnaissance tour of Micronesia, including several months the Marshall Islands.\nAdministration.\nIn December 1914, the Japanese military created the Provisional South Seas Defense Force to administer Micronesia from its command post at Truk Atoll. The military administration divided Micronesia into six naval districts, each governed by a commander: the central Carolines, governed from Truk; the eastern Carolines, governed from Ponape; the Marianas, governed from Saipan; the Marshalls, governed from Jaluit; Palau, governed from Koror; and Yap. The administration had orders to initially retain as many German-era laws as possible to enable a smooth transition to Japanese rule, though Japanese laws replaced German laws in 1915. The Japanese initially requested that German officials continue to work on behalf of the Japanese occupation, but later reversed course and deported most German settlers and officials in June 1915.\nThe military government implemented an embargo on most foreign ships, including those of its allies, from anchoring at harbors in the Marshall Islands. Non-Japanese foreigners needed to file a multi-step application to visit the islands with no guarantee that the government would grant permission. International mail service to Micronesia halted from 1914 to 1917 and resumed after the Anglo-Japanese secret agreement that Japan would retain the territories it had occupied after the war.\nDuring the first months of the occupation, Japanese scientists, agricultural researchers, medical specialists and other experts and scholars conducted an extensive survey of German Micronesia to assess the islands' economic potential. The survey's final report to the Japanese government suggested that the islands' primary value was strategic, because they could enable future southward expansion. In other parts of Micronesia the Japanese undertook novel development initiatives, but the Marshall Islands had the most limited economic potential in Micronesia. The Japanese adopted the German system of having local iroij collect a poll tax in copra.\nThe Japanese navy garrisons withdrew from Micronesia and closed their headquarters at Truk in 1921, and the civilian led by Toshiro Tezuka set up its headquarters in Koror, Palau, in April 1922. The Marshall Islands were one of six branch governments of the civil administration, and the administrative center of the district remained in Jaluit. The South Seas Government reported directly to the Prime Minister of Japan until 1929, when the government came under the authority of the Ministry of Colonial Affairs. The Japanese administration employed a much larger staff than the Germans. They also attempted to weaken the iroij by prohibiting any chief from having landholdings on more than one island. The government controlled most of the land on Jaluit, but the other Marshall Islands were among the only places in the South Seas Mandate where the government did not directly control the majority of the land.\nRelations with Marshall Islanders.\nThe government undertook a propaganda campaign to convince Micronesians that Japanese and Micronesian people were the same race, and the authorities encouraged the Marshallese to assimilate into Japanese culture. In 1915, the military administration instituted a three-year public school system that provided education the Japanese language and gradually replaced the missionary schools. Students were forbidden to speak Marshallese in the schools and could receive corporal punishment for not speaking Japanese. More than half of school lessons were devoted to Japanese language and cultural instruction. The government implemented a system of using boats to transport students from smaller and more remote islands to schools on the larger islands, and school books and materials were free. By 1935, public school attendance was mandatory for all children within range of a school.\nThe government also sponsored devoted to Japanese activities, such as track and field, baseball, handicrafts, and song competitions. Beginning in 1915, elite Marshall Islanders received free trips to Japan to expose them to Japanese culture. Students also received tours of Japan from 1917. Islanders were responsible for some of the costs of the trips from 1926, and the tour program continued until 1939.\nIn practice, Japanese colonial policies treated the Marshallese as second-class citizens. Schools for Marshallese students provided a shorter education than schools for Japanese settlers in the mandate. Post-primary education for many islanders was restricted to vocational training. Few islanders could get employment in the colonial bureaucracy and they tended to receive lower wages than Japanese settlers performing the same jobs.\nThe Japanese had less presence and impact on the remoter atolls, where only one or two traders might be in residence at any time. Islanders on remote islands had infrequent interactions with Japanese fishermen and colonial policemen. However, islanders in remote villages gained increased access to Japanese manufactured goods through the copra trade.\nThe islands of the South Seas Mandate featured in the popular culture of interwar Japan. One of the earliest examples was the song , which tells the story of a Japanese man who is rescued from drowning by a Marshallese woman. He falls in love with her and dances at a headhunter feast to win her hand in marriage. The song was adapted as a 1930 film of the same title. Scholars such as Naoto Sudo and Michael Baskett have argued that the story presents a contrast between romance and exoticized peril. Other Japanese media set in an exoticized fantasy of the South Seas Islands included the popular songs \"Banana Maiden\" and \"South Seas Maiden\" as well as the manga series \"Daring Dankichi\".\nJapanese settlement and development.\nThe Marshall Islands were the largest producer of copra in the Japanese mandate, copra being the Marshalls' largest industry as well as the second most important commodity in the mandate after sugarcane, which was largely produced in the Northern Mariana Islands. Other industries also grew in the Marshalls during the period, including phosphorus mining on Ebon as well as commercial tuna fishing and canning.\nThe Jaluit Company ceased operations in March 1915, and the Japanese , also called NBK, and the Australian Burns, Philp &amp; Co. took over the copra trade. NBK was able to build upon and expand the commercial infrastructure that German companies had built in the islands. The Japanese navy also granted NBK a monopoly on transporting military provisions and personnel between Japan and the islands. In 1918, the authorities attempted to increase copra yield by declaring that all land which had not been planted with coconut trees within three years would become government property.\nJapanese, Koreans, and Okinawans settled in the Marshall Islands, although they formed one of the smallest settler communities in the South Seas Mandate. In 1937, the immigrant population of the Marshalls was approximately 500, while Palau had 11,000, and Truk and Ponape had 3,600 each. Marshall Islanders remained the majority of the population throughout the mandate period, unlike Palau and the Mariana Islands, where Japanese settlers became the majority. While cities significantly grew and developed in other parts of the Japanese mandate, the administrative center at Jabor, Jaluit, grew more modestly during the Japanese period. The town included port infrastructure, government offices, NBK offices and warehouses, a post office, a public school, a communications post, a hospital, a power plant, and a settlement of Okinawan fishermen, but lacked many of the commercial businesses and social establishments built in areas with larger immigrant populations. While the immigrant labor force was small, their presence drove wages in the Marshall Islands down to pre-German colonial levels.\nMilitary buildup.\nOn March 27, 1933, Japan declared its intentions to withdraw from the League of Nations after the league denounced the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. Japan officially withdrew from the league in 1935 but continued to control the islands. Japan maintained an ambiguous policy about the Pacific Islands until World War II, signaling that it intended to continue administering the islands while also remaining silent about whether the islands had become Japanese territory.\nJapan began rearming and building up its military following its invasion of China in 1937. The Japanese navy reestablished itself in the South Seas Mandate that year and undertook the construction of civilian airfields. Military planners initially discounted the Marshalls as too distant and indefensible for extensive fortification, but as Japan developed long-range bombers, the islands became useful as a forward base to attack Australia, British colonies, and the United States. In 1939 and 1940, the navy built airfields on Kwajalein, Maloelap, and Wotje Atolls as well as seaplane facilities at Jaluit. The navy also expanded and modernized ports in the Marshalls. In February 1941, ships and troops of the Japanese 4th Fleet began arriving to garrison the newly fortified islands. The Japanese headquarters in Marshalls were at Kwajalein.\nThe government conscripted hundreds of Korean laborers to build the airfields and ports. Marshallese men were also conscripted to work in military camps.\nWorld War II.\nAt the outbreak of the Pacific War, the Japanese air raids and landing parties of the Battle of Wake Island launched from Kwajalein, and the Japanese invasions of the Gilbert Islands and Nauru both launched from Jaluit. On February 1, 1942, the United States Pacific Fleet carried out the Marshalls\u2013Gilberts raids, which struck Jaluit, Kwajalein, Maloelap, and Wotje. They were the first American air raids on Japanese territory.\nBy 1943, the Japanese navy had built airfields on Enewatak and Mili Atolls in addition to the pre-war airfields at Kwajalein, Maloelap, and Wotje.\nThe American invasion of the Marshall Islands began on January 31, 1944, during the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign. The Americans simultaneously invaded Majuro and Kwajalein. By autumn 1944, the Americans controlled all of the Marshall Islands, except for Jaluit, Maloelap, Mili, and Wotje. As the American campaign advanced through Micronesia and into the Ryukyu Islands, the four Japanese-held atolls were cut off from supplies and subject to American bombardment. The garrisons began running out of provisions in late 1944, leading to high casualties from starvation and disease. Of the 4700-man Japanese garrison on the Mili Atoll, 1600 died from starvation and disease while an additional 900 died in American air raids.\nTrust Territory of the Pacific Islands.\nFollowing capture and occupation by the United States during World War II, the Marshall Islands, along with several other island groups located in Micronesia, passed formally to the United States under United Nations auspices in 1947 as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 21.\nUnited States nuclear testing.\nFrom 1946 to 1958, the early years of the Cold War, the United States tested 67 nuclear weapons at its Pacific Proving Grounds located in the Marshall Islands, including the largest atmospheric nuclear test ever conducted by the U.S., code named Castle Bravo. \"The bombs had a total yield of 108,496 kilotons, over 7,200 times more powerful than the atomic weapons used during World War II.\" With the 1952 test of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb, code named \"Ivy Mike,\" the island of Elugelab in the Enewetak atoll was destroyed. In 1956, the United States Atomic Energy Commission regarded the Marshall Islands as \"by far the most contaminated place in the world.\"\nNuclear claims between the U.S. and the Marshall Islands are ongoing, and health effects from these nuclear tests linger. Project 4.1 was a medical study conducted by the United States of those residents of the Bikini Atoll exposed to radioactive fallout. From 1956 to August 1998, at least $759 million was paid to the Marshallese Islanders in compensation for their exposure to U.S. nuclear weapon testing.\nIndependence.\nIn 1979, the Government of the Marshall Islands was officially established and the country became self-governing.\nIn 1986, the Compact of Free Association with the United States entered into force, granting the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) its sovereignty. The Compact provided for aid and U.S. defense of the islands in exchange for continued U.S. military use of the missile testing range at Kwajalein Atoll. The independence procedure was formally completed under international law in 1990, when the UN officially ended the Trusteeship status pursuant to Security Council Resolution 683. The Republic was admitted to the UN in 1991.\nIn 2003, the US created a new Compact of Free Association for the Republic Marshall Islands and Micronesia, with funding of $3.5 billion to be made over the next 20 years.\nA report in mid 2017 by Stanford University, some 70 years after 23 atomic bombs were detonated on Bikini Atoll, indicates abundant fish and plant life in the coral reefs. That area of the islands was still not habitable by humans, however, due to contamination by radioactivity. A 2012 report by the United Nations had indicated that the contamination was \"near-irreversible\".\nIn January 2020, David Kabua, son of founding president Amata Kabua, was elected as the new President of the Marshall Islands. His predecessor Hilda Heine lost the position after a vote.\nClimate crisis.\nIn 2008, extreme waves and high tides caused widespread flooding in the capital city of Majuro and other urban centres, above sea level. On Christmas morning in 2008, the government declared a state of emergency. In 2013, heavy waves once again breached the city walls of Majuro.\nIn 2013, the northern atolls of the Marshall Islands experienced drought. The drought left 6,000 people surviving on less than of water per day. This resulted in the failure of food crops and the spread of diseases such as diarrhea, pink eye, and influenza. These emergencies resulted in the United States President declaring an emergency in the islands. This declaration activated support from US government agencies under the Republic's \"free association\" status with the United States, which provides humanitarian and other vital support.\nFollowing the 2013 emergencies, the Minister of Foreign Affairs Tony deBrum was encouraged by the Obama administration in the United States to turn the crises into an opportunity to promote action against climate change. DeBrum demanded new commitment and international leadership to stave off further climate disasters from battering his country and other similarly vulnerable countries. In September 2013, the Marshall Islands hosted the 44th Pacific Islands Forum summit. DeBrum proposed a Majuro Declaration for Climate Leadership to galvanize concrete action on climate change.\nRising sea levels are threatening the islands which may render some uninhabitable if sea levels continue to rise. Major flooding occurred in 2014 leading to a state of emergency for Majuro. Thousands of islanders have already moved to the US over the past decades for medical treatment and for better education or employment, many settling in Arkansas; emigration is likely to increase as sea levels rise. The right of residents to do so ends in 2023 unless the Compact with the US is renewed. The United States Geological Survey in 2014 warned that rising sea levels will salinize the fresh water on the islands, \"thus likely forcing inhabitants to abandon their islands in decades, not centuries, as previously thought\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57004", "revid": "50233433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57004", "title": "Economy of Tuvalu", "text": "Tuvalu is a Polynesian island nation located in the Pacific Ocean, midway between Hawaii and Australia, with a population of 11,192 per the 2017 census. The economy of Tuvalu is constrained by its remoteness and lack of economies of scale. Government revenues largely come from fishing licences (primarily paid under the South Pacific Tuna Treaty); direct grants from international donors (government donors as well as from the Asian Development Bank); and income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund. The lease of its highly fortuitous .tv Top Level Domain (TLD) also contributes revenue. The sale of stamps since the independence of Tuvalu in 1976 has been an important source of revenue for the country and government. However, such revenue has significantly declined in recent years. Tuvalu has hardly any tourism. It has no tour guides, tour operators, or organised activities, and no cruise ships visit.\nThe Tuvalu Trust Fund was established in 1987 by the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand to help supplement national deficits, underpin economic development, and help the nation achieve greater financial autonomy. The Fund has contributed roughly A$79 million, 15% of the annual government budget each year since 1990. With a capital value of about 2.5 times GDP, the Trust Fund provides an important cushion for Tuvalu's volatile income sources from fishing and royalties from the sale of the .tv domain. \nTuvalu joined the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on 24 June 2010. World Bank Statistics outline that in 2010 Tuvalu produced a bottom-tier ranking Gross Domestic Product of $31,350,804 and Gross National Income of $4,760, compared to other Pacific SIDS states such as Kiribati at $2,010 and the Marshall Islands at $3,640. \nThe growth of GDP of Tuvalu was at a high point in 2019. The global pandemic resulted in a retraction in the level of GDP (-3.7% in 2020, -0.5% in 2021, and -2.3% in 2022). Tuvalu experienced a 7.9% GDP growth in 2023, however the growth was estimated to moderate to 3.3 percent in 2024. An important factor in the moderation in growth is an expected decline in fishing revenue.\nIn 2025, GDP growth was estimated to further moderate to 3 percent of GDP. In 2026, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects GDP growth to ease further to 2.1 percent. This trend towards more modest and sustainable growth levels reflects underlying structural challenges in the economy of Tuvalu, including sluggish productivity, rising emigration, and growing exposure to climate-related risks, and also Tuvalu\u2019s exposure to global economic conditions. Tuvalu\u2019s economy is small and heavily reliant on a few sectors, including fishing, government services, and remittances from Tuvaluans participated in regional employment programmes in Australia and New Zealand. The National Bank of Tuvalu calculated remittances from New Zealand and Australia rose to 7% of GDP between 2021 and 2023.\nThe increase in inflation in 2022 was due to the rapid rise in the cost of food resulting from a drought that affected food production and from rising global food prices, following Russia\u2019s invasion of Ukraine (food imports represent 19 percent of Tuvalu\u2019s GDP, while agriculture makes up for only 10 percent of GDP). The government declared a national state of emergency in November 2022 as a consequence of a drought that exhausted rainwater supplies. The government responded to the rising inflation through untargeted \u201cinflation mitigation payouts\u201d (totalling AUD 400,000 or AUD 40 dollars per eligible household) and by expanding a list of products under price controls. In 2023, the IMF Article IV consultation with Tuvalu concluded that a successful vaccination strategy allowed Tuvalu to lift coronavirus disease (COVID-19) containment measures at the end of 2022. However, the economic cost of the pandemic was significant, with real gross domestic product growth falling from 13.8% in 2019 to -4.3 percent in 2020, although it recovered to 1.8% in 2021. Inflation rose to 11.5% in 2022, but inflation is projected to fall to 2.8% by 2028.\nGeography of Tuvalu.\nAgriculture in Tuvalu is focused on coconut trees and growing pulaka in large pits of composted soil below the water table. Subsistence farming of coconut palms to produce copra and fishing remain the primary economic activities, particularly off the capital island of Funafuti. There is no apparent large income disparity among the residents, although virtually the only jobs in the islands that pay a steady wage or salary are with the government, which make up about two-thirds of those in formal employment. About 15% of adult males work as seamen on foreign-flagged merchant ships. Population growth on the outer islands, the limits as to available land and the lack of employment opportunities, results in a flow of people from the outer islands to the capital in Funafuti with further pressure to migrate to Australia or New Zealand. There is high youth unemployment and few new jobs being created. Given the absence of natural resources (apart from tuna in the territorial waters), and the constraints imposed on the Tuvaluan economy by its remoteness and lack of economies of scale, practical policies are needed for improvements to the livelihoods of the growing numbers of young Tuvaluans who aspire to a more affluent lifestyle than older generations.\nTuvalu comprises four reef islands and five true atolls that result in a \"contiguous zone:\" \"exclusive economic zone:\" \"territorial sea:\" . Its nearest neighbours are Kiribati, Nauru, Samoa and Fiji. Tuvalu has worked with Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) and the European Union and enacted the Seabed Minerals Act 2014. The SPC-EU Pacific Deep Sea Minerals Project involves cooperation between the Cook Islands, Fiji, Tonga and Tuvalu with the object of those countries making informed decisions about future deep seabed mineral activities.\nThe population is 10,507 (2017 Census), which makes Tuvalu the third-least populous sovereign state in the world; as compared to its immediate neighbours, it has a larger population than Nauru, but is smaller than Kiribati which has a permanent population of just over 100,000 (2011). In terms of physical land size, at just Tuvalu is the fourth smallest country in the world; as compared to its immediate neighbours, Tuvalu is larger than Nauru, which is , and smaller than Kiribati, which comprises groups of atolls dispersed over 3.5\u00a0million square kilometres, (1,351,000\u00a0square\u00a0miles) of the Pacific Ocean. Tuvalu's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately 900,000\u00a0km2.\nTuvalu is considered a safe country of unspoiled natural beauty and friendly people. However, due to its remoteness, the cost of travelling to the island and limited air traffic to the country, limited numbers of tourists visit each year. The majority of visitors to Tuvalu are government officials, aid workers, NGO officials or consultants.\nTuvalu's economy.\nFishing resources.\nTuvaluans are primarily involved in traditional agriculture and fishing. Job opportunities also exist as observers on tuna boats where the role is to monitor compliance with the boat's tuna fishing licence.\nThe Tuvaluan economy, therefore, relies heavily on its fishing income, with 42% of the Tuvaluan population involved in fishing activity at various levels. The fishing in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) mainly consists of Skipjack Tuna, Yellowfin Tuna and Bigeye Tuna. UN Data calculated a gross value of fisheries at US$43,773,582 (2007 est), which accounted for the output of coastal commercial fishing, coastal subsistence fishing, locally based offshore fishing, foreign-based offshore fishing, freshwater fishing and aquaculture. In recent years all of the income has been generated through the listed activities in Tuvalu waters, rather than through exports direct from Tuvalu. The activities of international fishing vessels, which in 2008 comprised 42 longline fishing vessels, 3 pole/line vessels and 126 purse seiners, far outweigh domestic activity, with a production volume of 35,541 tonnes worth US$40,924,370 (2009 est) or 93.5% of gross value, although Tuvalu retains a sizeable share in income via licensing. Fishing licensing agreements with Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand and the United States generated an income of A$9 million in 2009. In 2013 revenue from fishing licenses doubled to more than 45% of GDP.\nOn 29 June 2017, the National Fishing Corporation of Tuvalu (NAFICOT), signed a joint venture agreement with the Republic of Korea's SAJO Fishing Industry to operate the fishing vessel \"M.V. Taina\" within the Tuvaluan EEZ and other Pacific Island waters.\nThe 2021 Budget of Tuvalu set out a shift in government policy regarding engagement in fishing activities, with a shift from joint venture arrangements (including the sale of \"FV Taumoana\" for $10.4 million) to just receiving revenue from fishing licenses and receiving management fees for flagged ships.\nRemittances from Tuvaluan seafarers.\nTuvalu men have for some time been employed abroad, working on container ships, primarily on German-owned ships. Remittances from seafarers is a major source of income for their families in Tuvalu. In 2002, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved an assistance package to upgrade the Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute (TMTI) which trains young Tuvaluans so they can work aboard foreign vessels. This project was completed in 2011.\nThe 1991 census identified 272 seaman working on merchant ships. In 2002 the Tuvaluan Overseas Seaman's Union (TOSU) estimated the number as 417 seaman working on ships. The Great Recession impacted global export-import activities and the demand for shipping, which reduced the need for Tuvaluan seafarers. The ADB identified that the number of Tuvaluans employed as seafarers has decreased steadily from about 340 in 2001 to only 205 in 2010; so that of a total pool of 800 qualified seafarers, including those on leave, almost 450 were unemployed. This decline in seafarer employment has reduced remittances from $2.4 million in 2001 to a projected $1.2 million in 2010. The International Labour Organization (ILO) also estimates that in 2010 there were approximately 200 Tuvaluan seafarers on ships. The International Monetary Fund 2014 Country Report described the effect of the GFC as reducing demand for the services of Tuvaluan seafarers. As of October 2013, there were about 112 Tuvalu seafarers working on cargo ships, compared to 361 in 2006. The consequence is that remittances from seafarers to their families in Tuvalu fell by about 9% of GDP for Tuvalu. In 2012 such remittances were 10% of GDP for Tuvalu.\nWhile a budget deficit of A$0.4 million was projected for 2015, the ADB assessed the budget as being A$14.3m in surplus as the result of high tuna fish license fees. The ADB predicted that the 2% growth rate for 2015 would continue into 2016.\nEconomic vulnerability.\nFrom 1996 to 2002, Tuvalu was one of the best performing Pacific Island economies and achieved an average real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 5.6% per annum. Since 2002 economic growth has slowed as Tuvalu was exposed to rapid rises in world prices of fuel and food with the level of inflation peaking at 10% in 2008, and falling to 0% in November 2010.\nHowever, due to the acute level of geographic, macroeconomic and financial isolation, scale of area, population infrastructure and agriculture, climate change, oil dependency, contracting GDP and economic dependency many sources in this decade view Tuvalu as an extremely vulnerable economy. The country is also dependent on imported fuel, with gas prices quoted at $12/gal (2009). The high cost of petroleum products has encouraged the development of projects to access renewable energy in Tuvalu.\nAlthough listed by the UN as a Lower Middle Income LDC, it scores very high in terms of Economic Vulnerability Index, with a rating of 79.7 out of 100 in 2009, leading the UN to state that Tuvalu is the most \"economically vulnerable country in the world\". Due to the factors addressed earlier, Tuvalu yields limited revenue from exports.\nPublic sector enterprises.\nThe public sector enterprises are the National Fishing Corporation of Tuvalu (NAFICOT), National Bank of Tuvalu, Development Bank of Tuvalu, Tuvalu Electricity Corporation, Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation, Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau, Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute and Vaiaku Lagi Hotel.\nThe government is the primary provider of medical services through Princess Margaret Hospital on Funafuti, which operates medical clinics on the other islands.\nBanking services are provided by the National Bank of Tuvalu. Effective of 7 October 2016, Tuvalu accepted the Article VIII obligations of the IMF Articles of Agreement, to maintaining an exchange system free of restrictions on payments for international transactions.\nThe Tuvalu Media Department of the Government of Tuvalu operates one station on the AM frequencies under the title of \"Radio Tuvalu\". \"Fenui \u2013 news from Tuvalu\" is a free digital publication of the Tuvalu Media Department that is emailed to subscribers and operates a Facebook page, which publishes news about government activities and news about Tuvaluan events, such as a special edition covering the results of the 2015 general election.\nThe Tuvalu National Provident Fund (TNPF) and the Copra Trading Co-operative (CTC) are owned by the members of each organisation. \nThe TNPF provides its members with loans, for which each member's account is used as collateral. The Tuvalu Cooperative Society is the main wholesaler and retailer in Tuvalu.\nPrivate sector enterprises.\nThe Tuvalu National Private Sector Organisation, the Tuvalu National Chamber of Commerce and Tuvalu Business Centre are active in supporting private sector enterprises. In order to set up a business in Tuvalu, an investor needs a start-up capital of AUD$20,000, a Tuvaluan partner and pay a business registration fee of AUD$100. As of 2010 there are only seven foreign-owned businesses operating in Tuvalu, which were mostly set up by Asian small business operators in the retail and restaurant sector.\nMackenzie Trading Limited, established by Mackenzie Kiritome in 2008, operates small retail outlets in the outer islands to sell merchandise in competition with the Co-operative Society (which is a community-owned enterprise). In 2010 Mackenzie Trading Limited employed 40 people. Other supermarkets on Funafuti include the Edwin Food City store, the Messamasui Supermarket, the SULANI Trading store and the JY Ocean Trading stores. Government regulations prohibit trading on Sundays.\nDevelopment of economic and social policy (\"Te Kakeega\"/\"Te Kete\").\n\"Te Kakeega\" was the statement of the national strategy for the sustainable development of Tuvalu, with economic and social goals intended to be achieved in the period 2005 to 2015. After consultations on each islands the National Summit on Sustainable Development (NSSD), was held at the \"Tausoalima Falekaupule\" in Funafuti from 28 June to 9 July 2004. The meeting resulted in the \"Malefatuga\" Declaration, which is the foundation of \"Te Kakeega II - National Strategy for Sustainable Development-2005-2015\", which \u201ccontained all the known aid projects, programmes, development initiatives and ideas adopted by the donors and the two successive Tuvalu governments (2004-2006 and 2006 to present)\u201d.\nThe \"Te Kakeega III - National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2016-2020\" (TK III) includes new strategic areas, in addition to the eight identified in TK II. The additional strategic areas are climate change; environment; migration and urbanization; and oceans and seas.\nIn the national strategy plan for 2021\u20132030, the name \"Te Kakeega\" was replaced by \"Te Kete\" which is the name of a domestic traditional basket woven from green or brown coconut leaves. Symbolically, \"Te Kete\" has biblical significance for Tuvaluan Christian traditions by referencing the basket or the cradle that saved the life of Moses.\nTuvalu Trust Fund.\nThe Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF) was established for the intended purpose of helping to supplement national deficits, underpin economic development, and help the nation achieve greater financial autonomy. The Trust Fund, has contributed roughly (A$79 million) 15% of the annual government budget each year since 1990. With a capital value of about 2.5 times GDP, the Trust Fund provides an important cushion for Tuvalu's volatile income sources from fishing and royalties from the sale of the .tv domain. Meeting the needs of the 2013/14 budget of the Tuvaluan Government will require drawing from funds held in the \u201cConsolidated Investment Fund\u201d (CIF) of the TTF.\nThe TTF was established in 1987 by the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand with about A$27 million in capital. The TTF, a prudently managed overseas investment fund, has contributed roughly (A$79 million), 15% of the annual government budget each year between 1990 and 2014. With a capital value of about 3.5 times GDP, the TTF provides an important cushion for Tuvalu's volatile income sources from fishing and royalties from the sale of the dot-TV domain.\nThe IMF 2014 Country Report noted the market value of the TTF dropped during the Great Recession, however by 2014 the total value of the fund had recovered to more than $A140 million (3.5 times GDP). In 2018 the TTF amounted to about A$179 million. In 2021 the TTF amounted to about A$192 million. In 2021 the market value of the TTF rose by 12 percent to its highest level on record (261 percent of GDP). However, the volatility in global equity markets in 2022 resulted in the TTF\u2019s value falling to A$191 million.\nThe capital of the Trust Fund is known as the \u201cA Account\u201d. The \"B Account\" or \u201cConsolidated Investment Fund\u201d (CIF) is a revolving \u201cbuffer account\u201d that receives funds from the returns or \u201cdisbursements\u201d of the \"A Account\". The operation of the Trust Fund through two accounts assists in stabilising the long-term financial situation of the Government of Tuvalu as well as addressing short-term budget needs. The \"B Account\", which belongs exclusively to the Government, holds income distributions from the \"A Account\" until funds are needed to be used for the national budget. It, therefore, serves as a buffer against the volatility of the \u2018A Account\u2019 returns, i.e., during years when there are no returns or low returns. Brian Bell, a member of the Tuvalu Trust Fund Advisory Committee from the inception of the Trust Fund in 1987 to 2002, describes the purpose of the Trust Fund as being:\n\u201cThe Tuvalu Trust Fund was aimed at providing a source of revenue to overcome a chronic budget deficit situation. The revenue is distributed to the Government from the A Account to the B Account. The amount needed is then drawn down into the consolidated revenue account as an additional source of revenue for expenditure on government services through the recurrent budget.\u201d\nThe 20th-anniversary review of the Tuvalu Trust Fund described the performance as being that:\n\u201cIn the first twenty years of operation the Fund has grown to $106.6 million in Market Value as of 30 June 2007. The real rate of return on the Fund has averaged 6.2 percent per annum providing $65.7 million in revenue to Tuvalu. Of this $24.1 million has been used to help fund budget deficits, $29.2 million has been reinvested in the Fund and $12.4 million is held in the CIF awaiting drawdown as of 30 June 2007. The Government's subsequent reinvestments back into the Fund since inception raises Tuvalu's contributions to the Fund to $29.8 million including the initial contribution of $1.6 million. It makes Tuvalu the major contributor to the Fund, which is evidence of Tuvalu's commitment to the long term sustainability of the Fund.\u201d\nFalekaupule Trust Fund.\nIn 1999 the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the government of Tuvalu set up the Falekaupule Trust Fund, which is intended to improve services on the outer islands. The island councils \u2013 composed of traditional leaders \u2013 are responsible for managing their own finances from a budget allocated from the Tuvaluan government from the Falekaupule Trust Fund. Under the Falekaupule Act, \"Falekaupule\" means \u201ctraditional assembly in each island...composed in accordance with the Aganu of each island\u201d. \"Aganu\" means traditional custom and culture. The initial capital of Falekaupule Trust Fund was A$12 million. The market value of the FTF has increased:\n\u201cAs at 30 June 2007, the FTF's market value stood at $25.3 million. After eight years of operation, the FTF has made three distributions totalling to $4.7 million. A Reserve Account was established in 2005 having the exact same purpose as the CIF, which is to smooth out the stream of revenue from the main investment. At 30 June 2007, the FTF's Reserve Account was $1.4 million.\u201d\nThe Great Recession affected the FTF, which is required to maintain its value in real terms before a distribution can be made. As of 30 September 2010, the maintained value was $27.3 million; the result of capital growth and contributions from development partners. This is some $3.5 million higher than the market value of $23.8 million. The gap of 15% between the market value and the maintained value must be recouped before another distribution can be made. Since the commencement of FTF, there have been four years in which distributions were made. The FTF has distributed $6.4 million with some $5.3 million allocated to island development (the balance of $1.1 million is held in reserve by the communities). This equates to an average of $55,000 spent per island per year.\nGovernment revenue.\nGovernment revenues largely come from sales of fishing licences, income from the Tuvalu Ship Registry, income from the TTF, and from the lease of its highly fortuitous .tv Internet Top Level Domain (TLD). Tuvalu Post issues stamps and coins to continue the operations of the Tuvalu Philatelic Bureau.\nFishing Licenses.\nFishing licences are an important source of revenue. The fishing in the 900,000\u00a0km2 of water area mainly consists of skipjack tuna, yellowfin tuna and bigeye tuna. Payments from US government made under the South Pacific Tuna Treaty (SPTT) was about $9\u00a0million in 1999. In May 2013 representatives from the United States and the Pacific Islands countries agreed to sign interim arrangement documents to extend the Multilateral Fisheries Treaty (which encompasses the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) to confirm access to the fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific for US tuna boats for 18 months. In 2015, Tuvalu refused to sell fishing days to certain nations and fleets that have blocked Tuvaluan initiatives to develop and sustain their own fishery. In 2016, Dr Puakena Boreham, the Minister of Natural Resources, drew attention to Article 30 of the WCPF Convention, which describes the collective obligation of members to consider the disproportionate burden that management measures might place on small-island developing states.\n.tv Domain.\nThe \".tv\" domain name generates around A$7 million each year from royalties. In 2019, 8.4% of total government revenue came from .tv royalties. The domain name is sought after due to its similarity to the abbreviation of the word television.\nVeriSign, Inc managed the .tv domain with the agreement running until 2021. On 14 December 2021 the Ministry of Justice, Communication and Foreign Affairs of the Tuvalu Government announced that they had selected GoDaddy Registry as the new registry service provider, after Verisign did not participate in the process.\nThe success of Twitch.tv and other esports and video game platforms means that Tuvalu can expect to derive increased revenue from the domain.\nEconomic Assessment.\nThe Asian Development Bank described the Global Economic Crisis (GEC) as impacting on Tuvalu through: \u201c(i) lower demand for Tuvalu seafarers and, therefore, falling remittances; (ii) volatile exchange rate movements affecting the value of remittances, revenues from fishing licence fees, and food prices; and (iii) lower market value of the Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF), which at the end of May 2010 was about 12% below the maintained value. Thus, as a direct result of the GEC, no distribution was made from the fund to the budget for 2010 and further distributions are unlikely while there is uncertainty in international financial markets.\u201d\nThe IMF 2010 Country Report describes economic activity in Tuvalu as dampened by lower offshore earnings, with \u201c[t]he economy is expected to have almost no growth in 2010, and growth is projected to be zero or even turn negative in 2011, led by lower government spending, and remain low over the medium term.\u201d\nThe IMF 2014 Country Report noted that real GDP growth had been volatile averaging only 1 percent in the past decade. The 2014 Country Report describes economic growth prospects as generally positive as the result of large revenues from fishing licenses, together with substantial foreign aid, \"while, over the medium to long run, growth prospects may be hampered by the dominance of inefficient public enterprise in the economy, uncertainty in the fisheries sector, and weak competitiveness.\"\nThe IMF 2021 Country Report concluded that swift implementation of COVID-19 containment measures and COVID-related fiscal spending financed by buoyant fishing revenues and donor grants have allowed Tuvalu to avoid a recession in 2020.\nLeast developed country status.\nThe United Nations designates Tuvalu as a least developed country because of its limited potential for economic development, absence of exploitable resources and its small size and vulnerability to external economic and environmental shocks. Tuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries, which was established in October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation. In 2013 Tuvalu deferred its graduation from least developed country status to a developing country to 2015. Prime Minister Enele Sopoaga said that this deferral was necessary to maintain access by Tuvalu to the funds provided by the United Nations's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), as \"Once Tuvalu graduates to a developed country, it will not be considered for funding assistance for climate change adaptation programmes like NAPA, which only goes to LDCs\". Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was to graduate from LDC status. Prime minister, Enele Sopoaga wants the United Nations to reconsider its criteria for graduation from LDC status as not enough weight is given to the environmental plight of small island states like Tuvalu in the application of the Environmental Vulnerability Index.\nInternational aid.\nAustralia and New Zealand continue to contribute capital to the Tuvalu Trust Fund and provide other forms of development assistance. Financial support to Tuvalu is also provided by Japan, South Korea and the European Union.\nTuvalu joined the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 1993. To improve aid effectiveness, the government of Tuvalu, ADB, AusAID, and NZAID signed the Development Partners Declaration (DPD) in 2009. The DPD is designed to improve aid effectiveness, both in the implementation of specific projects and in assisting the Tuvaluan government achieve performance benchmark indicators.\nTuvalu became a member of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in July 2010 and also joined the World Bank. In 2013 the World Bank approved US$6.06 million in finance for the existing Tuvalu Aviation Investment Project (TvAIP) for the purpose of improving operational safety and oversight of international air transport and associated infrastructure at Funafuti International Airport.\nTuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries, which was established in October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation. In 2013 Tuvalu deferred its graduation from Least Developed Country status to a developing country to 2015. Prime Minister Enele Sopoaga said that this deferral was necessary to maintain access by Tuvalu to the funds provided by the United Nations's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), as \u201cOnce Tuvalu graduates to a developed country, it will not be considered for funding assistance for climate change adaptation programmes like NAPA, which only goes to LDCs\u201d. Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was to graduate from LDC status. Prime minister, Enele Sopoaga wants the United Nations to reconsider its criteria for graduation from LDC status as not enough weight is given to the environmental plight of small island states like Tuvalu. Sopoaga said that:\n\u201cThe present application of those criteria we feel is totally unrealistic and perhaps very very wrong. We need to address that. The application of the current criteria - we have no problem with the criteria but the application - Environmental Vulnerability Index must be one of the two.\u201d\nOn 18 February 2016, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Islands Development Forum Charter and formally joined the Pacific Islands Development Forum (PIDF). In June 2017, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations (PACER).\nClimate change mitigation and cyclone recovery programs.\nThe South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) suggests that, while Tuvalu is vulnerable to climate change, environmental problems such as population growth and poor coastal management also affect sustainable development. SOPAC ranks the country as extremely vulnerable using the Environmental Vulnerability Index. Tuvalu's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) describes a response to the climate change problem as using the combined efforts of several local bodies on each island that will work with the local community leaders (the Falekaupule). The main office, named the Department of Environment, is responsible for coordinating the non-governmental organizations, religious bodies, and stakeholders. Each of the named groups are responsible for implementing Tuvalu's NAPA, the main plan to adapt to the adverse effects of human use and climate change.\nThe establishment of the A$5 million Tuvalu Survival Fund (TSF) in the 2016 Tuvaluan budget was intended for climate change mitigation and the recovery expenses that followed the impact of Cyclone Pam, which impacted Tuvalu in 2015.\nThe Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP) was launched in 2017 for the purpose of enhancing the resilience of the islands of Tuvalu to meet the challenges resulting from higher sea levels. Tuvalu was the first country in the Pacific to access climate finance from Green Climate Fund, with the support of the UNDP. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation project commenced. The project is to dredge sand from the lagoon to construct a platform on Fongafale, Funafuti that is 780 meters long and 100 meters wide, which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves beyond the year 2100. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) also provided funding for the TCAP. Further projects that are part of TCAP are capital works on the outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga aimed at reducing exposure to coastal damage resulting from storms.\nOn 26 September 2023, the World Bank (WB) approved US$11.5 million (AUD$18 million) in new grant financing to Tuvalu as part of the WB\u2019s First Climate and Disaster Resilience Development Policy Financing program. This WB support includes a development policy grant of US$7.5 million (AU$11.8 million). This grant is directed to assisting Tuvalu's National Disaster Management Office in coordinating post-disaster response activities; as well to the work of Tuvalu\u2019s National Building Code Assessment Unit, of the Public Works Department, to develop more disaster-resilient infrastructure in Tuvalu. The WB program includes an additional Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) of US$4 million (AU$6.3 million). The Cat DDO funds are made available to Tuvalu in the event of a natural disaster. The purpose of the WB grant is to support improved monitoring and reporting for the assessment of Tuvalu\u2019s climate and disaster risks, and to help the government fast-track the flow of critical supplies to the islands of Tuvalu following emergencies and natural disasters.\nBudgets of the government of Tuvalu.\nThe Hon. Seve Paeniu, finance minister, presented a half year budget to parliament on 20 November 2023. The 2024 Tuvaluan general election was held on 26 January 2024, subsequently Feleti Teo was appointed as prime minister on 26 February 2024, after he was elected unopposed by the parliament.\nIn 2024 Tuvalu changed its budgeting period from the calendar year to a July to June financial year. The Hon. Panapasi Nelesoni, finance minister, presented the 2024-2025 budget to parliament on 24 June 2024, which is intended to fund the implementation of 21 priority spending programs to bolster Tuvalu\u2019s resilience against impacts of climate change, strengthen economy efficiency and enhance service delivery to uplift welfare and the wellbeing of Tuvaluans. The total budget expenditure for 2024-2025 financial year was projected at A$96.9 million. This includes A$86.1 million for operating expenditure, A$7.7 million for capital investments and A$3.1 million for statutory expenditure. The 2024-2025 budget forecasted a deficit of A$3.9 million, which deficit was funded by a transfer from the Consolidated Investment Fund (CIF), which is a reserve fund maintained through the operation of the Tuvalu Trust Fund. The total revenue was projected at A$93.0 million, comprising A$39.0 million from fishing licences, A$12.7 million from taxation, A$10.9 million from commercial contracts, A$4.1 million from interest-dividends and rent, and A$1.8 million from other government generated income. Assistance from partner countries, which provide general budget support, was projected at A$24.5 million.\n\"Fiscal Summary - 2024-2025 National Budget\":\nNote 1: The Consolidated Investment Fund (CIF) is the \u2018B Account\u2019 that is part of the Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF), from which the government of Tuvalu can withdraw funds for expenditure on government services.\nNote 2: The operation of the Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF) is directed to ensuring that the capital of the Fund in the 'A Account' is maintained in real terms, taking account of the effect of inflation (the 'maintained value'). If the market value of the funds in the 'A Account' is greater than the maintained value, then the difference is placed in the 'B Account' or \u201cConsolidated Investment Fund\u201d (CIF).\nThe Hon. Panapasi Nelesoni presented the 2025-2065 budget to parliament on 23 June 2025. The 2025-2065 budget is a balance budget, which is not intended to draw from the CIF. The total projected revenue for 2025-2026 budget is $114.1 million from both domestic revenues and budget support from partner governments. This is an increase of $10.7 million (10%) from the 2024-2025 estimated actual revenue, which is largely due to improved fisheries revenues and investment return. Revenue from commercial contracts is expected to increase by $2.2 million.\n\"Fiscal Summary - 2025-2026 National Budget\":\nNote 1: See Note 1 to Fiscal Summary - 2024-2025 National Budget.\nNote 2: See Note 2 to Fiscal Summary - 2024-2025 National Budget.\nGDP and other economic performance indicators.\nInformation sourced from: \nThe Tuvaluan dollar and the Australian dollar (A$) are both official currencies of Tuvalu.\n\"Currency\": 1 Tuvaluan dollar ($T) or 1 Australian dollar (A$) = 100 cents\n\"GDP\": \n\"GDP - nominal\": A$47 million (2015); A$49 million (2016); A$59.1 million (2017); A$64.4 million (2018); A$77.9 million (2019); A$75.2 million (2020); A$80.1 million (2021); A$78.1 million (2022); A$76.1 (2023); A$85.5 (2024 est.); A$90.0 (2025 proj.); A$94.6 (2026 proj.); A$99.7 (2027 proj.); A$104.7 (2028 proj.); A$109.6 (2029 proj.); A$114.4 (2030 proj.).\n\"GNI - GNI per capita\": $4,760 (2010)\n\"GDP - per capita\": $2,447 (2009); $3,400 (2015 est.); $3,700 (2016 est.); $3,898 (2017 est.); $3,948 (2018 est.); $4,281 (2019 est.); 4,515 (A$7,152)(2021 est.)\n\"GDP \u2013 composition by sector\":\nAgriculture: 24.5% (2012 est.)\nIndustry: 5.6% (2012 est.)\nServices: 70% (2012 est.)\n\"Growth and inflation\":\n\"Total population\": 10,632 (2022 Census)\n\"Labor force - by occupation\": people make a living mainly through exploitation of the sea, reefs, and atolls and from wages sent home by those working abroad in Australia and New Zealand and sailors working on merchant ships.\n\"Unemployment rate\": The 2022 Census showed the national unemployment rate falling to 6.3 percent, down from 28.5 percent in 2017. Labour force participation decreased slightly from 49.3 to 43.0 percent, the employment-to-population ratio increased from 35.2 to 40.3 percent.\n\"Population below poverty line\": 26.3% (2010 est.)\n\"Budget (2010 to 2013)\":\n\"Budget (2014 to 2019)\":\n\"Budget (2020 to 2023)\":\n\"Government finance\" (2015 to 2021):\nNote 1: Includes Special Development Fund and infrastructure development.\nNote 2: Domestic current balance excludes fishing revenue, grants, and capital expenditure.\n\"Government finance\" (2022 to 2030):\nNote 1: Domestic current balance excludes fishing revenue, grants, and capital expenditure.\n\"Debt Indicators - IMF report 2025\":\n\"Electricity - installed generating capacity\": 5,100\u00a0kW (2011)\n\"Electricity - from fossil fuels\": 96% of total installed capacity (2015 est.)\n\"Industries\": fishing, tourism, copra\n\"Agriculture - products\": coconuts; fish\n\"Exports\": $2.232 million (2022 est) $1 million (f.o.b., 2004); $600,000 (2010 est.)\n\"Exports - commodities\": copra, fish\n\"Exports - partners\": Thailand 88%, Japan 6%, Philippines 3%, Ireland 1%, USA 1% (2023) \n\"Imports\": $57.388 million (2022 est), $12.91 million (c.i.f., 2005); $238.6 million (2012 est.); $136.5 million (2013 est.)\n\"Imports - commodities\": food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery, manufactured goods\n\"Imports - partners\": China 42%, Fiji 24%, Japan 11%, Australia 11%, NZ 4% (2023)\n\"Economic aid - recipient\": $30.4 (2009); $19.7 million (2010 est.) note - major donors are Australia, New Zealand, European Union, Japan, and the US\n\"Exchange rates\": Tuvaluan dollars or Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.505 (2023 est.), 1.0902 (2010), 1.2822 (2009), 1.2137 (2007), 1.3285 (2006); 0.9695 (2011 est.); 0.97 (2012 est.); 1.1094 (2013 est.); 1.67 (2014 est.); 1.33 (2015 est.)\n\"Fiscal year\": In 2024 Tuvalu changed its budgeting period from the calendar year to a July to June financial year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57007", "revid": "38427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57007", "title": "Economy of the Comoros", "text": "The economy of the Comoros is based on subsistence agriculture and fishing. Comoros has inadequate transportation links, a young and rapidly increasing population, and few natural resources. The low educational level of the labor force contributes to a subsistence level of economic activity, high unemployment, and a heavy dependence on foreign grants and technical assistance. The Comoros, with an estimated gross domestic product (GDP) per capita income of about $700, is among the world's poorest and least developed nations. Although the quality of the land differs from island to island, most of the widespread lava-encrusted soil formations are unsuited to agriculture. As a result, most of the inhabitants make their living from subsistence agriculture and fishing. Average wages in 2007 hover around $3\u20134 per day.\nAgriculture, including fishing, hunting, and forestry, is the leading sector of the economy. It contributes 40% to GDP, employs 80% of the labor force, and provides most of the exports. The country is not self-sufficient in food production; rice, the main staple, accounts for the bulk of imports.\nThe government is working to upgrade education and technical training, to privatize commercial and industrial enterprises, to improve health services, to diversify exports, to promote tourism, and to reduce the high population growth rate. Continued foreign support is essential if the goal of 4% annual GDP growth is to be met. At 24 percent of GDP, remittances constitute an important source of inflows for the Comorian economy.\nThe GDP per capita of the Comoros grew 55% in the 1980s. But this proved unsustainable and it consequently shrank by 42% in the 1990s.\nEconomic history.\nDuring the colonial period, the French and local leading citizens established plantations to grow cash crops for export. Even after independence, French companies, such as Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Bambao and \u00c9tablissements Grimaldi \u2014 and other concerns, such as Kalfane and Company and later, President Abdallah's \u00c9tablissements Abdallah et Fils\u2014dominated the Comoran economy. These firms diverted most of their profits overseas, investing little in the infrastructure of the islands beyond what was needed for profitable management of the plantations, or what could benefit these businesses' associates or related concerns. A serious consequence of this approach has been the languishing of the food-crop agricultural sector and the resultant dependence on overseas food imports, particularly rice. In 1993 the Comoros remained hostage to fluctuating prices on the international market for such crops as vanilla, ylang-ylang, and cloves.\nThe Comoros is one of the world's poorest countries; its per capita gross national product (GNP\u2014see Glossary) was estimated at US$400 in 1994, following the January devaluation of the Comorian franc. Although GNP increased in real terms at an average annual rate of 3.1 percent during the 1980s, rapid population growth effaced these gains and caused an average annual decrease in per capita GNP of 0.6 percent. Gross domestic product (GDP\u2014see Glossary) grew in real terms by 4.2 percent per year from 1980 to 1985, 1.8 percent from 1985 to 1988, and 1.5 percent in 1990. In 1991, because of its balance of payments difficulties, the Comoros became eligible for the IDA's Special Program of Assistance for debt-distressed countries of sub-Saharan Africa.\nThe economy is based on private ownership, frequently by foreign investors. Nationalization, even during the Soilih years, has been limited. Soilih did expropriate the facilities of a foreign oil company, but only after the government of Madagascar took over the company's plants in that country. The Abdallah government, despite its openness to foreign participation in the economy, nationalized the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Bambao and another French-capitalized firm, the Comoran Meat Company (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Comorienne des Viandes\u2014Socovia), which specialized in sales of meat and other foods in the islands. The nationalization was short-lived, however, because Socovia and other government-held enterprises were either liquidated or privatized as part of economic restructuring efforts in 1992.\nFollowing the Abdallah regime's rapprochement with France in 1978, the Comoran economy became increasingly dependent on infusions of French aid, along with assistance from other governments and international organizations. By 1990, the year the Comoros concluded negotiations with the IMF for an economic restructuring program, the republic's total external public debt was US$162.4 million, an amount equal to about three-quarters of GNP. The government delayed implementing the structural adjustment plan and was directed by the World Bank and the IMF to do so by September 1992. The plan recommendations entailed discharging about 2,800 of 9,000 civil servants, among other unpopular measures. The IMF granted the Comoros a new credit for US$1.9 million in March 1994 under the Structural Adjustment Facility. For the period 1994\u201396, the Comoros sought an economic growth rate of 4 percent as well as an inflation rate of 4 percent for 1995\u201396. The growth rate for 1994, however, was estimated only at 0.7 percent and the inflation rate at 15 percent. Meanwhile, in a move designed to encourage private enterprise and reduce unemployment, in May 1993 the UN Development Programme had given the Comoros a credit of US$2 million for programs in these areas. In January 1994, the European Development Fund (EDF) granted 1.3 million European Currency Units (ECUs; for value, see Glossary) to the Comoros to develop small businesses. The Comoros also received 5.7 million French francs from the French Aid and Cooperation Fund for agriculture and rural development.\nThe results of foreign aid to the Comoros have been mixed at best. The purposes of the aid ranged from helping the government cover its payroll for such huge, seemingly endless projects as expanding the seaport at Moroni and developing a new port at Mutsamuda on Nzwani. Neither project had shown much promise by early 1994. Meanwhile, the islands have been unable to develop local resources or create the infrastructure needed for economic development. The few successes included the creation of national news media and limited improvements in public health, education, and telecommunications. Developmental assistance from the United States, which totaled US$700,000 in fiscal year (FY\u2014see Glossary) 1991, was administered by CARE, the nongovernmental organization, and focused primarily on reforestation, soil conservation, and sustainable agriculture.\nThe Comoros has officially participated in the African Franc Zone (Communaut\u00e9 Financi\u00e8re Africaine\u2014CFA; see Glossary) since 1979. The CFA franc equaled one French franc.\nA national labor organization, the Union of Comoran Workers (Union des Travailleurs des Comores), also had headquarters in Moroni. Strikes and worker demonstrations often occurred in response to political crises, economic restructuring mandated by international financial organizations, and the failure of the government \u2014 occasionally for months at a time \u2014 to pay civil servants. Mean wages were $0.80 per man-hour in 2009.\nAgriculture, fishing, and forestry.\nAgriculture contributed 36,6% to the GDP in 2024 and provides most of the exports, with cloves alone accounting for 64,9% in 2023. The sector, which involves more than 80% of the population, provides virtually all foreign exchange earnings. Services including tourism, construction, and commercial activities constitute the remainder of the GDP. Plantations engage a large proportion of the population in producing the islands' major cash crops for export: vanilla, cloves, perfume essences, and copra. The Comoros is the world's leading producer of essence of ylang-ylang, used in manufacturing perfume. It also is the world's second-largest producer of vanilla, after Madagascar. Principal food crops are coconuts, bananas, and cassava. Foodstuffs constitute 32% of total imports.\nAgriculture and livestock.\nAgriculture supported about 80 percent of the population and supplied about 95 percent of exports in the early 1990s. Two agricultural zones are generally defined: the coastal area, which ranges in elevation from sea level to 400 meters and which supports cash crops such as vanilla, ylang-ylang, and cloves; and the highlands, which support cultivation of crops for domestic consumption, such as cassava, bananas, rain rice, and sweet potatoes. As the population increased, food grown for domestic use met fewer and fewer of Comorans' needs. Data collected by the World Bank showed that food production per capita fell about 12 percent from 1980 to 1987. The republic imported virtually all its meat and vegetables; rice imports alone often accounted for up to 30 percent of the value of all imports.\nThe Comoros is the world's principal producer of ylang-ylang essence, an essence derived from the flowers of a tree originally brought from Indonesia that is used in manufacturing perfumes and soaps. Ylang-ylang essence is a major component of Chanel No. 5, the popular scent for women. The republic is the world's second largest producer of vanilla, after Madagascar. Cloves are also an important cash crop. A total of 237 tons of vanilla was exported in 1991, at a price of about CF19 per kilogram. A total of 2,750 tons of cloves was exported in 1991, at a price of CF397 per kilogram. That year forty-three tons of ylang-ylang essence were exported at a price of about CF23,000 per kilogram. The production of all three commodities fluctuates wildly, mainly in response to changes in global demand and natural disasters such as cyclones. Profits\u2014and therefore, government receipts\u2014likewise skyrocket and plummet, wreaking havoc with government efforts to predict revenues and plan expenditures. Stabex (Stabilization of Export Earnings\u2014see Glossary), a system of the EC, provides aid to the Comoros and other developing countries to mitigate the effects of fluctuations in the prices of export commodities.\nLong-term prospects for the growth and stabilization of the markets for vanilla and ylang-ylang did not appear strong in the early 1990s. Vanilla faced increased competition from synthetic flavorings, and the preferences of perfume users were moving away from the sweet fragrance provided by ylang-ylang essence. Copra, the dried coconut meat that yields coconut oil, once an important Comoran export, had ceased to be a significant factor in the economy by the late 1980s, when the world's tastes shifted from high-fat coconut oil toward \"leaner\" substances such as palm oil. Although clove production and revenues also experienced swings, in the early 1990s cloves did not appear to face the same sorts of challenges confronting vanilla and ylang-ylang. Most Comoran vanilla is grown on Njazidja; Nzwani is the source of most ylangylang.\nNumerous international programs have attempted to reduce the country's dependence on food imports, particularly of rice, a major drain on export earnings. Organizations initiating these rural development programs have included the EDF, the IFAD, the World Food Program, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, and the governments of France and the United States. Despite these international efforts, which numbered as many as seventeen in 1984, food production per capita actually declined in the Comoros during the 1980s. The major clove and vanilla growers, whose plantations occupy the islands' fertile coastal lands, generally resisted these restructuring efforts, as did rice-importing firms, including the country's largest, \u00c9tablissements Abdallah et Fils.\nCrowded onto the mountain slopes by the cash crop plantations, food-crop farmers have caused deforestation and the erosion of the highlands' thin, fragile soil. In response, aid providers have dedicated an increasing amount of agricultural assistance to reforestation, soil restoration, and environmentally sensitive means of cultivation. For example, all United States agricultural aid in 1991 (US$700,000) was directed to such projects, as was a US$4 million loan from the IFAD to help initiate a small producers' support program on Nzwani.\nThe livestock sector is small\u2014some 47,000 cattle, 120,000 goats, 13,000 sheep, and 4,000 asses in 1990. The Comoros continues to import most domestically consumed meat.\nFishing.\nSince the latter part of the 1980s, the Comoros has made headway in developing fisheries as a source of export earnings. In 1988 the government concluded a three-year agreement with the EC by which forty French and Spanish vessels would be permitted to fish in Comoran waters, primarily for tuna. In return, the Comoros would receive ECU300,000, and ECU50,000 would be invested in fisheries research. In addition, fishing vessel operators would pay ECU20 per ton of tuna netted. Although the deep waters outside the islands' reefs do not abound in fish, it has been estimated that up to 30,000 tons of fish could be taken per year from Comoran waters (which extend 320 kilometers offshore). The total catch in 1990 was 5,500 tons. Japan has also provided aid to the fishing industry. Fisheries development is overseen by a state agency, the Development Company for Small-Scale Fisheries of the Comoros (Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de D\u00e9veloppement de la P\u00eache Artisanale des Comores).\nForestry.\nForested areas amounted to about in 2000. Numerous fruit trees and tropical hardwoods are found. Some timber is produced, notably on the island of Grande Comore, which has about half the remaining forest. Roundwood production in 2003 amounted to 9,000 cu m (300,000 cu ft).\nIndustry.\nIndustrial activities are responsible for only a tiny portion of Comoran economic activity\u2014about 5 percent of GDP in 1994. Principal industries are those that involve processing cash crops for export: preparing vanilla and distilling ylang-ylang into perfume essence. These activities were once controlled almost entirely by French companies, but as they closed unprofitable plantations, individual farmers set up many small, inefficient distilleries.\nComorans also produce handicrafts for export.\nOther industries are small and geared to internal markets: sawmills, printing, carpentry, and the production of shoes, plastics, yogurt, handicrafts (such as the jewelry exchanged as part of the grand marriage), and small fishing boats.\nSeveral factors provide major obstacles to the growth of industry: the islands' geographically isolated position, their distance from each other, a scarcity of raw materials and skilled labor, and the high cost of electricity (energy is produced by hydropower, imported petroleum, and wood products) and transportation. Value added in industry slowly declined throughout the 1980s.\nTourism.\nPerhaps the primary outcome of South African penetration of the Comoran economy during Ahmed Abdallah's regime was the development of tourism. Although South African investors built or renovated several hotels during the 1980s (with assistance from the South African and Comoran governments), only one resort, the 182-room Galawa Beach on Njazidja, was operating by late 1992. About 100 other hotel rooms were available on the islands. Political instability, a declining South African interest in the islands as the apartheid regime was disassembled and other tropical tourism venues became more welcoming, and the need to import most construction materials and consumable supplies inhibited the growth of tourism, despite the islands' physical beauty. Nonetheless, in large part thanks to Galawa Beach, which had been closed during 1990, tourism increased from 7,627 visitors in 1990 to 16,942 in 1991. Most of these tourists were Europeans, primarily French (see Historical Setting, this ch.).\nInfrastructure.\nThe country lacks the infrastructure necessary for development. Some villages are not linked to the main road system or at best are connected by tracks usable only by four-wheel-drive vehicles. The islands' ports are rudimentary, although a deepwater facility was recently completed on Anjouan. Only small vessels can approach the existing quays in Moroni on Grande Comore, despite recent improvements. Long-distance, ocean-going ships must lie offshore and be unloaded by smaller boats; during the cyclone season, this procedure is dangerous, and ships are reluctant to call at the island. Most freight is sent first to Mombasa or R\u00e9union and transshipped from there.\nThe banking system consists of the Central Bank of the Comoros (Banque Centrale des Comores) established in 1981 that had three offices (Moroni (Grande-Comore), Mutsamudu (Anjouan) and Fomboni (Moh\u00e9li)); the Banque pour l'Industrie et le Commerce des Comores, a commercial bank established in 1990 that had six branches in 1993 and was a subsidiary of the Banque Nationale de Paris; the Development Bank of the Comoros (Banque de D\u00e9veloppement des Comores), established in 1982, which provided support for small and midsize development projects, the Federal Bank of Commerce (Banque F\u00e9d\u00e9rale de Commerce) and the Exim Bank Comores Ltd. Most of the shares in the Development Bank of the Comoros were held by the Comoran government and the central bank; the rest were held by the European Investment Bank and the Caisse Centrale de Coop\u00e9ration \u00c9conomique, a development agency of the French government. All of these banks had headquarters in Moroni.\nExternal trade.\nFrance, the Comoros' major trading partner, finances small projects only. The United States receives a growing percentage of the Comoros' exports but supplies only a negligible fraction of its imports (less than 1%).\nThe overall effect of the republic's dependence on aid has been perennial trade deficits accompanied by chronic budget deficits. In 1992 total exports had a value of US$21 million, and total imports were valued at US$50 million. In 1991 receipts totaled about US$34.7 million (CF9.7 trillion; CF\u2014Comoran franc; for value of the Comoran franc\u2014see Glossary) whereas expenditures totaled about US$93.8 million (CF26.2 trillion). The shortfall, which equaled about 170 percent of receipts, was financed by international grants and loans, by draws upon existing lines of credit, and by debt rescheduling.\nIn 1991 France received 55 percent of Comoran exports, followed by the United States (19 percent) and Germany (16 percent). The main export products were vanilla, ylang-ylang, and cloves. The republic's primary suppliers were France (56 percent of imports), the Belgium-Luxembourg economic union (11 percent), and Japan (5 percent). Imports consisted of basic foodstuffs (rice and meat), petroleum, and construction materials.\nComoros has an international airport (Prince Said Ibrahim International Airport) at Hahaya on Grande Comore. It is a member of the franc zone with an exchange rate of 491.9677 Comorian francs (KMF) = 1 [Euro].\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57008", "revid": "40890682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57008", "title": "European robin", "text": "Species of bird\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe European robin (Erithacus rubecula), known simply as the robin or robin redbreast in the British Isles, is a small insectivorous passerine bird that belongs to the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae. It is found across Europe, east to Western Siberia and south to North Africa; it is sedentary in the west and south of its range, and migratory in the north and east of its range where winters are harsher.\nIt is in length; the male and female are identical in plumage, with an orange-toned red breast and face lined with grey, brown upper-parts and a whitish belly. Juveniles are distinct, freckled brown all over and without the red breast; first-winter immatures are like the adults, except for more obvious yellow-brown tips to the wing covert feathers (inconspicuous or absent in adults).\nEtymology.\nThe distinctive orange breast of both sexes contributed to the European robin's original name of \"redbreast\", \"orange\" as a colour name being unknown in English until the 16th century, by which time the fruit of the same name had been introduced. The Dutch , French , Swedish \"r\u00f6dhake\", German , Italian , Spanish and Portuguese all refer to the distinctively coloured front.\nIn the 15th century, when it became popular to give human names to familiar species, the bird came to be known as \"robin redbreast\", which was eventually shortened to \"robin\". As a given name, Robin is originally a smaller form of the name Robert. The term \"robin\" is also applied to some birds in other families with red or orange breasts. These include the American robin (\"Turdus migratorius\", a thrush) and the Australasian robins of the family Petroicidae, the relationships of which are unclear.\nOther older English names for the bird include \"ruddock\" and \"robinet\". In American literature of the late 19th century, this robin was frequently called the \"English robin\".\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nThe European robin was described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the 10th edition of his \"Systema Naturae\" under the binomial name \"Motacilla rubecula\". Its specific epithet \"rubecula\" is a diminutive derived from the Latin , meaning 'red'. The genus \"Erithacus\" was described by French naturalist Georges Cuvier in 1800, giving the bird its current binomial name \"E. rubecula\". The genus name \"Erithacus\" is from Ancient Greek and refers to an unknown bird, now usually identified as robin.\nThe genus \"Erithacus\" was formerly classified as a member of the thrush family (Turdidae) but is now known to belong to the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae. The genus formerly included the Japanese robin and the Ryukyu robin, but these east Asian species were shown in molecular phylogenetic studies to be more similar to a group of other Asian species than to the European robin; in a reorganisation of the genera, the Japanese and the Ryukyu robins were moved to the resurrected genus \"Larvivora\" leaving the European robin as the sole extant member of \"Erithacus\". A 2010 phylogenetic analysis placed \"Erithacus\" in a subfamily (Cossyphinae Vigors, 1825, syn. Erithacinae G. R. Gray, 1846) which otherwise contained only African species, but its exact position with respect to the other species in that subfamily was not resolved. More detailed analysis in 2023 confirmed it to be the sole European member of this tropical African subfamily, in which it is in a basal position.\nSubspecies.\nIn their large continental Eurasian range, robins vary somewhat, but do not form discrete populations that might be considered subspecies. Robin subspecies are mainly distinguished by forming resident populations on islands and in mountainous areas. The robin found in the British Isles and much of western Europe, \"Erithacus rubecula melophilus\", occurs as a vagrant in adjacent regions. \"E. r. witherbyi\" from northwest Africa, Corsica, and Sardinia closely resembles \"E. r. melophilus\" but has shorter wings. The northeasternmost birds, large and fairly washed-out in colour, are \"E. r. tataricus\". In the southeast of its range, \"E. r. valens\" of the Crimean Peninsula, \"E. r. caucasicus\" of the Caucasus and northern Transcaucasia, and \"E. r. hyrcanus\" southeastwards into Iran are generally accepted as significantly distinct.\nOn Madeira and the Azores, the local population has been described as \"E. r. microrhynchos\", and although not distinct in morphology, its isolation seems to suggest the subspecies is valid (but see below).\nCanary Islands robins.\nThe most distinct birds are those of Gran Canaria (\"E. r. marionae\") and Tenerife (\"E. r. superbus\"), which may be considered two distinct species or at least two different subspecies. They are readily distinguished by a white eye-ring, an intensely coloured breast, a grey line that separates the orange-red from the brown colouration, and the belly is entirely white.\nCytochrome \"b\" sequence data and vocalisations indicate that the Gran Canaria/Tenerife robins are indeed very distinct and probably derived from colonisation by mainland birds some 2\u00a0million years ago.\nChristian Dietzen, Hans-Hinrich Witt and Michael Wink published in 2003 in \"Avian Science\" a study called \"The phylogeographic differentiation of the European robin \"Erithacus rubecula\" on the Canary Islands revealed by mitochondrial DNA sequence data and morphometrics: evidence for a new robin taxon on Gran Canaria?\". In it they concluded that Gran Canaria's robin diverged genetically from their European relatives as far back as 2.3\u00a0million years, while the Tenerife ones took another half a million years to make this leap, 1.8\u00a0million years ago. The most likely reason would be a different colonisation of the Canaries by this bird, which arrived at the oldest island first (Gran Canaria) and subsequently passed to the neighbouring island (Tenerife).\nA thorough comparison between \"E. r. marionae\" and \"E. r. superbus\" is pending to confirm that the first one is effectively a different subspecies. Initial results suggest that birds from Gran Canaria have wings about 10% shorter than those on Tenerife. The west Canary Islands' populations are younger (Middle Pleistocene) and only beginning to diverge genetically. Robins from the western Canary Islands on El Hierro, La Palma and La Gomera (\"E. r. microrhynchus\") are more similar to the European type subspecies (\"E. r. rubecula\").\nFinally, the robins which can be found on Fuerteventura are the European subspecies, which is not surprising as the species does not breed either in this island or on nearby Lanzarote; they are wintering birds or just on passage during their migration between Africa and Europe.\nOther robins.\nThe larger American robin (\"Turdus migratorius\") is a much larger bird named from its similar colouration to the European robin, but the two birds are not closely related, with the American robin instead belonging to the same genus as the common blackbird (\"T.\u00a0merula\"), a species which occupies much of the same range as the European robin. The similarity between the European and American robins lies largely in the orange chest patch found in both species. This American species was incorrectly shown \"feathering its nest\" in London in the film \"Mary Poppins\", but it only occurs in the UK as a very rare vagrant.\nSome South and Central American \"Turdus\" thrushes are also called robins, such as the rufous-collared thrush. The Australian \"robin redbreast\", more correctly the scarlet robin (\"Petroica multicolor\"), is more closely related to crows and jays than it is to the European robin. It belongs to the family Petroicidae, whose members are commonly called \"Australasian robins\". The red-billed leiothrix (\"Leiothrix lutea\") is sometimes named the \"Pekin robin\" by aviculturalists. Another group of Old World flycatchers, this time from Africa and Asia, is the genus \"Copsychus\"; its members are known as magpie-robins, one of which, the Oriental magpie robin (\"C.\u00a0saularis\"), is the national bird of Bangladesh.\nDescription.\nThe adult European robin is long and weighs , with a wingspan of . The male and female bear similar plumage: an orange breast and face (more strongly coloured in the otherwise similar British subspecies \"E. r. melophilus\"), lined by a bluish grey on the sides of the neck and chest. The upperparts are brownish, or olive-tinged in British birds, and the belly whitish, while the legs and feet are brown. The bill and eyes are black. Juveniles are a spotted brown and white in colouration, with patches of orange gradually appearing.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe robin occurs in Eurasia east to Western Siberia, south to Algeria and on the Atlantic islands as far west as the Central Group of the Azores and Madeira. It is a vagrant in Iceland. In the southeast, it reaches Iran and the Caucasus range. Irish and British robins are largely resident but a small minority, usually female, migrate to southern Europe during winter, a few as far as Spain. Scandinavian and Russian robins migrate to Britain and western Europe to escape the harsher winters. These migrants can be recognised by the greyer tone of the upper parts of their bodies and duller orange breast. The continental European robins that migrate during winter prefer spruce woods in northern Europe, contrasting with its preference for parks and gardens in Great Britain.\nIn southern Iberia, habitat segregation of resident and migrant robins occurs, with resident robins remaining in the same woodlands where they bred.\nAttempts to introduce the European robin into Australia and New Zealand in the latter part of the 19th century were unsuccessful. Birds were released around Melbourne, Auckland, Christchurch, Wellington and Dunedin by various local acclimatisation societies, with none becoming established. There was a similar outcome in North America, as birds failed to become established after being released in Long Island, New York in 1852, Oregon in 1889\u20131892, and the Saanich Peninsula in British Columbia in 1908\u20131910.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nThe robin is diurnal, although it has been reported to be active hunting insects on moonlit nights or near artificial light at night. Well known to British and Irish gardeners, it is relatively unafraid of people and drawn to human activities involving the digging of soil, in order to look out for earthworms and other food freshly turned up. The British and Irish considered robins to be a gardener's friend and would never harm them, due also to the traditional association of the red colouring of their breasts with the blood of Christ. In continental Europe, on the other hand, robins were hunted and killed as were most other small birds, and are therefore more wary. Robins also approach large wild animals, such as wild boar, which disturb the ground, to look for any food that might be brought to the surface.\nIn autumn and winter, robins will supplement their usual diet of terrestrial invertebrates, such as spiders, worms and insects, with berries, fruit and seeds. They will also eat seed mixtures and suet placed on bird-tables, as well as left-overs. The robin is even known to feed on small vertebrates (including fish and lizards) and carrion.\nMale robins are very territorial and will fiercely attack other males and competitors that stray into their territories. They have been observed attacking other small birds without apparent provocation. There are recorded instances of robins attacking their own reflection. Territorial disputes sometimes lead to fatalities, accounting for up to 10% of adult robin deaths in some areas.\nBecause of high mortality in the first year of life, a robin has an average life expectancy of 1.1\u00a0years; however, once past its first year, life expectancy increases. One robin has been recorded as reaching 19\u00a0years of age. A spell of very low temperatures in winter can, however, result in higher mortality rates. The species is parasitised by the moorhen flea (\"Dasypsyllus gallinulae\") and the acanthocephalan \"Apororhynchus silesiacus\".\nBreeding.\nRobins may choose a wide variety of sites for building a nest. In fact, anything which can offer some shelter, like a depression or hole, may be considered. As well as the usual crevices, or sheltered banks, other objects include pieces of machinery, barbecues, bicycle handlebars, bristles on upturned brooms, discarded kettles, watering cans, flower pots and hats. Robins will also nest in manmade nest boxes, favouring a design with an open front placed in a sheltered position up to from the ground. Nests are generally composed of moss, leaves and grass, with fine grass, hair and feathers for lining.\nTwo or three clutches of five or six eggs are laid throughout the breeding season, which commences in March in Britain and Ireland. The eggs are a cream, buff or white speckled or blotched with reddish-brown colour, often more heavily so at the larger end. When juvenile birds fly from the nests, their colouration is entirely mottled brown. After two to three months out of the nest, the juvenile bird grows some orange feathers under its chin, and over a similar period this patch gradually extends to complete the adult appearance of an entirely red-orange breast.\nVocalisation.\nThe robin produces a fluting, warbling during the breeding season. Both the male and female sing throughout the year, including during the winter, when they hold separate territories. During the winter, the robin's song is more plaintive than the summer version. The female robin moves a short distance from the summer nesting territory to a nearby area that is more suitable for winter feeding. The male robin keeps the same territory throughout the year. During the breeding season, male robins usually initiate their morning song an hour before civil sunrise, and usually terminate their daily singing around thirty minutes after sunset. Nocturnal singing can also occur, especially in urban areas that are artificially lit during the night. Some urban robins opt to sing at night to avoid daytime anthropogenic noise.\nMagnetoreception.\nThe avian magnetic compass of the robin has been extensively researched and uses vision-based magnetoreception, in which the robin's ability to sense the magnetic field of the Earth for navigation is affected by the light entering the bird's eye. The physical mechanism of the robin's magnetic sense involves quantum entanglement of electron spins in cryptochrome in the bird's eyes.\nConservation status.\nThe European robin has an extensive range and a population numbering in the hundreds of millions. The species does not approach the vulnerable thresholds under the population trend criterion (&gt;30 per cent decline over ten years or three generations); the population appears to be increasing. The International Union for Conservation of Nature evaluates it as least concern.\nCultural depictions.\nThe robin features prominently in British folklore and that of northwestern France, but much less so in other parts of Europe,\nthough in the nineteenth century Jacob Grimm reported a tradition from German-speaking Europe that if someone disturbed a robin's nest their house would be struck by lightning. Robins feature in the traditional children's tale \"Babes in the Wood\"; the birds cover the dead bodies of the children.\nThe robin has become strongly associated with Christmas, taking a starring role on many Christmas cards since the mid-19th century.\nThe robin has appeared on many Christmas postage stamps. An old British folk tale seeks to explain the robin's distinctive breast. Legend has it that when Jesus was dying on the cross, the robin, then simply brown in colour, flew to his side and sang into his ear in order to comfort him in his pain. The blood from his wounds stained the robin's breast, and thereafter all robins carry the mark of Christ's blood upon them.\nAn alternative legend has it that its breast was scorched fetching water for souls in Purgatory. The association with Christmas more probably arises from the fact that postmen in Victorian Britain wore red jackets and were nicknamed \"Robins\"; the robin featured on the Christmas card is an emblem of the postman delivering the card.\nIn the 1960s, in a vote publicised by \"The Times\", the robin was adopted as the unofficial national bird of the United Kingdom.\nIn 2015, the robin was again voted Britain's national bird in a poll organised by birdwatcher David Lindo, taking 34% of the final vote.\nSeveral English and Welsh sports organisations are nicknamed \"the Robins\". The nickname is typically used for teams whose home colours predominantly use red. These include the professional football clubs Bristol City, Crewe Alexandra, Swindon Town, Cheltenham Town and, traditionally, Wrexham A.F.C., as well as the English rugby league team Hull Kingston Rovers (whose home colours are white with a red band). As of 2019, Bristol City, Swindon Town and Cheltenham Town also incorporate a robin image in their current badge designs. A small bird is an unusual choice, although it is thought to symbolise agility in darting around the field.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57010", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57010", "title": "Geography of Seychelles", "text": " \nSeychelles is a small island country east of the African continent located in the Sea of Zanj due north of Madagascar, with Antsiranana as its nearest foreign city. Seychelles lies between approximately 4\u00baS and 10\u00baS and 46\u00baE and 54\u00baE. The nation is an archipelago of 155 tropical islands, some granite and some coral, the majority of which are small and uninhabited. The landmass is only but the islands are spread wide over an exclusive economic zone of . About 90 percent of the population of 100,000 live on Mah\u00e9, 9 percent on Praslin and La Digue. Around a third of the land area is the island of Mah\u00e9 and a further third the atoll of Aldabra.\nThere are two distinct regions, the granitic islands, the world's only oceanic islands of granitic rock and the coralline outer islands. The granite islands are the world's oldest ocean islands, while the outer islands are mainly very young, though the Aldabra group and St Pierre (Farquhar Group) are unusual, raised coral islands that have emerged and submerged several times during their long history, the most recent submergence dating from about 125,000 years ago\nPhysical features.\nThe archipelago consists of 155 islands and thirty prominent rock formations scattered throughout a self-proclaimed exclusive economic zone of more than of ocean. Some forty islands are granitic and lie in a radius from Mah\u00e9, the main island. The remaining islands are coralline, stretching over a radius from Ile Aux Vaches in the northeast to the Aldabra Atoll in the southwest. The country's Inner Islands are the granitic islands plus two nearby coralline islands, Bird Island and Denis Island. The remaining coralline islands are the Outer Islands. The islands are all small\u2014the aggregate land area is only .\nMah\u00e9 is long and no more than wide, with an area of . It contains the capital and only city, Victoria, an excellent port. Victoria lies approximately east of Mombasa, Kenya; southwest of Mumbai; north of Mauritius; and northeast of Madagascar. The only other important islands by virtue of their size and population are Praslin and La Digue, situated about thirty kilometers to the northeast of Mah\u00e9.\nThe granitic islands are founded on a fragment separated from the Indian continental plate during the Palaeocene about 66 million years ago during the break up of the supercontinent of Gondwana. This break-up was associated with the volcanic activity that built the Mascarene Plateau. These granitic islands are characterized by boulder-covered hills and mountains as high as rising abruptly from the sea. Elsewhere, narrow coastal plains extend to the base of the foothills. Extensively developed coral reefs are found mainly on the east coasts because of the southwest trade winds and equatorial current. Ninety-nine percent of the population is located on the granitic islands, and most are on Mah\u00e9.\nThe coralline islands differ sharply from the granitic in that they are very flat, often rising only a few feet (one meter) above sea level. They have no fresh water, and very few have a resident population. Many, like Ile aux Vaches, Ile Denis, the Amirante Isles, Platte Island, and Coetivy Island, are sand cays upon which extensive coconut plantations have been established. Some of the coralline islands consist of uplifted reefs and atolls covered with stunted vegetation. Several of these islands have been important breeding grounds for turtles and birds, as well as the sites of extensive guano deposits, which formerly constituted an important element of the Seychellois economy but now for the most part are depleted. The Aldabra Islands, the largest coralline atoll with an area greater than Mahe, are a sanctuary for rare animals and birds.\nThe five groups of coralline islands that make up the Outer Islands are Southern Coral Group (a collective term for \u00cele Platte and Co\u00ebtivy Island), Amirante Islands, Alphonse Group (Alphonse Atoll and St. Fran\u00e7ois Atoll), Aldabra Group (Aldabra Atoll, Assumption Island, and the Cosmoledo Group, consisting of Cosmoledo Atoll and Astove Island), and Farquhar Group (Farquhar Atoll, Providence Atoll and St. Pierre Island).\nGeology.\nThe Seychelles Bank is founded on a granite basement, a fragment separated from the Indian continental plate during the Palaeocene about 66 million years ago. This break-up was associated with the volcanic activity that built the Mascarene Plateau. The occurrence of syenite, diorite and microgranite in the western part of the Seychelles Bank could indicate that crustal deposit across the northwestern Indian Ocean Ridge apparently drove the Seychelles block southwestwards, causing it to collide with the northeastern edge of the Mascarene Basin. This collision could have led to the development of the Amirante Trough. This rift formation is associated with the R\u00e9union hotspot which is also responsible for R\u00e9union Island and the Deccan Traps in India. Because of its long isolation, the Seychelles hosts several unique species including the coco de mer, a palm which has the largest seeds of any plant and the world's largest population of giant tortoises.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Seychelles is tropical, having little seasonal variation. Temperatures on Mahe rarely rise above or drop below . Humidity is high, but its enervating effect is usually ameliorated by prevailing winds. The southeast monsoon from late May to September brings cooler weather, and the northwest monsoon from March to May, warmer weather.\nHigh winds are rare inasmuch as most islands lie outside the Indian Ocean cyclone belt; Mahe suffered the only such storm in its recorded history in 1862. Mean annual rainfall in Mahe averages at sea level and as much as on the mountain slopes. Precipitation is somewhat less on the other islands, averaging as low as per year on the southernmost coral islands.\nBecause catchment provides most sources of water in Seychelles, yearly variations in rainfall or even brief periods of drought can produce water shortages. Small dams have been built on Mahe since 1969 in an effort to guarantee a reliable water supply, but drought can still be a problem on Mahe and particularly on La Digue.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe Seychelles contain at least 75 species of flowering plants, three mammal species, 14 bird species, 30 species of reptiles and amphibians, and several hundred species of snails, insects, spiders and other invertebrates found nowhere else. In addition, the waters contain more than 900 kinds of fish, of which more than one-third are associated with coral reefs. Specific examples of unique birds are the Seychelles paradise flycatcher, the Seychelles black parrot, the Seychelles warbler,\nand the flightless rail. Most famous of all the Seychelles animals are the giant tortoises of the genus \"Aldabrachelys\".\nEnvironmental threats.\nVast amounts of plastic debris accumulate on beaches across Seychelles. Observational analysis suggests that most terrestrial debris originates from Indonesia, India, and Sri Lanka. Debris associated with fisheries including fish aggregating devices also poses a major problem. Rats have reduced biodiversity on many islands. Climate change is also a significant issue.\nSeychelles began addressing the conservation problem in the late 1960s by creating the Nature Conservancy Commission, later renamed the Seychelles National Environment Commission. A system of national parks and animal preserves covering 42% of the land area and about of the surrounding water areas has been set aside. Legislation protects wildlife and bans various destructive practices.\nA major project was funded by Fonds Francais pour l'environnement Mondiale (FFEM) and implemented by Island Conservation Society. This aims to rehabilitate and enhance islands for the maintenance of native biodiversity in Seychelles through eradication of introduced predator species, rehabilitation of habitats and reintroduction of rare or threatened species. Rats have been eliminated from North Island, Cosmoledo Atoll and Conception Island.\nFacts and figures.\nGeographic coordinates: \nArea:\n\"total:\"\n459\u00a0km2\n\"land:\"\n459\u00a0km2\n\"water:\"\n0\u00a0km2\nLand boundaries:\n0\u00a0km\nCoastline:\n491\u00a0km\nMaritime claims:\n\"continental shelf:\"\n or to the edge of the continental margin\n\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n with \n\"territorial sea:\"\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nIndian Ocean 0 m\n\"highest point:\"\nMorne Seychellois 905 m\nNatural resources:\nfish, copra, cinnamon trees\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\"\n2%\n\"permanent crops:\"\n13%\n\"permanent pastures:\"\n0%\n\"forests and woodland:\"\n11%\n\"other:\"\n74% (1993 est.)\nIrrigated land:\n0\u00a0km2\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nBiodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling\n\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nClimate Change-Kyoto Protocol\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Seychelles, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57011", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57011", "title": "Economy of Singapore", "text": "The economy of Singapore is a highly developed mixed market economy with dirigiste characteristics. Singapore's economy has been consistently ranked as the most open, competitive and pro-business in the world. It is also the 3rd least corrupt in the world. Singapore has low tax-rates and the highest per-capita GDP in the world in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP). The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) is headquartered in Singapore.\nAlongside the business-friendly reputation for global and local privately held companies and public companies, various national state-owned enterprises play a substantial role in Singapore's economy. The sovereign wealth fund Temasek Holdings holds majority stakes in several of the nation's largest bellwether companies, such as Singapore Airlines, Singtel, ST Engineering and Mediacorp. With regards to foreign direct investment (FDI), the Singaporean economy is a major FDI outflow-financier in the world. In addition, throughout its history, Singapore has benefited from the large inward flows of FDI from global investors, financial institutions and multinational corporations (MNCs) due to its highly attractive investment climate along with a stable and conducive political environment throughout its modern years.\nOverview.\nSingapore relies on an extended concept of intermediary trade to entrep\u00f4t trade, by purchasing raw goods and refining them for re-export in order to sustain its high levels of export-oriented industrialization, such as in the wafer-fabrication industry and in oil refining. Singapore has a strategic port which makes it more competitive than many of its neighbours in carrying out such entrep\u00f4t activities. Singapore's trade-to-GDP ratio is among the highest in the world, as of 2020 the ratio was 320%. The Port of Singapore is the second-busiest in the world by cargo tonnage and is the busiest transshipment port in the world.\nSingapore is also a regional, continental and global hub for the management and operations of various MNCs, because of its strategic location in close proximity with other Asia-Pacific markets, along with its advanced connectivity and infrastructure (airline hub and maritime port with a diverse array of destinations, Gigabit fiber-optic communications, efficient road transport and public transport) and its immigration policies in welcoming global talent. In addition, Singapore is a popular international tourist destination for various types of tourism (Business tourism, MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) tourism, Medical tourism, Urban tourism).\nSingapore's economy is often referred to as a \"miracle\" due to its rapid transformation from a developing country to a developed, high-income economy in a relatively short period of time. This transformation took place in the second half of the 20th century under the leadership of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew and his government. One of the key factors contributing to Singapore's economic miracle was its strategic location, which made it an ideal hub for international trade and commerce.\nThe country's main exports include electronics, chemicals and services. Singapore is the regional hub for wealth management. Water is scarce in Singapore and a sizeable percentage of water is imported from Malaysia, therefore it is defined as a precious resource.\nSmall and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of Singapore's economic landscape. In 2022 SMEs contributed 48% (S$284 bil) of Singapore's total enterprise nominal value-added and employed 71% of Singapore's total workforce of 3.63 million.\nSingapore has limited arable land, meaning that Singapore is heavily reliant on agrotechnology parks (particularly vertical hydroponic farms) for agricultural production. As a result, Singapore imports 90% of its food supply and has a wide variety of supplier countries in order to achieve its food security; Singapore is ranked as among the most food secure in the world.\nApart from its strategic location at the cross-roads of trade between the East and the West, Singapore has little to no natural resources, hence human resources is a pivotal issue for the health of the Singaporean economy; the services and manufacturing sectors of the economy are heavily reliant on a highly-educated and highly-skilled 'Professional, Managerial, Executive and Technical' (PMET) workforce composed of residents and expatriates. The economy of Singapore ranked 2nd overall in the Scientific American Biotechnology ranking in 2014, with the featuring of Biopolis.\nTo preserve its international standing and to further its economic prosperity in the 21st century, Singapore has taken measures to promote innovation, to encourage entrepreneurship and to retrain its workforce. The Ministry of Manpower (MoM) has the prime responsibility for setting, adjusting, and enforcing immigration rules for foreign workers, in order to achieve the dual mandate of maximum employment of the local resident population and maximum economic growth for the nation. Approximately 29% of the total population within Singapore are non-resident foreigners, including 255,800 foreign domestic workers (FDWs) who operate in Singapore.\nEconomic statistics.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nHistory.\nBritish colonization.\nIn 1819, Stamford Raffles, at the time Lieutenant-Governor of Bencoolen, established a trading post in Singapore. Raffles had been searching for a new settlement that could be used as an outpost of the British Empire. He left Calcutta and set out to explore much of South-East Asia. At the time, the Dutch Empire and British Empire were close economic rivals. Colonization enabled these empires to gain control of the vast resources of militarily weaker and economically less prosperous nations. Raffles was looking for a new settlement that could replace Malacca as a key economic advantage over the Dutch Empire. The former had been handed over to the Dutch under the Treaty of Vienna of 1815. Raffles found Singapore to be a perfect location, sitting just of the edge of the Straits of Malacca, nowadays one of the most important shipping lanes in the world. As well, the territory had key economic resources which would benefit the British. There was abundant timber and fresh water, and a natural deep water harbor which would be beneficial for the British fleet. He arrived on an island at the mouth of the Singapore River, where there was a small Malay settlement. At the time accompanied by William Farquhar, Raffles met with Temenggong (essentially, Chief of Security, for the settlement) Abdul Rahman to negotiate the right to establish a trading post on the island, under the British Empire. The island was ruled nominally from Johar on the peninsula by Tengku (essentially, Prince) Rahman, Sultan of Johor, who was heavily influenced by the Dutch and the Bugis. However, the Sultanate was weakened by factional division so that Temenggong Abdul Rahman and his officials were more loyal to Rahman's elder brother Tengku Hussein (or Tengku Long) who was living in exile in \"Riau\" (likely the Riau Archipelago). With the Temenggong's help, Raffles managed to smuggle Hussein back to Singapore. He offered to recognize Hussein as the rightful Sultan of Johor and provide him with a yearly stipend; in return, Hussein would grant the British the right to establish a trading post on Singapore. On 6 February 1819 Raffles succeeded in having the territory formally incorporated into the British Empire as the aforementioned trading post. Much of the settlement's rapid economic growth thereafter can be credited to its natural suitability as a seaport hub.\nTrade expansion.\nOn 17 November 1869, the Suez Canal opens, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. This allowed for a decrease in travel time, which resulted in a rise in trade volume. The nation saw a $32\u00a0million rise just a year after its opening.\nTrade volume reached $105\u00a0million Straits dollars in 1879, during which entrepot trade was the main source of income and trade alone accounted for more than one-third of GDP.\nIndependence.\nIn the 1950s, the region saw social unrest which resulted in colonial powers deciding to relinquish some decision making. With spurs of race riots the colonial powers sought to empower and establish a formidable local government. With most of the unrest resulting from high unemployment, the local government was directed to solve this issue. The Economic Development Board was formed to empower the Singapore government in establishing, developing, and financing industrial undertakings.\nIn 1955, a Singapore local legislative Assembly with 25 out of 35 members elected was formed.\nUpon independence from Malaysia in 1965, Singapore faced a small domestic market, and high levels of unemployment and poverty. 70 percent of Singapore's households lived in badly overcrowded conditions, and a third of its people squatted in slums on the city fringes. Unemployment averaged 14 percent, GDP per capita was US$516, and half of the population was illiterate.\nIndustrialisation boom and change.\nAfter Lee Kuan Yew was elected, he oversaw significant economic reforms to the country. Structural change and machinery propelled the economy during his tenure. Singapore was a small and densely populated nation, with very few natural resources and little space to grow outwards. Recognizing this, Lee identified that the key advantage that Singapore held was its human capital, and its ability to provide highly educated citizens capable of competing in global industry and trade. On 1 August 1961, the Singapore Government established the Economic Development Board to spearhead an investment drive, and make Singapore an attractive destination for foreign investment. FDI inflows increased greatly over the following decades, and by 2001 foreign companies accounted for 75% of manufactured output and 85% of manufactured exports. Meanwhile, Singapore's savings and investment rates rose among the highest levels in the world, while household consumption and wage shares of GDP fell among the lowest. The beginning of Lee's tenure was marked with success and from 1965\u20131973, annual growth of real GDP was 12.7%. He directed spending to repair and improve infrastructure. This effort spurred economic productivity and put in place the foundations needed to build up basic industry. As of 2019, Singapore's infrastructure is ranked the best in terms of quality, with a score of 95.4 out of 100. The period from 1973-1979 marked a struggle for Singapore as they pivoted away from basic infrastructure spending and moved towards more sustainable economic progress. The 1973 oil crisis raised government awareness of issues such as economic concentration. It forced the government to hold new forum to discuss ways of adapting the countries economy to economic change. GDP growth during this time was slightly lower than the preceding years, at 8.5% annually. However, unemployment was virtually 0%, and most of the population had experienced great strides in productivity. The government highlighted a focus in technology and education to be the new wave of economic gain. In addition, they identified financial services as a key area in which Singapore could diversify and attract new growth. During this time, the government invested heavily in its budding financial services industry. It managed to minimize inflation and provide workers with the proper equipment and machinery to sustain growth.\nRecent history.\nGrowth in the service sector.\nAs a result of this investment drive, Singapore's capital stock increased 33 times by 1992, and achieved a tenfold increase in the capital-labour ratio. Living standards steadily rose, with more families moving from a lower-income status to middle-income security with increased household incomes.\nIn 1987, Lee claimed that (based on the government's home ownership criterion) 80% of Singaporeans could now be considered to be members of the middle-class. Under Lee, Singapore had both low inflation and unemployment. However, much unlike the economic policies of Greece and the rest of Europe, Singapore followed a policy of individualising the social safety net. This led to a higher than average savings rate and a very sustainable economy in the long run. Without a burdensome welfare state or its likeliness, Singapore has developed a very self-reliant and skilled workforce well versed for a global economy.\nIn the late 1980s, Singapore's export-driven economic model required adjustment for further development.79 The 1990s emergence of efficient manufacturing firms in southeast Asia challenged the nation with such a small labor force and land restrictions. Friedrich noted how \" it would be \"unlikely to expand beyond the current 25% share of the economy,\" when regarding manufacturing firms. Despite struggling in the manufacturing sector Singapore thrived in global finance, trading, and was an industrial hub for international trade. It positioned itself as a supplier of secondary factors, including expertise in management and industrial infrastructure, and emphasized a regionalization strategy through which it would invest in other Asian countries.79 Singaporean investment in China was a particularly important element of this strategy. To advance its regionalization strategy, Singapore began its Regional Industrial Parks Program to boost Singapore's domestic economy through profits from foreign industrial parks modeled on Singapore's Jurong Industrial Estate and also to build diplomatic ties in the host countries.80\nSingapore's economic strategy produced real growth averaging 8.0% from 1960 to 1999. Since the nation's independence in 1965, Singapore's GDP has amassed an average of a 9.5% increase. The economy picked up in 1999 under Goh Chok Tong, the Prime Minister of Singapore, after the regional financial crisis, with a growth rate of 5.4%, followed by 9.9% for 2000. However, the economic slowdown in the United States, Japan and the European Union, as well as the worldwide electronics slump, had reduced the estimated economic growth in 2001 to a negative 2.0%.\nThe economy expanded by 2.2% the following year, and by 1.1% in 2003 when Singapore was affected by the SARS outbreak. Subsequently, a major turnaround occurred in 2004 allowed it to make a significant recovery of 8.3% growth in Singapore, although the actual growth fell short of the target growth for the year more than half with only 2.5%. In 2005, economic growth was 6.4%; and in 2006, 7.9%.\nIt was apparent that Singapore would also struggle due to the 2008 financial crisis given its status as a financial services hub. Some market commentators doubted the economy's ability to cope with the effects of the crisis. In the end the economy grew in 2009 by 3.1% and in 2010, the nation saw a 15.2% growth rate.\nAs of 8 June 2013, Singapore's unemployment rate is around 1.9% and the country's economy has a lowered growth rate, with a rate of 1.8% on a quarter-by-quarter basis\u2014compared to 14.8% in 2010.\n2015 and 2016 saw a downturn for the nation as GDP growth shrunk to just 2 percent. Despite growth diminishing, the nation has yet to post negative growth rates which are a positive sign. During the same period of diminishing economic growth. Unemployment and inflation have also decreased.\nAs of 2017 Singapore's GDP reached $323.907 billion.\nSingapore is expected to experience an economic slowdown in 2019, with GDP growth slowing to 1.9% from 3.1% in 2018, due to tariff hikes from the United States and China.\nDuring the initial months of the COVID-19 pandemic, on 26 March 2020, Singapore's Ministry of Trade and Industry said it believed that the economy would contract by between 1% and 4% in 2020. This was after the economy shrank 2.2% in the first quarter of 2020 from the same quarter in 2019. On 26 May, MTI said that it was revising down its expectation for the Singapore economy in 2020 to shrink by 4% to 7%. Economists had to downgrade their numbers from previously, and some suggested that the economic recovery could take some time. In response to the economic pressure, Moody's temporarily downgraded the Singapore banking sector that year from \"stable\" outlook to a \"negative\" outlook.\nIt was estimated by the economist Chua Hak Bin, the Singapore circuit breaker measures in response to the pandemic, beginning on 7 April could impact the economy to the tune of S$10\u00a0billion. With the lockdown imposed on construction workers, there were concerns that there could be delays in construction projects of up to six months. Senior Minister of State for Trade and Industry Chee Hong Tat announced that some 3,800 companies had closed in April 2020, only slightly higher than the 3,700 reported on average for the same month in the past 5 years. Though he warned that this would likely rise in the coming months. Despite this only small increase in companies shutting down, the number of companies starting up had declined by about a third from the average April since 2015.\nState enterprise and investment.\nThe public sector is used both as an investor and as a catalyst for economic development and innovation. The government of Singapore has two sovereign wealth funds, Temasek Holdings and GIC Private Limited, which are used to manage the country's reserves. Initially the state's role was oriented more toward managing industries for economic development, but in recent decades the objectives of Singapore's sovereign wealth funds have shifted to a commercial basis.\nGovernment-linked corporations play a substantial role in Singapore's domestic economy. As of November 2011, the top six Singapore-listed GLCs accounted for about 17 percent of total capitalization of the Singapore Exchange (SGX). These fully and partially state-owned enterprises operate on a commercial basis and are granted no competitive advantage over privately owned enterprises. State ownership is prominent in strategic sectors of the economy, including telecommunications, media, public transportation, defence, port, airport operations as well as banking, shipping, airline, infrastructure and real estate.\nAs of 2014, Temasek holds S$69\u00a0billion of assets in Singapore, accounting for 7% of the total capitalization of Singapore-listed companies. In 2017, GSK shifted its Asian Headquarters to Singapore.\nAll figures in billions of Singapore dollars.\nSectors.\nTo maintain its competitive position despite rising wages, the government seeks to promote higher value-added activities in the manufacturing and services sectors. It also has opened, or is in the process of opening, the financial services, telecommunications, and power generation and retailing sectors up to foreign service providers and greater competition. The government has also attempted some measures including wage restraint measures and release of unused buildings in an effort to control rising commercial rents with the view to lowering the cost of doing business in Singapore when central business district office rents tripled in 2006.\nBanking.\nSingapore is considered a global financial hub by many leading financial analysts, economists and politicians, with Singapore banks offering world-class corporate bank account facilities. In the 2020 Global Financial Centres Index, Singapore was ranked as having the sixth most competitive financial sector in the world, and the fourth most competitive in Asia. These include multiple currencies, internet banking, telephone banking, current accounts, savings accounts, debit and credit cards, fixed term deposits and wealth management services. DBS, OCBC and UOB are the three major local banks of Singapore. In 2020, MAS granted license to digital banks for the first time. GXS Bank and MariBank are the two largest digital banks in Singapore.\nSingapore has also attracted assets formerly held in Swiss banks for several reasons, including new taxes imposed on Swiss accounts and a weakening of Swiss bank secrecy. Credit Suisse, the second largest Swiss bank, moved its head of international private banking to Singapore in 2005. For this, the country has also been dubbed the \"Switzerland of Asia\".\nBiotechnology.\nSingapore has been aggressively developing its biotechnology industry. Hundred of millions of dollars were invested into the sector to build up infrastructure, fund research and development and to recruit top international scientists to Singapore. Leading drug makers, such as GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Pfizer and Merck &amp; Co., have set up plants in Singapore. In 2006 GSK invested another S$300\u00a0million to build another plant to produce paediatric vaccines, its first such facility in Asia. Pharmaceuticals now account for more than 8% of the country's manufacturing production. In 2022, the biopharma industry of Singapore accounted for manufacturing output of USD 18 billion a year, a value that had tripled during two decades.\nEnergy and infrastructure.\nSingapore is the pricing centre and leading oil trading hub in Asia. The oil industry makes up 5% of Singapore's GDP, with Singapore being one of the top three export refining centres in the world. In 2007, it exported 68.1\u00a0million tonnes of oil. The oil industry has led to the promotion of the chemical industry as well as oil and gas equipment manufacturing. Singapore has 70 per cent of the world market for both jack-up rigs and for the conversion of Floating Production Storage Offloading units. It has 20 per cent of the world market for ship repair, and in 2008 the marine and offshore industry employed almost 70,000 workers.\nSingapore has limited potential for renewable energy mainly due to its small surface area; solar power holds the greatest potential. The government set a target of generating solar power to cover 350,000 households in 2030 that would equal to 4% of the country's electricity demand in 2020. As a financial hub, Singapore can play an important role in attracting investment in renewable energy in the entire ASEAN region.\nReal estate.\nThe Singapore government also owns 90 per cent of the country's land, as well as housing in which 80 per cent of the population lives.\nIn July 2022, a report by Savills revealed that Singapore tied with New York City in recording the highest rental growth rate for luxury homes globally.\nTourism.\nTourism plays an important role in the economy of Singapore. Singapore ranks among the most visited cities in the world.\nInternational trade and investment.\nSingapore's total trade in 2022 amounted to $1,365.4 billion SGD. In 2022, Singapore's imports were $655.4 billion SGD and exports were $710.0 billion SGD. China was Singapore's main import partner, as well as its largest export market in 2021. Singapore's major trading partners include Malaysia, the United States and the European Union.\nChina is Singapore's largest trading partner, with bilateral trade totalling roughly 175 billion Singapore dollars in 2022. Since 2009, the value of exports exceeds imports for Singapore's trade with China. In comparison, the value of imports exceeds exports for Singapore's trade with the US since 2006.\nRe-exports accounted for 43% of Singapore's total sales to other countries in 2000. Singapore's principal exports are electronic components, refined petroleum, gold, computers, and packaged medications. Singapore's main imports are electronic components, refined petroleum, crude petroleum, gold, and computers.\nTrade in Singapore has benefited from the extensive network of trade agreements Singapore has implementing. According to Healy Consultants, Singapore has free trade access to the entirety of the ASEAN network, with import duty reduced when dealing with Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Brunei, Burma, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam.\nThe Singapore Economic Development Board (EDB) continues to attract investment funds on a large-scale for the country despite the city's relatively high-cost operating environment. The US leads in foreign investment, accounting for 40% of new commitments to the manufacturing sector in 2000. As of 1999, cumulative investment for manufacturing and services by American companies in Singapore reached approximately $20\u00a0billion (total assets). The bulk of US investment is in electronics manufacturing, oil refining and storage, and the chemical industry. More than 1,500 US firms operate in Singapore.\nSingapore's largely corruption-free government, skilled workforce, and advanced and efficient infrastructure have attracted investments from more than 3,000 multinational corporations (MNCs) from the United States, Japan, and Europe. Foreign firms are found in almost all sectors of the economy. MNCs account for more than two-thirds of manufacturing output and direct export sales, although certain services sectors remain dominated by government-linked corporations.\nThe government also has encouraged firms to invest outside Singapore, with the country's total direct investments abroad reaching $39\u00a0billion by the end of 1998. The People's Republic of China was the top destination, accounting for 14% of total overseas investments, followed by Malaysia (10%), Hong Kong (9%), Indonesia (8%) and US (4%). The rapidly growing economy of India, especially the high technology sector, is becoming an expanding source of foreign investment for Singapore.\nThe United States strives to improve bilateral trade with Singapore and has signed the US-Singapore Free Trade Agreement in 2003. Singapore corporate tax is 17 per cent.\nSingapore is the European Union's 14th largest trading partner. Singapore-EU trade is worth more than \u20ac50 billion euros a year. Singapore is also the EU's 5th largest trade in services partner and the EU's 6th destination for foreign direct investment. Over 10,000 EU companies have set up their hubs or offices in Singapore.\nIn 2018, the EU and Singapore signed the EUSFTA, a free trade agreement which aims to boost and promote trade between Singapore and the EU. The agreement includes provisions on:\nIn addition to the free trade agreement, the EU and Singapore signed an investment protection agreement which aims to encourage investment between Singapore and the EU. It ensures that governments in the EU and Singapore treat each other's investors equally, and replaces old-style bilateral investment treaties between Singapore and individual EU countries.\nInternational trade agreements.\nThe following bilateral and plurilateral agreements are currently in effect. Signature and entry into force dates are as listed by the World Trade Organization.\nSingapore workforce.\nIn 2000, Singapore had a workforce of about 2.2\u00a0million. With limited access to natural resources, Singapore had been forced to invest in its people. The country has the largest proficiency of English language speakers in Asia, making it an attractive place for multinational corporations. Singapore has come a long way from where it once stood. In the 1970s according to Tilak Abeysinghe \"2.4 percent of the labor force were degree holders\". By 1990 the number rose to just 6.3%. In 2013 the percentage of the labor force who held degrees reached 31%. The nation's directive toward high skilled labor jobs, has promoted both growth and education to the region. The National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), the sole trade union federation, which has a symbiotic relationship with the ruling party, accounts for almost 99% of total organised labour. Government policy and pro-activity rather than labour legislation controls general labour and trade union matters.\nThe Employment Act offers little protection to white-collar workers due to an income threshold. The Industrial Arbitration Court handles labour-management disputes that cannot be resolved informally through the Ministry of Manpower. The Singapore Government has stressed the importance of co-operation between unions, management and government (tripartism), as well as the early resolution of disputes. There has been only one strike in the past 15 years.\nSingapore has enjoyed virtually full employment for long periods of time. Amid an economic slump, the unemployment rate rose to 4.0% by the end of 2001, from 2.4% early in the year. Unemployment has since declined and as of 2012 the unemployment rate stands at 1.9%.\nWhile the Singapore government has taken a stance against minimum wage and unemployment benefit schemes, in 2007 the government introduced a Workfare Income Supplement (WIS) scheme to supplement wages of low-skilled workers. To support employers in hiring older Singaporean workers, Special Employment Credit (SEC) was introduced in 2011. It was first enhanced in 2012 to provide employers with support in hiring older Singaporean workers and Persons with Disabilities (PWDs). It helped the employers to cope with costs associated with the increase in Central Provident Fund (CPF) contribution rates for older workers. The 5-year SEC scheme was further extended an additional 3 years, up to 2019 to encourage employers to voluntarily re-employ older workers aged 65 and above.\nThe Singapore Government and the NTUC have tried a range of programs to increase lagging productivity and boost the labour force participation rates of women and older workers. However, labour shortages persist in the service sector and in many low-skilled positions in the construction and electronics industries. Foreign workers help make up this shortfall. In 2000, there were about 600,000 foreign workers in Singapore, constituting 27% of the total work force. As a result, wages are relatively suppressed or do not rise for all workers. To have some controls, the government imposes a foreign worker levy payable by employers for low end workers like domestic help and construction workers. In 2012, the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) reported that Singapore should continue to fine-tune the calibration of its inflow of foreigners as the country continues to face an ageing population and a shrinking workforce. Singapore Parliament accepted the recommendations by its Economic Strategies Committee (ESC) for the optimal ratio of the level of immigration and foreign manpower for both high and low skilled workers. The Government recognises that the current overall foreign workforce should complement the local resident workforce and not replace the Singaporean Core concept, and helps companies greatly as they raise productivity through business restructuring and workforce retraining; raise resident labour force participation rate.\nPoverty and economic inequality.\nSingapore is one of the world's wealthiest countries \"per capita\", but its Gini coefficient is high in comparison to developed countries. Statistics on income inequality are published by the Singapore Department of Statistics. Without taking taxes and social transfers into account, Singapore's gini coefficient puts the country in the medium range. Nevertheless, the country remains on the \"very high\" category on the inequality-adjusted human development index (IHDI), a ranking similar to the Human Development Index (HDI), but with inequality also accounted for.\nIn October 2018, Oxfam ranked Singapore 149 out of 157 in its Commitment to Reducing Inequality Index 2018, placing it among the bottom ten of the countries in the index, which ranks countries based on efforts to reduce economic inequality. In its report, Oxfam accused Singapore of practices which encouraged \"harmful tax practices\", not having a universal minimum wage (apart from janitors and security guards), and poor performance on labour rights. The government responded to the report by claiming that it was more important to look at \"real outcomes\" such as Singapore's high home ownership, health, education, and employment, rather than public spending or tax rates, also saying that the report \"assumes that high taxation and high public expenditure reflects commitment to combating inequality\".\nThe government provides social support through a variety of social assistance schemes. The Ministry of Social and Family Development runs ComCare, a program which provides income support for low-income citizen households through various schemes for short-to-medium term assistance, long-term assistance, child support, and urgent financial needs. The Community Development Councils also run various local assistance schemes within their districts. The Ministry of Manpower runs a Silver Support Scheme which provides additional financial support for low-income elderly with no family support. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Health also runs MediFund to assist families that have difficulty paying for medical bills despite government subsidies and other health financing schemes. In addition, the National Council of Social Service coordinates a range of 450 non-government voluntary welfare organisations to provide social services, while raising funds through The Community Chest of Singapore.\nToday, low and middle-income groups now receive 2.5 times the public subsidies they did ten years ago.\nPublic finance.\nGovernment spending in Singapore has risen since the start of the 2008 financial crisis, from around 15% of GDP in 2008 to 17% in 2012. The government's total expenditure as a percentage of GDP ranks among the lowest internationally and allows for a competitive tax regime. Singapore is required under its constitution to keep a balanced budget over each term of government. Singapore government debt is issued for investment purposes, not to fund expenditure.\nPersonal income taxes in Singapore range from 0% to 22% for incomes above S$320,000. There are no capital gains or inheritance taxes in Singapore. Singapore's corporate tax rate is 17% with exemptions and incentives for smaller businesses. Singapore has a single-tier corporate income tax system, which means there is no double-taxation for shareholders.\nSingapore introduced Goods and Services Tax (GST) with an initial rate of 3% on 1 April 1994, increasing government's revenue by S$1.6\u00a0billion (US$1b, \u20ac800m) and establishing government finances.\nThe GST rate increased to 4% in 2003, 5% in 2004, 7% in 2007, 8% in 2023, and 9% in 2024.\nThe Singapore government owns two investment companies, GIC Private Limited and Temasek Holdings, which manage Singapore's reserves. Both operate as commercial investment holding companies independently of the Singapore government, but Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong and his wife Ho Ching serve as chairman and CEO of these corporations respectively. While GIC invests abroad, Temasek holds 31% of its portfolio in Singapore, holding majority stakes in several of the nation's largest companies, such as Singapore Airlines, Singtel, ST Engineering and Mediacorp. As of 2014, Temasek holds S$69\u00a0billion of assets in Singapore, accounting for 7% of the total capitalisation of Singapore-listed companies.\nIn April 2013, the country was recognised as an increasingly popular tax haven for the wealthy due to the low tax rate on personal income, a full tax exemption on income that is generated outside of Singapore and 69 double taxation treaties that can minimise both withholding tax and capital gains tax. Australian millionaire retailer Brett Blundy, with an estimated personal wealth worth AU$835\u00a0million, and multi-billionaire Facebook co-founder Eduardo Saverin are two examples of wealthy individuals who have settled in Singapore (Blundy in 2013 and Saverin in 2012). Additionally, Australian mining magnate Gina Rinehart owns property in Singapore and American investor Jim Rogers moved to Singapore in 2007\u2014Rogers has identified the 21st century as an era in which Asia will dominate and wishes for his two daughters to learn Mandarin as a key outcome of the relocation. Chinese Media TV celebrities Jet Li and Gong Li have also taken up naturalised Singapore citizenship.\nMonetary policy.\nThe Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) is Singapore's central bank and financial regulatory authority. Its current chairman is Lawrence Wong (July 2023\u2013present). It administers the various statutes pertaining to money, banking, insurance, securities and the financial sector in general, as well as currency issuance. The MAS has been given powers to act as a banker to and financial agent of the Government. It has also been entrusted to promote monetary stability, and credit and exchange policies conducive to the growth of the economy.\nUnlike many other central banks such as Federal Reserve System, European Central Bank or Bank of England, MAS does not regulate the monetary system via interest rates to influence the liquidity in the system. Instead, it chooses to do it via the foreign exchange mechanism, which it has been doing since 1981. In doing so it manages the Singapore dollar versus a number of currencies that they do not reveal publicly \u2013 a Singapore dollar nominal effective exchange rate (S$ NEER). It carries this out by intervening in the SGD market as well as other operations in the money market. The MAS reviews its policy stance less frequently than most central banks, in a cycle that is around every 6 months. In some circumstances, such as during the COVID-19 pandemic MAS can change the date of its twice yearly meeting.\nIn May 2022, six major banks agreed to pay $64.5 million to resolve antitrust allegations that they worked together to rig benchmark Singapore interest rates. The banks involved included Credit Suisse AG, Deutsche Bank AG, The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited, ING Bank N.V., Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co.\nProperty policy.\nTo dampen property speculation, the government imposed Additional Buyer's Stamp Duty (ABSD) starting in December 2011. It was subsequently raised in January 2013 and then again in July 2018. Currently for Singapore citizens buying their first property, there is no ABSD. For their second property onwards, they pay up to 15% ABSD. For foreigners the ABSD rate is 60% no matter if it is the first property. And for entities it is 65%. At the same time they raised the ABSD in 2018, the MAS tightened rules on housing loans, by limiting the loan tenure and reducing the Loan-to-Value ratio.\nMergers and acquisitions.\n16,156 mergers and acquisitions deals have been conducted in Singapore so far, which accumulated to a total value of US$850 bil. Since 1985 there has been a constant upward trend, disrupted only in 2002 and 2009. The most active year in terms of numbers (926) and value (US$78 bil.) has been 2017, so there is currently an all-time high. In general inbound and outbound deals in Singapore are nearly equally distributed.\nHere is a list of the top 10 deals with Singaporean participation inbound or outbound:\nFacts and figures.\nPercentage of economic growth:\n1.7% (2016)\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n1% (2016 est.)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n95.3%\n\"hydro:\"\n0%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n3.9% (2014 est.)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 consumption:\n47.5 TWh (2016)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 exports:\n0 kWh (2007)\nElectricity\u00a0\u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (2007)\nAgriculture\u00a0\u2013 products:\nrubber, copra, fruit, vegetables; poultry, eggs, fish, orchids, ornamental fish\nCurrency:\n1 Singapore dollar (S$ or SGD) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57013", "revid": "45525055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57013", "title": "Economy of Solomon Islands", "text": "Economic measure\nA per capita GDP of $3,200 ranks Solomon Islands as a lesser developed nation. Over 75% of its labour force is engaged in subsistence farming and fishing.\nEconomic history.\nUntil 1998, when world prices for tropical timber fell steeply, timber was Solomon Islands main export product. In recent years, Solomon Islands forests were dangerously overexploited.\nSolomon Islands was particularly hard hit by the Asian financial crisis even before the ethnic violence of June 2000. The Asian Development Bank estimates that the crash of the market for tropical timber reduced Solomon Island's GDP by between 15%-25%. About one-half of all jobs in the timber industry were lost. The government has said it will reform timber harvesting policies with the aim of resuming logging on a more sustainable basis.\nIn the wake of the ethnic violence in June 2000, exports of palm oil and gold ceased while exports of timber fell.\nEconomic sectors.\nCash crops.\nImportant cash crops and exports include copra and palm oil.\nGold.\nIn 1998 gold production began at Gold Ridge on Guadalcanal.\nFishing.\nExploitation of Solomon Islands' rich fisheries offers the best prospect for further export and domestic economic expansion. A Japanese joint venture, Solomon Taiyo Ltd., which operated the only fish cannery in the country, closed in mid-2000 as a result of the ethnic disturbances. Though the plant has reopened under local management, the export of tuna has resume now but under Soltuna and NFD.\nTourism.\nIn 2017, Solomon Islands was one of the least frequently visited countries in the world, with only 26,000 tourists. Tourism income in 2016 and 2017 was about Int'l$ 1.6 million (international dollars). Tourism is a potentially significant service industry but growth is hampered by the lack of infrastructure, transportation limitations and security concerns. Scuba diving and World War II history are two major tourist attractions.http:// https:// .\nForeign aid.\nSince 2000 the Solomon Islands government has become increasingly insolvent. It has exhausted its borrowing capacity; in 2001 the deficit reached 8% of GDP. It is unable to meet bi-weekly payrolls and has become extraordinarily dependent on funds from foreign aid accounts, which provided an estimated 50% of government expenditure in 2001. Principal aid donors are Australia https://, New Zealand http://, the European Union, Japan http://, and the Republic of China (Taiwan) http:// .\nSolomon Islands is a member of the WTO.\nEnergy.\nElectricity - production:\n78 GWh (2008 est.)\nElectricity - consumption:\n72.54 GWh (2008 est.)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (2009)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (2009)\nA team of renewable energy developers working for the Pacific Islands Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) and funded by the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership (REEEP), have hatched a scheme that enables these communities to access renewable energy, such as solar, without raising substantial sums of ready cash. If the islanders were not able to pay for solar lanterns with cash, reasoned the project developers, they can pay with crops.\nStatistics.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017.\nForeign Government Aid as a % of GDP:\n40.125% (2006 est.)\nGDP - per capita:\npurchasing power parity - $3,200 (2011 est.)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\" 37.7%\n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\" 6.4%\n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\" 55.9% (2011 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\nNA%\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n10% (1999 est.)\nLabor force:\n202,500 (2007)\nLabor force - by occupation:\nagriculture 75%, industry 5%, services 20% (2000 est.)\nUnemployment rate:\nNA%\nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\" $313.1 million\n&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\" $261.7 million, including capital expenditures of $0 (2011 est.)\nIndustries: \nfish (tuna), mining, timber\nIndustrial production growth rate:\nNA%\nAgriculture - products:\ncocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, rice, potatoes, vegetables, fruit; cattle, pigs; fish; timber\nExports:\n$216.5 million (2010 est.)\nExports - commodities:\ntimber, fish, palm oil, cocoa, copra\nExports - partners:\nChina 54%, Australia 12.5%, Thailand 4.6% (2011)\nImports:\n$360.3 million (2010 est.)\nImports - commodities:\nfood, plant and equipment, manufactured goods, fuels, chemicals\nImports - partners:\nAustralia 27.3%, Singapore 26.4%, China 6.5%, Malaysia 5.1%, New Zealand 5.1% (2011)\nDebt - external:\n$166 million (2004)\nCurrency:\n1 Solomon Islands dollar (SI$) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nSolomon Islands dollars (SI$) per US$1 \u2013 7.833 (January 2017)\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57014", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57014", "title": "Economy of Saint Kitts and Nevis", "text": "The economy of Saint Kitts and Nevis has traditionally depended on the growing and processing of sugar cane; decreasing world prices have hurt the industry in recent years. Tourism, export-oriented manufacturing, and offshore banking activity have assumed larger roles in Saint Kitts and Nevis. Most food is imported. The government has undertaken a program designed to revitalize the faltering sugar sector. It is also working to improve revenue collection in order to better fund social programs. In 1997, some leaders in Nevis were urging separation from Saint Kitts on the basis that Nevis was paying far more in taxes than it was receiving in government services, but the vote on secession failed in August 1998. In late September 1998, Hurricane Georges caused approximately $445 million in damages and limited GDP growth for the year.\nThe economy of St. Kitts and Nevis experienced strong growth for most of the 1990s but hurricanes in 1998 and 1999 contributed to a sharp slowdown. Real economic growth was 0.75% in 2002 after a decline of 4.3% in 2001. The economy experienced a mixed performance during 2002, with some sectors experiencing positive growth while others experienced varying levels of decline. The construction sector recorded a 4.51% decline, manufacturing and hotels and restaurants also recorded significant declines of 4.01 and 9.89% respectively, and sugar production fell by 5.1%. Significant new investment in tourism, including a 648-room Marriott hotel and convention center that opened in December 2002, as well as continued government efforts to diversify the economy, are expected to improve economic performance. Consumer prices have risen marginally over the past few years. The inflation rate was 3\u20134% for most of the 1990s.\nSt. Kitts and Nevis is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) issues a common currency (the East Caribbean dollar) for all members of the ECCU. The ECCB also manages monetary policy, and regulates and supervises commercial banking activities in its member countries. There is an extensive parallel economy denominated in US$, which is the de facto currency for many business transactions.\nSt. Kitts is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Telecommunications (ECTEL) authority, which is developing the regulations to liberalize the telecommunications sector in the region by 2004.\nPrimary industries.\nTourism.\nAccording to the CIA World Factbook the main industry is tourism. Tourists, mainly Americans, come to the island via cruise ships (via Port Zante in Basseterre), air travel (via Robert L Bradshaw International Airport), and the private airport and private dock (for private yachts).\nThe tourism industry is unique in that it relies on both long term and short term visitors. Short term visitors are generally Americans, Canadians, and other CARICOM countries who come via cruise ship for the day or via Robert L Bradshaw airport for short term stay. Long term visitors are mostly Americans and Canadians that are staying for an average of 2.5-3 years on the island for vet school or medical school. The vet school on the island is Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine.\nThe tourism sector was badly hit by the effects of the hurricanes in 1998 and 1999. The country had just started to rebuild after Georges in 1998 when Lenny created substantial damage in 1999. The Port Zante complex, where the pier and terminal buildings are located, suffered serious damage. In Nevis, the only large hotel was forced to close for 6 months, resulting in lay-offs of staff (although many were employed to re-landscape devastated gardens) and decreased government revenue. Overall visitor arrivals, both of those staying over and those on cruise ship calls, fell about 15 percent in 1999, with a resulting decrease in visitor expenditure from the 1998 figure of US$75.7 million.\nA unique point of interest is that the island of St. Kitts possesses the only remaining active railway in the West Indies. This was built to move sugarcane around, and part of the railway remains in use for tourist tours.\nSt. Kitts is also home to Brimstone Hill Fortress, a UNESCO world heritage site\nAgriculture.\nOf the islands' total land area, about 39% is devoted to crops. The principal agricultural product of St. Kitts is sugarcane; peanuts are now the second crop. On Nevis, sea island cotton and coconuts are the major commodities. Sweet potatoes, onions, tomatoes, cabbages, carrots, and breadfruit are grown for local consumption on both islands, mostly by individual smallholders. In 2001, agricultural products accounted for about 18.5% of total imports by value and 11.2% of exports; the government has embarked on a program to substitute for food imports.\nSugar estate lands were nationalized in 1975, and the sugar factory was purchased by the government the following year. The output of raw sugar slumped between 1986 and 1989, and as a result the government entered into a management agreement with Booke and Tate of Great Britain in August 1991; a World Bank loan of US$1.9 million was utilized to provide financial stability. Sugar production in 1999 was estimated at 197,000 tons. Faced with a sugar industry that was finding it increasingly difficult to earn a profit, the Government of St. Kitts and Nevis embarked on a program to diversify the agricultural sector and stimulate the development of other sectors of the economy, particularly tourism. In July 2005, sugar production ceased.\nAnimal husbandry.\nPasture areas are small, covering some 2.7% of the islands. Pangola and Bermuda grasses provide the bulk of the fodder. Estimates of livestock in 2001 were sheep, 14,000; goats, 14,400; cattle, 4,300 head; and pigs, 4,000.\nFishing.\nFishing is a traditional occupation that has not expanded to any great extent; the catch in 2000 was 257 tons (down from 620 tons in 1990). Some exports (primarily lobsters) are made to the Netherlands Antilles and Puerto Rico; fisheries exports totaled US$245,000 in 2000. Fish is caught by traditional methods such as beach-seining, pot and trap fishing &amp; hand-lining. The catch is not enough to satisfy local demand for fish. Large quantities of dried, salted and smoked fish, as well as frozen are imported from Canada and the United States.\nForestry.\nBoth islands have small stands of virgin tropical forest, with palms, poincianas, and palmettos. About 11% of the land area consists of forests. Imports of forest products nearly reached US$1.8 million in 2000.\nMining.\nThe mining sector played a minor role in St. Kitts and Nevis. No commercially valuable mineral deposits have been found on Saint Kitts. Hence mining and quarrying activities are limited to earthen materials. Presently, there is only one quarry on St. Kitts and multiple quarries on Nevis. Raking of salt, the country's fourth-leading industry, was done from time to time. Local quarrying of some materials was used to supplement the construction industry. In 2000, output for sand and gravel was 214,700 tons, up from 50,389 in 1996; crushed stone output was 121,226 tons.\nSecondary industries.\nIndustry accounted for 26% of GDP in 2001. The principal manufacturing plant and largest industrial employer is the St. Kitts Sugar Manufacturing Corp., a government enterprise; it grinds and processes sugarcane for export. The Carib brewery on St. Kitts makes beer for local consumption. Cotton is ginned and baled on Nevis. Electronic plants produce switches, calculators, car radios, and pocket radios. Other industries are clothing and shoe manufacturing. These provide a much-needed alternative to agricultural employment, particularly for women.\nThe manufacturing suffered a decline in 1998 due to Hurricane Georges. As a result of diversification and expansion, St. Kitts and Nevis has transformed small electronics plants into the largest electronics assembly industry in the Eastern Caribbean. Its apparel assembly industry has also become very successful in recent years. Garment manufacturing has expanded since the mid-1990s and now accounts for a large share of export earnings. Upgrading the Port Zante harbor complex in Basseterre enables large container ships to call, further enhancing St. Kitts' attractiveness as an offshore manufacturing base. Manufactured exports were valued at US$20 million in 1998 and 1999, suggesting that this sector was the least affected by hurricane damage.\nThere were four major industrial sites in St. Kitts and Nevis in 2000: C. A. Paul Southwell Industrial Park, Bourkes Industrial Estate, Canada Industrial Estate, and Prospect Industrial Estate. Port Zante is the main seaport.\nStatistics.\npurchasing power parity - $726 million (2006 est.)\nGDP - real growth rate:\n6% (2007 est.)\nGDP - per capita:\npurchasing power parity - $8,200 (2005 est.)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n\"agriculture:\"\n3.5%\n\"industry:\"\n25.8%\n\"services:\"\n70.7%(2001)\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n8.7% (2005 est.)\nLabor force:\n18,172 (June 1995)\nUnemployment rate:\n4.5% (1997)\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$64.1 million\n\"expenditures:\"\n$73.3 million, including capital expenditures of $10.4 million (1997 est.)\nIndustries:\nsugar processing, tourism, cotton, salt, copra, clothing, footwear, beverages\nElectricity - production:\n125 million kWh (2005)\nElectricity - production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n100%\n\"hydro:\"\n0%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n116.3 million kWh (2005)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (2005)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (2005)\nAgriculture - products:\nsugarcane, rice, yams, vegetables, bananas; fish\nExports:\n$42 million (1998)\nExports - commodities:\nmachinery, food, electronics, beverages, tobacco\nExports - partners:\nUS 61.9%, Canada 9.4%, Netherlands 6.6%, Azerbaijan 5% (2006)\nImports:\n$383 million (2006)\nImports - commodities:\nmachinery, manufactures, food, fuels\nImports - partners:\nUS 49.5%, Trinidad and Tobago 13.3%, UK 4.5% (2006)\nDebt - external:\n$314 million (2004)\nEconomic aid - recipient:\n$3.52 million (2005)\nCurrency:\n1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nEast Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7 (2007), 2.7 (2006), 2.7 (2005), 2.7 (2004), 2.7 (2003)\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57015", "revid": "49535605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57015", "title": "Battle of Adrianople", "text": "Battle between Eastern Roman Empire and Goths (378)\nThe Battle of Adrianople also known as Battle of Hadrianopolis was fought between the Eastern Roman army led by the Roman emperor Valens and Gothic rebels (largely Thervings as well as Greutungs, non-Gothic Alans, and various local rebels) led by Fritigern. The battle took place on 9 August 378 in the vicinity of Adrianople, in the Roman province of Thracia (modern Edirne in European Turkey). It ended with an overwhelming victory for the Goths and the death of Emperor Valens.\nAs part of the Gothic War of 376\u2013382, the battle is often considered the start of the events which led to the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century.\nA detailed contemporary account of the lead-up to the battle from the Roman perspective was written by Ammianus Marcellinus and forms the culminating point at the end of his history.\nBackground.\nIn 376, the Goths, led by Alavivus and Fritigern, asked to be allowed to settle in the Eastern Roman Empire after being displaced by the invasions of the Huns. Hoping that they would become farmers and soldiers, the Eastern Roman emperor Valens allowed them to establish themselves in the Empire as allies (\"foederati\"). Once across the Danube and into Roman territory, however, the dishonesty of the Roman provincial commanders Lupicinus and Maximus led the newcomers to revolt after suffering many hardships.\nValens then asked Gratian, the western emperor, for reinforcements to fight the Goths. Gratian sent the general Frigeridus with reinforcements, as well as the leader of his guards, Richomeres. For the next two years preceding the Battle of Adrianople there were a series of running battles with no clear victories for either side.\nIn 378, Valens decided to take control himself and assembled additional troops from his own resources in Syria and from the reserves of the Western Roman Empire in Gaul.\nValens left Antioch for Constantinople, and arrived on 30 May. He appointed Sebastianus, newly arrived from Italy, to reorganize the Roman armies already in Thrace. Sebastianus picked 2,000 of his legionaries and marched towards Adrianople. Along the way, they came upon and ambushed small detachments of Goths. Fritigern as the leader of the Goths assembled his forces at Nicopolis and Beroe (now Stara Zagora) in order to deal with the Roman threat.\nAt the time, much of Gratian's army was in Pannonia where they were in the interim attacked across the Rhine by the Lentienses (part of the Alamanni). After the Romans regrouped and defeated the Lentienses near Argentaria (near modern-day Colmar, France), Gratian's army traveled east partly by sea and partly overland.\nUpon learning of Sebastianus's success against the Goths and of Gratian's victory over the Lentienses, Valens was more than ready for a victory of his own. To link up with Sebastianus's forces before confronting the Goths, Valens moved his army from Melantias to Adrianople. On 6 August, reconnaissance informed Valens that approximately 10,000 Goths were advancing toward Adrianople from a position 25 kilometers to the north. In preparation at Adrianople, Valens fortified his camp with both ditches and ramparts.\nRichomeres, sent in advance to Adrianople by Gratian, carried a letter asking Valens to wait for his arrival with reinforcements before engaging in battle. Valens' officers also recommended that he wait for Gratian, but Valens decided to fight without waiting, ready to claim the ultimate prize.\nThe Goths were also watching the Romans, and on 8 August, Fritigern sent an emissary to propose peace and an alliance in exchange for Roman territory. Sure that he would be victorious due to his supposed numerical superiority, Valens rejected these proposals. Valens' estimates of manpower, however, neglected to take into consideration part of the Gothic cavalry that had gone extended distances to forage.\nComposition of the Roman troops.\nValens' army may have included troops from three Roman field armies: the Army of Thrace, based in the eastern Balkans, which may have sustained heavy losses in 376\u2013377; the 1st Army in the Emperor's Presence; and the 2nd Army in the Emperor's Presence. Both armies in the Emperor's Presence were normally based at Constantinople in peacetime but had been committed to the Persian frontier in 376 and sent west in 377\u2013378.\nValens' army included units of veterans, men accustomed to war. The entire force consisted of seven legions \u2013 among which were the Legio I \"Maximiana\" and imperial auxiliaries \u2013 of 700 to 1000 men each. The cavalry was composed of mounted archers (\"sagittarii\") and \"Scholae\" (the imperial guard). \nAmmianus Marcellinus makes references to the following forces under Valens:\nHe also refers to the following officers:\nStrength of Valens' army.\nSeveral modern historians have attempted to estimate the strength of Valens' army.\nWarren Treadgold estimates that, by 395, the Army of Thrace had 24,500 soldiers, while the 1st and 2nd Armies in Emperor's Presence had 21,000 each. However, all three armies include units either formed (several units of \"Theodosiani\" among them) or redeployed (various legions in Thrace) after Adrianople. Moreover, troops were needed to protect Marcianopolis and other threatened cities, so it is unlikely that all three armies fought together.\nSome modern historians estimated the real number of Roman troops to be as many as 15,000 men, 10,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry.\nOrder of battle of Valens' army.\nIt is not possible to precisely list the units of the Roman army at Adrianople. The only sources are Ammianus, who describes the battle but mentions few units by name, and the eastern , which lists Roman army units in the late 4th to early 5th century, after Theodosius. Many units listed in the Balkans were formed after Adrianople; others were transferred from other parts of the Empire, before or after Adrianople; others are listed in two or more sectors. Some units at Adrianople may have been merged or disbanded due to their losses. The Roman forces consisted of heavy infantry, various archers and cavalry.\nComposition of the Gothic forces.\nThere were probably two main Gothic armies south of the Danube. Fritigern led one army, largely recruited from the Therving exiles, while Alatheus and Saphrax led another army, largely recruited from the Greuthung exiles.\nFritigern brought most if not all of his fighters to the battle and appears to have led the force the Romans first encountered. Alatheus and Saphrax brought their cavalry into action \"descending like a thunderbolt\" against the Romans. These forces included Alans.\nThe Gothic armies were mostly infantry, with some cavalry, which was significant in the Battle of Adrianople. Some older works attribute the Gothic victory to overwhelming Gothic numbers, to Gothic cavalry, and sometimes to Gothic use of stirrups. More recent scholarly works mostly agree that the armies were similarly sized, that the Gothic infantry was more decisive than their cavalry and that neither the Romans nor the Goths used stirrups until the 6th century, probably brought by the Avars.\nAmmianus records that the Roman scouts estimated 10,000 Gothic troops, but Ammianus dismissed this as an underestimate. This appears to be due to Alatheus and Saphrax's forces being away when the Roman scouts estimated the Goths' numbers before battle. Several modern historians have estimated the strength of the Gothic armies at 12,000\u201315,000.\nAmmianus notes the important role of the Gothic cavalry. Charles Oman, believing that the cavalry were the majority of the Gothic force, interpreted the Battle of Adrianople as the beginning of the dominance of cavalry over infantry for the next thousand years. Some other historians have taken the same view. T. S. Burns and other recent historians argue that the infantry were the vast majority of the Gothic force, and that the battle had little effect on the relationship between infantry and cavalry.\nLocation.\nThe battle took place within a few hours' march of the city of Adrianopolis, but its precise location is uncertain. Three possible locations of the battle have been discussed in modern historiography:\nBattle.\nOn the morning of 9 August, Valens decamped from Adrianople, where he left the imperial treasury and administration under guard. The reconnaissance of the preceding days informed him of the location of the Gothic camp north of the city. Valens arrived there around noon after marching for eight miles over difficult terrain.\nThe Roman troops arrived tired and dehydrated, facing the Gothic camp that had been set up on the top of a hill. The Goths, except for their cavalry, defended their wagon circle, inside of which were their families and possessions. Fritigern's objective was to delay the Romans, in order to give enough time for the Gothic cavalry to return. The fields were burnt by the Goths to delay and harass the Romans with smoke, and negotiations began for an exchange of hostages. The negotiations exasperated the Roman soldiers who seemed to hold the stronger position, but they gained precious time for Fritigern.\nSome Roman units began the battle without orders to do so, believing they would have an easy victory, and perhaps over-eager to exact revenge on the Goths after two years of unchecked devastation throughout the Balkans. The imperial scholae of shield-archers under the command of the Iberian prince Bacurius attacked, but lacking support they were easily pushed back. Then the Roman left wing reached the circle of wagons, but it was too late. At that moment, the Gothic cavalry, returning from a foraging expedition, arrived to support the infantry. The cavalry surrounded the Roman troops, who were already in disarray after the failure of the first assault. The Romans retreated to the base of the hill where they were unable to maneuver, encumbered by their heavy armor and long shields. The casualties, exhaustion, and psychological pressure led to a rout of the Roman army. The cavalry continued their attack, and the killing continued until nightfall.\nIn the rout, the Emperor himself was abandoned by his guards. Some tried to retrieve him, but the majority of the cavalry fled. Valens' final fate is unknown; he may have died anonymously on the field. His body was never found. An alternative story circulated after the battle that Valens had escaped the field with a bodyguard and some eunuchs and hid in a peasant's cottage. The enemy attempted to pillage the cottage, apparently unaware Valens was inside. Valens' men shot arrows from the second floor to defend the cottage and in response the Goths set the cottage on fire. The bodyguard leaped out the window and told the Goths who was inside, but it was too late. Valens perished in the flames.\nAftermath.\nAccording to the historian Ammianus Marcellinus, the Goths immediately marched to the city of Adrianople and attempted to take it; Ammianus gives a detailed account of their failure. Ammianus refers to a great number of Roman soldiers who had not been let into the city and who fought the besieging Goths below the walls. A third of the Roman army succeeded in retreating, but the losses were uncountable. Many officers, among them the general Sebastianus, were killed in the worst Roman defeat since the Battle of Edessa, the low point of the Crisis of the Third Century. The battle was a crushing blow for the late Empire, resulting in the destruction of the East Roman army's core, the deaths of valuable administrators, and the destruction of nearly all armories on the Danubian provinces following the battle. The lack of reserves for the army worsened the recruitment crisis. Despite the losses, the Battle of Adrianople did not mark the end of the Roman Empire because the imperial military power was only temporarily crippled.\nThe defeat at Adrianople signified that the barbarians, fighting for or against the Romans, had become powerful adversaries. The Goths, though partly tamed by Valens' successor Theodosius I (who accepted them once more as allied tribes), were never expelled, exterminated, or assimilated; they remained as a distinct entity within its frontiers, for a few years allies, later semi or fully independent or often hostile.\nThe long-term implications of the Battle of Adrianople for the art of war are disputed. Charles Oman in 1885 wrote that the battle represented a turning point in military history, with heavy cavalry triumphing over Roman infantry and ushering in the age of the medieval knight. T. S. Burns disputed this in a 1973 book, writing that the Gothic army's cavalry arm was fairly small, that Valens would actually have had more cavalry, and that while the role of Fritigern's cavalry was critical to his victory, the battle was a mainly infantry versus infantry affair. The medieval knight was not to rise for several centuries after Adrianople.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57018", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57018", "title": "Economy of Dominica", "text": "The economy of Dominica is reliant upon agriculture, particularly bananas, with the financial services industry and citizenship by investment scheme becoming increasingly the island's largest source of income. Banana production employs, directly or indirectly, upwards of one-third of the work force. This sector is highly vulnerable to weather conditions and to external events affecting commodity prices. The value of banana exports fell to less than 25% of merchandise trade earnings in 1998 compared to about 44% in 1994.\nIn view of the European Union's announced phase-out of preferred access of bananas to its markets, agricultural diversification is a priority. Dominica has made some progress, with the export of small quantities of citrus fruits and vegetables and the introduction of coffee, patchouli, aloe vera, cut flowers, and exotic fruits such as mangoes, guavas, and papayas. Dominica has also had some success in increasing its manufactured exports, with soap as the primary product. Dominica also recently entered the offshore financial services market.\nBecause Dominica is mostly volcanic and has few beaches, development of tourism has been slow compared with that on neighboring islands. Nevertheless, Dominica's high, rugged mountains, rainforests, freshwater lakes, hot springs, waterfalls, and diving spots make it an attractive destination. Cruise ship stopovers have increased following the development of modern docking and waterfront facilities in the capital. Eco-tourism also is a growing industry on the island.\nDominica is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) issues a common currency (the East Caribbean dollar) to all eight members of the ECCU. The ECCB also manages monetary policy, and regulates and supervises commercial banking activities in its member countries. Dominica is a beneficiary of the U.S. Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI). Its 1996 exports to the U.S. were $7.7 million, and its U.S. imports were $34 million. Dominica is also a member of the 15-member Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).\nPrimary industries.\nAgriculture.\nAbout 22.6% of the total land area is arable. Agricultural production was on the decline even before the 1979 hurricane disaster. The main crop of Dominica is bananas, the output of which had fallen to 29,700 tons in 1978. As a result of Hurricane David, production hit a low of 15,700 tons in 1979. Agriculture suffered a further blow from Hurricane Allen in August 1980. However, after outside financial support began to rehabilitate the sector, production rose to 27,800 tons in 1981 and totaled 30,000 tons in 1999. Additionally, there are other products like citrus, coconuts, cocoa, herbal oils and extracts.\nAgriculture accounts for about 20% of GDP and employs about 40% of the labor force. Agricultural exports amounted to $19.1 million in 2001. Most crops are produced on small farms, the 9,000 owners of which are banded together in about 10 cooperatives; there are also several large farms that produce mostly bananas for export. Other major crops are coconuts and citrus fruits which are grown in commercial quantities. Production for 1999 included coconuts, 11,000 tons; grapefruit, 21,000 tons; lemons and limes, 1,000 tons; and oranges, 8,000 tons. Fruits and vegetables are produced mostly for local consumption.\nAnimal husbandry.\nThere are about of pasture land, comprising 2.7% of the total land area. The island does not produce sufficient meat, poultry, or eggs for local consumption so there are large imports of animal products. In 2001 there were an estimated 540 head of cattle, 9,700 goats, 7,600 sheep, and 5,000 hogs. In 2001, production of meat totaled 1,300 tons; and milk, 6,100 tons.\nFishing.\nBefore Hurricane David, some 2,000 persons earned a living fishing in coastal waters, producing about 1,000 tons of fish a year and meeting only about one-third of the local demand. The hurricane destroyed almost all of the island's 470 fishing boats; afterward, only about a dozen vessels could be reconstructed for use. In 2000, the catch was 1,150 tons, up from 552 tons in 1991.\nThere is a relatively large fishing industry in Dominica, but it is not modernized and almost exclusively serves the domestic market. A successful experiment in fresh-water prawn farming, supported by Taiwanese aid, has produced substantial amounts of prawns for the domestic and local markets. Japan has provided support for a fish landing and processing plant in Roseau.\nForestry.\nDominica has the potential for a lumber industry. Some are classified as forest, representing 61% of the total land area. In 1962, Canadian experts produced a study indicating that over a 40-year period the island could produce a yearly output of 22,000 cu m (800,000 cu ft) of lumber. Before Hurricane David, annual output had reached about 7,500 cu m (265,000 cu ft). There are some of government land allocated to commercial forestry and about of forestland in private hands. Commercially valuable woods include mahogany, blue and red mahoe, and teak. Total imports of forest products in 2000 amounted to $10.3 million.\nMining.\nDominica's mining sector played a minor role in its economy. Pumice was the major commodity extracted from the island for export, and Dominica produced clay, limestone, volcanic ash, and sand and gravel, primarily for the construction industry. There is some mining potential in Dominica, especially in the island's northeast where there are believed to be deposits of copper.\nSecondary industries.\nDominica's small manufacturing sector is almost entirely dependent on agriculture, and the island has built up a handful of successful industries specializing in soaps and other agricultural byproducts. The largest manufacturer is Dominica Coconut Products, controlled by Colgate-Palmolive, which produces soap from coconuts. The factory has an agreement to sell an estimated 3 million bars of soap each year to Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines. Dominican soap is also exported throughout the region, but has recently encountered intensified competition from other regional producers, especially in the important export markets of Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago.\nThere are four plants to process limes and other citrus fruits; two bottling plants; two distilleries; four small apparel plants; and four small furniture factories. Dominica exports water to its Caribbean neighbors; shoes, cement blocks, furniture, and soap and toiletries are also exported. Home industries produce some leather work, ceramics, and straw products.\nSince the 1990s, the small manufacturing sector has been expanding at a modest pace, including electronic assembly, rum, candles, and paints. The Trafalgar Hydro Electric Power Station is now operational, making the island virtually energy self-sufficient. Industry accounted for 23% of GDP in 2001.\nDominica has not yet been able to attract significant numbers of foreign manufacturers, partly because its wage rates are relatively high and partly because its infrastructure is not suited to high-volume manufacturing. Like other islands, it seeks to attract investors with tax concessions and other financial inducements, but several offshore manufacturing plants have closed after their duty-free concessions expired, normally a 10-year span.\nTertiary industries.\nTourism.\nTourism in Dominica is mostly centered around Eco Tourism. It consists of hiking, bird watching, canyoning, kayaking etc. Being the Nature Isle of the Caribbean, it stands true to its name as there are numerous outdoor activities based in nature. With the impact of COVID-19, the island has halted its Carnival and Independence Celebrations since mid 2020, which are two of its largest financial contributors in the tourism sector.\nFinancial services.\nThe Commonwealth of Dominica has become in recent years a major international financial hub, and is quickly becoming one of the largest banking centres in the world, and offshore services are also becoming its main source of income. There are a number of service providers. These include global financial institutions including Scotiabank, Royal Bank of Canada, First Caribbean International Bank;\nThe largest Financial sectors are \"offshore banking, payment processing companies, and general corporate activities\". Regulation and supervision of the financial services industry is the responsibility of the Financial Service Unit of the Commonwealth of Dominica (FSU) under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance.\nStarting in the mid-late 1990s, offshore financial centres, such as the Commonwealth of Dominica, came under increasing pressure from the OECD for their allegedly harmful tax regimes, where the OECD wished to prevent low-tax regimes from having an advantage in the global marketplace. The OECD threatened to place the Commonwealth of Dominica and other financial centres on a \"black list\" and impose sanctions against them. However, the Commonwealth of Dominica successfully avoided being placed on the OECD blacklist by committing to regulatory reform to improve transparency and begin information exchange with OECD member countries about their citizens.\nDominica has tried to expand its base by building up offshore financial services. So far, a relatively small number of offshore banks and other international business companies have registered in Dominica, but the government is trying to attract more by making registration economical and easy. A Dominica-based International Business Company (IBC) can, for instance, be formed over the Internet, and the government has also granted operating licenses to several Internet gambling companies.\nFacts at a glance.\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity - $485 million (2006 est.)\nGDP - real growth rate:\n3.2% (2007 est.)\nGDP - per capita:\npurchasing power parity - $3,800 (2005 est.)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\n17.7%\n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\n32.8% \n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\n49.5% (2004 est.)\nPopulation below poverty line:\n29% (2009 est.)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n-0.1% (2005 est.)\nLabor force:\n25,000 (2000 est.)\nLabor force - by occupation:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\n40% \n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\n32%\n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\n28% (2000 est.)\nUnemployment rate:\n23% (2003 est.)\nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\"\n$73.9 million \n&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\"\n$84.4 million (2001)\nIndustries:\nsoap, coconut oil, tourism, copra, furniture, cement blocks, shoes\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n-10% (1997 est.)\nElectricity - production:\n80 million kWh (2005)\nElectricity - production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n50%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n50%\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n74.4 million kWh (2005)\nElectricity - exports:\n0 kWh (2005)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (2005)\nAgriculture - products:\nbananas, citrus, mangoes, root crops, coconuts, cocoa; forest and fishery potential not exploited\nExports:\n$94 million f.o.b. (2006)\nExports - commodities:\nbananas 50%, soap, bay oil, vegetables, grapefruit, oranges\nExports - partners:\nUnited Kingdom 24.8%, Jamaica 12.3%, Antigua and Barbuda 9.8%, Guyana 8.3%, China 7.9%, Trinidad and Tobago 5.4%, Saint Lucia 4.5% (2006)\nImports:\n$296 million f.o.b. (2006)\nImports - commodities:\nmanufactured goods, machinery and equipment, food, chemicals\nImports - partners:\nUnited States 25.3%, China 22.7%, Trinidad and Tobago 13.8%, South Korea 4.8% (2006)\nDebt - external:\n$213 million (2004)\nEconomic aid - recipient:\n$15.17 million (2005 est.)\nCurrency:\n1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nEast Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7 (2007), 2.7 (2006), 2.7 (2005), 2.7 (2004), 2.7 (2003)\nFiscal year:\n1 July - 30 June\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57019", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57019", "title": "Kuwait City, Kuwait", "text": ""}
{"id": "57020", "revid": "46652772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57020", "title": "Economy of Mozambique", "text": "The economy of Mozambique is $23.77 Billion by gross domestic product as of 2025, and has developed since the end of the Mozambican Civil War (1977\u20131992). In 1987, the government embarked on a series of macroeconomic reforms designed to stabilize the economy. These steps, combined with donor assistance and political stability since the multi-party elections in 1994, led to dramatic improvements in the country's growth rate. Inflation was low during the late 1990s, although it rose again in 2000\u20132002. Fiscal reforms, including the introduction of a value-added tax and reform of the customs service, have improved the government's revenue collection abilities.\nIn spite of these gains, Mozambique remains dependent upon foreign assistance for much of its annual budget. Subsistence agriculture continues to employ the vast majority of the country's workforce. A substantial trade imbalance persists. However, the opening of the Mozal aluminium smelter, the country's largest foreign investment project to date, has increased export earnings. Additional investment projects in titanium extraction and processing and garment manufacturing should further close the import/export gap. Mozambique's once substantial foreign debt has been reduced through forgiveness and rescheduling under the International Monetary Fund's Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) and Enhanced HIPC initiatives, and is now at a manageable level. Mozambique is a least developed country according to United Nations.\nHistory.\nThe Portuguese rule.\nAlthough\nthe Portuguese participated in the trading networks of East Africa as early as the 16th century, they did not establish hegemonic (total) colonial dominance over the entire territory that now comprises Mozambique until the 19th century. Portugal founded settlements, trading posts, forts and ports. Cities, towns and villages were founded all over the territory by the Portuguese, like Louren\u00e7o Marques, Beira, Vila Pery, Vila Junqueiro, Vila Cabral and Porto Am\u00e9lia. Others were expanded and developed greatly under Portuguese rule, like Quelimane, Nampula and Sofala. By this time, Mozambique had become a Portuguese colony, but administration was left to the trading companies (like Mozambique Company and Niassa Company) who had received long-term leases from Lisbon. By the mid-1920s, the Portuguese created a highly exploitative and coercive settler economy, in which African natives were forced to work on the fertile lands taken over by Portuguese settlers. Indigenous African peasants mainly produced cash crops designated for sale in the markets of Portugal. Major cash crops included cotton, cashews, tea and rice. This arrangement ended in 1932 after the takeover in Portugal by the new Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar government. Thereafter, Mozambique, along with other Portuguese colonies, was put under the direct control of Lisbon. In 1951, it became an overseas province. The economy expanded rapidly during the 1950s and 1960s, attracting thousands of Portuguese settlers to the country. It was around this time that the first nationalist guerrilla groups began to form in Tanzania and other African countries. The strong industrial and agricultural development that did occur throughout the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s was based on Portuguese development plans, and also included British and South African investment.\nIn 1959\u201360, Mozambique's major exports included cotton, cashew nuts, tea, sugar, copra and sisal. The expanding economy of the Portuguese overseas province was fuelled by foreign direct investment, and public investment which included ambitious state-managed development plans. British capital owned two of the large sugar concessions (the third was Portuguese), including the famous Sena states. The Matola Oil Refinery, Procon, was controlled by England and the United States. In 1948 the petroleum concession was given to the Mozambique Gulf Oil Company. At Maotize coal was mined; the industry was chiefly financed by Belgian capital. 60% of the capital of the Compagnie de Charbons de Mozambique was held by the Societe Miniere et Geologique Belge, 30% by the Mozambique Company, and the remaining 10% by the governing authorities of the territory.\nThree banks were in operation, the Banco Nacional Ultramarino, Portuguese, Barclays Bank, D.C.O., British, and the \"Banco Totta e Standard de Mo\u00e7ambique\" (a joint-venture between Standard Bank of South Africa and Banco Totta &amp; A\u00e7ores of the Portuguese mainland). Nine out of the twenty-three insurance companies were Portuguese. 80% of life-insurance was in the hands of foreign companies which testifies the openness of the economy. The Portuguese overseas province of Mozambique was the first territory of Portugal, including the European mainland, to distribute Coca-Cola. Lately the Louren\u00e7o Marques Oil Refinery was established by the Sociedade Nacional de Refina\u00e7\u00e3o de Petr\u00f3leo (SONAREP) \u2013 a Franco-Portuguese syndicate. In the sisal plantations Swiss capital was invested, and in copra concerns, a combination of Portuguese, Swiss and French capital was invested. The large availability of capital from both Portuguese and international origin, allied to the wide range of natural resources and the growing urban population, lead to an impressive growth and development of the economy. From the late stages of this notable period of high growth and huge development effort started in the 1950s, was the construction of the Cahora Bassa dam by the Portuguese, which started to fill in December 1974 after construction was commenced in 1969.\nIn the face of intransigent Portuguese ruling authorities, the main nationalist movement, FRELIMO, began a guerrilla war which gradually wrested control of parts of the northernmost regions of the territory from the Portuguese. The Mozambican War of Independence came to an end in 1974 following a leftist military coup in Portugal. The new left-wing government in Lisbon had no wish to maintain an empire and negotiations on the country's independence began immediately. In 1975, after the leftist military coup of 24 April 1974 in Portugal that overthrew the Estado Novo regime which had governed the country and its overseas territories, the colonial wars that raged in the various Portuguese African territories since the early 1960s ended. At independence, Mozambique's industrial base was well-developed by Sub-Saharan Africa standards, thanks to a boom in investment in the 1960s and early 1970s. Indeed, in 1973, value-added in manufacturing was the sixth highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. However, further industrialisation was stopped by the hasty exodus of 90 percent of the ethnic Portuguese citizens during and after the independence process which was concluded on June 25, 1975. The rapid exodus of Mozambique's Portuguese population left its economy in disarray. The situation was exacerbated by the Mozambican Civil War (1977\u20131992) during the following years that destroyed the remaining wealth and left the former Portuguese Overseas Province in a state of disrepair.\nIndependent Mozambique.\nMozambique became an independent state in 1975. The exodus of trained Portuguese workers and the eruption of the Mozambican Civil War in 1977 opposing RENAMO to FRELIMO, drove the country to absolute chaos. Mozambique became an independent republic and the Frente de Libertacao de Mocambique (FRELIMO), the socialist guerrilla organization that had fought the colonial war against Portugal, assumed power. Over the next several years, FRELIMO pursued numerous socialist policies, including nationalization of land and large industries, centralized planning, and heavy funding for the national educational and health systems, which however, remained weak for decades in independent Mozambique, and still are among the most ineffective and underfunded in the world. The exodus (mass departure) of the Portuguese following independence in 1975 facilitated the takeover of many shops by Mozambicans. Unfortunately, the exodus, which totaled over 275,000 ethnic Portuguese, also led to a huge loss of professionals, productive machinery, entrepreneurs, and skilled workers. By the early 1980s, Mozambique became what Joseph Hanlon\u2014author of \"Peace Without Profit: How the IMF Blocks Rebuilding in Mozambique\" \u2014called a \"Cold War battlefield.\" The term refers to the situation in which socialist FRELIMO, with Soviet backing, was forced to fight a lengthy civil war (Mozambican Civil War) against a counterinsurgency movement of Mozambicans named RENAMO, funded and directed by the neighboring white minority states of apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia. The Cold War was defined by animosity between capitalist and socialist world powers, and though there was never an outright military conflict between the former and the latter, each respectively funded counterinsurgency movements against governments they disfavored. The capitalist governments of South Africa and Zimbabwe feared that a successfully ruled African socialist system might send a message of revolution and self-rule to citizens in contemporaneous majority rule African countries, such as their own.\nIn 1983, however, the Fourth Congress of FRELIMO initiated the first steps towards privatization by allowing for a partial dismantling of state farms. The political pressure of the ideologically charged civil war, in conjunction with the excruciating need for aid and funds to finance imports, compelled FRELIMO to negotiate its first structural adjustment package (SAP) with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (commonly referred to as the Bretton Woods institutions) in 1986. The series of SAPs that followed thereafter required privatization of major industries, less government spending, deregulation of the economy, and trade liberalization. The SAPs, therefore, have essentially focused on the implementation of an unfettered free market economy. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, more than 1400 privatizations of public enterprises took place. At the time, this was the largest privatization programme in Africa. The tendency towards austerity, privatization and other neoliberal reforms has continued throughout the following decades, for instance with the PARPA action plan (2001-2014) whose stated goal was the reduction of poverty. However, PARPA largely focused on attracting multinational corporations in sectors such as aluminium and oil. It has been noted that GDP growth in this period did not result in a \"trickle-down\" effect: in fact, the poorest segments of society have become even poorer, while public education and healthcare also suffered from the austerity measures.\nIn 1995 alone, Mozambique received $1.115 billion in aid. In 1999, the total external debt stood at $4.8 billion. Fortunately, in the same year significant economic recovery did occur, as the real GDP growth rate reached 10 percent.\nToday, the economy of Mozambique continues to be dominated by agriculture. Major exports include prawns, cotton, cashew nuts, sugar, citrus, copra and coconuts, and timber. Export partners, in turn, include Spain, South Africa, Portugal, the United States, Japan, Malawi, India, and Zimbabwe. Imports, such as farm equipment and transport equipment, are capital goods that are worth more than agricultural products, hence Mozambique's large trade deficit. The country also imports food, clothing, and petroleum products. Import partners include South Africa, Zimbabwe, Saudi Arabia, Portugal, the United States, Japan, and India. In the past several years, the value of imports outweighed the value of exports by 5 to 1 or more\u2014a factor that obliges Mozambique to depend heavily on foreign aid and loans by foreign commercial banks and the Bretton Woods Institutions (BWIs).\nDue to its reliance on loans, Mozambique also continues to commit itself to the IMF's loan conditions. In 2024, for instance, a new support package from the IMF was coupled to requirements such as further boosting the private sector and freezing wages. Concurrently, Mozambique has also intensified its relations with Chinese firms and financial institutions. An important example is the Maputo\u2013Katembe bridge, the longest suspension bridge in Africa, which was realized by the China Road and Bridge Corporation and with Exim loans between 2014 and 2018. China is said to have \"become Mozambique\u2019s top infrastructure partner\" between 2014 and 2024.\nSectors.\nAll economic sectors ranging from manufacturing and agriculture to tourism and finance, declined sharply after independence from Portugal in 1975, but picked up in the 2000s after the end of the Mozambican Civil War, although they are still performing well below potential.\nGas and oil reserves.\nRecent oil and gas discoveries across East Africa, most notably in Mozambique and Tanzania, have seen the region emerge as a new player in the global oil and gas Industry.\nThe discoveries have driven billions of dollars in annual investment to the region. According to BMI estimates, the finds in the last few years are more than that of any other region in the world, and the discoveries are expected to continue for the next few years.\nAgriculture, fishing and forestry.\nIn Mozambique, agriculture is the mainstay of the economy and the country has a great potential for growth in the sector. Agriculture employs more than 80 percent of the labour force and provides livelihoods to the vast majority of over 23 million inhabitants. Agriculture contributed 31.5 percent of the GDP in 2009, while commerce and services accounted for 44.9 percent. By contrast, 20 percent of the total export value in 2009 originated from the agriculture sector, mostly through the export of fish (mainly shrimps and prawns), timber, copra, cashew nuts and citrus, cotton, coconuts, tea and tobacco.\nAgricultural potential is high, particularly in the fertile northern regions, which accounts for the bulk of the country's agricultural surplus. The main cash crops are sugar, copra, cashew nuts, tea, and tobacco. Total sugar production was expected to rise by 160% in the 2000s, which would make the country a major net exporter for the first time since independence. All the plantations and refineries have been privatized. Marine products, particularly prawns, are Mozambique's largest single export. There is an abundance of marine resources that are not fully exploited. After the Mozambican Civil War, the return of internally displaced persons and the gradual restoration of rural markets have enabled Mozambique to increase agricultural production dramatically.\nMozambique produced, in 2018:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nMining and semi-processing.\nThere are large mineral deposits, but exploration has been constrained by the civil war (1977\u20131992) and poor infrastructure. The World Bank has estimated that there was the potential for exports worth US$200m by 2005 \u2013 in the late 1990s they totaled US$3.6m, some 1% of total exports, and a contribution of less than 2% of GDP. Minerals currently being mined include marble, bentonite, coal, gold, bauxite, granite, titanium and gemstones. Illegal exports from artisanal production are estimated at US$50 million.\nMozambique exported its first batch of coal in 2011 and expects to become the world's largest coal exporter. It is also spending about US$50 billion in infrastructure projects to access its coal reserves. Mozambique is reported to have the fourth largest reserves of natural gas in the world, after Russia, Iran, and Qatar.\nManufacturing.\nAlthough very well developed during the 1960s and early 1970s, industrialisation declined rapidly with the withdrawal of most Portuguese after independence. Since 1995 production has increased sharply and was expected to grow by 33% in 2001 due to the expansion (costing US$860m) of the Mozal aluminium smelter which was approved in mid-2001. The country's largest ever foreign investment, Mozal has little impact on employment, but is making a substantial contribution to balance of payments through taxes generated. Exports generated in the first quarter of 2001 were worth US$85.3, the primary factor for the 172% expansion in Mozambique's exports for the period. Completion of the smelter resulted in aluminium accounting for up to 70% of exports. Construction materials, agricultural processing, beverages, and consumer goods were the main sub-sectors.\nTourism.\nThis sector declined sharply after independence from Portugal, but has been developed, although it is still performing well below potential. The national strategy is to promote high-value, low-volume tourism. The first section of the \"Peace Park\" initiative which links with Kruger Park in South Africa, and Gonarezhou in Zimbabwe, was a project aimed at the development of tourism.\nTelecommunication.\nImmediately after a long civil war ended in 1992 the country started to reform telecommunication sector. The mobile sub-sector has experienced excellent growth rates following the introduction of competition in 2003 between Vodacom Mozambique and mCel, the incumbent mobile subsidiary of the national telco, Telecomunica\u00e7\u00f5es de Mo\u00e7ambique (TDM). The government is intent on introducing competition to the fixed-line sector as well, but it is hesitating to privatise TDM. All other services are open to competition, subject to licensing by the industry regulator, INCM. Internet usage in the country has been hampered by the inadequate fixed-line infrastructure and the high cost of international bandwidth, but this market sector has started to accelerate following the introduction of various kinds of broadband services including ADSL, cable modems, WiMAX wireless broadband and mobile data services, and then the landing of the first international submarine fibre optic cable in the country (SEACOM) in 2009. Further improvements can be expected from the ongoing rollout of 3G mobile services and a national fibre backbone network as well as the landing of the second international fibre (EASSy) in 2010. The lower cost of bandwidth has already started to trickle down to lower consumer prices in some service segments, while others have remained unchanged.\nFinance.\nThe banking system, dominated by the Portuguese collapsed after independence in 1975. From an earlier position (in the 1980s) of central government control of the economy, Mozambique has initiated rapid reforms in recent years, accelerating the implementation of market-based economic policies, and committing to a policy of fiscal and monetary discipline. In 1995 the government introduced its medium-term economic growth, strategy which it continues to pursue. Since the late 1990s, both national and international banking, established an environment for rapid economic growth and development of the financial system. On 11 December 2012, the Mozambican Government acquire the Portuguese shares of BNI Banco Nacional de Investimento, owning 100% of the bank and turning it into the country's development bank and nominated a former Governor of the Bank of Mozambique, Adriano Maleiane as CEO.\nMacroeconomic review.\nAlleviating poverty: at the end of the civil war in 1992, Mozambique ranked among the poorest countries in the world. It still ranks among the least developed countries, with very low socioeconomic indicators. In the last decade, however, it has experienced a notable economic recovery. Per capita GDP in 2000 was estimated at $222; in the mid-1980s, it was $120. With a high foreign debt (originally $5.7 billion at 1998 net present value) and a good track record on economic reform, Mozambique was the first African country to receive debt relief under the initial Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative. In April 2000, Mozambique qualified for the Enhanced HIPC program as well and attained its completion point in September 2001. This led to the Paris Club members agreeing in November 2001 to substantially reduce the remaining bilateral debt. This will lead to the complete forgiveness of a considerable volume of bilateral debt, including that owed to the United States.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRebounding growth.\nThe resettlement of war refugees and successful economic reform have led to a high natural increase rate: the average growth rate from 1993 to 1999 was 6.7%; from 1997 to 1999, it averaged more than 10% per year. The devastating floods of early 2000 slowed GDP growth to a 2.1%; estimates point to a full recovery in 2001. The government projects have caused the economy to continue to expand between 7%-10% a year for the next 5 years, although rapid expansion in the future hinges on several major foreign investment projects, continued economic reform, and the revival of the agriculture, transportation, and tourism sectors. More than 75% of the population engages in small scale agriculture, which still suffers from inadequate infrastructure, commercial networks and investment. Yet 88% of Mozambique's arable land is still uncultivated; focusing economic growth in this sector is a major challenge for the government.\nLow inflation.\nThe government's tight control of spending and the money supply, combined with financial sector reform, successfully reduced inflation from 70% in 1994 to less than 5% from 1998 to 1999. Rates spiked in 2000, however, to a rate of 12.7% due to economic disruptions stemming from the devastating floods. Starting 2001 the inflation was in the range of 5% and 12%.\n2003 - 5.2%; \n2004 - 7.5%; \n2005 - 7.6%; \n2006 - 11.8%; \n2007 - 7.4%; \n2008 - 8.4%; \n2009 - 4.2%; \n2010 - 10.0%; \n2011 - 11.1%\nExtensive economic reform.\nEconomic reform has been extensive. Over 1,200 state-owned enterprises (mostly small) have been privatized. Preparations for privatization and/or sector liberalization are underway for the remaining parastatals, including telecommunications, electricity, water service, airports, ports, and the railroads. The government frequently selects a strategic foreign investor when privatizing a parastatal. Additionally, customs duties have been reduced, and customs management has been streamlined and reformed. The government introduced a highly successful value-added tax in 1999 as part of its efforts to increase domestic revenues. Plans for 2001-02 include Commercial Code reform; comprehensive judicial reform; financial sector strengthening; continued civil service reform; improved government budget, audit, and inspection capability; and introduction of the private management of water systems in major cities. The process of liberalization in Mozambique was an initiative from the World Bank. In the Mid 1990s, the World Bank made it necessary for the country to liberalize its cashew industry. The lifting of protectionist measures for the cashew industry in Mozambique was an attempt to increase the incomes of cashew farmers and reduce poverty in the country. This policy of liberalization has been one of the most contentious policies.\nImproving trade imbalance.\nIn recent years, the value of imports has surpassed that of exports by almost 2:1, an improvement over the 4:1 ratio of the immediate post-war years. In 2000 imports were $1,217 million, and exports were $723 million. Support programs provided by development partners have largely compensated for balance of payments shortfalls. The medium-term outlook for exports is encouraging, since a number of foreign investment projects should lead to substantial export growth and a better trade balance. Mozal, a large aluminum smelter that commenced production in mid-2000, has greatly expanded the nation's trade volume. Traditional Mozambican exports include cashews, shrimp, fish, copra, sugar, cotton, tea, and citrus fruits. Most of these industries are being rehabilitated. Mozambique is becoming less dependent on imports for basic food and manufactured goods due to steady increases in local production.\nStatistics.\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity - $39.16 billion (2018 est.)\nGDP - real growth rate:\n3% (2017 est.)\nGDP - per capita:\npurchasing power parity - $1,327.9 (2018 est.)\nGDP - composition by sector:\n\"agriculture:\"\n22.3% (2017 est.)\n\"industry:\"\n23% (2017 est.)\n\"services:\"\n54.7% (2017 est.)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n\"lowest 10%:\"\n1.9% (2008)\n\"highest 10%:\"\n36.7% (2008)\nDistribution of family income - Gini index:\n47.3 (2002)\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n15.3% (2017 est.)\nLabor force:\n12.98 million (2017 est.)\nLabor force - by occupation:\nagriculture 74.4%, industry 3.9%, services 21.7% (2017 est.)\nUnemployment rate:\n24.5% (2017 est.)\nBudget:\n\"revenues:\"\n$2.758 billion (2017 est.)\n\"expenditures:\"\n$3.607 billion (2017 est.)\nIndustries:\nfood, beverages, chemicals (fertilizer, soap, paints), aluminium, petroleum products, textiles, cement, glass, asbestos, tobacco\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n10.5% (2017 est.)\nElectricity - production:\n19.58 billion kWh (2015 est.)\nElectricity - consumption:\n13.86 billion kWh (2015 est.)\nElectricity - exports:\n12.88 billion kWh (2015 est.)\nElectricity - imports:\n10.55 billion kWh (2015 est.)\nOil - consumption:\n (2006 est.)\nOil - proved reserves:\n (1 January 2006 est.)\nNatural gas - production:\n5.695 billion cu m (2015 est.)\nNatural gas - consumption:\n1.895 billion cu m (2015 est.)\nNatural gas - exports:\n3.8 billion cu m (2015 est.)\nNatural gas - imports:\n0 cu m (2013 est.)\nNatural gas - proved reserves:\n2.832 trillion cu m (1 January 2017 est.)\nAgriculture - products:\ncotton, cashew nuts, sugar cane, tea, cassava (tapioca), coconuts, sisal, citrus and tropical fruits; potatoes, sunflowers, beef, poultry\nExports:\n$4.773 billion (2017 est.)\nExports - commodities:\naluminum, prawns, cashews, cotton, sugar, citrus, timber; bulk electricity\nExports - partners:\nIndia 28.1%, Netherlands 24.4%, South Africa 16.7% (2017)\nImports:\n$5.021 billion (2017 est.)\nImports - commodities:\nmachinery and equipment, vehicles, fuel, chemicals, metal products, foodstuffs, textiles\nImports - partners:\nSouth Africa 36.8%, China 7%, UAE 6.8%, India 6.2%, Portugal 4.4% (2017)\nDebt - external:\n$10.27 billion (31 December 2017 est.)\nCurrency:\n1 metical (Mt) = 100 centavos\nExchange rates:\nmeticais (MZM) per US dollar - 24.125 (2008 est.), 26.264 (2007), 25.4 (2006)\nFiscal year:\ncalendar year\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57021", "revid": "40968262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57021", "title": "Kuwait City", "text": "Capital and largest city of Kuwait\nKuwait City (; ) is the capital and largest city of Kuwait. Located at the heart of the country on the south shore of Kuwait Bay on the Persian Gulf, it is the political, cultural and economic centre of the emirate, containing Kuwait's Seif Palace, government offices, and the headquarters of most Kuwaiti corporations and banks.\nAs of 2018,[ [update]] the metropolitan area had roughly three million inhabitants (more than 70% of the country's population). The city itself has no administrative status. All six governorates of the country comprise parts of the urban agglomeration, which is subdivided into numerous areas. In a narrower sense, \"Kuwait City\" can also refer only to the town's historic core, which nowadays is part of the Capital Governorate and seamlessly merges with the adjacent urban areas.\nKuwait City's trade and transportation needs are served by Kuwait International Airport, Mina Al-Shuwaik (Shuwaik Port) and Mina Al Ahmadi (Ahmadi Port).\nHistory.\nIn the early to mid 1700s, Kuwait City was a small fishing village. Sometime in the mid 1700s, the Bani Utubs settled in Kuwait. At the time of the arrival of the Utubs, Kuwait was inhabited by a few fishermen. In the eighteenth century, Kuwait gradually became a principal commercial centre for the transit of goods between India, Muscat, Baghdad, Persia, and Arabia. By the late 1700s, Kuwait had already established itself as a trading route from the Persian Gulf to Aleppo.\nDuring the Persian siege of Basra in 1775\u20131779, Iraqi merchants took refuge in Kuwait and were partly instrumental in the expansion of Kuwait's boat-building and trading activities. As a result, Kuwait's maritime commerce boomed. Between the years 1775 and 1779, the Indian trade routes with Baghdad, Aleppo, Smyrna and Constantinople were diverted to Kuwait. The East India Company was diverted to Kuwait in 1792. The East India Company secured the sea routes between Kuwait, India and the east coasts of Africa. After the Persian withdrawal from Basra in 1779, Kuwait continued to attract trade away from Basra.\nKuwait was the centre of boat building in the Persian Gulf region. During the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, ship vessels made in Kuwait carried the bulk of trade between the ports of India, East Africa and the Red Sea. Kuwaiti ship vessels were renowned throughout the Indian Ocean. Regional geopolitical turbulence helped foster economic prosperity in Kuwait in the second half of the 18th century. Kuwait became prosperous due to Basra's instability in the late 18th century. At the time, Kuwait functioned partly as a haven for Basra's merchants fleeing Ottoman persecution. According to Palgrave, Kuwaitis developed a reputation as the best sailors in the Persian Gulf.\nDuring the reign of Mubarak Al-Sabah, Kuwait was dubbed the \"Marseille of the Gulf\" because its economic vitality attracted a large variety of people. In the first decades of the twentieth century, Kuwait had a well-established elite: wealthy trading families who were linked by marriage and shared economic interests.\nIn 1937, Freya Stark wrote about the extent of poverty in Kuwait at the time:\nPoverty has settled in Kuwait more heavily since my last visit five years ago, both by sea, where the pearl trade continues to decline, and by land, where the blockade established by Saudi Arabia now harms the merchants.\nSome prominent merchant families left Kuwait in the early 1930s due to the prevalence of economic hardship. At the time of the discovery of oil in 1937, most of Kuwait's inhabitants were impoverished.\nFrom 1946 to 1982, Kuwait experienced a period of prosperity driven by oil and its liberal atmosphere. In popular discourse, the years between 1946 and 1982 are referred to as the \"Golden Era\". In 1950, a major public-works programme began to enable Kuwaitis to enjoy a modern standard of living. By 1952, the country became the largest oil exporter in the Persian Gulf region. In the following year, the country's annual oil income grew to $169 million. This massive growth attracted many foreign workers, especially from Jordan, Egypt and India and helped finance the development of a new master plan, which the state approved in 1952. In June 1961, Kuwait became independent with the end of the British protectorate and the sheikh Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah became an Emir. Under the terms of the newly drafted constitution, Kuwait held its first parliamentary elections in 1963. Kuwait was the first Persian Gulf country to establish a constitution and parliament.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Kuwait was the most developed country in the region. Kuwait was the pioneer in the Middle East in diversifying its earnings away from oil exports. The Kuwait Investment Authority is the world's first sovereign wealth fund. From the 1970s onward, Kuwait scored highest of all Arab countries on the Human Development Index. Kuwait University was established in 1966. Kuwait's theatre industry was well-known throughout the Arab world. In the 1960s and 1970s, Kuwait's press was described as one of the freest in the world. Kuwait was the pioneer in the literary renaissance in the Arab region. In 1958, \"Al Arabi\" magazine was first published, the magazine went on to become the most popular magazine in the Arab world. Many Arab writers moved to Kuwait for freedom of expression because Kuwait had greater freedom of expression than elsewhere in the Arab world. Kuwait was a haven for writers and journalists from all parts of the Middle East, with the Iraqi poet Ahmed Matar leaving Iraq in the 1970s to take refuge in the more liberal environment of Kuwait.\nKuwaiti society embraced liberal and Western attitudes throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Most Kuwaiti women did not wear the hijab in the 1960s and 1970s. At Kuwait University, mini-skirts were more common than the hijab.\nIn the early 1980s, Kuwait experienced a major economic crisis after the Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash and decrease in oil price.\nThe Kuwait National Assembly Building, a parliament building designed by the works of J\u00f8rn Utzon in its elements of Islamic architecture, was completed in 1982 by orders of his son Jan Utzon.\nDuring the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Kuwait supported Iraq. Throughout the 1980s, there were several terror attacks in Kuwait, including the 1983 Kuwait bombings, hijacking of several Kuwait Airways planes and attempted assassination of Emir Jaber in 1985. Kuwait was a leading regional hub of science and technology in the 1960s and 1970s up until the early 1980s, the scientific research sector significantly suffered due to the terror attacks.\nThe Kuwaiti government strongly advocated Islamism throughout the 1980s. At that time, the most serious threat to the continuity of Al Sabah came from home-grown secular democrats. The secular Kuwaiti opposition were protesting the 1976 suspension of the parliament. Al Sabah were attracted to Islamists preaching the virtues of a hierarchical order that included loyalty to the Kuwaiti monarchy. In 1981, the Kuwaiti government gerrymandered electoral districts in favour of the Islamists. Islamists were the government's main allies, hence Islamists were able to colonise state agencies, such as the government ministries. By the mid-1980s, Kuwait was described as an autocracy. In 1986, Emir Jaber suspended the parliament.\nAfter the Iran\u2013Iraq War ended, Kuwait declined an Iraqi request to forgive its US$65 billion debt. An economic rivalry between the two countries ensued after Kuwait increased its oil production by 40 percent. Tensions between the two countries increased further in July 1990, after Iraq complained to OPEC claiming that Kuwait was stealing its oil from a field near the Iraq\u2013Kuwait border by slant drilling of the Rumaila field.\nIn August 1990, Iraqi forces invaded and annexed Kuwait. After a series of failed diplomatic negotiations, the United States led a coalition to remove the Iraqi forces from Kuwait, in what became known as the Gulf War. On 26 February 1991, the coalition succeeded in driving out the Iraqi forces. As they retreated, Iraqi forces carried out a scorched earth policy by setting oil wells on fire. During the Iraqi occupation, more than 1,000 Kuwaiti civilians were killed. In addition, more than 600 Kuwaitis went missing during Iraq's occupation, approximately 375 remains were found in mass graves in Iraq.\nIn March 2003, Kuwait became the springboard for the US-led invasion of Iraq. Upon the death of the Emir Jaber, in January 2006, Saad Al-Sabah succeeded him but was removed nine days later by the Kuwaiti parliament due to his ailing health. Sabah Al-Sabah was sworn in as Emir.\nGeography.\nKuwait City is located on Kuwait Bay, a natural deep-water harbor. Ninety percent of Kuwait's population live within the Kuwait Bay coast. The country is generally low-lying, with the highest point being above sea level. It has nine islands, all of which, with the exception of Failaka Island, are uninhabited. With an area of , Bubiyan is the largest island in Kuwait and is connected to the rest of the country by a bridge. The land area is considered arable and sparse vegetation is found along its coastline.\nKuwait's Burgan field has a total capacity of approximately of proven oil reserves. During the 1991 Kuwaiti oil fires, more than 500 oil lakes were created covering a combined surface area of about . The resulting soil contamination due to oil and soot accumulation had made eastern and south-eastern parts of Kuwait uninhabitable. Sand and oil residue had reduced large parts of the Kuwaiti desert to semi-asphalt surfaces. The oil spills during the Gulf War also drastically affected Kuwait's marine resources.\nClimate.\nKuwait City has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BWh\") with extremely hot, very prolonged summers and mild, short winters. It is one of the hottest cities in summer on Earth. Average summer high temperatures are above for three months of the year, and during heat waves; the daytime temperature regularly exceeds with nighttime lows often remaining above . In winter, nighttime temperatures frequently drop below . Considering its coastal position and relative distance to the equator in comparison with the hot desert climates in Africa and Saudi Arabia, the heat in the city is rather extreme\u2014being surrounded in almost every direction by the hot desert.\nSand storms occur at times during summer from the shamal wind. Sand storms can occur any time of year but occur mostly during summer, and less frequently during autumn.\nEconomy.\nKuwait has a petroleum-based economy, petroleum and fertilisers are the main export products. As of \u00a015, 2024[ [update]] and according to Wise, the Kuwaiti dinar is the highest-valued currency unit in the world. Petroleum accounts for 43% of GDP and 70% of export earnings.\nTransport.\nThere are two airports in Kuwait. Kuwait International Airport serves as the principal hub for international air travel. State-owned Kuwait Airways is the largest airline in the country. A portion of the airport complex is designated as Al Mubarak Air Base, which contains the headquarters of the Kuwait Air Force, as well as the Kuwait Air Force Museum. In 2004, the first private airline of Kuwait, Jazeera Airways, was launched. In 2005, the second private airline, Wataniya Airways was founded.\nCulture.\nMuseum &amp; Cultural Centre.\nKuwait National Museum, Museum of Modern Art, Maritime Museum, Al Shaheed Park Museums, the Al Sabah Collection, Sadu House, Al Salam Palace, and the Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Cultural Centre are considered the most famous museums and cultural centres in Kuwait City.\nTheatre.\nKuwait is known for its home-grown tradition of theatre. Kuwait is the only Arab country in the Gulf region with a theatrical tradition. The Arabic theatrical movement in Kuwait constitutes a major part of the country's Arabic cultural life. Theatrical activities in Kuwait began in the 1920s when the first spoken dramas were released. Theatre activities are still popular today.\nSoap operas.\nKuwaiti soap operas (\u0627\u0644\u0645\u0633\u0644\u0633\u0644\u0627\u062a \u0627\u0644\u0643\u0648\u064a\u062a\u064a\u0629) are among the most-watched soap operas in the Arab world. Most Gulf soap operas are based in Kuwait. Although usually performed in the Kuwaiti dialect, they are aired in the majority of Arabic-speaking countries and are highly popular.\nSports.\nThe city is home to the Al Kuwait SC, which has traditionally provided Kuwait's national basketball team with key players.\nFrom 13 to 15 February 2020 it held the first Aquabike World Championship Grand Prix of Kuwait.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57023", "revid": "4711431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57023", "title": "Economy of Papua New Guinea", "text": "The economy of Papua New Guinea (PNG) is largely underdeveloped with the vast majority of the population living below the poverty line. It is dominated by the agricultural, forestry, and fishing sector and the minerals and energy extraction sector. The agricultural, forestry, and fishing sector accounts for most of the labour force of PNG while the minerals and energy extraction sector, including gold, copper, oil and natural gas is responsible for most of the export earnings.\nPNG's GDP growth has been driven by the extraction industries and real GDP growth per capita has averaged 4% since mid-2000. The country has made significant progress investing proceeds from oil and gas in infrastructure building. As a result, its major cities like Port Moresby and Lae have received increased international investor attention, giving rise to an unprecedented building boom to exploit the opportunities presented by the country's rise as a regional economic leader in the South Pacific region. This is well supported by its strategic location as a gateway from the Pacific to Asia, as well as its comparatively huge landmass and demographic profile (almost 7 times that of the rest of the smaller Pacific Island nations)\nAccording to the International Monetary Fund, PNG, despite its poverty, is richly endowed with natural resources, but exploitation has been hampered by the rugged terrain and the high cost of developing infrastructure. Agriculture provides a subsistence livelihood for the bulk of the population. Mineral deposits, including oil, copper, and gold, account for 72% of export earnings.\nBudgetary support from Australia and development aid under World Bank auspices continue to sustain the economy. Australia is PNG's largest aid donor, and will provide $479.2 million of aid in 2023. In June 2021 the World Bank approved a US$100 million (PGK 352 million equivalent) operation to support Papua New Guinea in its response to COVID-19, and to lay important foundations for a sustainable recovery.\nEconomy.\nPapua New Guinea is classified as a developing economy by the International Monetary Fund. The economy is largely dependent on natural resources, where capital investment is dominated by mining and oil, while most labour is taken up by agriculture. As of 2018, natural resource extraction made up 28% of overall GDP, with substantial contributors including minerals, oil, and natural gas.\nAccording to the Investment Promotion Authority of Papua New Guinea the major economic sectors are agriculture and livestock, forestry, mining and petroleum, tourism and hospitality, fisheries and marine resources, manufacturing, retailing and wholesaling, building and construction, transport and telecommunications, and finance and business trade. The economy generally can be separated into subsistence and market sectors, although the distinction is blurred by smallholder cash cropping of coffee, cocoa, and copra. About 75% of the country's population relies primarily on the subsistence economy. The minerals, timber, and fish sectors are dominated by foreign investors. Manufacturing is limited, and the formal labour sector consequently also is limited.\nTimber and marine resources are also exported, with the country being one of the few suppliers of tropical timber, Forestry is an important economic resource for Papua New Guinea, but the industry uses low and semi-intensive technological inputs. As a result, product ranges are limited to sawed timber, veneer, plywood, block board, moulding, poles and posts and wood chips. Only a few limited finished products are exported. Lack of automated machinery, coupled with inadequately trained local technical personnel, are some of the obstacles to introducing automated machinery and design. Forestry is an avenue for corruption and many projects face legal uncertainty. Up to 70% of logging may be illegal. Marine fisheries provide around 10% of global catch. The EEZ forms the largest fisheries zone in the South Pacific. The dominant deep-sea fishery is tuna. There are also inland and coastal fisheries.\nOther sources include renewable resources, such as forests, marine resources (including a large portion of the world's major tuna stocks), and in some parts agriculture. Agriculture, for subsistence and cash crops, provides a livelihood for 85% of the population and continues to provide some 30% of GDP. Oil palm production has grown steadily over recent years (largely from estates and with extensive outgrower output), with palm oil now the main agricultural export. Coffee remains the major export crop (produced largely in the Highlands provinces); followed by cocoa and coconut oil/copra from the coastal areas, each largely produced by smallholders; tea, produced on estates; and rubber.\nMeasuring economic growth is tricky due to the resource-dependent economy distorting GDP. Other metrics such as Gross national income are hard to measure. Even historical GDP estimates have changed dramatically. As of 2019, PNG's real GDP growth rate was 3.8%, with an inflation rate of 4.3% This economic growth has been primarily attributed to strong commodity prices, particularly mineral but also agricultural, with the high demand for mineral products largely sustained even during the crisis by the buoyant Asian markets, a booming mining sector and by a buoyant outlook and the construction phase for natural gas exploration, production, and exportation in liquefied form (liquefied natural gas or \"LNG\") by LNG tankers, all of which will require multibillion-dollar investments (exploration, production wells, pipelines, storage, liquefaction plants, port terminals, LNG tanker ships).\nFormal employment is low. There is a minimum wage, but it has declined in real terms since independence. In the late 2010s, around 40% of those employed in urban areas worked outside of agriculture, but only around 20% in rural areas. Altogether, the informal economy supports about 85% of the population, mainly through subsistence agriculture.\nThe Papua New Guinean kina is managed through a crawling peg, with its value heavily impacted by the country's natural resource exports. The largest bilateral trade partner is Australia, followed by Japan, and then China.\nHistory.\nThe first decade of independence saw slow but steady economic growth. The Ok Tedi Mine opened in 1982. While Australian contribution to the budget dropped from 40% of government revenue in 1975 to 17% in 1988, improved taxation allowed for government expenditure to be maintained. The closure of the Bougainville mine led to issues with government finances, however an expansion of exports of oil, minerals, and forestry products led to economic recovery in the early 1990s. This growth did not decrease inequality however, and government services declined. This economic decline both caused and was exacerbated by increases in violence. Local violence damaged infrastructure, and defence expenditure increased. In 1986 the public services lost a significant degree of independence, leading to their becoming more politicised. Increasing government expense and resulting rising debt led to significant economic trouble. The Papua New Guinean kina was devalued and put on a floating exchange rate in 1994, and the country obtained an emergency loan from the World Bank in 1995. The economy had a series of crises during the 1990s. A drought in 1997 caused by the El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation killed over 1,000 people.\nGDP grew around 9.4% a year from 2008 to 2015, although this ranged from 0.7% from 2014 to 2015 to 21.1% from 2009 to 2010. The economy in this period relied heavily on foreign direct investment, which came to an end when liquefied natural gas began to be exported.\nThe GDP Growth rate for PNG in 2021 was at 1.3%. According to the Asian Development Bank its GDP was expected to grow 3.4% in 2022 and 4.6% in 2023.\nMineral resources.\nSignificant exported minerals include gold, copper, cobalt, and nickel. Oil and liquified natural gas (LNG) are also significant resource exports. Extractive resources make up 86% of all exports, has their high value has enabled the country to generally run current account surpluses. The biggest mine is a private gold mine on Lihir Island, which is followed by the state-run Ok Tedi Mine, and then the Porgera Gold Mine.\nIn 1999, mineral production accounted for 26.3% of gross domestic product. Government revenues and foreign exchange earning minerals. Copper and gold mines are currently in production at Porgera, Ok Tedi, Misima, Lihir, Simberi and Hidden Valley. As of 2014, talks of resuming mining operations in the Panguna mine have also resurfaced, with the Autonomous Bougainville Government and National Government of Papua New Guinea expressing interest in restarting mining operations in the area.\nNew nickel, copper and gold projects have been identified and are awaiting a rise in commodity prices to begin development. At early 2011, there are confirmation that Mount Suckling project has found at least two new large highly prospective porphyry bodies at Araboro Creek and Ioleu Creek. A consortium led by Chevron is producing and exporting oil from the Southern Highlands Province of Papua New Guinea. In 2001, it expects to begin the commercialization of the country's estimated 640\u00a0km3 (23 trillion cubic feet) of natural gas reserves through the construction of a gas pipeline from Papua New Guinea to Queensland, Australia. The project was shelved.\nIn 2019, the country was the 8th largest world producer of cobalt, and the 15th largest world producer of gold. In the production of silver, in 2017 the country produced 90 tons.\nMineral deposits account for 72% of export earnings.\nTraces of gold were first found in 1852, in pottery from Redscar Bay on the Papuan Peninsula.\nOil and gas.\nThe Iagifu/Hedinia Field was discovered in 1986 in the Papuan fold and thrust belt. Most crude oil produced is exported, although some is imported for energy production.\nLNG exports began in 2014, although the opening of new projects has been delayed due to disputes regarding revenue sharing. Around 80% of all LNG produced is exported.\nThe first major gas project was the PNG LNG joint venture. ExxonMobil is operator of the joint venture, also comprising PNG company Oil Search, Santos, Kumul Petroleum Holdings (Papua New Guinea's national oil and gas company), JX Nippon Oil and Gas Exploration, the PNG government's Mineral Resources Development Company and Petromin PNG Holdings. The project is an integrated development that includes gas production and processing facilities in the Hela, Southern Highlands and Western Provinces of Papua New Guinea, including liquefaction and storage facilities (located northwest of Port Moresby) with capacity of 6.9 million tonnes per year. There are over of pipelines connecting the facilities. It is the largest private-sector investment in the history of PNG. A second major project is based on initial rights held by the French oil and gas major TotalEnergies and the U.S. company InterOil Corp. (IOC), which have partly combined their assets after TotalEnergies agreed in December 2013 to purchase 61.3% of IOC's Antelope and Elk gas field rights, with the plan to develop them starting in 2016, including the construction of a liquefaction plant to allow export of LNG. TotalEnergies has separately another joint operating agreement with Oil Search.\nFurther gas and mineral projects are proposed (including the large Wafi-Golpu copper-gold mine), with extensive exploration ongoing across the country.\nAgriculture, timber, and fish.\nThe agricultural, forestry, and fishing sector accounts for most of the labour force of PNG. Agriculture currently accounts for 25% of GDP and supports more than 80% of the population. Most agriculture is subsistence, while cash crops are exported. The main crops by value are coffee, oil, cocoa, copra, tea, rubber, and sugar.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture in the country includes crops grown for domestic sale and international export, as well as for subsistence agriculture. Agricultural export of commodities such as copra, copra oil, rubber, tea, cocoa, and coffee have not grown. However, the conversion of forests to oil palm plantations to produce palm oil has become a significant and growing source of employment and income. Overall the country produces 1.6% of global palm oil, and 1% of global coffee. While not the largest sector of the economy, agriculture provides the most employment, at around 85% of all jobs.\nAssessments of poverty have found that it is most common in rural areas. Nearly 40% of the population are subsistence farmers, living relatively independently of the cash economy. Their traditional social groupings are explicitly acknowledged by the Papua New Guinea Constitution, which expresses the wish for \"traditional villages and communities to remain as viable units of Papua New Guinean society\" and protects their continuing importance to local and national community life. This makes farming the most widespread economic activity. Most is carried out through simple rainfed surface irrigation, with specific techniques varying by location. Taro is a historical crop, although the introduction of the now-staple sweet potato allowed for cultivation as high as . \"Metroxylon\" (a sago palm) is another common crop.\nIt is estimated that only 30% of the country's land has climate conditions and terrain amenable to agriculture. Most produce comes from smallholders, who farm less than . Plantation production has decreased since the 1980s, and by the mid-2010s smallholders produced 70% of tree crops. Intensive farming is carried out in highly populated areas, with a variety of land management techniques used to maintain soil productivity. \nSubsistence farmers often use or less. This land is often cleared through slash-and-burn techniques, cultivated for two years, and then left to fallow for five to fifteen years. Alongside crops, pigs, chickens, and ducks are reared. Fish ponds are sometimes used.\nPapua New Guinea has the largest yam market in Asia. Other crops produced and consumed domestically include sweet potato, banana, sago, taro, cassava, and sugarcane.\nPapua New Guinea produced in 2021:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like natural rubber (7.7 thousand tons) and tea (5.5 thousand tons).\nTimber.\nThe timber industry was not active in 1998, due to low world prices, but rebounded in 1999. About 40% of the country is covered with timber rich trees, and a domestic woodworking industry has been slow to develop.\nAs of 2018, over three-quarters of the forest was considered old-growth, 11.9% was heavily logged, and 0.2% had been logged at small-scales.\nFish.\nFish exports are confined primarily to shrimp, although fishing boats of other nations catch tuna in Papua New Guinea waters under license.\nThe country has inland fisheries and aquaculture. Marine resources include sea cucumber, shrimp, and tuna. There is a domestic shrimp fishing industry, and a tuna longline fishing industry. Deep-water tuna fishing and purse seine fishing is carried out in Papua New Guinea waters by foreign ships.\nThe overall market is thought to be somewhere between K350 and K400 million per year, although this is highly variable.\nIndustry.\nIn general, the Papua New Guinea economy is highly dependent on imports for manufactured goods. Its industrial sector\u2014exclusive of mining\u2014accounts for only 9% of GDP and contributes little to exports. Small-scale industries produce beer, soap, concrete products, clothing, paper products, matches, ice cream, canned meat, fruit juices, furniture, plywood, and paint. The small domestic market, relatively high wages, and high transport costs are constraints to industrial development.\nTelecommunications.\nUntil the second half of 2007, information and communication technology (ICT) services in Papua New Guinea (PNG) were limited to urban centres under the monopoly operator, Telikom PNG (Mitchel 2008). Thereafter, the Irish owned utility Digicel entered the mobile market and expanded mobile signal coverage across the country enabling connectivity to many people \u2014 the mobile phone penetration rate reached 41 per cent by 2014, marking a substantial change in the communications landscape. PNG has 42.68 mobile phone users per 100 population, estimated in 2017.\nPNG has a low level of broadband uptake, estimated in 2017 at 0.213 per 100 population.\nEnergy.\nParticularly in rural areas there is reliance on traditional sources of biomass energy for cooking.\nElectricity.\nAccess to electricity.\nBy 2017, only 50.42% of the rural population had access to electricity.\n80.23% of the urban population in 2017 had access to electricity. Limitations in the transmission and distribution infrastructure lead to frequent outages in urban centers.\nAround half of electricity is produced using petroleum products, while most of the rest comes from natural gas, and some comes from renewables (mainly hydropower). As of 2018, around half of the 797MW produced was from private sources, and this was mostly for use in mining.\nConsumption.\nElectricity - consumption: 3.116 billion kWh (2012 est.)\nMost energy consumed comes from petroleum products, and is mostly used by the transport sector.\nGeneration.\nElectricity - production: 3.35 billion kWh (2012 est.)\nAs of 2018 the country had 8 power stations and 28 substations. Significant sources of energy generation include hydropower and diesel generators, while smaller sources include biogas, natural gas, and geothermal.\nTransmission and distribution.\nPNG Power Ltd (PPL) operates three separate grids. There are two main large grids, the Port Moresby system serving the National Capital District and the large Ramu grid that extends into the highlands. Also, PPL operates the small Gazelle Peninsula Grid powered mainly by a 10 MW run-of-river hydro plant.\nEntities and institutions.\nThe Electricity Commission (ELCOM) was privatised with the passage of the Electricity Commission (Privatization) Act 2002. PNG Power Limited (PPL) is a vertically integrated utility responsible for generation, transmission, distribution and retailing of electricity throughout Papua New Guinea.\nRenewable energy.\nA study by Bloomberg New Energy Finance ranked PNG in the top 10 for potential renewable resources, with about 2.5 GW of these but only 2% of it exploited.\nHydroelectric projects.\nThe Yonki Dam project, which commenced operation in 1991, on the Ramu River has generation capacity of 77 MW (103,000\u00a0hp) (Ramu 1) plus proposed additional capacity of 18 MW.\nAs of 2018, there was 432MW of hydropower capacity.\nProposed projects.\nThe list of intended projects include the US$2 billion Ramu 2 hydro project on the Ramu River to be built under a public-private partnership with Shenzhen Energy Group.\nEdevu Dam is to be constructed by PNG Hydro Development Ltd (PNGHDL) to generate 50 Megawatts (MW).\nConsultants to PNG Power have conducted feasibility studies for the Naoro Brown hydroelectricity Project which would supply up to 80MW of electricity to the Port Moresby grid.\nTransport.\nThe country's mountainous terrain impedes transport. Aeroplanes opened up the country during its colonial period and continue to be used for most travel and most high-density/value freight. The capital, Port Moresby, has no road links to any of PNG's other major towns. Similarly, many remote villages are reachable only by light aircraft or on foot.\nJacksons International Airport is the major international airport in Papua New Guinea, located from Port Moresby. In addition to two international airfields, Papua New Guinea has over 500 airstrips, most of which are unpaved. 21, including the international airport, are considered national airports. These are operated by the National Airports Corporation. There are six ICAO-certified airports in addition to this, three run by private companies and three by provincial governments. The national airline is Air Niugini, operating out of Jacksons International. As of 2018, Air Niugini flew between 11 of the domestic airports. The second largest airline is PNG Air, and the third is Mission Aviation Fellowship.\nIn 2010 there were around 46,000 registered vehicles, or 1 per 147 people, including motorcycles. Official statistics suggest this has grown by only 1% a year over the preceding decade. Vehicle registration is carried out at the provincial level, and so may be unreliable and not account for the actual number of vehicles in use. Large goods vehicles make up a fifth to half of highway traffic, followed by passenger vehicles, government vehicles, and private vehicles.\nTransport in Papua New Guinea is in many cases heavily limited by the mountainous terrain. The capital, Port Moresby, is not linked by road to any of the other major towns and many highland villages can only be reached by light aircraft or on foot.\nPapua New Guinea has no major railways, but some mine sites have disused tracks.\nThe country has of waterways, and commercial port facilities at Port Moresby, Alotau, Oro Bay, Lae, Kimbe, Kieta Madang, Buka, Rabaul/Kokopo, Kiunga, Wewak and Vanimo. In total there are 22 official ports, 16 of which are run by the PNG Port Corporation. Private companies may maintain their own ports, usually to assist extractive industries. International trade routes from East Asia to East Australia pass through Papua New Guinean ports. As of 2010, international trade ships stopped in Papua New Guinean ports 6,330 times.\nFinance.\nThe Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) is the central bank of Papua New Guinea. Its main function is to issue currency and to act as the banker and financial agent to the Government. It is also in charge of regulating banking and other financial services and manages the gold, foreign exchange and any other international reserves of Papua New Guinea.\nBPNG is engaged in developing policies to promote financial inclusion and is a member of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, which had been formed in 2008. In 2013, BPNG made a Maya Declaration Commitment to create an enabling environment for building an inclusive financial sector in Papua New Guinea.\nThe currency of Papua New Guinean, issued by the BPNG, is the kina, which was introduced on 19 April 1975 to replace the Australian dollar.\nTrade and investment.\nIn 2014, Papua New Guinea's merchandise exports were:\nMajor destinations for merchandise exports include Australia (39.9%), the European Union (20.2%), Japan (11.7%), China (6.7%), and Singapore (5.6%).\nIn 2014, Papua New Guinea's merchandise imports were:\nMajor source countries for merchandise imports include Australia (34.4%), Singapore (14.3%), the European Union (8.3%), China (6.9%), and Japan (6.4%).\nPetroleum, mining machinery and aircraft have been the primary U.S. exports to Papua New Guinea. In 1999, as mineral exploration and new minerals investments declined, as did United States exports. Crude oil is the largest U.S. import from Papua New Guinea, followed by gold, cocoa, coffee, and copper ore.\nU.S. companies are active in developing Papua New Guinea's mining and petroleum sectors. Chevron operates the Kutubu and Gobe oil projects and is developing its natural gas reserves. A 5,000\u20136,000 m\u00b3 (30,000\u201340,000 barrel) per day oil refinery project in which there is an American interest also is under development in Port Moresby.\nIn 1993, Papua New Guinea became a participating economy in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Forum. In 1996, it joined the World Trade Organization (WTO).\nDevelopment programs and aid.\nPapua New Guinea is highly dependent on foreign aid. Australia has been the largest bilateral aid donor to PNG, providing $A506 million ($US376 million) in 2016. Budgetary support, which has been provided in decreasing amounts since independence, was phased out in 2000, with aid concentrated on project development.\nOther major aid sources to Papua New Guinea are Japan, the European Union, the People's Republic of China, the Republic of China, the United Nations, the Asian Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank. Volunteers from a number of countries, including the United States, and mission church workers also provide education, health, and development assistance throughout the country.\nIn July 2024 The International Monetary Fund would provide Papua New Guinea with immediate access to about $125 million in order \"to support Papua New Guinea\u2019s reform agenda, help protect the vulnerable and foster inclusive growth, with a focus maintained on strengthening debt sustainability, alleviating FX shortages, and enhancing governance and anti-corruption frameworks,\" \nMany countries and international organisations have supported climate change-related activities.\nLand tenure.\nOver 97% of the country designated as customary land, held by communities. Many such effective titles remain unregistered and effectively informal. Land registration efforts have had very limited success. \nThe PNG legislature has enacted laws in which a type of tenure called \"customary land title\" is recognised, meaning that the traditional lands of the indigenous peoples have some legal basis for inalienable tenure. This customary land notionally covers most of the usable land in the country (some 97% of total land area); alienated land is either held privately under state lease or is government land. Freehold title (also known as fee simple) can only be held by Papua New Guinean citizens.\nOnly some 3% of the land of Papua New Guinea is in private hands; this is privately held under a 99-year state lease, or it is held by the State. There is virtually no freehold title; the few existing freeholds are automatically converted to state leases when they are transferred between vendor and purchaser. Unalienated land is owned under customary title by traditional landowners. The precise nature of the seisin varies from one culture to another. Many writers portray land as the communal ownership of traditional clans; however, closer studies usually show that the smallest portions of land whose ownership cannot be further divided are held by the individual heads of extended families and their descendants or their descendants alone if they have recently died.\nThis is a matter of vital importance because a problem of economic development is identifying the membership of customary landowning groups and the owners. Disputes between mining and forestry companies and landowner groups often devolve on the issue of whether the companies entered into contractual relations for the use of land with the true owners. Customary property\u2014usually land\u2014cannot be devised by will. It can only be inherited according to the custom of the deceased's people. The Lands Act was amended in 2010 along with the Land Group Incorporation Act, intended to improve the management of state land, mechanisms for dispute resolution over land, and to enable customary landowners to be better able to access finance and possible partnerships over portions of their land if they seek to develop it for urban or rural economic activities. The Land Group Incorporation Act requires more specific identification of the customary landowners than hitherto and their more specific authorisation before any land arrangements are determined; (a major issue in recent years has been a land grab, using, or rather misusing, the Lease-Leaseback provision under the Land Act, notably using 'Special Agricultural and Business Leases' (SABLs) to acquire vast tracts of customary land, purportedly for agricultural projects, but in almost all cases as a back-door mechanism for securing tropical forest resources for logging\u2014circumventing the more exacting requirements of the Forest Act, for securing Timber Permits (which must comply with sustainability requirements and be competitively secured, and with the customary landowners' approval). Following a national outcry, these SABLs have been subject to a Commission of Inquiry, established in mid-2011, for which the report is still awaited for initial presentation to the Prime Minister and Parliament.\nScience and technology.\nPapua New Guinea's \"National Vision 2050\" was adopted in 2009. This has led to the establishment of the Research, Science and Technology Council. At its gathering in November 2014, the Council re-emphasised the need to focus on sustainable development through science and technology.\n\"Vision 2050\"'s medium-term priorities are:\nIn 2016, women accounted for 33.2% of researchers in Papua New Guinea.\nAccording to Thomson Reuters' Web of Science, Papua New Guinea had the largest number of publications (110) among Pacific Island states in 2014, followed by Fiji (106). Nine out of ten scientific publications from Papua New Guinea focused on immunology, genetics, biotechnology and microbiology. Nine out of ten were also co-authored by scientists from other countries, mainly Australia, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, Spain and Switzerland. In 2019 Papua New Guinea produced 253 publications in the Scopus (Elsevier) database of scientific publications. Health sciences accounted for 49% of these publications. Papua New Guinea's top scientific collaborators from 2017 to 2019 were Australia, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, France and India.\nRenewable energy sources represent two-thirds of the total electricity supply. In 2015, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community observed that, 'while Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and Samoa are leading the way with large-scale hydropower projects, there is enormous potential to expand the deployment of other renewable energy options such as solar, wind, geothermal and ocean-based energy sources'. The European Union funded the Renewable Energy in Pacific Island Countries Developing Skills and Capacity programme (EPIC) over 2013 to 2017. The programme developed a master's programme in renewable energy management, accredited in 2016, at the University of Papua New Guinea and helped to establish a Centre of Renewable Energy at the same university.\nPapua New Guinea is one of the 15 beneficiaries of a programme on Adapting to Climate Change and Sustainable Energy worth \u20ac37.26 million. The programme resulted from the signing of an agreement in February 2014 between the European Union and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. The other beneficiaries are the Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.\nEconomic conditions.\nBy mid-1999, Papua New Guinea's economy was in crisis. Although its agricultural sector had recovered from the 1997 drought and timber prices were rising as most Asian economies recovered from their 1998 slump, Papua New Guinea's foreign currency earnings suffered from low world mineral and petroleum prices. Estimates of minerals in exploration expenditure in 1999 were one-third of what was spent in 1997. The resulting lower foreign exchange earnings, capital flight, and general government mismanagement resulted in a precipitous drop in the value of Papua New Guinea's currency, the kina, leading to a dangerous decrease in foreign currency reserves. The kina has floated since 1994. Economic activity decreased in most sectors; imports of all kinds shrunk; and inflation, which had been over 21% in 1998, slowed to an estimated annual rate of 8% in 1999.\nCiting the previous government's failure to successfully negotiate acceptable commercial loans or bond sales to cover its budget deficit, the government formed by Sir Mekere Morauta in July 1999 successfully requested emergency assistance from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. With assistance from the Fund and the Bank, the government has made considerable progress toward macroeconomic stabilization and economic reform.\nAs of 2019, although statistics show that an economic recovery is underway, Papua New Guinea's economy is still struggling.\nThe rugged terrain (including high mountain ranges and valleys, swamps and islands) and the high cost of developing infrastructure, combined with other factors (including law and order problems in some centres and the system of customary land title) make it difficult for outside developers. Local developers are hindered by years of deficient investment in education, health, and access to finance.\nThe country's terrain has made it difficult for the country to develop transportation infrastructure, resulting in air travel being the most efficient and reliable means of transportation. There are five highways, although only two go into the interior. Domestic shipping is limited. There are 22 international ports, although not all are operational. The biggest is Lae Port, which handles about half of all international cargo. Many roads are poorly maintained, and some cannot be used during the wet season. Nonetheless, the majority of the population lives within of a national road, and even more live near district or rural roads.\nOverall housing quality is low, with 15% of houses having a finished floor in the late 2010s. In urban areas, 55% of houses were connected to electricity in 2016. Rural areas saw only 10% connection, although this is a significant increase from 3% in 1996. Over half of urban houses had access to piped water, while only 15% of rural houses did, although rural houses had more access to wells. The average number of people per room was 2.5.\nThe Sirinumu Dam and Yonki Dam provide some hydropower. There is limited sewage treatment, even in the capital. Some is discharged directly into the ocean, leading to issues with pollution.\nFormer Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morauta tried to restore integrity to state institutions, stabilise the kina, restore stability to the national budget, privatise public enterprises where appropriate, and ensure ongoing peace on Bougainville following the 1997 agreement which ended Bougainville's secessionist unrest. The Morauta government had considerable success in attracting international support, specifically gaining the backing of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank in securing development assistance loans.\nThe PNG government's long-term Vision 2050 and shorter-term policy documents, including the 2013 Budget and the 2014 Responsible Sustainable Development Strategy, emphasise the need for a more diverse economy, based upon sustainable industries and avoiding the effects of Dutch disease from major resource extraction projects undermining other industries. This occurred in many countries experiencing oil or other mineral booms, notably in Western Africa, undermining much of their agriculture sector, manufacturing and tourism, and with them broad-based employment prospects. Measures have been taken to mitigate these effects, including through the establishment of a sovereign wealth fund, partly to stabilise revenue and expenditure flows, but much will depend upon the readiness to make real reforms to effective use of revenue, tackling rampant corruption and empowering households and businesses to access markets, services and develop a more buoyant economy, with lower costs, especially for small to medium-sized enterprises. Economic 'development' based on the extractive industries also carries difficult consequences for local communities. One major project conducted through the PNG Department for Community Development suggested that other pathways to sustainable development should be considered.\nThe Institute of National Affairs, a PNG independent policy think tank, provides a report on the business and investment environment of Papua New Guinea every five years, based upon a survey of large and small, local and overseas companies, highlighting law and order problems and corruption, as the worst impediments, followed by the poor state of transport, power and communications infrastructure.\nStatistics.\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n\"lowest 10%:\"\n4.3%\n\"highest 10%:\"\n36% (2008)\nLabour force:\n2.078 million\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n2,200 GWh (2008)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n67.78%\n\"hydro:\"\n32.22%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n0% (2008)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n2,000 GWh (2008)\nElectricity exports:\n10 kWh (2008)\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (2008)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncoffee, cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, tea, rubber, sweet potatoes, fruit, vegetables; poultry, pork, vanilla\nCurrency:\n1 kina (K) = 100 toea\nExchange rates:\nkina (K) per US$1 \u2013 3.14 (April 2016), 2.7624 (November 1999), 2.520 (1999), 2.058 (1998), 1.434 (1997), 1.318 (1996), 1.276 (1995)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text taken from http://, 535\u2013555, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing. "}
{"id": "57024", "revid": "22841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57024", "title": "Kingstown, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines", "text": ""}
{"id": "57025", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57025", "title": "Libreville, Gabon", "text": ""}
{"id": "57026", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57026", "title": "Economy of Niue", "text": "The economy of Niue is heavily dependent upon aid from New Zealand. Government expenditures regularly exceed revenues, and grants from New Zealand make up the shortfall and are used to pay wages to public employees. Niue has cut government expenditures by reducing the public service by almost half.\nLocal economic activity.\nThe agricultural sector consists mainly of subsistence gardening, although some cash crops are grown for export. Industry consists primarily of small factories to process passion fruit, lime oil, honey, and coconut cream. The sale of postage stamps to foreign collectors has historically been an important source of revenue.\nThe island in recent years has suffered a serious loss of population because of migration of Niueans to New Zealand. Efforts to increase GDP include the promotion of tourism. An initiative into the financial services industry was dropped under pressure from the US Treasury. More recently the sale of Internet domain names under the NU top level domain has brought in some income. These domains are particularly popular in Scandinavia, Belgium and the Netherlands, since \"nu\" means \"now\" in Dutch and the Scandinavian languages.\nEconomic statistics.\nGDP: USD$24.938 million (2016)\nGDP:\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $10 million (2003),\nGDP \u2013 real growth rate:\n6.2% (2003 est.)\nGDP \u2013 per capita:\nnominal - USD$15,586 (2016)\npurchasing power parity \u2013 $5,800 (2003), $15,066 (2011)\nGDP \u2013 composition by sector:\n&lt;br&gt;\"agriculture:\"\n23% (2003) \n&lt;br&gt;\"industry:\"\n27% (2003) \n&lt;br&gt;\"services:\"\n50% (2003) \nPopulation below poverty line:\n13%\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\n&lt;br&gt;\"lowest 10%:\"\nNA%\n&lt;br&gt;\"highest 10%:\"\nNA%\nInflation rate (consumer prices):\n1% (1995)\nLabor force:\n450 (1992 est.) 663 (2001 est.)\nLabor force \u2013 by occupation:\nMost people work on family plantations; paid work exists only in government service, small industry, and on the Niue Development Board\nUnemployment rate:\n12% (2001) \nBudget:\n&lt;br&gt;\"revenues:\"\n$15.07 million (FY 04-05)\n$26 million (FY 18-19)&lt;br&gt;\"expenditures:\"\n$16.33 million\nIndustries:\ntourism, handicrafts, food processing\nIndustrial production growth rate:\nNA%\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n3 GWh (1998)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\n&lt;br&gt;\"fossil fuel:\"\n100%\n&lt;br&gt;\"hydro:\"\n0% (2010)\n&lt;br&gt;\"nuclear:\"\n0% (2010)\n&lt;br&gt;\"other:\"\n0% (1998)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n3 GWh (1998)\nElectricity \u2013 exports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncoconuts, passion fruit, honey, limes, taro, yams, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, poultry, beef cattle\nExports:\n$3.52 million 2014, USD$1.391 million (2016)\nExports \u2013 commodities:\ncanned coconut cream, copra, honey, passion fruit products, pawpaws, root crops, limes, footballs, stamps, handicrafts\nIn 2014:\nExports \u2013 partners:\nNew Zealand 89%, Fiji, Cook Islands, Australia.\nIn 2014:\nImports:\n$9 million (2003), $19 million (2014), USD$14.95 million (2016), NZD$21.5 million (2018)\nImports \u2013 commodities:\nfood, live animals, manufactured goods, machinery, fuels, lubricants, chemicals, drugs\nIn 2014: Special Purpose Ships ($5.48M), Refined Petroleum ($2.93M), Large Construction Vehicles ($403k), Prefabricated Buildings ($402k) and Cars ($312k).\nImports \u2013 partners:\nNew Zealand 59%, Fiji 20%, Japan 13%, Samoa, Australia, United States\nIn 2014:\nDebt \u2013 external:\n$NA\nEconomic aid \u2013 recipient:\n$8.3 million (1995), $5.7 million (FY 08-09)\nCurrency:\n1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents\nExchange rates:\nNew Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 \u2013 1.9451 (January 2000), 1.8889 (1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5082 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995)\nFiscal year:\n1 April \u2013 31 March\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57027", "revid": "47126202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57027", "title": "Fitts's law", "text": "Predictive model of human movement\nFitts's law (often cited as Fitts' law) is a predictive model of human movement primarily used in human\u2013computer interaction and ergonomics. The law predicts that the time required to rapidly move to a target area is a function of the ratio between the distance to the target and the width of the target. Fitts's law is used to model the act of \"pointing\", either by physically touching an object with a hand or finger, or virtually, by pointing to an object on a computer monitor using a pointing device. It was initially developed by Paul Fitts.\nFitts's law has been shown to apply under a variety of conditions; with many different limbs (hands, feet, the lower lip, head-mounted sights), manipulanda (input devices), physical environments (including underwater), and user populations (young, old, special educational needs, and drugged participants).\nOriginal model formulation.\nThe original 1954 paper by Paul Morris Fitts proposed a metric to quantify the difficulty of a target selection task.\nThe metric was based on an information analogy, where the distance to the center of the target (\"D\") is like a signal and the tolerance or width of the target (\"W\") is like noise.\nThe metric is Fitts's \"index of difficulty\" (\"ID\", in bits):\nformula_1\nFitts also proposed an \"index of performance\" (\"IP\", in bits per second) as a measure of human performance. The metric combines a task's index of difficulty (\"ID\") with the movement time (\"MT\", in seconds) in selecting the target. In Fitts's words,\n\"The average rate of information generated by a series of movements is the average information per movement divided by the time per movement.\" Thus,\nformula_2\nToday, \"IP\" is more commonly called \"throughput\" (\"TP\"). It is also common to include an adjustment for accuracy in the calculation.\nResearchers after Fitts began the practice of building linear regression equations and examining the correlation (\"r\") for goodness of fit. The equation expresses the relationship between\n\"MT\" and the \"D\" and \"W\" task parameters:\nformula_3\nwhere:\nSince shorter movement times are desirable for a given task, the value of the \"b\" parameter can be used as a metric when comparing computer pointing devices against one another. The first human\u2013computer interface application of Fitts's law was by Card, English, and Burr, who used the index of performance (\"IP\"), interpreted as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044\"b\", to compare performance of different input devices, with the mouse coming out on top compared to the joystick or directional movement keys. This early work, according to Stuart Card's biography, \"was a major factor leading to the mouse's commercial introduction by Xerox\".\nMany experiments testing Fitts's law apply the model to a dataset in which either distance or width, but not both, are varied. The model's predictive power deteriorates when both are varied over a significant range. Notice that because the \"ID\" term depends only on the \"ratio\" of distance to width, the model implies that a target distance and width combination can be re-scaled arbitrarily without affecting movement time, which is impossible. Despite its flaws, this form of the model does possess remarkable predictive power across a range of computer interface modalities and motor tasks, and has provided many insights into user interface design principles.\nMovement.\nA movement during a single Fitts's law task can be split into two phases:\nThe first phase is defined by the distance to the target. In this phase the distance can be closed quickly while still being imprecise. The second movement tries to perform a slow and controlled precise movement to actually hit the target.\nThe task duration scales linearly in regards to difficulty. But as different tasks can have the same difficulty, it is derived that distance has a greater impact on the overall task completion time than target size.\nOften it is cited that Fitts's law can be applied to eye tracking. This seems to be at least a controversial topic as Drewes showed. During fast saccadic eye movements the user is blind. During a Fitts's law task the user consciously acquires its target and can actually see it, making these two types of interaction not comparable.\nBits per second: model innovations driven by information theory.\nThe formulation of Fitts's index of difficulty most frequently used in the human\u2013computer interaction community is called the Shannon formulation:\nformula_4\nThis form was proposed by Scott MacKenzie, professor at York University, and named for its resemblance to the Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem. It describes the transmission of information using bandwidth, signal strength and noise. In Fitts's law, the distance represents signal strength, while target width is noise.\nUsing this form of the model, the difficulty of a pointing task was equated to a quantity of information transmitted (in units of bits) by performing the task. This was justified by the assertion that pointing reduces to an information processing task. Although no formal mathematical connection was established between Fitts's law and the Shannon-Hartley theorem it was inspired by, the Shannon form of the law has been used extensively, likely due to the appeal of quantifying motor actions using information theory. In 2002 the ISO 9241 was published, providing standards for human\u2013computer interface testing, including the use of the Shannon form of Fitts's law. It has been shown that the information transmitted via serial keystrokes on a keyboard and the information implied by the \"ID\" for such a task are not consistent. The Shannon-Entropy results in a different information value than Fitts's law. The authors note, though, that the error is negligible and only has to be accounted for in comparisons of devices with known entropy or measurements of human information processing capabilities.\nAdjustment for accuracy: use of the effective target width.\nAn important improvement to Fitts's law was proposed by Crossman in 1956 (see Welford, 1968, pp.\u00a0147\u2013148) and used by Fitts\nin his 1964 paper with Peterson. With the adjustment, target width (\"W\") is replaced by an effective target width (\"W\"e).\n\"W\"e is computed from the standard deviation in the selection coordinates gathered over a sequence of trials for a particular \"D-W\" condition. If the selections are logged as \"x\" coordinates along the axis of approach to the target, then\nformula_5\nThis yields\nformula_6\nand hence\nformula_7\nIf the selection coordinates are normally distributed, \"W\"e spans 96% of the distribution. If the observed error rate was 4% in the sequence of trials, then \"W\"e = \"W\". If the error rate was greater than 4%, \"W\"e &gt; \"W\", and if the error rate was less than 4%, \"W\"e &lt; \"W\". By using \"W\"e, a Fitts' law model more closely reflects what users actually did, rather than what they were asked to do.\nThe main advantage in computing \"IP\" as above is that spatial variability, or accuracy, is included in the measurement. With the adjustment for accuracy, Fitts's law more truly encompasses the speed-accuracy tradeoff. The equations above appear in ISO 9241-9 as the recommended method of computing \"throughput\".\nWelford's model: innovations driven by predictive power.\nNot long after the original model was proposed, a 2-factor variation was proposed under the intuition that target distance and width have separate effects on movement time. Welford's model, proposed in 1968, separated the influence of target distance and width into separate terms, and provided improved predictive power:\nformula_8\nThis model has an additional parameter, so its predictive accuracy cannot be directly compared with 1-factor forms of Fitts's law. However, a variation on Welford's model inspired by the Shannon formulation,\nformula_9\nThe additional parameter \"k\" allows the introduction of angles into the model. Now the users position can be accounted for. The influence of the angle can be weighted using the exponent. This addition was introduced by Kopper et al. in 2010.\nThe formula reduces to the Shannon form when \"k = 1\". Therefore, this model \"can\" be directly compared against the Shannon form of Fitts's law using the F-test of nested models. This comparison reveals that not only does the Shannon form of Welford's model better predict movement times, but it is also more robust when control-display gain (the ratio between e.g. hand movement and cursor movement) is varied. Consequently, although the Shannon model is slightly more complex and less intuitive, it is empirically the best model to use for virtual pointing tasks.\nExtending the model from 1D to 2D and other nuances.\nExtensions to two or more dimensions.\nIn its original form, Fitts's law is meant to apply only to one-dimensional tasks. However, the original experiments required subjects to move a stylus (in three dimensions) between two metal plates on a table, termed the reciprocal tapping task. The target width perpendicular to the direction of movement was very wide to avoid it having a significant influence on performance. A major application for Fitts's law is 2D virtual pointing tasks on computer screens, in which targets have bounded sizes in both dimensions.\nFitts's law has been extended to two-dimensional tasks in two different ways. For navigating e.g. hierarchical pull-down menus, the user must generate a trajectory with the pointing device that is constrained by the menu geometry; for this application the Accot-Zhai steering law was derived.\nFor simply pointing to targets in a two-dimensional space, the model generally holds as-is but requires adjustments to capture target geometry and quantify targeting errors in a logically consistent way.\nMultiple Methods have been used to determine the target size\u00a0:\nWhile the \"W\"-model is sometimes considered the state-of-the-art measurement, the truly correct representation for non-circular targets is substantially more complex, as it requires computing the angle-specific convolution between the trajectory of the pointing device and the target \nCharacterizing performance.\nSince the \"a\" and \"b\" parameters should capture movement times over a potentially wide range of task geometries, they can serve as a performance metric for a given interface. In doing so, it is necessary to separate variation between users from variation between interfaces. \nThe \"a\" parameter is typically positive and close to zero, and sometimes ignored in characterizing average performance, as in Fitts' original experiment. Multiple methods exist for identifying parameters from experimental data, and the choice of method is the subject of heated debate, since method variation can result in parameter differences that overwhelm underlying performance differences.\nAn additional issue in characterizing performance is incorporating success rate: an aggressive user can achieve shorter movement times at the cost of experimental trials in which the target is missed. If the latter are not incorporated into the model, then average movement times can be artificially decreased.\nTemporal targets.\nFitts's law deals only with targets defined in space. However, a target can be defined purely on the time axis, which is called a temporal target. A blinking target or a target moving toward a selection area are examples of temporal targets. Similar to space, the distance to the target (i.e., temporal distance \"D\"t) and the width of the target (i.e., temporal width \"W\"t) can be defined for temporal targets as well. The temporal distance is the amount of time a person must wait for a target to appear. The temporal width is a short duration from the moment the target appears until it disappears. For example, for a blinking target, \"D\"t can be thought of as the period of blinking and \"W\"t as the duration of the blinking. As with targets in space, the larger the \"D\"t or the smaller the \"W\"t, the more difficult it becomes to select the target.\nThe task of selecting the temporal target is called \"temporal pointing\". The model for temporal pointing was first presented to the human\u2013computer interaction field in 2016. The model predicts the error rate, the human performance in temporal pointing, as a function of temporal index of difficulty (\"ID\"t):\nformula_10\nImplications for UI design.\nMultiple design guidelines for GUIs can be derived from the implications of Fitts's law. In its basic form, Fitts's law says that targets a user has to hit should be as big as possible. This is derived from the \"W\" parameter. More specifically, the effective size of the button should be as big as possible, meaning that its form has to be optimized for the direction of the user's movement onto the target.\nLayouts should also cluster functions that are commonly used with each other. Optimizing for the \"D\" parameter in this way allows for smaller travel times.\nPlacing layout elements on the four edges of the screen allows for infinitely large targets in one dimension and therefore presents ideal scenarios. Since the pointer will always stop at the edge, the user can move the mouse with the greatest possible speed and still hit the target. The target area is effectively infinitely long along the movement axis. Therefore, this guideline is called \u201cRule of the infinite edges\u201d. The use of this rule can be seen for example in MacOS, which always places the menu bar on the top left edge of the screen instead of the current program's windowframe.\nThis effect can be exaggerated at the four corners of a screen. At these points two edges collide and form a theoretically infinitely big button. Microsoft Windows (prior to Windows 11) places its \"Start\" button in the lower left corner and Microsoft Office 2007 uses the upper left corner for its \"Office\" menu. These four spots are sometimes called \"magic corners\".\nMacOS places the close button on the upper left side of the program window and the menu bar fills out the magic corner with another button.\nA UI that allows for pop-up menus rather than fixed drop-down menus reduces travel times for the \"D\" parameter. The user can continue interaction right from the current mouse position and doesn't have to move to a different preset area. Many operating systems use this when displaying right-click context menus. As the menu starts right on the pixel which the user clicked, this pixel is referred to as the \"magic\" or \"prime pixel\".\nJames Boritz et al. (1991) compared radial menu designs. In a radial menu all items have the same distance from the prime pixel. The research suggests that in practical implementations the direction in which a user has to move their mouse has also to be accounted for. For right-handed users, selecting the left-most menu item was significantly more difficult than the right-most one. No differences were found for transitions from upper to lower functions and vice versa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57028", "revid": "14896122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57028", "title": "Libreville", "text": "Capital and largest city of Gabon\nLibreville (; ) is the capital and largest city of Gabon, located on the Gabon Estuary. Libreville occupies of the northwestern province of Estuaire. Libreville is also a port on the Gabon Estuary, near the Gulf of Guinea. As of the 2013 census, its population was 703,904.\nThe area has been inhabited by the Mpongwe people since before the French acquired the land in 1839. It was later an American Christian mission, and a slave resettlement site, before becoming the chief port of the colony of French Equatorial Africa. By the time of Gabonese independence in 1960, the city was a trading post and minor administrative centre with a population of 32,000. Since 1960, Libreville has grown rapidly and now is home to one-third of the national population.\nHistory.\nVarious native peoples lived in or used the area that is now Libreville before colonization, including the Mpongw\u00e9 tribe. French admiral \u00c9douard Bou\u00ebt-Willaumez negotiated a trade and protection treaty with the local Mpongw\u00e9 ruler, Antchou\u00e9 Kom\u00e9 Rapontcombo (known to the French as King Denis), in 1839.\nAmerican missionaries from New England established a mission in Baraka, Gabon, on what is now Libreville, in 1842. In 1846, the Brazilian slave ship \"L'Elizia\", carrying slaves from the Congo, was captured near Loango by the French navy which was tasked with contributing to the British Blockade of Africa. Fifty-two of the freed slaves were resettled on the site of Libreville (French for \"Freetown\") in 1849. Following the French Revolution of 1848 and establishment of the French Second Republic, the former slaves organized an election to select leaders of the new village in 1849. A former slave named Mountier was elected Mayor of Libreville. Libreville was the administrative capital of France's Congo-Gabon colony between 1888 and 1904, when the capital moved to Brazzaville.\nIn 1910, Gabon became part of French Equatorial Africa (\"Afrique \u00e9quatoriale fran\u00e7aise\", AEF). French companies were allowed to exploit the Middle Congo (modern-day Congo-Brazzaville). It soon became necessary to build a railroad that would connect Brazzaville, the terminus of the river navigation on the Congo River and the Ubangi River, with the Atlantic coast. As rapids make it impossible to navigate on the Congo River past Brazzaville, and the coastal railroad terminus site had to allow for the construction of a deep-sea port, authorities chose the site of Ponta Negra instead of Libreville as originally envisaged. Construction of the Congo\u2013Ocean Railway began in 1921, and Libreville was surpassed by the rapid growth of Pointe-Noire, farther down the coast. Libreville received its first bank branch when Paris-based Banque de l'Afrique Occidentale opened a branch in 1930. In 1940, Libreville was the central focus of the Battle of Gabon as Charles de Gaulle's Free French forces, supported by the Royal Navy, moved to consolidate control over French Equatorial Africa.\nWith national independence on the horizon, L\u00e9on M'ba won Libreville's first free mayoral election in 1956. Mba was later the first president of independent Gabon. The city's population was only 32,000 at independence, but grew rapidly thereafter. It now houses one-third of the national population.\nGeography.\nFrom north to south, major districts of the city are the residential area Batterie IV, Quartier Louis (known for its nightlife), Mont-Bou\u00ebt and Nombak\u00e9l\u00e9 (busy commercial areas), Glass (the first European settlement in Gabon), Oloumi (a major industrial area) and Lalala, a residential area. The city's port and train station on the Trans-Gabon Railway line to Franceville lie in Owendo, south of the main built-up area. Inland from these districts lie poorer residential areas. North-west of Equatorial Guinea is where the city stands, labeling the city as a part of north-west Gabon. In terms of the country's surrounding boundaries, north is Cameroon, east is Congo, and south-east is the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also rides the shores of the South Atlantic Ocean, which is on the country's west coast for reference. Additionally, in terms of aquatic geography, the Komo River passes through the city and empties into the ocean. The Komo River also stands as a potential hydroelectric source of power for the city which could generate supportive amounts of energy and power. Several city districts provide distinct and separate benefits throughout the city as well. In terms of nightlife, the Quartier Louis sector is most renowned. One of this zone's sides includes the coast, and this heavily influences the possible activities available in the area. Commercial areas within Libreville are housed in the Mont-Bou\u00ebt and Nombak\u00e9l\u00e9 districts, which feature several shopping centers and stations selling purchasable goods. Oloumi contains much of the city's industry, integrating production separately from the districts that focus upon other aspects. Finally, Lalala and Batterie IV are residential and housing sectors, where much of the populace resides.\nClimate.\nLibreville features a tropical monsoon climate (Am) with a lengthy wet season and a short dry season. The city's wet season, which is also its autumn, winter and spring, spans about nine months (September through May), with a great deal of rain falling during these months. Its dry season (or summer) lasts from June through August, and is caused by the cold Benguela Current reaching its northernmost extent and suppressing rainfall. Despite the lack of rain, Libreville remains very cloudy during this time of year.\nAs is common with many cities with this climate, average temperatures remain relatively constant throughout the course of the year, with average high temperatures at around .\nTransport.\nL\u00e9on-Mba International Airport is the largest airport in Gabon and is located around north of the city.\nNational Taxis operate around the city. Each district has a colour for its taxis and Libreville's is red.\nThe National Society of Transport (SOGATRA) launched new taxis that operate on a counter system in 2014.\nThe Gabonese Transport Company operates a bus service to all districts of Libreville.\nEducation.\nThe Omar Bongo University was founded in 1970.\nThere are several high-end international schools in Libreville, including:\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples: Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Libreville (Catholic Church), \u00c9glise de l'Alliance chr\u00e9tienne et missionnaire du Gabon (Alliance World Fellowship), Assemblies of God, Evangelical Church of Gabon. There are also Muslim mosques.\nLanguages.\nLibreville is one of several African cities where French is truly becoming a native language, with some local features.\nEconomy.\nThe city is home to a shipbuilding industry, brewing industry, and sawmills. The city exports raw materials such as wood, rubber and cocoa from the city's main port, and the deepwater port at Owendo.\nGabon Airlines has its headquarters in Libreville. Prior to their dissolutions, both Air Gabon and Gabon Express were headquartered on the grounds of Libreville International Airport.\nThe French Army's 6th Marine Infantry Battalion is based in the north of the city.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57029", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57029", "title": "Lilongwe, Malawi", "text": ""}
{"id": "57030", "revid": "152145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57030", "title": "Lilongwe", "text": "Capital city and largest city of Malawi\nLilongwe (, ,) is the capital and largest city of Malawi. It has a population of 989,318 as of the 2018 Census, up from a population of 674,448 in 2008. In 2020, that figure was 1,122,000. The city is located in the central region of Malawi, in the district of the same name, near the borders with Mozambique and Zambia, and it is an important economic and transportation hub for central Malawi. It is named after the Lilongwe River.\nHistory.\nLilongwe was first set up as a boma by the local leader Njewa around 1902, and later became an administrative centre in 1904. In the 1920s, its location at the junction of several major roadways increased its importance as an agricultural market centre for the fertile Central Region Plateau.\nAs a trading post, Lilongwe was officially recognized as a town in 1947. After gaining independence, it increasingly developed into an important trading centre in Malawi's central region.\nIn 1965, Malawi's first president, Hastings Kamuzu Banda, selected it as an economic growth point for northern and central Malawi.\nLilongwe became the capital of Malawi in 1975, replacing the previous capital, Zomba. The last government offices were relocated to Lilongwe in 2005.\nDevelopment projects of the 1970s and 1980s included the construction of Lilongwe International Airport, which serves the city; rail connections to Salima to the east and the Zambian border to the west; industrial areas in the northern part of the city; and an agricultural program for the fertile tobacco lands of the Central Region Plateau. Lilongwe's population continues to experience rapid growth.\nThe city's population is increasing rapidly, with an annual growth rate of 4.3%.\nPlanning history.\nThe first plan for Lilongwe was published in 1955, before the decision was made in 1965 to move the capital from Zomba to Lilongwe. The aims of the move were to improve Government efficiency by concentrating Central Government administration in one city and to stimulate development in the Central and Northern Regions by establishing a major growth point in the centre of the country. Consultants were appointed to prepare the Lilongwe Master Plan, which was completed in 1968. Many of the principles set out in the Master Plan were adopted in subsequent plans. The first of these was the Lilongwe Outline Zoning Plan 1969. It was prepared in order to elaborate the broad recommendations of the Master Plan and amend those aspects which the Government thought were inappropriate.\nThe Lilongwe Outline Zoning plan guided the early development of the capital city. A liner, multi-centred urban form was adopted in order to avoid the congestion problems that can arise with a single centre. The aim was to cluster residential, employment, and service areas around each centre, so as to reduce the need to travel long distances. There were four such centres, and each one was the focus of a sector of the city.\n (a) Old Town Primary Commercial Centre, comprising the twin established centres in Area 2 (Bwalonjobvu) and Area 3 (Kang'ombe)\n (b) City Centre, serving the Capital Hill sector\n (c) Kanengo Primary Commercial Centre in Area 25/2 (Bvunguti)\n (d) Lumbadzi Primary Commercial Centre, based on the established trading centre in Area 53/2 (Kalimbakatha).\nThe aim was to achieve balanced development of housing, industry and commerce, among other features. Another key feature of the city was its parkland setting. From the beginning there was a concern to create a high-quality environment with spacious living standards, as befits a capital city.\nBy the mid-1970s, it was felt that there should be a new, up-dated plan which would take a wider look at the development of the city. The result was the Lilongwe Urban Structure Plan of 1978. This incorporated boundary changes and new planning work on Lumbadzi and the Kamuzu International Airport. The plan was the principal influence on planning policy.\nThe initial stage of development was completed in 1986. The city was well established and its future growth was assured. A large part of the road network had been built and there were water supply and electricity networks. Urban development was taking place in all four sectors of the city. The Old Town sector was nearly fully developed; the Capital Hill sector was about half developed; and the Kanengo and Lumbadzi sectors were about one quarter developed.\nThe Lilongwe Outline Zoning Scheme was established and indicated the various land uses of the new capital city. The scheme was reviewed and the area of the city proper was expanded by including Area 56 and Area 57. Then Area 58 was added to the jurisdiction of the city according to the 2008 Population and Housing Census. The 1986 Outline Zoning Scheme was intended to promote regulated urban development and appropriate land use for transport and other purposes. The Scheme was effective until 2000, but it was not updated after the year 2000 due to financial, technical and human resource constraints.\nIn response to the official request of the Government of Malawi (GoM), the Government of Japan (GoJ) decided to conduct a \"Study of Urban Development Master Plan for Lilongwe\", which was entrusted to the Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA), in accordance with the Agreement on Technical Co-operation between the GoM and the GoJ, signed on 15 November 2008. The study was jointly carried out by a JICA study team and Malawi's counterpart agency for a fourteen-month period from June 2009 to September 2010. On 20 July 2011, the report on the Study of Urban Development Master Plan for Lilongwe City was approved by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.\nThe Project for Urban Plan and Development Management of Lilongwe City has been in the process of implementation since November 2012, with support from JICA. JICA experts assisted Lilongwe City Council with revisions of the Urban Structure Plan.\nThe jurisdiction area of Lilongwe City, including Area 58, is 393\u00a0km2 and has a population of approximately 989,318 according to the 2018 Population and Housing Census. Despite the fact that the existing outline zoning scheme was planned to develop the four sectors of (1) Old Town Sector, (2) Capital Hill Sector, (3) Kanengo Sector and (4) Lumbadzi Sector, the urban area has been expanding to the southern, south-western and western areas of the old town section of the city. Unplanned settlements occupied by illegal settlers have expanded in almost all areas. Some areas have problems of illegal settlers occupying land designated for industrial development and public use. It is necessary to urgently identify and secure a sizeable land area for planned residential development.\nPolitics.\nLocal government.\nLilongwe is governed by Lilongwe City Council, which is dominated by the Malawi Congress Party.\nParliament.\nThe Malawian parliament is in Lilongwe.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical population.\nThe population of Lilongwe City has grown from under 20,000 people in 1966 to nearly a million people in 2018. This was remarkably fast growth and has caused the development of slums around the city.\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the 2018 census, 42.28% of Lilongwe City were Chewa who made up the largest ethnic group. The largest ethnic minority group in the city was the Ngoni, comprising 17.13% of the population. Other minor ethnic groups were Lomwe with 14.48% of the population, Yao with 12.11%, Tumbuka with 6.46%, Mang'anja with 1.86%, Sena with 1.78%, Tonga with 1.56%, Nyanja with 0.67%, Nkhonde with 0.63%, Lambya with 0.35%, Sukwa with only 0.04%, and various other ethnic groups comprising 0.64% of the population.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe largest religious denomination in Lilongwe City is the Church of Central Africa Presbyterian with 23.15%. The largest minority religion in the city is Catholicism with 17.28%. Other minority religions include Seventh-day Adventist, Baptist, and Apostolic with 10.35% combined, Pentecostal with 8.6%, Anglican with 2.31%, other Christian denominations with 21.67%, Islam with 11.12%, Traditional with 0.34%, other religions with 3.38%, and no religion with 1.73% of the population.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nLilongwe is located on a plateau in Central Malawi, forming part of the East African Rift Valley situated at an altitude of 1,050\u00a0m (3,440\u00a0ft) above sea level, along Lilongwe River.\nDivisions.\nLilongwe is divided into a New and Old City. The former hosts hotels, embassies, governmental institutions, and offices while the latter has markets, bus stations, cafes and restaurants. The modern shops of the city are contrasted by the street and walled markets of Old Town.\nResidential.\nThere is a whole area for low density residential area in Area 12. There are some areas in Area 3, 9, 10, 11, 38, 42, 43, 45, 59 and 61 in 2030.\nThere is a whole area for medium density residential area in Area 15. There are some areas in Area 2, 6, 14, 41, 43, 47, 52, 54, 55 and 58 in 2030.\nThe areas which are mostly for high-density housing are 7, 18 and 21. There are some areas in Area 1, 8, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 36, 38, 39, 43, 46, 47, 49, 50, 53, 58 and 61 in 2030.\nThe area which is mostly for high-rise flats is 17. There are some areas in Area 3, 9, 26, 33, 37, 42 and 52 in 2030.\nThe areas which are mostly for \"Quasi-Residential\" buildings are 36, 50, 56 and 57(Chinsapo). There are some areas in Area 1, 22, 23, 24, 25, 35, 38, 43, 44, 49, 51, 53, 58, 59, 60, 61 and 62 in 2030. 10.2 Commercial Land Use\nCommercial.\nThe category of \"Commercial\" was the sole classification applied to commercial land use in the 1986 Zoning Scheme. In order to achieve compact land use and to make the city centre more efficient and attractive, the Master Plan has added another category called \"High-Rise Commercial\", where multi-story buildings are concentrated. This zoning category shall be applied to the city centre area.\nThe land use of the Old Town shall be regulated as commercial. The adherence to compact land use allows both commercial and high-rise commercial areas to be mixed up with residential areas. Industrial land use should be, in general, separated from the commercial area in the central part.\nAreas for this category of development include Area 4, 5 and part of Area 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 11, 14, 22, 27, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 43, 46, 47, 49, 50, 52, 53,54, 58, 60 and 61 in 2030.\nAreas designated for high-rise commercial use include Area 13, 16,19 and parts of Area 31, 32 and 42 in 2030. 10.3 Industrial Land Use\nIndustrial.\nThe term \"industrial\" used to be the only category of industrial land use in the 1986 Zoning Scheme. In view of upgrading and diversification of industries, industrial land use shall be classified into two categories. One is \"heavy/large-scale industries\" located in the Kanengo area. The other is \"light industries\".\nThere are the whole areas for heavy/large\u2013scale industrial area in Area 28 and 29. There are some areas in Area 26, 27, 39, 50, 51 and 52 in 2030.\nThere are some areas for light industrial areas in Area 38, 46, 47, 49, 60 and 61 in 2030.\nGovernment use.\nGovernment institutions use sizable land. For instance, the land area of the State House in Area 44 accounts for approximately 555 ha. The Capital Hill is a complex of national governmental institutions. It substantially occupies a large size of land in Area 20. Meanwhile, the police headquarters is located in Area 30. The Master Plan accorded a specific category to such land where governmental institutions are concentrated in the future. This is primarily because development and building control is easily applied to such a specific zoning. Nevertheless, Area 35 where the military base and logistics are concentrated should be limited to military activity land use.\nThe following areas have been reserved for government use areas in Area 40. Government land takes much of the land in Area 30, 35 and parts of Area 3, 20, 31 and 44 in 2030.\nOpen Space/Greenery Land.\nOpen Space/Greenery Land use for open space and greenery comprise the following five sub-categories 1) Natural Sanctuary, 2) Park and Recreation, 3) Greenery / Natural Open Space, 4) Agriculture and 5) Forestry. Lilongwe City boasts the existence of a Natural Sanctuary in the very centre of the city. This should be preserved and maintained for future generations.\nUrban spatial development.\nBased on the results of the land use study, actual urbanization has not resulted in an even and independent growth of the four sector areas: i) Lumbadzi, ii)Kanengo, iii) Capital Hill, and iv) Old Town. On the contrary, the city's growth has been concentrated in two big economic centres (the Old Town and the City Centre). The urban expansion axis is now extending to the south, southeast, southwest and to the west since most residential areas are closely linked to the economic centres. With reference to the future urban structure for Lilongwe City, the Cluster Shape Development was adopted as alternative of Urban Spatial Development. In recent years, the cluster shape development is popular among urban planners in the world because it is suitable pattern for delineation of area on the selective development purpose and prevention of endless and indiscriminate extension of conurbation.\nHouse numbering and suburbs.\nAreas.\nThe city of Lilongwe is divided into areas which are assigned a number. The numbers are assigned chronologically, not geographically, so Area 1 would be the first area, Area 2 the second and so on. The built-up area in Lilongwe City forms an oval shape centring on the Old Town and the City Centre.\nLilongwe City is composed of Areas 1\u201358. The 2008 census had already included Area 58 as part of Lilongwe City, converting it from the previous Lilongwe District. Housing development and urban sprawl are very active in Lilongwe City and particularly in the southern region. Urban expansion axis is now extending mainly to southeast, and to the west to a limited degree. In fact, urban sprawl is already expanding beyond some of the southern borderlines (Area 36, 38, 46, 56, 57 and 58).\nClimate.\nLilongwe features a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cwa) that borders on a subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cwb), with pleasantly warm summers and mild winters. Due to the altitude, temperatures are lower than would be expected for a city located in the tropics. Lilongwe features a short monsoon season that runs from December to March, a lengthy dry winter that covers April to August, and a warm summer that lasts from September to November. However, the city sees heavy downpours during the monsoon, seeing around of rain in a month during the wettest months.\nEconomy.\nWhile Blantyre is the commercial Capital of Malawi, Lilongwe's economy is dominated by the government and public institutions. Kanengo, in the north of the city, is the main industrial area, where food processing, tobacco storage and sales, maize storage, and other activities related to light industry take place. Finance, banking, retail trade, construction, transport, public administration, tourism, and tobacco manufacturing are the main economic activities in the city.\n76 percent of Lilongwe's population live in informal settlements, while poverty stands at 25 percent and unemployment at 16 percent.\nThe civil service employs about 27 percent of all formal workers, while 40 percent work in the private sector and 2 percent are self-employed.\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nKamuzu International Airport (LLW) is located to the north of the city, approximately 7 kilometers from the City Centre (Central Business District). Kamuzu International Airport is the country's oldest airport.\nBuses.\nThere are regular bus services from Lilongwe to Blantyre, Zomba, Kasungu and Mzuzu. International buses to South Africa, Zambia and Tanzania are available daily.\nPrimary road network comprises north\u2013south axis (M1), inner ring road, outer ring road, Nacala corridor (part of the western bypass), radial roads and the Kamuzu International Airport (KIA) access road. The inner ring road connects with M1 and other main roads serving the high accumulated commercial/administration areas in the central business districts (CBD). The outer ring road serves industry-related traffic and avoids passing through the main built-up area of the city., but there has been tremendous improvements in the city's road network throughout the city in the resent years through road development that is shaping the city's outlook and an improved road transportation.\nRail.\nThere is a rail service to Lilongwe. To the west the Sena railway line runs towards Zambia, and to the east the Sena railway line runs to Salima.\nEducation.\nThe University of Malawi was founded in 1964.\nThere are 38 private (Bedir Star International School, Bishop Mackenzie International school etc.) and 66 public primary schools with a total of 103,602 pupils as well as 29 secondary schools with 30,795 students in Lilongwe.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples: Lutheran Church of Central Africa (Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference), Church of Central Africa Presbyterian (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Baptist Convention of Malawi (Baptist World Alliance), Assemblies of God, Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lilongwe (Catholic Church). There are also Muslim mosques.\nSport.\nA new national stadium with a capacity of 40,000 has been constructed with the help of a $70\u00a0million loan from the Government of the People's Republic of China. The stadium is called Bingu National Stadium which was officially opened early 2017. The other football stadiums include Silver Stadium (Area 47), Civo Stadium (Area 9) and Nankhaka Ground (Area 30). Big teams in Lilongwe are Silver Strikers, Civo Sporting, Blue Eagles and Kamuzu Barracks.\nBasketball is played at African Bible College, Civo Court, Don Bosco, and other private institutions. Other sporting disciplines in Lilongwe include Netball played at Gateway Mall, Don Bosco, Nankhaka and ABC. A new modern Sports complex just south of Bingu national stadium has also been officially opened and can host sports like Basketball, volleyball and netball, The sports complex is called Griffin Sayenda Sports complex. \nThere is also a Rugby Union competition based in the city, with multiple teams competing.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLilongwe is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57033", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57033", "title": "United states secret service", "text": ""}
{"id": "57034", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57034", "title": "68HC11", "text": ""}
{"id": "57035", "revid": "2320974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57035", "title": "Luxembourg City", "text": "Capital and largest city of Luxembourg\nLuxembourg (; ; ), also known as Luxembourg City ( or ; ; or ), is the capital city of Luxembourg and the country's most populous commune. Standing at the confluence of the Alzette and P\u00e9trusse rivers in southern Luxembourg, the city lies in the center of Western Europe, situated by road from Brussels and from Cologne. The city contains Luxembourg Castle, established by the Franks in the Early Middle Ages, around which a settlement developed.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], Luxembourg City has a population of 136,208 inhabitants, which is more than three times the population of the country's second most populous commune (Esch-sur-Alzette). The population consists of 160 nationalities. Foreigners represent 70.1% of the city's population, whilst Luxembourgers represent 29.9% of the population, making it the commune with the highest proportion of foreign residents in Luxembourg.\nIn 2024, Luxembourg was ranked by the IMF as having the highest GDP per capita in the world at $140,310 (PPP), with the city having developed into a banking and administrative centre. In the 2019 Mercer worldwide survey of 231 cities, Luxembourg was placed first for personal safety, while it was ranked 18th for quality of living.\nLuxembourg is one of the \"de facto\" capitals of the European Union (alongside Brussels, Frankfurt and Strasbourg), as it is the seat of several institutions, agencies and bodies, including the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Court of Auditors, the Secretariat of the European Parliament, the European Public Prosecutor's Office, the European Investment Bank, the European Investment Fund, the European Stability Mechanism, Eurostat, as well as other European Commission departments and services. The Council of the European Union meets in the city for three months annually.\nHistory.\nIn the Roman era, a fortified tower guarded the crossing of two Roman roads that met at the site of Luxembourg city. Through an exchange treaty with the abbey of Saint Maximin in Trier in 963, Siegfried I of the Ardennes, a close relative of King Louis II of France and Emperor Otto the Great, acquired the feudal lands of Luxembourg. Siegfried built his castle, named \"Lucilinburhuc\" (\"small castle\"), on the Bock \"Fiels\" (\"rock\"), mentioned for the first time in the aforementioned exchange treaty.\nIn 987, Archbishop Egbert of Trier consecrated five altars in the Church of the Redemption (today St. Michael's Church). At a Roman road intersection near the church, a marketplace appeared around which the city developed.\nThe city, because of its location and natural geography, has through history been a place of strategic military significance. The first fortifications were built as early as the 10th century. By the end of the 12th century, as the city expanded westward around the new St. Nicholas Church (today the Cathedral of Notre Dame), new walls were built that included an area of . In about 1340, under the reign of John the Blind, new fortifications were built that stood until 1867.\nIn 1443, the Burgundians under Philip the Good conquered Luxembourg. Luxembourg became part of the Burgundian, and later Spanish and Austrian empires (See Spanish Netherlands and Spanish Road) and under those Habsburg administrations Luxembourg Castle was repeatedly strengthened so that by the 16th century, Luxembourg itself was one of the strongest fortifications in Europe. Subsequently, the Burgundians, the Spanish, the French, the Spanish again, the Austrians, the French again, and the Prussians conquered Luxembourg.\nIn the 17th century, the first casemates were built; initially, Spain built of tunnels, starting in 1644. These were then enlarged under French rule by Marshal Vauban, and augmented again under Austrian rule in the 1730s and 1740s.\nDuring the French Revolutionary Wars, the city was occupied by France twice: once, briefly, in 1792\u201393, and, later, after a seven-month siege. Luxembourg held out for so long under the French siege that French politician and military engineer Lazare Carnot called Luxembourg \"the best fortress in the world, except Gibraltar\", giving rise to the city's nickname: the 'Gibraltar of the North'.\nNonetheless, the Austrian garrison eventually surrendered, and as a consequence, Luxembourg was annexed by the French Republic, becoming part of the d\u00e9partement of For\u00eats, with Luxembourg City as its pr\u00e9fecture. Under the 1815 Treaty of Paris, which ended the Napoleonic Wars, Luxembourg City was placed under Prussian military control as a part of the German Confederation, although sovereignty passed to the House of Orange-Nassau, in personal union with the United Kingdom of the Netherlands.\nAfter the Luxembourg Crisis, the 1867 Treaty of London required Luxembourg to dismantle the fortifications in Luxembourg City. Their demolition took sixteen years, cost 1.5 million gold francs, and required the destruction of over of underground defences and of casemates, batteries, barracks, etc. Furthermore, the Prussian garrison was to be withdrawn.\nWhen, in 1890, Grand Duke William III died without any male heirs, the Grand Duchy passed out of Dutch hands, and into an independent line under Grand Duke Adolphe. Thus, Luxembourg, which had hitherto been independent in theory only, became a truly independent country, and Luxembourg City regained some of the importance that it had lost in 1867 by becoming the capital of a fully independent state.\nDespite Luxembourg's best efforts to remain neutral in the First World War, it was occupied by Germany on 2 August 1914. On 30 August, Helmuth von Moltke moved his headquarters to Luxembourg City, closer to his armies in France in preparation for a swift victory. However, the victory never came, and Luxembourg would play host to the German high command for another four years. At the end of the occupation, Luxembourg City was the scene of an attempted communist revolution; on 9 November 1918, communists declared a socialist republic, but it lasted only a few hours.\nIn 1920 and 1921, the city limits were greatly expanded, with the communes of Eich, Hamm, Hollerich, and Rollingergrund all merging with Luxembourg City. Until then, the city proper had only had an area of ; the merger gave Luxembourg City a new area of , making the city the largest commune in the country (a position that it would hold until 1978).\nIn 1940, Germany occupied Luxembourg again. The Nazis were not prepared to allow Luxembourgers self-government, and gradually integrated Luxembourg into the Third Reich by informally attaching the country administratively to a neighbouring German province. Under the occupation, the capital city's streets all received new, German names, which was announced on 4 October 1940. The Avenue de la Libert\u00e9 for example, a major road leading to the railway station, was renamed \"Adolf-Hitlerstra\u00dfe\". Luxembourg City was liberated on 10 September 1944. The city was under long-range bombardment by the German V-3 cannon in December 1944 and January 1945.\nAfter the war, Luxembourg ended its neutrality, and became a founding member of several inter-governmental and supra-governmental institutions. In 1952, the city became the headquarters of the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community. In 1967, the High Authority was merged with the commissions of the other European institutions; although Luxembourg City was no longer the seat of the ECSC, it hosted some part-sessions of the European Parliament until 1981. Luxembourg remains the seat of the European Parliament's secretariat, as well as the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Court of Auditors, and the European Investment Bank. Several departments of the European Commission are also based in Luxembourg. The Council of the EU meets in the city for the months of April, June and October annually.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nLuxembourg City lies on the southern part of the Luxembourg plateau, a large Early Jurassic sandstone formation that forms the heart of the Gutland, a low-lying and flat area that covers the southern two-thirds of the country.\nThe city centre occupies a picturesque site on a salient, perched high on precipitous cliffs that drop into the narrow valleys of the Alzette and P\u00e9trusse rivers, whose confluence is in Luxembourg City. The deep gorges cut by the rivers are spanned by many bridges and viaducts, including the Adolphe Bridge, the Grand Duchess Charlotte Bridge, and the Passerelle. Although Luxembourg City is not particularly large, its layout is complex, as the city is set on several levels, straddling hills and dropping into the two gorges.\nThe commune of Luxembourg City covers an area of over , or 2% of the Grand Duchy's total area. This makes the city the fourth-largest commune in Luxembourg, and by far the largest urban area. Luxembourg City is not particularly densely populated, at about 2,600 people per km2; large areas of Luxembourg City are maintained as parks, forested areas, or sites of important heritage (particularly the UNESCO sites), while there are also large tracts of farmland within the city limits.\nDistricts of Luxembourg City.\nLuxembourg City is subdivided into twenty-four districts (), which cover the commune in its entirety. The districts generally correspond to the major neighbourhoods and suburbs of Luxembourg City, although a few of the historic districts, such as Bonnevoie, are divided between two districts.\nClimate.\nLuxembourg City has an oceanic climate (Cfb), with moderate precipitation, cold to cool winters and warm summers. It is cloudy about two-thirds of the year.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment.\nLocal government.\nUnder the Luxembourgish constitution, local government is centred on the city's communal council. Consisting of twenty-seven members (fixed since 1964), each elected every six years on the second Sunday of October and taking office on 1 January of the next year, the council is the largest of all communal councils in Luxembourg. The city is considered a stronghold of the Democratic Party (DP), which has provided its mayor without interruption since 1969 and is the second-largest party nationally. The Democratic Party is the largest party on the council, with ten councillors.\nThe city's administration is headed by the mayor, who is the leader of the largest party on the communal council. After Xavier Bettel became Luxembourg's new prime minister on 4 December 2013, Lydie Polfer (DP), who had already been in office from 1982 to 1999, was sworn in as new mayor of Luxembourg on 17 December of the same year. Since the last elections the mayor leads the cabinet, the College of Aldermen, in which the DP forms a coalition with the CSV. Unlike other cities in Luxembourg, which are limited to four aldermen at most, Luxembourg is given special dispensation to have six aldermen on its College.\nNational government.\nLuxembourg City is the seat for the Luxembourg Government. The Grand Ducal Family of Luxembourg lives at Berg Castle in Colmar-Berg.\nFor national elections to the Chamber of Deputies, the city is located in the Centre constituency.\nEuropean institutions.\nLuxembourg City is the seat of several institutions, agencies and bodies of the European Union, including the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Commission, the secretariat of the European Parliament, the European Court of Auditors and the European Investment Bank. The majority of these institutions are located in the Kirchberg quarter, in the northeast of the city.\nCulture.\nDespite the city's small size, it has several notable museums: the recently renovated National Museum of History and Art (MNHA), the Luxembourg City History Museum, the new Grand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art (Mudam) and National Museum of Natural History (NMHN).\nIn addition to its two main theatres, the Grand Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de Luxembourg and the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Capucins, there is the Philharmonie concert hall, as well as a conservatory with a large auditorium. Art galleries include the Villa Vauban, the Casino Luxembourg and Am Tunnel.\nLuxembourg was the first city to be named European Capital of Culture twice. The first time was in 1995. In 2007, along with the Romanian city of Sibiu, the European Capital of Culture was to be a cross-border area (Greater Region of SaarLorLux or Grande R\u00e9gion) consisting of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Rheinland-Pfalz and Saarland in Germany, the Walloon Region and the German-speaking part of Belgium, and the Lorraine area in France. The event was an attempt to promote mobility and the exchange of ideas, crossing borders in all areas, physical, psychological, artistic and emotional.\nLuxembourg City is also famed for its wide selection of restaurants and cuisines, including four Michelin starred establishments.\nUNESCO World Heritage Site.\nThe city of Luxembourg is on the UNESCO World Heritage List as \"City of Luxembourg: its Old Quarters and Fortifications\", on account of the historical importance of its fortifications. The site is located mainly in Ville Haute (Uewerstad).\nSport.\nThe ING Europe Marathon has been contested annually in the capital since June 2006. It attracted 11,000 runners and over 100,000 spectators during the 2014 edition.\nThe Luxembourg Open is a tennis tournament held since 1991 in the capital. The tournament runs from 13 to 21 October. BGL BNP Paribas, one of the more famous sponsors in the world of tennis, was the contracted title sponsor of the tournament until 2014.\nThe Stade de Luxembourg, situated in Gasperich, southern Luxembourg City, is the country's national stadium and largest sports venue in the country with a capacity of 9,386 for sporting events, including football and rugby union, and 15,000 for concerts. The largest indoor venue in the country is d'Coque, Kirchberg, north-eastern Luxembourg City, which has a capacity of 8,300. The arena is used for basketball, handball, gymnastics, and volleyball, including the final of the 2007 Women's European Volleyball Championship. D'Coque also includes an Olympic-size swimming pool.\nThe two football clubs of the city of Luxembourg; Racing FC Union Luxembourg and F.C. Luxembourg City, play in the country's highest league, the BGL Ligue, and second-tier, Division of Honour, respectively. The Stade de Luxembourg hosts the Luxembourg national football team.\nPlaces of interest.\nPlaces of interest include the Gothic Revival Cathedral of Notre Dame, the fortifications, Am Tunnel (an art gallery underground), the Grand Ducal Palace, the G\u00eblle Fra war memorial, the casemates, the Neim\u00ebnster Abbey, the Place d'Armes, the Adolphe Bridge and the city hall. The city is home to the RTL Group.\nThe Second World War Luxembourg American Cemetery and Memorial is located within the city limits of Luxembourg at Hamm. This cemetery is the final resting place of 5,076 American military dead, including General George S. Patton. There is also a memorial to 371 Americans whose remains were never recovered or identified.\nTransport.\nHighways.\nLuxembourg is situated in the heart of Europe in the Gold Triangle between Frankfurt, Paris, and Amsterdam. It is therefore connected to several motorways and international routes.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport in Luxembourg City, like in the rest of country, has been free since 29 February 2020, including rail, bus and tram.\nRail.\nLuxembourg City is served by five rail stations operated by the state rail company, the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale des Chemins de Fer Luxembourgeois (CFL), including the principal station and terminus of all rail lines in the Grand Duchy, Luxembourg station. Stations in Luxembourg City are served by domestic rail services operated by CFL, as well as international rail services, operated by CFL, and German, Belgian, and French service providers. Additionally, Luxembourg station is connected to the French LGV Est network, providing high-speed services on to Paris and Strasbourg. Services to Basel and Z\u00fcrich in Switzerland are available via two daily scheduled international trains.\nBus.\nLuxembourg City has a network of 40 bus routes, operated by the municipal transport authority, \"Autobus de la Ville de Luxembourg\" (AVL), partly subcontracted to private bus companies. There is also a free bus service linking the Glacis to Luxembourg station, the \"Joker Line\" for seniors, and a \"City night network\". A \"Park &amp; Ride\" scheme is operated by the city with five carparks connected to the bus network. In addition to AVL buses, CFL and RGTR operate regional buses to other locales in Luxembourg and nearby cities in Germany and France.\nTram.\nBetween 1875 and 1964, the city was covered by an extensive tram network. In December 2017, trams were reintroduced to the capital, with the phased opening of a new line, line T1, completed in March 2025, which runs between Luxembourg Airport and the Stade de Luxembourg, via the city centre. The network is expected to have 4 lines by 2035, with future lines currently in the planning stages.\nAir.\nLuxembourg City is served by the only international airport in the country: Luxembourg Airport (codes: IATA: LUX, ICAO: ELLX). Accessibility to the airport, situated in the commune of Sandweiler, from the city centre, is provided via lines 6, 16 and 29 of the municipal bus network, and line T1 of the city tramway, which terminates there since 2025. The airport is the principal hub for Luxembourg's flag carrier, Luxair, and one of the world's largest cargo airlines, Cargolux.\nInternational relations.\nLuxembourg is a member of the QuattroPole union of cities, along with Trier, Saarbr\u00fccken, and Metz (neighbouring countries: Germany and France).\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nLuxembourg is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57036", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57036", "title": "Majuro, Marshall Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "57037", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57037", "title": "Majuro", "text": "Capital of the Marshall Islands\nMajuro (; Marshallese: \"\" ]) is the capital and largest city of the Marshall Islands. It is also a large coral atoll of 64 islands in the Pacific Ocean. It forms a legislative district of the Ratak (Sunrise) Chain of the Marshall Islands. The atoll has a land area of and encloses a lagoon of . As with other atolls in the Marshall Islands, Majuro consists of narrow land masses. It has a tropical trade wind climate, with an average temperature of .\nMajuro has been inhabited by humans for at least 2,000 years and was first settled by the Austronesian ancestors of the modern day Marshallese people. Majuro was the site of a Protestant mission and several copra trading stations in the 1870s, before the German Empire annexed the atoll as part of the German Protectorate of the Marshall Islands in 1885. The city was later under Japanese and American administration. After the Marshall Islands broke away from the Federated States of Micronesia in 1978 to form the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Majuro became the new country's capital and meeting place of the Nitije\u013c\u0101, supplanting the former capital of Jaluit.\nThe main population center, Delap-Uliga-Djarrit (DUD), is made up of three contiguous motus and had a population of 23,156 people at the 2021 census. Majuro has a port, shopping district, and various hotels. Majuro has an international airport with scheduled international flights to Hawaii, the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Guam, Nauru, and flights to domestic destinations around the country. Its economy is primarily service sector-dominated.\nGeography.\nMajuro Atoll consists of over 60 islands, three of which are larger than . At the western end of the atoll, about from Delap-Uliga-Djarrit (DUD) by road, is the island community of Laura, an expanding residential area with a popular beach. Laura has the highest elevation point on the atoll, estimated at less than above sea level. Djarrit is mostly residential.\nClimate.\nBeing slightly north of the Equator, Majuro has a tropical rainforest climate (Af) but not an equatorial climate because trade winds are prevailing throughout the year though they are frequently interrupted during the summer months by the movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone across the area. Typhoons are rare. Temperatures are extremely consistent throughout the course of the year with average temperatures around . The hottest month is only 0.4 degree Celsius hotter than the coldest month. Very rarely does the temperature fall below . Majuro sees roughly of precipitation annually, with fall (Sep - Nov) being both the hottest and the rainiest season.\nHistory.\nThe atoll has been inhabited for at least 2,000 years by Austronesian peoples, including the ancestors of modern-day Marshallese residents. Archaeological excavations of \"um\" earth ovens at the Laura village on Majuro suggest habitation around the 1st century AD with a radiocarbon dating range of 93 BC to 127 AD.\nProtestant missionaries of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions established a church and school on atoll in 1869. By 1876, agents of the firms Capelle &amp; Co., Hernsheim &amp; Co., and Thomas Farrell were engaged in the copra trade on Majuro. After buying out Thomas Farrell's interests in 1877, New Zealand-based copra firm Henderson &amp; Macfarlane had its regional headquarters on Majuro.\nRival iroij Jebrik and Rimi fought waged war against each other for several years in the late 1870s and 1880s. Their uncle Lerok, the previous iroijlaplap of Majuro had wanted them to divide the atoll between them when he died, but Jebrik began a war for sole control. At least 10 islanders died in the conflict; the destruction of trees and crops caused a serious food shortage; and a slowdown in copra production caused Jebrik to take on debt for his war effort. In 1883, Cyprian Bridge of the passing British warship mediated a peace treaty. The fighting never resumed, but when passed Majuro in 1884, Rimi was trying to persuade the iroij of Aur Atoll to join him in an attack on Jebrik. The British commander mediated peace and warned the iroij of Aur to stay out of the conflict. The commander of the \"Dart\" threatened to fine copra traders who had been selling weapons to the islanders, but some traders continued selling weapons in spite of the prohibition, and the residents of Majuro refused to give up their firearms after the war between Jebrik and Rimi ended, because they feared invasion by neighboring islanders.\nThe German Empire claimed Majuro Atoll as part of the German Protectorate of the Marshall Islands in 1885. As with the rest of the Marshalls, Majuro was captured by the Imperial Japanese Navy in 1914 during World War I and mandated to the Empire of Japan by the League of Nations in 1920. The island then became a part of the Japanese mandated territory of the South Seas Mandate; although the Japanese had established a government in the Mandate, local affairs were mostly left in the hands of traditional local leaders until the start of World War II.\nOn January 30, 1944, United States Armed Forces invaded, but found that Japanese forces had evacuated their fortifications to Kwajalein and Enewetak about a year earlier. A single Japanese warrant officer had been left as a caretaker. With his capture, the islands were secured. This gave the U.S. Navy use of one of the largest anchorages in the Central Pacific. The lagoon became a large forward naval base, Naval Base Majuro, and was the largest and most active port in the world until the war moved westward when it was supplanted by Ulithi (Yap, Federated States of Micronesia).\nFollowing World War II, Majuro came under the control of the United States as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. After the Marshall Islands broke away from the Federated States of Micronesia in 1978 to form the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Majuro became the new country's capital and meeting place of the Nitije\u013c\u0101, the legislature of the Marshall Islands. It supplanted Jaluit Atoll as the administrative center of the Marshall Islands, a status that it retains after the independence of the Marshall Islands in 1986 under a Compact of Free Association.\nThe island was also the site of the Majuro Declaration, a declaration by the Pacific Islands Forum signed on September 5, 2013, to make a unified action on climate change adaptation and international aid.\nDemographics.\nThe major population centers are the D\u2013U\u2013D communities: the islets of Delap\u2013Uliga\u2013Djarrit (listed from south to north, on the eastern edge of the atoll). Majuro had a population of 23,156 at the 2021 census.\nReligion.\nMost of the population is Christian. The majority are Protestant and follow the United Church of Christ (47%), Assembly of God (16%) and others such as Bukot Nan Jesus (5%), Full Gospel (3%), Reformed Congressional Church (3%), the Salvation Army (2%), Seventh-Day Adventist (1%), and Meram in Jesus (1%). 8% of the population are Catholic, with the Cathedral of the Assumption of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Prefecture of the Marshall Islands located in Majuro.\nIslamic influence has been increasing. There are a sizable number of Ahmadi Muslims. The first mosque opened in Majuro in September 2012.\nThere are also LDS churches, Baptist churches, and Jehovah's Witnesses.\nEconomy.\nMajuro's economy is driven by the service sector, which composed 86% of the GDP in 2011.\nOn September 15, 2007, Witon Barry, of the Tobolar Copra processing plant in the Marshall Islands' capital of Majuro, said power authorities, private companies and entrepreneurs had been experimenting with coconut oil as an alternative to diesel fuel for vehicles, power generators, and ships. Coconut trees abound in the Pacific's tropical islands. Copra from 6 to 10 coconuts makes 1 litre of oil.\nAir Marshall Islands has its headquarters in Majuro.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nThe College of the Marshall Islands is located in Uliga. The University of South Pacific has a presence on Majuro.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nMarshall Islands Public School System operates public schools.\nHigh schools:\nPrimary schools:\nIn the 1994\u20131995 school year Majuro had 10 private elementary schools and six private high schools.\nThere is a Seventh Day Adventist High School and Elementary School in Delap, where English is taught to all students.\nHealth.\nThe 101-bed Majuro Hospital (officially the Leroij Atama Zedkeia Medical Center) is the main hospital for Majuro, as well as many of the outer islands. The country's only other major hospital is on Ebeye Island, the Leroij Kitlang Memorial Health Center. As of 2015, most of the 43 physicians employed by the Marshall Islands were located at the Majuro Hospital. The Laura and Rongrong Health Centers are also located on the atoll of Majuro.\nInfrastructure.\nWater and sewage.\nThe Majuro Water and Sewer Company obtains water from a catchment basin on the International Airport runway. It supplies a year or per person per day. This compares with New York City's per person per day. Water is supplied 12 hours daily. The threat of drought is commonplace.\nTransport.\nAir.\nMarshall Islands International Airport, offering domestic and international services, is on Majuro. It is served by four passenger airlines: United Airlines, Nauru Airlines, Air Marshall Islands, and Asia Pacific Airlines.\nAir Marshall Islands flies to most of the Marshalls' inhabited atolls once a week. It offers daily service between Majuro and Kwajalein, except Thursdays and Sundays.\nSea.\nMajuro Lagoon is an active port. It is one of the busiest tuna transshipment ports in the world, with 306,796 tons of tuna being moved from purse seine vessels to carrier vessels in 2018.\nThe Marshall Islands Shipping Corporation was established by the Marshall Islands via the Marshall Islands Shipping Corporation Act 2004. It manages several government ships that move people and freight around the islands. These ships include three older ships (Langidrik, Aemman, and Ribuuk Ae), as well as two newer ships (Majuro, Kwajalein) which were donated to the Republic of the Marshall Islands by Japan in 2013. They also operate a landing craft (\"Jelejeletae\"). These vessels are the main link for transporting people and supplies to and from the outer islands.\nAdditionally, the lagoon acts as a harbor for commercial fishing vessels, cruise ships, and luxury yachts.\nSport.\nMajuro was initially scheduled to host the seventh edition of the Micronesian Games, in 2010. It subsequently renounced its hosting rights, citing a lack of adequate infrastructure. In 2018, the Marshall Islands were awarded the 2022 Micro Games, and a new stadium is being built in Majuro. (In 2021, it was decided to move back the Games a year, to 2023.) The new stadium is also expected to host soccer matches, which will be a first step in forming the Marshall Islands' first-ever national soccer team.\nWeightlifter Mattie Langtor Sasser competed for the Marshall Islands in the 2016 Summer Olympics, participating in the Women's 58\u00a0kg category on August 8.\nTwin towns.\nMajuro is twinned with:"}
{"id": "57038", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57038", "title": "European Investment Bank", "text": "Investment bank of the European Union\nThe European Investment Bank (EIB) is the European Union's investment bank and is owned by the 27 member states. It is the largest multilateral financial institution in the world. The EIB finances and invests both through equity and debt solutions companies and projects that achieve the policy aims of the European Union through loans, equity and guarantees.\nThe EIB focuses on the areas of climate, environment, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), development, cohesion and infrastructure. It has played a large role in providing finance during crises including the 2008 financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. Over 60 years since its inception in 1958 to 2018 the EIB has invested over 1.1 trillion euros. It primarily funds projects that \"cannot be entirely financed by the various means available in the individual Member States\".\nThe EIB is one of the biggest financiers of green finance in the world. In 2007, the EIB became the first institution in the world to issue green bonds. In 2019 it committed to stop funding fossil fuel projects by the end of 2021. The EIB plans to invest 1 trillion euros in climate-related projects by 2030 including a just transition. The EIB is not funded through the budget of the EU. Instead, it raises money through the international capital markets by issuing bonds. The EIB is rated triple-A, the most credit-worthy rating on the bond market, by \"the Big Three\" credit rating agencies: Moody's, Standard and Poor's, and Fitch. Each member state pays capital into the EIB's reserves which is broadly in line with their share of EU gross domestic product.\nThe EIB was founded by the Treaty of Rome, which came into force on 1 January 1958. It was the first of the world's regional development banks and is sometimes referred to as the largest multilateral development bank (MDB). The EIB was established to facilitate equitable development in the EU through lending to regions that are less developed and to support the EU's internal market. The EIB is active in 140 countries throughout the world. It makes around 10% of its investments outside the EU to support the European Union's development aid and cooperation policies.\nThe EIB has been criticised and caused controversy for various actions and inactions of its own (or projects it funded), including: insufficient stakeholder consultation, lack of organisational transparency, climate change response, tax avoidance, and staff harassment.\nEIB role within the EU system.\nThe European Investment Bank is the European Union's bank and is owned by the member states of the European Union. Its role is to fund projects that achieve the aims of the European Union.\nMost of the EIB's activity (90%) takes place inside the European Union with the aim of fostering European integration and development. It makes investments outside Europe to support the EU's development aid and cooperation policies. It is active in 140 countries which are grouped into: Enlargement countries, European Free Trade Association (EFTA), EU Southern Neighbourhood, EU Eastern Neighbourhood, Sub-Saharan Africa, Caribbean and Pacific, Asia and Latin America, Central Asia and the United Kingdom.\nAs an independent body the bank takes its own borrowing and lending decisions. It cooperates with other EU institutions, especially the European Commission, the European Parliament, and the Council of the European Union.\nFinancial products and services.\nThe EIB lends to both the private and the public sector through various financial products: Financing is the bank's main activity, it also provides guidance on how to utilise additional sources of investment.\nLoans.\nThe European Investment Bank provides long-term loans, typically up to 50% of a project's overall cost, for the public and the private sector, and for small and medium-sized businesses through intermediated lending partners. The EIB's private sector financing of single large investment projects or investment programmes start from \u20ac25 million. It offers framework loans starting from \u20ac100 million to public sector entities for investment programmes that consist of a number of smaller projects. Loans for both private and public sector projects have to be aligned with one or more priorities of the EIB. Besides direct debt financing or project finance for the private sector, the EIB makes loans to intermediaries including Groupe BPCE (France), Deutsche Bank AG (Germany), or Intesa Sanpaolo (Italy) that provide small and medium-sized businesses with local and targeted funds up to \u20ac12.5 million and below the EIB's threshold for direct private financing of \u20ac25 million.\nEquity.\nThe European Investment Bank invests and co-invests in companies and funds that focus on infrastructure, environment, or small- and medium-sized enterprises and mid-size corporations in exchange for equity which allows companies to raise capital by selling shares for short term costs or to achieve long-term financial goals. In some cases, the EIB provides direct quasi-equity financing to support companies aiming for financing to grow which involves venture debt products for European companies in the field of biotech and life sciences, software and ICT, engineering and automation, renewables and clean technology. These investments, which are a relatively recent addition to the bank's work, tend to be smaller than its previous limits on the size of its deals, because they are aimed at startups and growth companies. The European Investment Fund (EIF) supports the EIB by working with SMEs and related financial partners (banks, guarantee, leasing and microfinance institutions, private equity and venture capital funds etc.).\nThe EIB's investments in equity and debt funds usually cover 10% to 20% of the fund size (with a maximum of 25%) and address climate action, infrastructure, or private sector development and social impact goals.\nGuarantees.\nThe EIB provides credit enhancement of senior debt using subordinated financing, funded or unfunded guarantees and contingent credit lines. Credit enhancement is the process of improving a company's creditworthiness by taking internal and external measures. The EIB increases the protection of the senior debt, enhances the credit rating and credit quality for project finance and aims to help projects attract further private finance from institutional investors. By offering guarantees to small and medium-sized enterprises or mid-caps, the bank covers a portion of possible losses from a portfolio of loans and sets the ground for additional financing. A guarantee is a legal contract with which a third party (guarantor) promises to assume a borrower's debt or other liabilities in the event of default.\nAdvisory services and technical assistance.\nThe European Investment Bank's advisory services are carried out by the European Advisory Hub and are available for public and private projects inside as well as outside the European Union. Besides advice on specific investment mechanisms or market development, the services can involve strategic and technical guidance on completing a project. Prior to a funding agreement with the EIB or other investors, future clients can make use of the bank's expertise in the fields of financial structuring, procurement and regulation, or impact assessment, e.g. regarding a project's implications on climate change. It does not offer advice related to the purchase or sale of securities or any advisory services regarding project evaluation and audit.\nfi-compass.\nfi-compass is a comprehensive advisory service platform developed by the European Commission and the European Investment Bank (EIB) Group. It supports EU shared management managing authorities and other stakeholders by providing practical know-how and learning tools on financial instruments across the Union.\nFinancial instruments co-funded by EU shared management funds, such as loans, guarantees, and equity investments, are efficient ways to invest in growth and development across the European Union. These instruments leverage public funding to attract additional private investments, contributing to EU policy objectives like economic growth, job creation, and social cohesion.\nfi-compass offers tailored advice on using financial instruments under various EU shared management funds, including the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD), the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+), the European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund (EMFAF), and the Asylum, Migration and Integration Fund (AMIF).\nMandates and partnerships.\nApart from financing projects using its own resources, the European Investment Bank establishes mandates and partnerships which help to fund riskier projects and to blend loans with grants; which are disbursed funds or products that do not require repayment. Mandates can also involve financial investment and can be based on technical and financial advice.\nThe EIB has partnerships with organisations across the world, including the European Commission and European External Action Service, the United Nations (e.g. Sustainable Energy for All) or the International Fund for Agricultural Development.\nFunding sources.\nThe European Investment Bank is a not for profit organisation. While it is a European Union body, none of the European Investment Bank's funds come from the European Union budget, the bank is financially autonomous. It has its own resources and money raised through the international capital markets.\nThe EIB issues bonds to borrow money on capital markets which it then lends to its clients, which is a common way for governments and corporations to borrow money. Both parties agree on a fixed date when the loan is due to be paid back usually including an interest rate. The EIB's bonds are purchased by retail investors and institutional investors around the world.\nThe EIB focuses on long-term investment and is triple-A rated by Moody's, Standard and Poor's, and Fitch. This allows the bank to borrow money at lower rates to then lend it at lower rates to projects inside and outside Europe that foster EU policy objectives.\nIn addition to benchmark bonds, public bonds, and private placements that vary in terms of size, currencies, maturities, and structures, the bank offers Green Bonds and Sustainability Awareness Bonds.\nThe European Investment Bank issued the first Green Bond in 2007, called a Climate Awareness Bond. The EIB is the global leader of Green Bonds issuance with over EUR 30.8bn raised in 2020 across 16 currencies. With the money raised through Green Bonds, the EIB exclusively supports projects that contribute to climate action in the renewable energy sector (including wind, hydroelectric, solar and geothermal energy production) and the energy efficiency sector (e.g. projects for district heating, co-generation, and building insulation).\nShareholders.\nThe European Investment Bank's has capital from its shareholders, the member states of the European Union. Each member state is subscribed in capital based on its economic weight (expressed in gross domestic product) within the European Union at the time of the country's accession to the European Union.\nFollowing Brexit and the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union, the European Investment Bank's board of governors decided that the remaining member states would proportionally increase their capital subscriptions to maintain the same level of overall subscribed capital (EUR 243.3 billion). As of March 2020, the subscribed capital of the EIB has increased by an additional EUR 5.5 billion, following the decision by two member states to increase their capital subscriptions (Poland and Romania). The EIB's total subscribed capital now amounts to EUR 248.8 billion. The departure of the UK from the EU did not impact the EIB Group's AAA credit rating.\nEuropean Investment Bank Group.\nThe EIB Group was formed in 2000. It is composed of the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the European Investment Fund (EIF) and the EIB Institute.\nEuropean Investment Bank.\n90% the European Investment Bank's activity takes place inside the European Union with the aim of fostering European integration and development. It makes investments outside Europe to support the European Union's development aid and cooperation policies. It is active in some 140 countries throughout the world in the following geographical areas: , European Free Trade Association (EFTA), EU Southern Neighbourhood, EU Eastern Neighbourhood, Sub-Saharan Africa, Caribbean and Pacific, Asia and Latin America, Central Asia and the United Kingdom.\nIt is one of the largest supranational lenders in the world. Since its establishment in 1958, the European Investment Bank has invested over a trillion euros.\nEuropean Investment Fund.\nThe European Investment Fund (EIF) is the European Union's venture capital arm. It also provides guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). In 2018, 25 million SMEs in the EU made up 99.8% of all non-financial enterprises, employed around 97.7 million people (66.6% of total employment) and generated 56.4% of total added value (EUR 4,357bn).\nThe EIF supports businesses through all their stages of development; pre-seed, seed-, and start-up-phase (technology transfer, business angel financing, microfinance, early stage venture capital) to the growth and development segment (formal venture capital funds, mezzanine funds, portfolio guarantees/credit enhancement).\nThe European Investment Bank is the EIF's majority shareholder, holding 62% of shares. The other main shareholder is the European Commission, which holds 29% of shares. The EIF operates on the basis of specific mandates from the European Council and the European Parliament, from the European Commission or other public authorities, from the European Investment Bank or at its own risk.\nEIB Institute.\nIn 2012, the EIB Institute was created to promote and support social, cultural, and academic initiatives with European stakeholders and the public at large. It works on community and citizenship for the EIB Group. The EIB Institute is an integral part of the EIB and does not have a separate legal personality.\nObjectives and activities.\nThe EIB is a not for profit organisation and provides long-term project funding, guarantees and advice to further the goals of the European Union. It is part of the European Commission's Investment Plan for Europe strategy which aims to bridge investment gaps by taking on some of the risk in projects it funds.\nThe bank funds projects in the areas of; climate, environment, innovation and skills, infrastructure, small and medium-sized enterprises, cohesion and development as well as crises including the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2008 financial crisis. Since 1959 the European Investment Bank has signed almost 25,000 projects around the world. It funds projects both inside and outside the EU that meet one of the criteria of; in less developed regions, where projects can not be funded by individual member states and projects which benefit multiple member states.\nThe bank aims to support sustainable economic growth both within the member states of the European Union and externally. Because of its AAA credit rating in the international markets the EIB is able to borrow and lend at low rates. The bank pursues the objectives of the European Union by providing long-term project funding, as well as guarantees and advice. The EIB Group (European Investment Bank and European Investment Fund) supports companies, small businesses and start-ups by cooperating with a wide network of commercial banks, national banks and institutions, leasing companies, venture capital and private equity funds, angel investors and various providers.\nWithin the European Commission's Investment Plan for Europe, the EIB Group and the European Investment Fund for Strategic Investments are part of a plan aimed at relieving investors of some of the risks inherent in projects. Project financing is granted after preliminary screenings of the viability and the carbon emissions associated with the projects.\nCOVID-19 response.\nThe European Investment Bank has provided financial resources for both economic impacts of the pandemic and for health-related emergencies, the search for a vaccine against COVID-19, and solutions to slow the spread of the virus.\nOn 26 May 2020, the EIB Board of Directors approved the Pan-European Guarantee Fund (EGF), a \u20ac25 billion fund which was endorsed by the European Council as part of the overall European Union COVID-19 response package. All 27 EU member states were invited to contribute to the fund in the form of guarantees proportional to the respective share in the bank. Using the EGF, the EIB group 'aimed to mobilise' up to \u20ac200 billion of additional financing for small and medium-sized European businesses from the private sector. European Union companies are eligible to seek financing from the Pan-European Guarantee Fund if they have financial issues due to the economic implication of the COVID-19 pandemic but could have been able to secure loans under pre-crisis circumstances.\nIn December 2019, the European Investment Bank signed a \u20ac50 million loan to help BioNTech work on cancer treatments. A new loan worth \u20ac100 million was approved in June 2020 to support the company's vaccine trials and manufacturing. BioNTech's COVID-19 vaccine was approved for use by the UK drug regulators in December 2020.\nClimate.\nThe EIB Group, is one of the world's main financiers of climate action. The EIB plans to invest 1 trillion euros in climate-related projects by 2030 including a just transition. As the EU's climate Bank, the European Investment Bank Group committed in November 2019 to align its activities with the goals and principles of the Paris Agreement by the end of 2020. In November 2020, the EU member states approved the EIB Group Climate Bank Roadmap 2021\u20132025 that outlines its upcoming contributions to the European Green Deal and to sustainable development outside the EU. By the end of 2021, the EIB will stop financing all fossil fuel projects.\nThe EIB contributes to the European Green Deal which aims for Europe to become the first carbon-neutral continent by 2050. It finances projects that; limit global warming to 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C by the end of the decade, fight environmental degradation, stop biodiversity loss and address inequalities caused by climate change. In 2019, the European Investment Bank Group financed projects for \u20ac19.3 billion to fight climate change.\nInnovation and skills.\nSince 2000, the EIB has financed projects which include skills development with more than \u20ac210 billion of investment, including \u20ac14.4 billion in 2019. This support targeted/aimed at; the development and commercialisation of new products, economic processes and business models, increased investment in research and development, education, upskilling and training and improved connectivity and access through broadband and mobile networks. In addition; the adoption and diffusion of digital and other emerging technologies and empowering women's participation in the labour market.\nDevelopment.\nThe EIB Group finances sustainable projects and supports investments that reduce poverty and inequality aims with the aim of contributing to stable growth within the member states of the European Union, emerging markets and developing countries. Since 2010 the EIB financing outside the European Union reached \u20ac69.6 billion. In 2020 the European Investment Bank Group has offered loans to more than 100 countries, financed vaccines, diagnostics and treatments and invested \u20ac1.7 billion to help the Western Balkan countries recover from the COVID-19 pandemic It also expanded its partnership with the United Nations Development Programme and increased cooperation with the Association of European Development Finance Institutions to assist impacted businesses in developing countries, providing financing for \u20ac280 million partnered with the World Health Organization to finance health care projects in 10 African countries.\nInfrastructure.\nSince its foundation in 1958, the European Investment Bank has supported the development of infrastructure for both EU member states and third countries. In 2019, the EIB provided \u20ac15.74 billion to support infrastructure projects. The EIB supports infrastructure projects involving; sustainable transport; energy efficiency, urban development, digital networks, social housing and key public buildings, cultural heritage and water and wastewater management.\nSmall to medium size enterprises.\nThe bank is part of InnovFin, the EU Finance for Innovators, a joint initiative of the EIB Group in cooperation with the European Commission under Horizon 2020). Through it the EIB Group provides direct financing to mid-caps. The group also offers venture debt financing under the European Growth Finance Facility, backed by the European Fund for Strategic Investments.\nThe EIB Group works with a broad network of commercial banks, national promotional banks and institutions, leasing companies, venture capital and private equity funds, angel investors and service providers, including in regions where access to finance is limited. Through intermediaries, the EIB finances micro-enterprises (0\u20139 employees), small enterprises (10\u201349 employees), medium-sized enterprises (50\u2013249 employees), mid-caps (250\u20133 000 employees).\nIn 2019 the EIB Group provided \u20ac25.52 billion in loans and other services to 386,600 SMEs and mid-caps which employ 4.4 million.\nCohesion.\nAs a supranational institution, the EIB focuses on economic, social and territorial cohesion and solidarity within the member states of the European Union and outside the EU. The EIB prioritises projects addressing inequalities by providing jobs and education, public infrastructure and services, a sustainable environment across the European Union. The EIB's annual target for cohesion financing is 30% of all new operations in the EU, Pre-Accession and EFTA countries which amounted to \u20ac16.13 billion in 2019. In 2023, the EIB Group invested \u20ac36.2 billion in cohesion-related initiatives.\nHistory.\nThe European Investment Bank was founded by the Treaty of Rome, brought about the creation of the European Economic Community (EEC), which came into force on 1 January 1958. At the time the role of the bank was to provide financing in the form of loans for Europe's infrastructure projects.\n1960s.\nIn 1962 the bank was authorised to finance projects also outside the European Community (EC), which was created in 1957 by six member states \u2013 Italy, France, West Germany, Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands. These countries had signed the Treaty of Rome to increase the cooperation among the European countries after World War II. Also in 1962, the EIB issued its first loan carried out in cooperation with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The bank loaned funds to three Italian companies: Sincat and Celene in Sicily, which needed funds to build a petrochemical complex, and Mercure in Lucania, to exploit a seam of lignite to produce electricity.\nIn 1968 the EIB moved from Brussels to Luxembourg City, opened an office in Rome and adopted the global loan facility for small and medium-enterprises (SME) financing. The growing economies among the member states of the European Community at the end of the 1950s and through the 1960s meant that the countries themselves were able to finance their infrastructure development, which lead to the EIB playing a supporting role.\n1970s.\nThe 1973\u20131975 recession in Europe and the first enlargement of the European Community changed the EIB's role. The financial turmoil affecting the initial EC members made it more difficult for the individual nations to pursue their national policy objectives; the addition in 1973 of three new countries to the European Community \u2013 United Kingdom, Ireland and Denmark led to the EIB's first capital enlargement. The larger financial base, coupled with the development of European-wide policies at the European Parliament, led the bank to draft its own regional lending policy starting from 1974.\nUnder its new policy and a more diversified economic and infrastructure development, the EIB expanded its lending to include industrial development loans in the depressed industrial regions of the growing EC membership. The bank benefited from the creation of a new structural fund, the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), founded in 1975. The ERDF was created to provide financial support for the development and structural adjustment of regional economies, economic change, enhanced competitiveness as well as territorial cooperation throughout the EU.\nThe EIB was the first European Community institution to directly handle the construction of its own headquarters. The purchase of the site on the Kirchberg plateau was agreed to by the Luxembourg government and the contract between the grand duchy and the bank concluded in November 1972.\n1980s.\nIn the 1980 the EIB moved its headquarters to a new building, designed by the British architect Sir Denys Lasdun. The complex known as West Building was designed in the brutalist style on the Kirchberg plateau. Construction began in 1974, inaugurated in 1981 and extended in 1995.\nIn the 1980s the EIB became responsible for assisting associate countries such as Greece, Spain, and Portugal in achieving requirements for EC admission. In 1981, Greece joined the EIB and five years later, in 1986, Spain and Portugal did the same. In 1987 the bank began focusing more on loans to finance small and medium-sized enterprises, as well as 'innovative' companies, telecommunications and urban transport initiatives among EC members.\nAfter the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the bank started to finance projects in former Soviet states, lending to Poland, Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia. The EIB increased investment in the region toward the late 1990s as these countries prepared their applications to join the 15 members of what by then had become the European Union (EU).\n1990s.\nIn 1991 the bank contributed to the foundation of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and in 1993 it extended its activities to the Baltic countries (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) and to Latin American and Asian countries. In 1994 the European Investment Fund (EIF)\u2014whose logo depicts a bridge symbolising the connection between public and private finance\u2014was established. In 1995, Austria, Finland and Sweden joined the EIB.\nThe European Investment Bank made its first borrowing operation in euros in 1997, over a year before the new European currency was launched, on 1 January 1999. In the same year the bank adopted a new logo which consisted of three elements: a central blue stripe, representing Europe, and two grey lateral shapes, representing the headquarters in Luxembourg.\n2000s.\nIn 2000 the EIB Group was created and the European Investment Bank became the majority shareholder of the EIF, the specialist arm for providing risk capital. Also in 2000 the Cotonou Agreement \u2013 signed in Benin's largest city by the 15 member states of the European Union and 78 African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP Countries), replaced the Lom\u00e9 Convention (1975). Under the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement, the EIB expanded its cooperation with non-EU countries outside Europe having agreements with the Union.\nFollowing the Lisbon European Council in 2000, the EIB changed objectives. The bank continued providing infrastructure and policy support to the European Union, as well as contributing to achieving the Lisbon summit's stated objective of making Europe a high-technology and knowledge-based economy.\nIn 2004, the EIB received a mandate from the European Union for operations in Russia, Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine. In the same year the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Malta and Cyprus entered the European Union, followed by Bulgaria and Romania in 2007 and Croatia in 2013.\nFrom 2002, the bank and the European Commission started coordinating their efforts in investments aimed at mitigation and adaptation to climate change. In 2007 the EIB issued the first Climate Awareness Bonds on the capital markets, the world's first Green Bonds. The funds raised were earmarked to match disbursements to EIB lending projects in the field of renewable energy and energy efficiency.\n2010s.\nThe East Building, inaugurated in 2008 on the Kirchberg plateau was designed by Ingenhoven Architekten in association with Werner Sobek. It was the first building in continental Europe to obtain a Bespoke Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM) certification of \"very good\".\nThe European Fund for Strategic Investments was launched in 2014 led by the European Commission and the EIB. Part of the Investment Plan for Europe, it initially aimed to mobilise \u20ac315 billion and was then extended to \u20ac500 billion by 2020. In 2016 the bank launched the Economic Resilience Initiative which supports regions outside Europe significantly affected by the refugee crisis through investments supporting growth, jobs, infrastructure and social cohesion. In 2019 the bank agreed to stop funding fossil fuel projects by the end of 2021.\n2020s.\nIn 2020 it announced the 'Climate Bank Roadmap 2021\u20132025' which will include stopping funding for all high carbon projects. As part of the European Guarantee Fund (EGF) to tackle the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic the bank made available \u20ac200 billion of additional financing. The bank is funding both efforts at containing the economic effects of the crisis as well as healthcare related projects which; address immediate health-related emergencies, research vaccines and mechanisms to limit the spread of the virus e.g. testing.\nAs the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine entered its third year and while the European Industrial Defence Strategy programme was debated, it became apparent that EIB \"policy\" or \"its rules explicitly\" forbid defence investment. On 18 March 2024 more than half of the member states signed a letter asking the EIB to reconsider its policy against defence expenditure.\nControversies.\nProjects.\nSome projects financed or under the appraisal procedure by the EIB have raised objections from local communities as well as international and national NGOs, on a variety of grounds including allegations of corruption in awarding contracts, misallocation of funds, violation of laws, or displacing local residents. These include the M10 motorway in Russia, the Gazela Bridge in Serbia, Ra\u010da Bridge between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the D1 motorway in the Slovakia, \u0160o\u0161tanj Power Plant in Slovenia, the Bujagali Hydroelectric Power Station in Uganda, the Nenskra Hydropower Plant in Georgia, the Trans Adriatic Pipeline transporting natural gas from Azerbaijan to Europe starting from Greece, through Albania to Italy, the Volkswagen emissions scandal also known as Dieselgate, the Mombasa-Mariakani road project in Kenya, the Olkaria geothermal development in Kenya, the Vinca incinerator in Belgrade, Serbia.\nTransparency.\nThe Transparency Policy of the EIB has been criticised by NGOs. In 2004, the British human rights organisation Article 19 issued a memorandum in which it accused the EIB of failing to meet international (including EU) standards on openness. In 2010 the EIB updated its transparency policy following a public consultation. The latest update of the Transparency Policy in 2015 also followed a public consultation.\nIn 2024, EU prosecutors launched a corruption probe into former EIB senior executives Werner Hoyer and Henry von Blumenthal. The two stand accused of \"corruption, abuse of influence, as well as the misappropriation of EU funds.\"\nClimate change.\nA 2011 report by the CEE Bankwatch Network accused the EIB of a lending policy that failed its responsibility to further the EU goal of cutting carbon emissions.\nIn 2019 the bank announced it would cease funding most fossil fuel projects by the end of 2021, a decision approved by members representing 90% of its capital. It will only fund energy projects capable of producing one kilowatt hour of energy for less than 250 grams of carbon dioxide. EIB energy loans were \u20ac21.3 billion in 2023, up from \u20ac11.6 billion in 2020, supporting energy efficiency, renewable energy, innovation, storage, and new energy network infrastructure.\nThe 2019 agreement received criticism for its limitations for continuing to fund carbon-intensive activities including high carbon agriculture, airport expansions and new conventional energy intensive plants including gas. In November 2020 the EIB announced the \"Climate Bank Roadmap 2021\u20132025\" which will include stopping funding high carbon projects, including a just transition mechanism, increasing accountability and accelerating their timetable for green funding to make more than 50% of annual financing dedicated to green investment by 2025.\nTax.\nIn 2014, eleven NGOs demanded the release of an EIB report into allegations of tax fraud by the Swiss commodity trader Glencore in Zambia related to the Mopani Copper Mines. Following a recommendation of the European Ombudsman the EIB released a summary which stated their investigation had been \"non-conclusive\". The Ombudsman subsequently called this summary inadequate and accused the EIB of failing to meet its own transparency policy. In response, EIB stopped lending to Glencore in 2011 due to concerns about its corporate governance.\nThe EIB reviewed its transparency standards applying to control functions by including a new provision of the EIB Group's Transparency Policy of 2015 allowing the bank to disclose a summary after an investigation has been closed.\nReports in 2010 and 2015, from a coalition of NGOs, implicated the EIB in tax avoidance by lending to businesses that use tax havens. The EIB has been constantly improving its procedures and standards including on governance and tax matters. This includes the EIB's Environmental and Social Standards, the Anti-fraud Policy, and the EIB Group Policy towards weakly regulated, non-transparent and non-cooperative jurisdictions and tax good governance.\nHarassment.\nIn 2021 EIB has been criticised related to its treatment of staff, following several cases of harassment, bullying and suicide in its premises. The European Parliament, in its annual report on the EIB in July 2021, referred to its \"serious concerns about allegations regarding harassment and the working environment\" at the EIB. In July 2022, the European Parliament again expressed \"serious concerns about the lack of social dialogue at the EIB, in particular to address concerns about harassment allegations and the working environment\".\nEIB structure.\nThe EIB's departments prepare and implement the decisions of management bodies. The departments carry out evaluation, appraisal and then finance projects; assess and manage risks, run economic or financial background studies and raise financial resources on the capital markets. Article 308 \"et seq.\" of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) establishes the EIB, and the Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank is annexed to the TFEU.\nGovernance.\nThe European Investment Bank has three decision-making bodies: the Board of Governors, the board of directors and the Management Committee. The board of governors, who are the finance ministers of the European Union member states, sets the direction of the European Investment Bank. The board of directors oversees strategic direction. The Management Committee supervises daily operations.\nThe European Investment Bank's president chairs the meetings of the management committee. The members of the management committee are responsible solely to the bank; they are appointed by the board of governors, on a proposal from the board of directors, for a renewable period of six years. The president is also chair of the board of directors.\nInternal and independent controls aim to guarantee the integrity and soundness of European Investment Bank's operations. These include Investigations, Audit Committee, Compliance, Credit Risk, Financial Control, Internal Control, Internal Audit, External Auditors, and Operations Evaluation. The bank also cooperates with independent control bodies: European Court of Auditors, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and the European Ombudsman.\nIn 2018, seven EU governments demanded improvements in the governance and structure of the institution as well as stricter cost controls. There were concerns that EIB had been slow to implement recommendations raised by its own audit committee, which aimed at improving the risk management and project selection.\nAccountability.\nInternal control bodies.\nThe EIB has four statutory bodies; the audit committee, the board of governors, the board of directors and the management committee.\nThe audit committee functions as an independent control body and verifies the bank's operations and the validity of its accounts. Its six independent members are appointed for a non-renewable term of office of six consecutive financial years by the board of governors. It issues a report on the bank's financial statements at the time of approval of the financial statements by the board of directors. The audit committee directly reports to the board of governors.\nThe audit committee appoints the external auditors of the EIB and evaluates their independence and investigates potential conflicts of interest. In recent years, KPMG has functioned as the EIB's external auditor.\nOther internal organisational provisions such as Financial Control or Internal Audit make recommendations regarding the effectiveness of the bank's governance, risk management or internal control and express their opinion on certain aspects of the EIB's financial policies and their implementation.\nThe EIB Compliance Function is responsible for ensuring that all of the bank's activities are in line with its standards of integrity. Its tasks include combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism, and supporting a corporate culture that is based on ethical values and professional conduct.\nExternal control bodies.\nThe EIB also cooperates with independent control bodies: the European Court of Auditors, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and the European Ombudsman. According to Article 287(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU (TFEU), the European Court of Auditors has access to information required for the audit of the European Union's expenditure and revenue managed by the EIB. This means that the Court of Auditors is authorised to audit loan operations that are under the mandate conferred by the EU or that are guaranteed by the general EU budget and administered by the EIB. The bank further collaborates with the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) to combat fraud and corruption within European Institutions. Based on a memorandum of understanding between the European Investment Bank and the European Ombudsman, EU citizens can escalate their concerns regarding an EIB project, policy or activity to the European Ombudsman if the outcome of the EIB's Complaints Mechanism is not satisfactory.\nTransparency.\nComplaints can range from environmental degradation or threats to community health and safety to involuntary resettlement. The Complaints Mechanism team examines whether the EIB Group has failed to comply with internal policies, standards or procedures or with applicable legislation and offers mediation to solve conflicts between the complainant and an EIB project or activity. It monitors closed complaints to ensure that agreed measures are implemented. Improvements to the EIB policy framework that are identified during complaints processes are given to the senior management.\nThe EIB's Project Procurements Complaints Committee (PCC) deals with projects procurement complaints, e.g. objections arising from tendering of EIB-financed contracts for goods, works and consultant services. The Fraud Investigations Division investigates allegations, verifies the existence of a robust anti-fraud policy framework, proactively identifies actual or potential vulnerabilities and trains staff on fraud awareness.\nThe bank publishes documents related to its role, governance, accountability, policies and operations. Project-related information usually include a summary of the investment project, the loans obtained through financial intermediaries, environmental and social information, and project briefs. Key figures and information on the EIB's lending activities are published in the EIB Activity Reports (yearly figures) and the Statistical Reports (summary tables). As part of the bank's Transparency policy the EIB does not publish information that may harm legitimate interests of clients and project partners. It refuses to disclose, for example, personal data, commercial interests such as patents, and information related to on-going investigations. In 2014, the EIB set up a public register to increase transparency and to allow citizens to browse the bank's publications or to request documents.\nCommunication and outreach.\nThe EIB Complaints Mechanism organises events to inform the general public and members of Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) of the mandate of the mechanism, the admissibility criteria and the methodological approach. In addition, the European Investment Bank holds formal public consultations to demonstrate transparency and accountability and to benefit from the participants' expertise.\nOffices.\nThe bank is active in 140 countries throughout the world in the following geographical areas: Enlargement countries, European Free Trade Association (EFTA), EU Southern Neighbourhood, EU Eastern Neighbourhood, Sub-Saharan Africa, Caribbean and Pacific, Asia and Latin America, Central Asia and the United Kingdom.\nLeadership.\nPresidents of the EIB: \nDr. Werner Hoyer was the president of the European Investment Bank from 2012 to 2024. He was named European Banker of the Year in 2019 for his contribution to economic stability and development in Europe. Under Hoyer the European Investment Bank has funded EUR 150 billion in projects that contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions.\nNadia Calvi\u00f1o has been appointed as the president of the European Investment Bank in 2024. This appointment follows her nomination by the Spanish government in August 2023 and the endorsement of the German and Belgian governments. The Economic and Financial Affairs Council granted approval to her candidacy in early December 2023. Calvi\u00f1o had previously held the position of First Deputy Prime Minister of Spain from July 2021 and served as Minister of Economy from 2018 until December 2023.\nPublications and multimedia.\nThe European Investment Bank publishes a wide range of reports, studies, essays, surveys and working papers aimed at professionals and the general public. All publications are available free of charge on the Publications page of the EIB website, in their digital formats: PDF, e-book or online with a limited number of print publications available free of charge.\nAnnual reports.\nThe EIB publishes annual reports including the Activity Report, the Financial report, the Statistical Report, the Investment Report and the Sustainability Report which cover the main activities of the bank.\nSurveys.\nEuropean Investment Bank does research in several areas.\nBlog.\nThe site of the bank also hosts blog articles, expert essays, press releases and podcasts. In 2019 the podcast series A Dictionary of finance won The Digital Communication Awards prize for Best Channel. In 2020 the podcast series, Monster under the Bed, received the SABRE Award in the category Best in Audio. The bank's Climate Solutions content series (expert blog posts, podcast series and e-book) won the European Excellence Award 2020 in the Sustainability and Environment category.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57039", "revid": "46950062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57039", "title": "Mal\u00e9, Maldives", "text": ""}
{"id": "57040", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57040", "title": "Mal\u00e9", "text": "Capital of the Maldives\nMal\u00e9 is the capital and most populous city of the Maldives. With a population of 211,908 in 2022 within its administrative area and coterminous geographical area of , Mal\u00e9 is one of the most densely populated cities in the world. The city is geographically located in the southern edge of North Mal\u00e9 Atoll (Kaafu Atoll). Administratively, the city consists of a central island, an airport island, and five other islands presided over by the Mal\u00e9 City Council.\nTraditionally it was the King's Island, from where the ancient royal dynasties ruled and where the palace was located. The city was then called \"Mahal\". Formerly it was a walled city surrounded by fortifications and gates (\"doroshi\"). The Royal Palace (\"Gan'duvaru\") was destroyed along with the picturesque forts (\"koshi\") and bastions (\"buruzu\") when the city was remodelled under President Ibrahim Nasir's rule in the aftermath of the abolition of the monarchy in 1968. However, some buildings remained, namely, the Mal\u00e9 Friday Mosque. In the last few decades, the island has been considerably expanded in size through land reclamation. Over the years, Mal\u00e9 has been the center of political protests and milestone events.\nIslam has played a central role in the city's history since 1153 CE, when the Maldives converted from Buddhism to Islam under the influence of North African traders and missionaries. This religious shift deeply influenced Mal\u00e9\u2019s cultural and architectural identity, visible today in the form of mosques such as the 17th-century Hukuru Miskiy (\"Friday Mosque\"), built from coral stone and considered one of the oldest mosques in the country. Over the centuries, Mal\u00e9 has remained not only the capital but also the symbolic and historical core of the Maldives.\nOverview.\nAlthough Mal\u00e9 is geographically located in Kaafu Atoll, administratively it is not considered part of it. \nIslands of Mal\u00e9 City.\nThe central part of the city is formed by the island of Mal\u00e9. Six more islands form part of the city which includes Hulhul\u00e9, Hulhumal\u00e9, Villimal\u00e9, Gulhifalhu, Thilafushi and Giraavarufalhu.\nA commercial harbour is located on the central island and serves as the heart of all commercial activities in the country. Velana International Airport is located on the Island of Hulhul\u00e9.\nThe central island is heavily urbanised, with the built-up area taking up essentially its entire landmass. Slightly less than one-third of the nation's population lives in the capital city, and the population has increased from 20,000 people in 1987 to 100,000 people in 2006. Many Maldivians and foreign workers living in other parts of the country find themselves in occasional short-term residence on the island since it is the centre of administration and bureaucracy. Most of the population of Mal\u00e9 live in small houses or apartment complexes, often shared with external family or roommates. This led to the development of Hulhumal\u00e9 and the extension to Phase 2.\nThe Indian expatriate community in the Maldives stands as the second-largest, comprising around 27,000 individuals. Among them, a substantial portion consists of construction workers, doctors, nurses, health professionals, and teachers, who play vital roles in the Maldivian infrastructure, healthcare, and education sectors. Additionally, Indian and Bangladeshi nationals contribute significantly as skilled workers, alongside a sizable presence of unskilled laborers, as well as other professionals and members of the business community.\nHistory.\nThe whole island group, the Maldives, is named after its capital. The word \"Maldives\" means \"the islands (dives) of Mal\u00e9\".\nThe first settlers in the Maldivian islands were Dravidian people who arrived from the neighboring shores of the modern Indian subcontinent and coastal Ceylon. Comparative studies of Maldivian linguistic, oral, and other cultural traditions, in addition to folklore, point to a strong Dravidian influence on Maldivian society, centered in Mal\u00e9, from ancient times. The Giraavaru people of Giraavaru claim descent from the first Tamil settlers of the Maldives.\nIt is said that early Tamil settlers called the islands \"Maalaitivu\", which means Garland Islands or Chain Islands. Early records also indicate that the island was called \"Athamana Huraa\" before being named Mal\u00e9. According to regional lore, Giraavaru fishermen used to go regularly to a certain large sandbank (\"finolhu\") at the southern end of their atoll to clean tuna fish after a good catch. Owing to a large amount of tuna fish offal and blood, the waters around that sandbank looked like a big pool of blood (\"maa ley gandeh\": \"maa\" from the Sanskrit \u092e\u0939 \"maha\", meaning \"big\", and \"l\u0113\" \"blood\"). Traditionally the first inhabitants of the Maldives, which include the Giravaru people, did not have kings. They lived in a simple society and were ruled by local headmen.\nHowever, one day, a prince from the subcontinent called Koimala arrived at the Mal\u00e9 Atoll sailing from the North on a big ship. The people of Giraavaru spotted his vessel from afar and welcomed him. They allowed Prince Koimala to settle on that large sandbank amid the waters tainted with fish blood. Trees were planted on the sandbank and it is said that the first tree that grew on it was the papaya tree. (However, this could refer to any tree that bears edible fruit as the archaic Dhivehi word, and Mahal word in modern times, for fruit (\"falhoa\"), was the same as that for the papaya.) As time went by, the local islanders accepted the rule of this Northern Prince. A palace was built and the island was formally named Maa-le (Mal\u00e9), while the nearest island was named Hulhu-le.\nThe names of the main four wards or divisions of Mal\u00e9 Island are said to have been given by the original Giraavaru fishermen: Maafannu from \"maa\" (big) and \"fannu\" (a place where a village path meets the sea), Henveiru from \"en-beyru\" (out where fishermen got their bait), Galolhu from \"galu-olhu\" (stone groove) and, Macchangolhi from \"mathi-angolhi\" (windward path-fork).\nIn early foreign sources, Mal\u00e9 was called Ambria or Mahl. For the Maldivians, it was Fura Mal\u00e9, i.e. \"Mal\u00e9 the Pre-Eminent\".\nWhen Ibn Battuta traveled to Mal\u00e9 in 1343 (in thus the entire Maldivian islands were \u0630\u0650\u064a\u0628\u064e\u0629\u064f \u0627\u0644\u0645\u064e\u062d\u064e\u0644 \"Dh\u012bbat-ul-Ma\u1e25al\"), he provided a rather extensive description of the city as well as the Islands of the Maldives overall. He mentioned that the Queen, Rehendhi Khadeeja, had a residence in Mal\u00e9, which from its description may be assimilated to the same palace of the later sultan rulers, in the centre of the island. Within the palace compounds, several pits contained stores of cowrie shells, ready to be traded. Ibn Battuta also mentioned several mosques, built in wood.\nMal\u00e9 was fortified in the 17th century by the sultan Muhammad Imaduddin, who built walls on the north, east, and west sides of the island.\nAn inner harbour was used by fishing vessels and small dhonis, while larger vessels had to anchor in the outer harbour, between the islands of Vilingili and Hulhule. The island covered less than one square mile in size and was surrounded by a shallow lagoon.\nMal\u00e9 had 2,148 inhabitants in 1888, but population growth soon led to the search for new spaces for housing. The old forts and decrepit walls were dismantled in 1925\u20131927 under the reign of Muhammad Shamsuddeen III, to be rebuilt on a smaller scale. Roads were also widened and straightened. Former large cemeteries had also been cleared out, to achieve more housing space.\nThe Royal Palace (\"Gan'duvaru\") was destroyed along with the picturesque forts (\"koshi\") and bastions (\"buruzu\") when the city was remodelled under President Ibrahim Nasir's rule in the aftermath of the abolition of the monarchy in 1968. Only the National Museum building, the residence of the last sultan, as well as the Mal\u00e9 Friday Mosque, remain.\nMal\u00e9's residents soon grew to 11,453 by 1967 and 29,522 by 1977. To cater to the growing population, by 1986 the shallow lagoon around Mal\u00e9 was reclaimed.\nThe most revered place in Mal\u00e9 is the Medhu Ziyaaraiy, across the street from the Mal\u00e9 Friday Mosque: the tomb of Abu al-Barakat Yusuf al-Barbari, considered to have converted the Maldives to Islam in 1153.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nMal\u00e9 has a tropical monsoon climate (\"Am\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. The city features a mix of both wet and dry seasons, with the wet season lasting from April through January and the drier season covering the months of February and March. Unlike several cities with this climate, Mal\u00e9 experiences relatively consistent temperatures throughout the year, with an average high of and an average low of , which is equivalent to many equatorial cities' average year-round daily mean. The city averages slightly more than of precipitation annually. The temperature is constantly high year-round.\nSubdivisions.\nThe city is divided into six divisions, four of which are on Mal\u00e9 Island: Henveiru, Galolhu, Maafannu, and MacchanGoalhi. The nearby island of Villimal\u00e9, formerly a tourist resort and before that a prison, is the fifth division. The sixth division is Hulhumal\u00e9, an artificial island settled since 2004. In addition, the airport Island Hulhul\u00e9 is part of the city. Plans have been made to develop the \"Gulhifalhu\" reef, implementation began in 2008.\nThe island of Mal\u00e9 is the eighth most densely populated island in the world, and it is the 160th most populous island in the world. Since there is no surrounding countryside, all infrastructure has to be located in the city itself. Water is provided from desalinated ground water; the water works pumps brackish water from deep wells in the city and desalinates that using reverse osmosis. Electric power is generated in the city using diesel generators. Sewage is pumped unprocessed into the sea. Solid waste is transported to nearby islands, where it is used to fill in lagoons. The airport was built in this way, and currently the Thilafushi lagoon is being filled in.\nMany government buildings and agencies are located on the waterfront. Velana International Airport is on adjacent Hulhul\u00e9 Island which includes a seaplane base for internal transportation. Several land reclamation projects have expanded the harbour.\nEconomy.\nTourism is the largest industry in the Maldives, accounting for 28% of GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. The GDP per capita expanded by 265% in the 1980s and a further 115% in the 1990s. Over 90% of government tax revenue comes from import duties and tourism-related taxes. Mal\u00e9, the capital, has many tourist attractions and nearby resorts. Maldivian, the airline of the Maldives, has its head office in Mal\u00e9, as does the airline Villa Air.\nThe central harbour and port of the Maldives are located in Mal\u00e9, the centre for all commercial activities. The Maldives Transport and Contracting Company (MTCC) was formed in 1980 to contribute towards the development of infrastructure and transport services in the Maldives. The port is part of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean, there to the Upper Adriatic region with its rail connections to Central and Eastern Europe.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nEach of the islands of Mal\u00e9 is served by a dense network of paved roads, which are named \"magu\" (thoroughfare or street), \"hingun\" (road or street), and \"goalhi\" (small road or alley). Road traffic is heavy, especially on Mal\u00e9 Island.\nMal\u00e9 and Hulhul\u00e9 Island are linked by the Sinamal\u00e9 Bridge, which was opened to traffic in October 2018, while Hulhul\u00e9 and Hulhumal\u00e9 are linked via a causeway, thus allowing the road networks of the three islands to be connected.\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport in Mal\u00e9 primarily consists of 3 minibus lines that run through the city, and connect the Greater Mal\u00e9 region to the main island. All the routes are operated by Raajje Transport Link (RTL). These busses go through the wider roads through the city. Children under 18, people with special needs, and people above 65 years of age ride for free.\nThe Orchid Route (R10), the Ameenee Route (R11) and the Sosun Route (R12). The routes are named after the main roads that the minibus drives through in Mal\u00e9, being \"Orchid Magu\", \"Ameenee\" \"Magu and Sosun Magu\". The Mal\u00e9 system has a total of 41 stops, of which R10 and R11 stop at 20 each, while R12 stops at 8. All 3 routes go through \"Majeedhee Magu\", in the centre of the city.\nR11 to R9 are various routes connecting Mal\u00e9 to Hulhumal\u00e9 and Velana International Airport. These buses are much larger, and in late 2020, began operating double-decker buses to Hulhumal\u00e9. The buses move between the islands using the Sinamal\u00e9 Bridge.\nR13 Is an internal minibus route located internally within Villimal\u00e9 and goes through 13 stops. It uses much smaller electrical-powered buses along with the Sosun Route (R12).\nAir.\nVelana International Airport is located on nearby Hulhul\u00e9 island and is the city's airport as well as the principal airport in Maldives. With the opening of the Sinamal\u00e9 Bridge, the airport is now accessible from Mal\u00e9 by road. Before the opening of the bridge, transport between the airport and Mal\u00e9 was by a frequent ferry service. Hulhul\u00e9 and Hulhumal\u00e9 have been connected via a causeway since the development of Hulhumal\u00e9, allowing the airport to be accessed by road from the latter.\nFerries &amp; Speedboats.\nThere is regular scheduled public ferry service from the island of Mal\u00e9 to the islands of Villimal\u00e9, Hulhumal\u00e9, Thilafushi and Gulhifalhu operated by the Maldives Transport and Contracting Company. Premium high-speed ferries operated by the also travel between islands in the region. The government has made an effort in recent years to improve the frequency and connectivity of public ferry services in Mal\u00e9, most notably through the Raajje Transport Link initiative.\nIn addition to public ferries, numerous private chartered ferry and speedboat services operate to and from Mal\u00e9. \nPort.\nThe Island of Mal\u00e9 is the main commercial port of the Maldives. It is located on reclaimed land in the Maafannu ward in the north-west of the island. Most of the cargo that arrives in the Maldives passes through the Port of Mal\u00e9. The port is managed by the Maldives Ports Authority. \nGovernment.\nCity Council.\nMal\u00e9 City Council is the local government authority that governs the islands of Mal\u00e9, Hulhumal\u00e9 and Villimal\u00e9. The council was created in 2011, as per the Decentralization Act of 2010. There are 17 single member districts; 15 districts in Mal\u00e9, 1 district in Hulhumal\u00e9 and 1 district in Villimal\u00e9. The mayor and the council are elected under a mayor\u2013council form of local government.\nIn the Local Council Elections in 2021, the mayor was directly elected for the first time, with Mohamed Muizzu being elected to the position. The Progressive Party of the Maldives picked up 11 seats while the Maldivian Democratic Party picked up 6 seats. After Muizzu resigned to run for president, a by-election was triggered. Adam Azim of the MDP won the mayoral by-election, resulting in a split party city government, with an MDP mayor and PPM-PNC led council.\nNational Government\nMal\u00e9 is the seat of the Maldivian government. Most national government ministries, departments and authorities are based in Mal\u00e9. There are 16 MPs representing Mal\u00e9 in the People's Majilis; 12 from the People's National Congress, 3 from the Maldivian Democratic Party and 1 from the Maldives National Party as of September 2025. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57041", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57041", "title": "Managua, Nicaragua", "text": ""}
{"id": "57042", "revid": "19614876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57042", "title": "Managua", "text": "Capital and largest city of Nicaragua\nManagua () is the capital and largest city of Nicaragua, and one of the largest cities in Central America. Located on the shores of Lake Managua, the city had an estimated population of 1,055,247 as of 2020, and a population of 1,401,687 in its metropolitan area. The city also serves as the seat of Managua Department.\nFounded in 1819, Managua became the national capital in 1852. The city underwent a rapid expansion and urbanization between 1842 and 1930, leading it to become one of the most developed cities in Central America. Several earthquakes have affected the city's growth, especially the 1931 earthquake and the 1972 earthquake, but the city has been rebuilt several times. Today, the city is a major economic hub for both the country and Central America.\nEtymology.\nTwo possible origins for the name \"Managua\" have been proposed. It may have originated from the term \"Mana-ahuac\", which in the Nahuatl language translates to \"adjacent to the water\" or \"site surrounded by water\" (referring to Lake Managua. Alternatively, it may have come from the Mangue language, where the word \"managua\" was said to mean \"place of the big man\" or \"chief\".\nResidents of the city are called \"managuas\", \"manag\u00fcenses\", or \"capitalinos\".\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nNicaragua was inhabited by Paleo-Indians as far back as 12,000 BC. The ancient footprints of Acahualinca are 2,100-year-old fossils discovered along the shores of Lake Managua. Other archeological evidence, mainly in the form of ceramics and statues made of volcanic stone, like the ones found on the island of Zapatera, and petroglyphs found on Ometepe island, contribute to the increasing knowledge of Nicaragua's ancient history.\nEarly history.\nFounded as a pre-Columbian fishing town, the city was incorporated in 1819 and given the name \"Leal Villa de Santiago de Managua\". Efforts to make Managua the capital of Nicaragua began in 1824, after the Central American nations formally attained their independence from Spain. Nicaragua became an independent nation in 1838. Managua's location between the rival cities of Le\u00f3n and Granada made it a logical compromise site. Hence, Managua was officially selected as the nation's capital in 1852.\nBetween 1852 and 1930, Managua underwent extensive urbanization, becoming a base of governance, infrastructure and services. The city was hampered by major floods in 1876 and 1885. Managua had become Central America's most developed city. Today's references differentiate the pre-1970s Managua by labeling it as \"La Antigua Ciudad,\" which in English translates to \"The Ancient City\" or \"The Old City\".\n20th century.\nA disastrous earthquake in 1931 destroyed much of the city, killing between 1,000 and 2,450 people. A large fire in 1936 also destroyed much of the city. Under the rule of Anastasio Somoza Garc\u00eda and his family (1936\u20131979), the city was rebuilt and began to grow rapidly. New government buildings were erected, industry developed, and universities were established. The city's development caught the attention of Irving Fields and Albert Gamse, who composed a musical piece about the city that became popular in the 1940s through the performances of Freddy Martin, Guy Lombardo and Kay Kyser.\nManagua's progress came to a sudden halt after it suffered a second major earthquake on December 23, 1972, which destroyed 90% of the city's downtown and killed more than 19,120 people. Infrastructure was severely damaged and the restoration of buildings was nearly impossible and Managua's limited resources had to be directed to disaster relief purposes. Surviving fire squadrons and ambulance companies were not able to handle the increasing demand for their services. Some buildings burned to the ground, while the foundations of others simply gave way. Not able to rebuild quickly, the city directed emergency workers to clear away much of the city's ruins quickly while burying the deceased in mass graves. Residences, government buildings and entire avenues were demolished. Escaping the city center, earthquake victims found refuge in the outskirts of the city. In addition, corruption within the Somoza regime which allocated part of the relief funds hindered the reconstruction of the city's center which remains somewhat isolated from the rest of the capital.\nThe Nicaraguan Revolution of 1979 to overthrow the Somoza regime and the 11-year-long Contra War of the 1980s further devastated the city and its economy. To make matters worse, a series of natural disasters, including Hurricane Mitch in 1998, made economic recovery more difficult. After winning the presidential election in 1990, the National Opposition Union began the reconstruction of Managua in earnest. More than 300,000 Nicaraguans returned from abroad bringing their expertise and needed capital. Businesses mushroomed, new housing projects and schools were constructed, the airport was expanded and modernized, streets were widened, older malls were repaired and new ones were built, and buildings were cleaned up.\n21st century.\nIn 2006, after the Sandinista National Liberation Front came back into power, literacy, health and reconstruction programs were expanded.\nNew governmental buildings, galleries, museums, apartment buildings, squares, promenades, monuments, boat tours on Lake Managua, restaurants, nighttime entertainment, and broad avenues have resurrected part of downtown Managua's former vitality. Commercial activity, however, remains low. Residential and commercial buildings have been constructed on the outskirts of the city, in the same locales that were once used as refugee camps for those who were homeless after the earthquake. These booming locales have been of concern to the government because of their close proximity to Lake Managua.\nThe construction of a new sewer system and the redirecting of waste water to a new water treatment plant at Las Mercedes in Eastern Managua in May 2009 relieved previous concerns over water pollution and native wildlife, and brought some residents closer to the old city center and the rest of the mainland.\nIn 2015, Dorotea Wilson organized the first Summit of Afro-descendant Women Leaders of the Americas, which took place in the city from 26\u201328 June.\nGeography.\nManagua is located on the southern shores of Lake Managua, also known as Lake Xolotl\u00e1n. Lake Managua contains the same fish species as larger Lake Cocibolca in southeastern Nicaragua, except for the freshwater sharks found exclusively in the latter. Once a Managuan scenic highlight, the lake has been polluted from the dumping of chemical and waste water since 1927. A new sewer system and the redirecting of waste water to a new waste water treatment plant at Las Mercedes funded by the German government to decontaminate the lake was expected to be the largest in Central America and was inaugurated in 2009.\nThese works of progress have relieved old concerns over water pollution and the endangering of native wildlife have brought some residents closer to the old city center and the rest of the mainland. \nManagua's city area extends about , essentially south from the south shore of Lake Managua. The lakeshore is at an altitude of above sea level, and the city climbs as it gets towards the Sierras de Managua further south where it is over above sea level.\nGeologically, the city lies on fault lines, thus seismologists predict that Managua will experience a severe earthquake every 50 years or less.\nManagua features four smaller crater lakes or lagoons within city limits. The most centrally located is the Tiscapa Lagoon in the Tiscapa Lagoon Natural Reserve.\nFlora.\nManagua, due to its tropical climate, varied topography, rich fertile soils, and abundant rain and water sources, boasts a great variety of flora. Many different types of trees, some of which are not found elsewhere in the world, appear, including \"chilamate\"s, \"ceibo\"s, \"pochote\"s, \"gen\u00edzaro\"s, \"tig\u00fcilote\"s, royal palms, \"pi\u00f1uela\"s and \"madro\u00f1o\"s (Nicaragua's national tree) surround the city. During the rainy season (May to November), Managua becomes a lush city due to many palms, bushes, and other plants and trees which dominate the city's appearance.\nClimate.\nManagua, like much of Western Nicaragua, except for the Sierras, has a tropical climate with constant temperatures averaging between . Under K\u00f6ppen's climate classification, the city has a tropical wet and dry climate (\"Aw\"). The city spends most of the year seeing strong heat and a bright shining sun. The temperature varies from at night to during the daytime. Temperatures are highest in March, April and May when the sun lies directly overhead and the summer rainfall has yet to begin. As stated before Managua only has two seasons, the dry and the rainy. The rainy season occurs between mid-May and mid-November, while the dry-season occurs between mid-November and the middle or end of May. During the dry season the countryside gets dull and even dusty.\nEducation.\nMost of the nation's prestigious universities and higher education institutions are based in Managua. In 2007, after a successful literacy campaign, Managua was declared by the Mayor of Managua and the Sandinista party newspaper to be the first capital city in Central America to be rid of illiteracy. Nicaragua's higher education system consists of 48 universities and 113 colleges, vocational and technical institutes which serve students in the areas of electronics, computer systems and sciences, agroforestry, construction and trade-related services. The educational system includes 1 United States accredited English language university, 3 bilingual university programs, 5 bilingual secondary schools and dozens of English Language Institutes.\nIn 2005, almost 400,000 (7%) of Nicaraguans held a university degree. In 2014, the Neil Armstrong Observatory was completed in Managua. About 18 percent of Nicaragua's total budget is invested in primary, secondary and higher education. University level institutions account for 6% of the 18 percent.\nHigher education.\nThe National Autonomous University of Nicaragua (UNAN) (Spanish: \"Universidad Nacional Aut\u00f3noma de Nicaragua\") is the main state-funded public university of Nicaragua. UNAN was established in 1812 in the city of Le\u00f3n and its main campus is located in Managua. By government decree in 1983 the campus of the National Autonomous University of Nicaragua in Le\u00f3n and Managua, became two separate entities; UNAN and UNAN-Le\u00f3n.\nThe Polytechnic University of Nicaragua (UPOLI) (Spanish: \"Universidad Polit\u00e9cnica de Nicaragua\") is a university located in Managua, Nicaragua. It was founded in 1967.\nThe INCAE Business School (Spanish: \"Instituto Centroamericano de Administraci\u00f3n de Empresas, INCAE\") is a private business school. INCAE was founded in 1964 with the support of the United States government and other Central American countries. According to a study done by Am\u00e9rica Econom\u00eda INCAE ranked as the number one business school in Latin America in 2004 and 2005 and ranked in the top ten international business schools by \"The Wall Street Journal\" in 2006.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Thomas More Universitas (UTM)\nEconomy.\nManagua is the economic center and a generator of services for the majority of the nation. The city, with a population exceeding one million inhabitants, houses many large national and international businesses. It is home to many factories which produce diverse products. Multinational companies such as Wal-Mart, Telefonica, Union Fenosa, and Parmalat have offices and operations in Managua. The city's chief products include beer, coffee, pharmaceuticals, textiles, shoes, matches, construction products, etc. The main trading products are beef, coffee, cotton, and other crops. Managua is also Nicaragua's main political, social, cultural, educational and economic hub. At the same time, the city is served by the Augusto C. Sandino International Airport, the country's primary international gateway, and regional Los Brasiles airport and Punta Huete military air base, recently renewed.\nManagua is also home to all of the major banks of the nation, Banco de la Producci\u00f3n (BANPRO), BAC Credomatic, Banco de Finanzas (BDF), Banco de Cr\u00e9dito Centroamericano (Bancentro) and its parent company the Lafise Group. Several new hotels including Crowne Plaza, Best Western, InterContinental, Holiday Inn, and Hilton currently have facilities in Managua. As well as many hotels, Managua has opened four western style shopping centers or malls, such as Plaza Inter, Centro Comercial Metrocentro, Galerias Santo Domingo, and Multicentro Las Americas, with many more being constructed.\nThere is a large established local market system that caters to the majority of Nicaraguans. In \"Mercado Roberto Huembes, Mercado Oriental, Mercado Israel Lewites\" and other locations one can find anything from household amenities, food, clothing, electronics, construction materials, and other contracting supplies. The markets enjoy a substantial amount of popularity, as many of the backpacking, ecotourism-focused tourists and tourists on-a-budget use these markets for their supplies and souvenirs.\nCulture.\nManagua is Nicaragua's cultural capital, boasting restaurants, theaters, museums, and shopping centers. The city is also home to many communities of immigrants and ex-pats from countries including but not limited to Taiwan, China, Germany, the United States, Palestine, and Latin American countries. \nManagua is home to the annual Miss Nicaragua pageant, the national beauty pageant of Nicaragua. The pageant is traditionally held at the Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo National Theatre and has been held since 1955.\nFestivals.\nManagua's most famous festival is that of its patron saint Santo Domingo de Guzm\u00e1n. It starts on the morning of August 1, when the \"Bajada del Santo\" (walk down of the saint) involves many joyful people walking and carrying the old statue of Santo Domingo from Las Sierritas Church in south Managua to another church across the city to the north, in the area destroyed by the 1972 earthquake. It remains here for ten days until the morning of August 10, when the \"Subida del Santo\" (walking up of the saint) returns the statue to Las Sierritas Church where it remains for the rest of the year. Thousands of people attend this event which involves dancing, eating, drinking and the marching of musical bands, mainly for traditions that date back to pre-colonial times, or to ask for personal miracles, make promises, or give thanks to the saint. During the parade many people dress up in typical costumes, masks and painted bodies. During the festival some people cover themselves in a mix of grease and motor oil to pay promises to the saints while others wear masks and costumes.\nCarnaval has been celebrated in Managua since 2002 as \"Alegr\u00eda por la Vida\" (Joy for Life) and takes place in March. There is a different slogan or theme every year. This event is celebrated with parades, floats, live music, food and dancing as well as the march of the Carnival Queen.\nMuseums and cultural institutions.\nThe National Library holds a great amount of volumes and affords abundant bibliographic information about the discovery and independence of Nicaragua. The National Palace of Culture has an exhibition of Nicaraguan art from the time previous to its independence. Inside the National Palace of Culture is the National Museum, containing archeological finds with some examples of pre-Columbian pottery, statues, and other findings.\nManagua is home to an array of art galleries which feature pieces by both national and international artists.\nManagua is home to many types of museums. Among the art museums are the Julio Cort\u00e1zar Museum and the Archivo F\u00edlmico de la Cinemateca Nacional. Natural history museums include the Museo del Departamento de Malacolog\u00eda UCA, Museo Gemol\u00f3gico de la Concha y el Caracol, and Museo Paleontol\u00f3gico \"El Hato\". The Santo Domingo de Guzm\u00e1n Museum is an anthropology museum. History museums include the Museo de la Revoluci\u00f3n, Museo Casa Hacienda San Jacinto and Museo Parque Loma de Tiscapa.\nThe Doctor Roberto Incer Barquero Library, located in Managua, is designated to promote Nicaraguan culture. The library has 67,000 books, free internet, a newspaper archive, and economic information from the Central Bank. The library also has a gallery in the same building, where notable Nicaraguan paintings, as well as pieces from new promising artists, are exhibited. In the numismatic hall there is a permanent exhibition of Nicaraguan coins, bills, and memorial medals from throughout Nicaragua's history.\nCultural centers in Managua include the Centro Cultural Nicarag\u00fcense Norteamericano (CCNN) (Nicaraguan-North American Culture Center), the Centro Cultural Chino Nicarag\u00fcense (Chinese Nicaraguan Culture Center), and the Alianza Francesa de Managua (French Alliance of Managua), among others.\nEntertainment.\nManagua features many bars, nightclubs, casinos, theaters and cinemas. Compared to western prices, alcoholic beverages, theater visits and cinema tickets are relatively inexpensive. There are cinemas in all major shopping centers; screening both English- and Spanish-language films. Foreign embassies in Managua also sponsor film festivals.\nSince the late 1990s and early 2000s, many casinos and karaoke bars opened and have remained popular attractions for Nicaraguans and foreign visitors. Popular music includes the Palo de Mayo, Merengue, Cumbia and Latin pop among other Latin music genres, as well as American pop and rock. Salsa dancing is a national pastime. Managua boasts a vibrant night life. Nightclubs and bars are abound in Managua, particularly, in the popular areas called \"Zona Viva\" located in the shopping mall \"Galer\u00edas Santo Domingo\", as well as very close by \"Plaza Mi Viejo Santo Domingo\" and \"Plaza Familiar\". Other popular areas are \"Zona Hippos\" behind the Hilton hotel near Metrocentro and \"Zona Rosa\".\nLGBT culture.\nAlthough promoting or practicing homosexuality was illegal in Nicaragua, there is a modest gay social scene in Managua. As of March 2008, homosexuality is no longer illegal and no longer carries a prison sentence.\nSports.\nBaseball is by far Nicaragua's most popular sport, followed by soccer and boxing. The Dennis Mart\u00ednez National Stadium is home to many baseball games of Managua's Boer team. At the time of its construction in the late 1960s, it was the most modern stadium in Central America. The baseball league has 34 teams.\nThere has been growing amateur interest in little football or \"futbolin\" among teens and adults. New private courts have played a big role in the promotion of amateur games and tournaments. On the professional level, the National Nicaraguan Football team has still not had the public support nor the international exposure as the regional counterparts like the Costa Rican, Honduran or Salvadoran teams. However, with support of the FIFA, the first national soccer stadium in Managua is under construction.\nIn Managua there are two golf courses, the better-known of which is Nejapa Golf &amp; Country Club.\nManagua is home to the basketball team Costa Caribe. The team reached the \"Final Four\" at the 2016 .\nManagua is also home to the Polideportivo Alexis Arg\u00fcello, an indoor arena with 8,500 seat capacity. The venue will host the 2025 FIBA AmeriCup where their national basketball team will make their debut.\nLandmarks.\nNational Palace of Culture.\nThe National Palace is one of Managua's oldest buildings, undamaged by the 1972 earthquake. It was commissioned by President Juan Bautista Sacasa in 1935 and built by architect Pablo Dambach, who also built the St. James Cathedral. For more than 50\u00a0years, the National Palace housed the Congress. Today, it houses the National Archive, the National Library, as well as the National Museum which is open to the public. The museum features pre-Columbian paintings, statues, ceramics, etc. Also part of the exhibit is the Hall of National History and the Hall of National Symbols. The National Palace was one of the few buildings that survived the 1972 earthquake.\nRub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo National Theatre.\nThe Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo National Theatre is Nicaragua's most important theater, and is one of the most modern theaters in Central America. Both national and international artists present shows, concerts, exhibitions, and cultural performances such as El G\u00fceg\u00fcense among many others. The National Theatre is one of the few buildings that survived the 1972 earthquake that destroyed 90% of Managua.\nPlaza de la Revoluci\u00f3n.\n\"Plaza de la Revoluci\u00f3n\" (Revolution Square), formerly known as \"Plaza de la Rep\u00fablica\" (Republic Square) is home to Managua's historic center and is located on the shores of Lake Managua. The plaza has been partially rebuilt and many old buildings have been refurbished. Some of the more important buildings which managed to survive the 1972 Nicaragua earthquake include the \"Catedral de Santiago\" (St. James' Cathedral, known colloquially as the Old Cathedral), the Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo National Theatre, and the National Palace of Culture.\nWithin the Revolution Square is the \"Parque Central\" (Central Park) which contains many historical monuments, some dedicated to national heroes and poets. Some of these include a centrally located Art Deco gazebo crowned with a white-washed naked muse, which happens to have superb acoustics. There is also the bust of Professor Josefa Toledo de Aguerri, who was an educator, philanthropist, writer, social activist, and one of the first feminists in the Americas. Also, the tomb of Carlos Fonseca, founder of the FSLN, which is guarded by an eternal flame. Across from the Central Park, on the north side, is the Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo park and monument, dedicated to Nicaragua's greatest poet and one of the most influential literary figures of the Spanish-speaking world. It is a neo-classical monument which consists of a round pedestal, topped by a balustrade surrounding a fountain containing a gondola filled with singing cherubs, and at the center, a pillar topped with a statue of Dar\u00edo dressed in a Roman tunic protected by an angel. Constructed of Carrara marble, Dar\u00edo's monument is one of the greatest in the country. There is also a park dedicated to the Guatemalan writer Miguel \u00c1ngel Asturias. Other monuments include the monument of \"El Guerrillero sin Nombre\" (The Nameless Guerrilla Soldier) and \"Monumento \u00e0 la Paz\" (Monument for Peace).\nMuseum of Acahualinca.\nManagua is also home to \"Museo Sitio Huellas de Acahualinca\" (the Museum of Acahualinca), where the Ancient footprints of Acahualinca, fossilized Paleo American footprints made 2,100 years ago, are engraved in volcanic ash. The museum is located in west Managua in the Acahualinca neighborhood. In addition to the footprints, the museum also displays artifacts found in other localities around the country. Artifacts such as mammoth footprints, pre-Columbian tools, a skull from Le\u00f3n Viejo, and a small collection of pottery, among other archeological objects.\nTiscapa Lagoon.\nTiscapa Lagoon, located within the Tiscapa Lagoon Natural Reserve, is just south of Managua's Historical Center. \nThe reserve is located within Managua's city limits, and is a tourist attraction. Restaurants and stores line the walls of the lagoon.\nLeading up to the lagoon is \"Calle del Comercio\" (Commerce Street), which leads to the \"Monumento al Liberalismo\" (Monument to Liberalism), built in the late 1930s by the Liberal party in honor of President Anastasio Somoza Garc\u00eda. Nearby is the Monument to Sandino which is a silhouette of Augusto C. Sandino, one of Nicaragua's national heroes. The monument stands 59\u00a0feet tall. The monument was proposed by Ernesto Cardenal and is protected by the Nicaraguan military. The Sandino monument was constructed on top of the wreckage of the old Mozarabic-style presidential palace commissioned by President Sacasa in the late 1920s but long used by the Somoza Family as their personal residence. Also on the crater lip of Tiscapa is the \"Mazmorras\", a prison where current President Daniel Ortega and many other political prisoners were tortured during the Somoza regime.\nDennis Mart\u00ednez National Stadium.\nThe Dennis Mart\u00ednez National Stadium was built in 1948 and was the largest stadium in Central America at the end of its construction. It survived the 1972 earthquake. The stadium was named in honor of Nicaragua's first baseball player to play in Major League Baseball. It serves as a venue for baseball and soccer games, as well as concerts and religious events. The Dennis Mart\u00ednez National Stadium has a capacity for 40,000, making it the largest stadium in Nicaragua.\nOld Cathedral.\nThe \"Catedral de Santiago\" (St. James' Cathedral), also known as the Old Cathedral of Managua was designed by Belgian architects, and the iron that was used to shape the core of the cathedral was shipped from Belgium. Construction lasted from 1928 to 1938, overseen by Pablo Dambach, who was a Belgian engineer residing in Managua. The architects had been inspired by the church of Saint-Sulpice in Paris, France. The St. James' Cathedral became the first cathedral in the Western Hemisphere to be built entirely of concrete on a metal frame. The cathedral survived the 1931 earthquake, but was heavily damaged during the 1972 earthquake, which eventually led to the construction of a new cathedral located in another part of Managua. Restoration of the old cathedral has appeared to be possible.\nNew Cathedral.\nThe Metropolitan Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, more commonly referred to as the New Cathedral, was designed by architect Ricardo Legorreta and inaugurated in 1993. The New Cathedral was built to replace the Old Cathedral downtown that had been damaged during the 1972 earthquake. Upon the completion of its construction, the New Cathedral generated controversy among tourists and locals because of its bland and dull appearance. Critics pointed to the fact that buildings of particular importance, especially those of colonial heritage, were painted in bright colors. Such a building whose intention was to serve as a place of worship was expected to have some sort of vibrant color. Eventually, the church's original concrete and gray surface became accepted and Catholic pilgrims began to embrace the church as it was.\nGovernment.\nManagua is governed by a Mayor, Deputy Mayor and City Council. Since 2001, the Sandinista National Liberation Front has held a majority on the city council.\nUrban planning.\nThe German government funded the construction of a water treatment plant with plans to process the city's sewage and clean Lake Managua. Also pending is a mega-project to reconstruct the old center of Managua, and to introduce a light rail system, to alleviate future transportation problems in Managua.\nCrime.\nNeither Nicaragua nor the city of Managua have major gang problems, in comparison to some of its regional neighbors. The number of gang members was estimated at 4,500 throughout the country, lower than all of its Northern neighbors in the region except Belize. In 2003, the National Police of Nicaragua recognized gangs committed only 0.51% of all crimes. In 1991, there were 110 gangs in Managua. Since, the number of gangs and gang members both decreased and increased to 34 gangs in 2005, with 706 members in Managua.\nMedia.\nManagua is the home of most national broadcasting television channels as well as the major national newspapers. Some of the larger television channels include: Canal 2, Telenica, Canal 10, Canal 15 (100% Noticias), and several others. There are numerous radio stations in Managua, some of which tend to have political, social, or religious affiliations.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nTransportation-wise, Managua is one of Nicaragua's best positioned cities. All of Nicaragua's main roads lead to Managua, and there are good public transportation connections to and from the capital. There are four main highways that lead into Managua. The Pan-American Highway enters the city from the north, connecting Managua to Nicaragua's northern and central departments. This highway is commonly referred to as the \"Northern Highway.\"\nThe \"Southern Highway\", the southern part of the Pan-American highway, connects Managua to the southern departments of Carazo, Rivas, and others.\nThe \"Carretera A Masaya\" connects Managua to the departments of Masaya and Granada.\nThe newly reconstructed \"Carretera A Le\u00f3n\" connects Managua with Le\u00f3n.\nAll of these highways are in good condition, with little traffic congestion. Infrastructure on the highways is well maintained. This also tends to be true for cities and towns that are served or are in close distance with the freeways. However, this does not yield truthfully for cities and towns that tend to be considerably further from the main highway roads. Nicaraguan bus companies, often referred to as \"Chicken Buses\", serve both urban and rural areas to remedy the lack of sufficient infrastructure that plagues these towns or villages.\nTransportation infrastructure has grown outside of Managua and other Pacific coast cities and departments in recent years. A road from the river port city of El Rama to Pearl Lagoon, located in the South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region, was completed in 2007. El Rama is connected by highway to Managua. Managua and Puerto Cabezas, located in the North Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region are also connected via road. A third road, under construction, will connect Bluefields, South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region with Managua via Nueva Guinea. Traveling by airplane is more efficient than traveling by these roads due to the poor conditions, especially in the rainy season. Domestic flights are operated by La Coste\u00f1a from the international airport.\nAirport.\nThe Augusto C. Sandino International Airport (formerly Managua International Airport) is the largest and only international airport in Nicaragua. It recently inaugurated its over US$52 million extension and renovation partly financed by Spain. The airport was remodeled by architect Roberto Sans\u00f3n and has now been converted into one of the region's most modern airports. The airport used to serve as the hub for the Nicarag\u00fcenses de Aviaci\u00f3n airline, which was bought by TACA Airlines the El Salvador national airline, that bought all of the airlines in Central America.\nThe airport, known as Aeropuerto Sandino or MGA to locals, serves as the primary hub for connections at both domestic and international levels. TACA Regional member La Coste\u00f1a operates flights to local destinations like Bluefields, the Corn Islands and San Carlos among others. The airport is located near the northern highway and is about east of the city's downtown. Out of the country's one hundred and forty airports, it is the only one with the appropriate infrastructure and capacity to handle international flights.\nBuses.\nThere are 36 bus routes in Managua. These are regulated by the city's regulatory entity for municipal transports (IRTRAMMA) and individually operated by cooperatives and private companies. In addition there are two bus routes that formerly connected to outside parts of Managua, but these became now are part of the city (Esquipulas and Los Vanegas). And seven bus routes connect to the nearby Ciudad Sandino. Buses are the most economical way to get around the city and thus contributes to high numbers of ridership. Managua's prime location between the Northern Pan-American highway and the Southern Highway make it an ideal hub for local, national and international buses.\nA transport map of the city's 44 bus routes was created in 2016 in a crowdsourcing initiative by the Nicaraguan OpenStreetMap community.\nMost bus coaches in Managua are fabricated by DINA S.A. and Mercedes-Benz. One out of every ten buses now grants access to wheelchair passengers, granting disabled passengers for the first time the ability to utilize public transportation resources.\n\"TransNica\" is a Nicaraguan bus company that operates international bus services throughout Central America. It competes extensively with its counterpart, \"TicaBus\", a Costa Rican bus company. Managua serves as the company's hub, with buses departing from Managua to San Jos\u00e9, Costa Rica, Tegucigalpa, San Salvador and Choluteca.\nRail.\nThere are no railroads that operate in Managua or in Nicaragua. The country's railroads fell into disrepair during the 1980s. The Chamorro government closed the system and sold the cars and rails for scrap.\nMetro.\nThe President of Nicaragua, Daniel Ortega, was presented with a plan to revitalize the city center. The project included the possibility of building a metro that would cross over the old center of the capital that remains rather unchanged since the 1972 earthquake. The metro would serve important locales, such as the Augusto C. Sandino International Airport and continue service to Ciudad Sandino. The project costs $100 million and has been considered as a possibility for the nation's capital.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nManagua is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnion of Ibero-American Capital Cities.\nManagua is part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities from 12 October 1982 establishing brotherly relations with the following cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57044", "revid": "44356317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57044", "title": "Maputo", "text": "Capital and chief port of Mozambique\nMaputo () is the capital and largest city of Mozambique. Located near the southern end of the country, it is within of the borders with Eswatini and South Africa. The city has a population of 1,088,449 (as of 2017) distributed over a land area of . The Maputo metropolitan area includes the neighbouring city of Matola, and has a total population of 2,717,437. Maputo is a port city, with an economy centered on commerce. It is noted for its vibrant cultural scene and distinctive, eclectic architecture. Maputo was formerly named Louren\u00e7o Marques (; until 1976).\nMaputo is situated on a large natural bay on the Indian Ocean, near where the rivers Tembe, Mbuluzi, Matola and Infulene converge. The city consists of seven administrative divisions, which are each subdivided into quarters or \"bairros\". The city is surrounded by Maputo Province, but is administered as a self-contained, separate province since 1998. Maputo City is the geographically smallest and most densely populated province in Mozambique. Maputo is a cosmopolitan city, with Xitsonga, Portuguese, and, to a lesser extent, Arabic, Indian, and Chinese languages and cultures present. Almost 50% of Maputo speaks Portuguese as a native language as of 2017.\nThe area on which Maputo stands was first settled as a fishing village by ancient Tsonga people. It was soon named Louren\u00e7o Marques, after the navigator of the same name who explored the area in 1544. The modern city traces its origins to a Portuguese fort established on the site in 1781. A town grew around the fort starting around 1850, and in 1877 it was elevated to city status. In 1898, the colony of Portuguese Mozambique relocated its capital there. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Louren\u00e7o Marques grew both in population and economic development as a port city. Upon Mozambican independence in 1975, the city became the national capital and was renamed Maputo. During the Mozambican Civil War, the city's economy was devastated. When the war ended, the FRELIMO government launched a program to revive the city's economy, and to clean up the city by forcibly removing criminals, squatters, and undocumented residents.\nMaputo has a number of landmarks, including Independence Square, City Hall, Maputo Fortress, the central market, Tunduru Gardens, and Maputo Railway Station. Maputo is known as an aesthetically attractive, if dilapidated, city. With wide avenues lined by jacaranda and acacia trees, it has earned the nicknames \"City of Acacias\" and the \"Pearl of the Indian Ocean\". The city is known for its distinct, eclectic architecture, with Portuguese colonial Neoclassical and Manueline styles alongside modern art deco, bauhaus, tropical modernism and Brutalist buildings. The historic \"Baixa de Maputo\" district is the downtown area. Maputo has a vibrant cultural scene, with many restaurants, music and performance venues, and local film industry. Maputo's economy is centred around its port, through which much of Mozambique's imports and exports are shipped. The chief exports include cotton, sugar, chromite, sisal, copra, and hardwood. In addition to trade, the city has robust manufacturing and service sectors. Several colleges and universities are located in Maputo, including Pedagogical University, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e1s University, Catholic University of Mozambique, and Eduardo Mondlane University, the oldest in the country.\nHistory.\nOn the northern bank of Esp\u00edrito Santo Estuary of Delagoa Bay, an inlet of the Indian Ocean, Louren\u00e7o Marques was named after the Portuguese navigator who, with Ant\u00f3nio Caldeira, was sent in 1544 by the governor of Mozambique on a voyage of exploration. They explored the lower courses of the rivers emptying their waters into Delagoa Bay, notably the Esp\u00edrito Santo. The forts and trading stations that the Portuguese established, abandoned and reoccupied on the north bank of the river were all named \"Louren\u00e7o Marques\". The existing town dates from about 1850, with the previous settlement having been entirely destroyed by the natives. The town developed around a Portuguese fortress completed in 1787.\nIn 1871, the town was described as a poor place, with narrow streets, fairly good flat-roofed houses, grass huts, decayed forts, and a rusty cannon, enclosed by a recently erected wall high and protected by bastions at intervals. The growing importance of the Transvaal led, however, to greater interest being taken back in Portugal in the development of a port. A commission was sent by the Portuguese government in 1876 to drain the marshy land near the settlement, to plant the blue gum tree, and to build a hospital and a church. A city since 1887, it superseded the Island of Mozambique as the capital of Mozambique in 1898. In 1895, the opening of the NZASM railroad to Pretoria, South Africa, caused the city's population to grow. The Witwatersrand Gold Rush, which began in 1886, also increased the economic development of the city in the late 19th and early 20th centuries as Louren\u00e7o Marques served as the closest seaport for the export of gold from South Africa. The existing town dates from about 1850, with the previous settlement having been entirely destroyed by the natives. The town developed around a Portuguese fortress completed in 1787.\nOn 9 December 1876, Louren\u00e7o Marques was elevated to the status of town (\"vila\" in Portuguese), and on 10 November 1887 it became a city.\nThe Luso-British conflict for the possession of Louren\u00e7o Marques ended on 24 July 1875 with Patrice de MacMahon, the French President, ruling in favour of Portugal.\nIn the early 20th century, with a well-equipped seaport, with piers, quays, landing sheds and electric cranes which enabled large vessels to discharge cargoes direct into the railway trucks, Louren\u00e7o Marques developed under Portuguese rule and achieved great importance as a lively cosmopolitan city. It was served by British, Portuguese, and German liners, and the majority of its imported goods were shipped to Southampton, Lisbon, and Hamburg.\nWith the continuous growth of the city's population due to its expanding economy centred on the seaport, from the 1940s Portugal's administration built a network of primary and secondary schools, industrial and commercial schools as well as the first university in the region. The University of Louren\u00e7o Marques was opened in 1962. Portuguese, Islamic (including Ismailis), Indian (including from Portuguese India) and Chinese (including Macanese) communities \u2014 but not the unskilled African majority \u2014 achieved great prosperity by developing the industrial and commercial sectors of the city. Urban areas of Mozambique grew quickly in this period due to the lack of restriction on the internal migration of indigenous Mozambicans, a situation that differed from the apartheid policies of neighbouring South Africa.\nBefore Mozambique's independence in 1975, thousands of tourists from South Africa and Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) frequented the city and its scenic beaches, high-quality hotels, restaurants, casinos, and brothels.\nThe Mozambique Liberation Front, or FRELIMO, formed in Tanzania in 1962 and led by Eduardo Mondlane, fought for independence from Portuguese rule. The Mozambican War of Independence lasted over 10 years, ending only in 1974 when the Estado Novo regime was overthrown in Lisbon by a leftist military coup \u2014 the Carnation Revolution. The new government of Portugal granted independence to almost all Portuguese overseas territories (except for Timor Leste and Macau).\nThe words \"Aqui \u00e9 Portugal\" (\"Here is Portugal\") were once inscribed on the walkway of its municipal building.\nIndependence.\nThe People's Republic of Mozambique was proclaimed on 25 June 1975 in accordance with the Lusaka Accord signed in September 1974. A parade and a state banquet completed the independence festivities in the capital, which was expected to be renamed Can Phumo, or \"Place of Phumo\", after a Shangaan chief who lived in the area before the Portuguese navigator Louren\u00e7o Marques first visited the site in 1545 and gave his name to it. However, after independence, the city's name was changed (in February 1976) to Maputo. Maputo's name reputedly has its origin in the Maputo River: in fact, this river, which marks the border with South Africa in the southernmost extent of Mozambique, had become symbolic during the FRELIMO-led armed struggle against Portuguese sovereignty, after the motto \u00ab\"Viva Mo\u00e7ambique unido, do Rovuma ao Maputo\"\u00bb, that is, \"Hail Mozambique, united from Rovuma down to Maputo\" (Rovuma is the river which marks the northern border with Tanzania).\nGeography.\nMaputo is located on the west side of Maputo Bay, near the Estu\u00e1rio do Esp\u00edrito Santo where the four rivers Tembe, Umbeluzi, Matola and Infulene drain. The bay is long and wide. At the extreme east of the city and bay is the island of Inhaca. The total area covered by the municipality of Maputo is and borders the city of Matola northeast and east, the districts of Marracuene to the north; Boane in the east and Matutu\u00edne at the south all of which are part of Maputo Province. The city is from the South African border at Ressano Garcia and from the border with Eswatini near the town of Namaacha.\nClimate.\nMaputo features a tropical savanna climate (\"Aw\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, having enough precipitation to prevent it from being classified as a hot semi-arid climate (\"BSh\"). Maputo is a relatively dry city, averaging of precipitation per year. Precipitation is abundant during summer and sparse during winter. The city has a relatively warm climate averaging a mean temperature of . The hottest month is January with a mean temperature of , while the coolest month is July with a mean temperature of .\nClimate change.\nA 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a \"moderate\" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Maputo in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Goi\u00e2nia in Brazil. The annual temperature would increase by , and the temperature of the warmest month by , while the temperature of the coldest month would increase by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.\nMoreover, Maputo is particularly vulnerable to impacts such as cyclones and flooding caused by sea level rise. Poverty and inequality, which are concentrated in the overpopulated bairros, further exacerbate climate change vulnerabilities in the city. According to the 2022 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, Maputo is one of 12 major African cities (Abidjan, Alexandria, Algiers, Cape Town, Casablanca, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Durban, Lagos, Lom\u00e9, Luanda and Maputo) which would be the most severely affected by future sea level rise. It estimates that they would collectively sustain cumulative damages of US$65 billion under RCP 4.5 and US$86.5 billion for the high-emission scenario RCP 8.5 by the year 2050. Additionally, RCP 8.5 combined with the hypothetical impact from marine ice sheet instability at high levels of warming would involve up to US$137.5 billion in damages, while the additional accounting for the \"low-probability, high-damage events\" may increase aggregate risks to US$187 billion for the \"moderate\" RCP4.5, US$206 billion for RCP8.5 and US$397 billion under the high-end ice sheet instability scenario. Since sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years under every scenario of climate change, future costs of sea level rise would only increase, especially without adaptation measures.\nAdministrative subdivisions.\nThe city is divided into seven main administrative divisions. Each of these consists of several smaller city quarters or \"bairros\".\nInfrastructure.\nThe central area of Maputo is a planned city with square blocks and wide avenues, with Portuguese traces and their typical architecture of the 1970s. After the Carnation Revolution (1974) military coup in Lisbon, Portuguese refugees fled in massive numbers close to the date of independence (1975), and the resultant lack of skills and capital, in the context of a fierce civil war and government mismanagement, contributed to its state of dereliction in the years following these events.\nRecovery of the older infrastructure has been slow and most property developers in recent years have decided to invest in the construction of new properties rather than rehabilitating any of the existing ones. The rates for property in the city are high as investment increases, larger numbers of businesses are hoping to locate within easy reach of the airports, banks and other facilities.\nMaputo faces many challenges, such as poor transport and drainage infrastructure, which have profound implications on people's livelihoods, particularly in informal settlements. Inadequate planning regulation and law enforcement, as well as perceived corruption in government processes, lack of communication across government departments and lack of concern or government coordination with respect to building codes are major impediments to progressing the development of Maputo's infrastructure, according to the Climate &amp; Development Knowledge Network.\nAs a coastal city, Maputo is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of sea level rise, and population growth is putting increasing pressure on the coastal areas.\nPROMAPUTO.\nIn 2007, the municipality of Maputo began a project to seriously consider rehabilitating the city's infrastructure. PROMAPUTO was a project that began as co-operation between the local city council and the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank. The first phase (PROMAPUTO1) took place between 2007 and 2010 and was chiefly concerned with developing the systems, knowledge and planning required to support the gradual overhaul of the infrastructure. The project was broken into several key areas and a budget allocated to each of these, namely: Institutional Development, Financial Sustainability, Urban Planning, Urban Infrastructure Investment and Maintenance, Metropolitan Development (services such as waste collection and disposal). The total financial allocation for this phase was US$30 million. Little was done, however.\nIn 2011, PROMAPUTO2, the second phase of the project began. This phase was to last until 2015 and a total of US$105 million was spent. The plan called for an IT systems, Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) together with Geographic Information System (GIS). These systems would supposedly help the municipality control its budgets and manage tenders, while the GIS would allow for precise information about land location and titling to be kept. Several roads should have been expanded and improved and the Avenida Julius Nyerere finally completed. Financial sustainability for the project was to be guaranteed through the improved collection of property tax (IPRA). The project also coincided with the recent overhaul of the Road Safety and Traffic Regulations (final completion 2020) which was an antiquated system that had not seen changes since the 1950s. Amongst the new regulations, heavy penalties and fines would now apply to many detrimental actions done by automobiles, such as pollution, loud noises, and illegal maneuvers.\nBuilding projects.\nIn spite of its previous instability, Mozambique is experiencing one of the fastest growth rates for a developing country in the world. The projected growth rate for 2011 is expected to be around 7.5%, some of it centered on the construction of several capital intensive projects in Maputo. Some of the more notable developments include Edificio 24, a mixed-use development that will be located at the center of the city along Avenida 24 Julho and Avenida Salvador Allende. The Maputo Business Tower is a modern 19-story building. The Radisson Blu corporation has constructed a 22-story hotel with 256 rooms in one of the city's trendiest spots on the \"marginal\" along the beach. A 15-story building for the second largest telecommunication company in the country, Vodacom, was projected to be completed in 2010. The regeneration of the Maputo waterfront is an urban regeneration project that is being developed at site of the former annual industrial fair grounds (FACIM).\nRehabilitation projects.\nIn February 2011, president Armando Guebuza announced that the Vila Algarve would be restored to its former condition and the building transformed into a museum for the veterans of the civil war. The Vila Algarve belonged to the International and State Defence Police (PIDE) during colonial rule. It was where political prisoners and others accused of conspiring to harm the regime were taken for interrogation and torture. There are claims that several individuals were executed in the building. No dates have been released on when the renovation is to commence. The building has changed ownership several times and has been an off-on residence for squatters.\nSports facilities.\nMaputo hosted the 2011 All-Africa Games. The main stadium Est\u00e1dio do Zimpeto was built in Zimpeto for the Games that also hosted the football and athletics competitions. The Zimpeto Olympic Pool for swimming was also built for these Games. Other venues in Zimpeto for the Games were the Pavilh\u00e3o do Zimpeto for basketball and Courts do Zimpeto for tennis.\nMaputo has a number of stadiums designed for football, which can be modified for other purposes, such as the new Est\u00e1dio do Zimpeto, Est\u00e1dio do Maxaquene and the Est\u00e1dio do Costa do Sol which can seat 32,000, 15,000 and 10,000 people respectively. The largest stadium in the Metropolitan Area is, however, the Est\u00e1dio da Machava (opened as Est\u00e1dio Salazar), located in neighbouring Matola municipality. It opened in 1968, in Machava and was at the time the most advanced in the country conforming to standards set by FIFA and the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI). The cycling track could be adjusted to allow for 20,000 more seats. It was the site where Portugal officially handed over the country to Samora Machel and FRELIMO on 25 June 1975. In 2005, the Birmingham based reggae group UB40 held a one-night-only concert in the stadium filled to maximum capacity. A newer stadium called the Est\u00e1dio do Zimpeto which is located in the suburb of Zimpeto will be opened in 2011. The stadium will be built in time for the 2011 All-Africa Games with a capacity for 42,000 spectators. A smaller football stadium, Est\u00e1dio Mahafil, holds 4,000 people.\nBeginning in the 1950s, motorsport was introduced to the city. At first race cars would compete in areas around the city, Polana and along the \"marginal\" but as funding and interest increased, a dedicated race track was built in the Costa Do Sol area along and behind the \"marginal\" with the ocean to the east with a length of . The initial surface of the new track, named Aut\u00f3dromo de Louren\u00e7o Marques did not provide enough grip and a crash in the late 1960s killed eight people and injured many more. Therefore, in 1970, the track was renovated and the surface changed to meet the safety requirements that were needed at large events with many spectators. The length then increased to . The city became host to several international and local events beginning with the inauguration on 26 November 1970. The track was abandoned after 1975 and events only occurred sporadically such as in 1981 when the government allowed the sport again. Since 2000, interest has been rekindled by the Automovel &amp; Touring Club de Mo\u00e7ambique (ATCM) and several events including go-carting, drag racing and motocross are planned.\nThe city's main basketball arena is the Pavilh\u00e3o do Maxaquene which holds up to 3,500 people. It is home to Ferrovi\u00e1rio de Maputo which competes in the Basketball Africa League and the Mozambican Basketball League.\nStreet names.\nThe street names were changed after independence in 1975. Close ties with the Eastern Bloc highly influenced the new names that were chosen as did removal of names referring to colonial era figures.\nTransport.\nAirports.\nMaputo International Airport is the main international airport of Mozambique. An international terminal was opened in 2010 with a capacity for 900,000 passengers per year; a domestic terminal was completed in 2012.\nBuses.\nMaputo's transportation needs are mainly served by minibus taxis called \"chapas\", which support a majority of non-walking trips. In an effort to resolve a public transport crisis in the city, the state-owned company, Transporte de Mo\u00e7ambique (TPM) has recently acquired a new fleet of 270+ buses. There are three major bus terminals in the city: at Baixa (downtown/central), Museu (Museum), and at Junta (regional and national buses).\nFerries.\nFerry boats departing from Maputo to the district of KaTembe are available during the week. A ferry can carry approximately 20 vehicles per trip.\nRails.\nThe city of Maputo lies at the end of three railway lines: Goba railway, Limpopo railway and Pretoria\u2013Maputo railway.\nTrams.\nMaputo was home to one of the first electric tramway systems in Africa, commencing in February 1904. At first the lines ran from the Central Railway Station (CFM) to the City Municipality building. It is said that the establishment of the tram system caused some protests from the general public as certain classes had limited access to its use. Trams lost favor in the second half of the 20th century as cars and buses became more common, and they have not been in use at all since 1936, although parts of some of the tracks can still be seen coming up through the tar in certain streets, like Av. 24 de Julho.\nPorts.\nThe main port of Maputo handled 17 million tons of cargo in 1971, at its peak. It was part of the trio of Mozambique's main ports for the Nacala-Beira-Maputo route. Today, it is managed by the Maputo Port Development Company (MPDC), a joint venture of Grindrod and DP World. The government has allowed the firm to manage the port until 2030 in order to upgrade much of its infrastructure that has been destroyed after years of stagnation. In 2010, the dredging works in the channel were finished and the Port of Maputo can now handle larger vessels \u2013 such as the Panamax vessels \u2013 with more cargo. In addition, investments are being made for coal and container terminals.\nA new terminal for vehicles was developed, which allowed for over 50,000 vehicles to be moved per year (Phase 1) with a peak 250,000 under an agreement with H\u00f6egh Autoliners as a potential trans-shipment route between the Middle East and Europe. Coal will also be exported from the Matola side at a rate of 10 million tons per year. It is envisaged that by 2020, the port will generate about US$160 million per year. By 2030, the port will be able to handle up to 25 trains a day and 1,500 trucks for a total of 50 million tons of cargo per year. The total investment will exceed US$500 million.\nOther means.\nA recent introduction is three-wheelers commonly known as tuk-tuks in some Asian countries. The three-wheeled bikes, called \"tchopelas\" by the population, are cheaper to own and run and have posed a commercial threat to conventional taxis.\nArchitecture.\nMaputo had always been the center of attention during its formative years and this strong artistic spirit was responsible for attracting some of the world's most forward architects at the turn of the 20th century. The city is home to masterpieces of building work by Pancho Guedes, Herbert Baker and Thomas Honney, amongst others. The earliest architectural efforts around the city focused on classical European designs such as the Central Train Station (CFM) designed by architects Alfredo Augusto Lisboa de Lima, Mario Veiga and Ferreira da Costa and built between 1913 and 1916 (sometimes mistaken with the work of Gustav Eiffel), and the Hotel Polana designed by Herbert Baker.\nAs the 1960s and 1970s approached, Maputo was yet again at the center of a new wave of architectural influences made most popular by Pancho Guedes. The designs of the 1960s and 1970s were characterized by modernist and brutalist movements of clean, straight and functional structures. However, prominent architects such as Pancho Guedes fused this with local art schemes giving the city's buildings a unique Mozambican theme. As a result, most of the properties erected during the second construction boom take on these styling cues.\nLoss of heritage.\nIn recent years, the influx of capital into the real estate sector from local and international investors has resulted in the demolition of many historically significant buildings. Single homes along Av. Julius Nyerere, Av. 24 de Julho and Av. Mao Tse Tung have been torn down and high rise residential apartments built in their place. The difficulty in legally expanding the city coupled with a limited heritage building protection framework have been the main impediments. The local government, the City Council of Maputo has been unable to bring order to the situation. \nAdditionally, many acacia trees that once lined the footpaths and gave the city its distinct identity have also been removed for unclear reasons. The process gains momentum usually in the winter months between June and August under the guise of pruning overgrown trees. Without proper supervision the pruning work is excessive and destructive leading to the eventual loss of the tree.\nCulture.\nMaputo is a melting pot of several cultures. The Bantu and Portuguese cultures dominate, but the influence of Arab, Indian, and Chinese cultures is also felt.\nFilm and cinema.\nBefore television was introduced in 1981, film and cinema had a prominent position as a form of entertainment in the lives of Mozambicans especially in Maputo where there were at least a dozen movie theaters by the time of independence. In the 1950s and 1960s, at the height of racial segregation, most of the movie-goers were either European whites or South Asians \u2013 each group having their own designated locale. Black Mozambicans, although more heavily discriminated against, also enjoyed movies in makeshift theatres, often in rooms temporarily converted to handle a projector, screen and chairs.\nFor much of the late 1970s and 1980s, the local film industry was geared towards creating \"home-made\" productions depicting Socialist ideologies which placed great influence on the family unit, the non-commercialized production of agriculture and political autonomy. Maputo has been the setting for many Hollywood blockbuster movies such as \"The Interpreter\", \"Blood Diamond\" and \"Ali\".\nAssocia\u00e7\u00e3o N\u00facleo de Arte.\nAn important cultural and artists' centre in Maputo is the Associa\u00e7\u00e3o N\u00facleo de Arte. It is the oldest collective of artists in Mozambique. Seated in an old villa in the centre of Maputo the N\u00facleo has played a significant role in metropolitan cultural life for decades. The two best known and most influential contemporary Mozambican artists started their career at N\u00facleo de Arte, the painter Malangatana Ngwenya and the sculptor Alberto Chissano. Over one hundred painters, sculptors and ceramists are members of the N\u00facleo, which regularly stages exhibitions on its own premises and over the last few years has actively participated in exchanges with artists from abroad. The N\u00facleo became well known for their project transforming arms into tools and objects of art. It played an important role for reconciliation after the Mozambican Civil War. The exhibition of art objects such as the Chair of the African King and the Tree of Life was shown around the world, among others in the British Museum in 2006.\nMaputo is home to the Dockanema Documentary Film Festival, and international festival showcasing documentary films from around the world.\nHandicraft.\nMozambique's capital is famous for making special small sculptures called \"pshikelekedanas\" from soft wood using a penknife. These sculptures often depict important animals in Mozambique, like hippos, etc...\nLandmarks.\nDuring its five centuries of Portuguese colonialization, the city has gained several examples of Portuguese architecture. Most of the noteworthy buildings are former colonial administrative buildings or current government buildings.\nThe city's notable landmarks include:\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Maputo (Catholic Church), Reformed Church in Mozambique (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Igreja Presbiteriana de Mo\u00e7ambique (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Conven\u00e7\u00e3o Baptista de Mo\u00e7ambique (Baptist World Alliance), Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, Assemblies of God, Zion Christian Church. There are also Muslim mosques.\nParks.\nThe city does not yet have a very expansive list of parks and other recreational areas. However, at the center of the city lies the Jardim Tunduru (Tunduru Gardens) which was formerly called the Vasco Da Gama Garden. It was designed in the 1880s by a British architect, Thomas Honney. The entrance of the park is designed in the Neo-Manueline style. After independence, the name was changed to the current one and a statue of the country's first president was erected.\nEducation.\nMaputo offers several options for education with pre-schools, primary, secondary schools and higher education institutions. The quality of the syllabus is said to differ greatly depending on whether an institution is private or public.\nHigher education.\nMozambique's largest higher education institution is the Universidade Eduardo Mondlane which was established in 1968 as the Universidade de Louren\u00e7o Marques. Most of the universities faculties and departments are located in the city of Maputo with nearly 8,000 students attending 10 faculties. Some faculties also exist in Beira, Quelimane, Nampula and Inhambane.\nSince the 1990s there has also been a rapid growth of private education houses offering higher education such as \"Instituto Superior de Ci\u00eancias e Tecnologias de Mo\u00e7ambique\" (ISCTEM), \"Instituto Superior de Tecnologias e Gest\u00e3o\" (ISTEG) and \"Instituto Superior de Transportes e Comunica\u00e7\u00f5es\" (ISUTC).\nSecondary education.\nMaputo's notable private schools include:\nHealth services.\nMaputo has several hospitals and clinics, including the city and country's largest hospital, the Hospital Central de Maputo. Other hospitals include the public Hospital Geral Jos\u00e9 Macamo as well as the private Clinica da Sommerschield, Cl\u00ednica Cruz Azul, Hospital Privado and Hospital Geral de Mavalane.\nThe construction of Hospital Miguel Bombarda began in 1900. In 1976, Samora Machel renamed the hospital as \"Hospital Central de Maputo\" (HCM). The hospital has 1500 beds for in-patients and has an estimated staff number of 3000. It is made of a multi-block structure with 35 separate buildings spanning an area of 163,800 m2. The hospital has six departments: Medicine, Surgery, Pediatrics, Orthopedics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics. It also has divisions for Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology and a morgue. The hospital provides services for an average 700 out-patients a day and over of washing is done daily. In the early 1990s, a section of the hospital was divided and turned into a private clinic offering higher quality services for those who could afford it called the \"Cl\u00ednica Especial de Maputo\". The residence for the head of medicine is on the corner of \"Avenida Eduardo Mondlane\" and \"Avenida Salavador Allende\". It is a historically valuable structure which was completed in 1908 and has since the 1990s been converted into a charming restaurant with colonial themes called \"Restaurante 1908\". The upper floors are still used by the hospital as offices.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMaputo is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCooperation agreements.\nMaputo also has a cooperation agreement with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57047", "revid": "23501988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57047", "title": "Maseru", "text": "Capital and largest city of Lesotho\nMaseru is the capital and largest city of Lesotho. It is also the capital of the Maseru District. Located on the Caledon River, Maseru lies directly on the Lesotho\u2013South Africa border. Maseru had a population of 330,760 in the 2016 census. The city was established as a police camp and assigned as the capital after the country became a British protectorate in 1869. When the country achieved independence in 1966, Maseru retained its status as capital. The name of the city is a Sesotho word meaning \"red sandstones\".\nHistory.\nMaseru was founded by the British as a small police camp in 1869, following the conclusion of the Free State\u2013Basotho Wars when Basutoland became a British protectorate. Maseru is located at the edge of the \"conquered territories\" relinquished to the Orange Free State (now the Free State province of South Africa) as part of the peace terms. It was located west of Basotho King Moshoeshoe I's stronghold of Thaba Bosiu, the previous \"de facto\" capital. A bustling market town soon grew around the area.\nMaseru initially functioned as the state's administrative capital between 1869 and 1871, before administration of Basutoland was transferred to the Cape Colony. During their rule between 1871 and 1884, Basutoland was treated similarly to territories that had been forcefully annexed, much to the chagrin of the Basotho. This led to the Gun War in 1881 and the burning of many buildings in Maseru. In 1884, Basutoland was restored to its status as a Crown colony, and Maseru was again made capital. When Basutoland gained its independence and became the Kingdom of Lesotho in 1966, Maseru remained the country's capital.\nPrior to Lesotho's independence, Maseru had remained relatively small; it was contained within well-defined colonial boundaries and had little room for growth, while the British had little interest in developing the city. After 1966 Maseru experienced rapid expansion: its area increased around sevenfold, from around to the current area of , due to incorporation of nearby peri-urban villages to the city proper. The annual population growth rates remained around 7% for several decades, before tapering off to around 3.5% between 1986 and 1996.\nAfter the 1998 parliamentary elections in Lesotho led to suspicions of vote fraud and a military intervention by South Africa, much of the city was damaged by riots and pillaging. The cost of repairing the damage done to the city was estimated at two billion rand (US$350 million), and until almost 2008, the effects of the riots could still be seen within the city.\nGeography.\nMaseru is located in northwest Lesotho by the South African border, denoted by the Mohokare River, also known as Caledon River. The two countries are connected by a border post at the Maseru Bridge, which crosses the river. On the South African side, Ladybrand is the town closest to Maseru. The city lies in a shallow valley at the foot of the Hlabeng-Sa-Likhama, foothills of the Maloti Mountains. The elevation of the city is listed as above sea level. The city has an area of around .\nClimate.\nMaseru has a subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cwb\"), with the city being categorised by warm, rainy summers and cool to chilly, dry winters. The average mean daily temperature during summer \u2014 from December to March in the Southern Hemisphere \u2014 is . During winter, between June and September, the average temperature is . The hottest month is January, with temperatures between . During the coldest month, July, the temperatures range from . The average rainfall ranges from 3\u00a0mm in July to in January.\nDemographics.\nThe latest (2016) census lists the city's population at 330,760, or around a tenth of the entire population of the country, and half of the total urban population. The population of the city was at 98,017 by the 1986 census, and 137,837 by the 1996 census, demonstrating the early rapid expansion of the city after independence.\nTransport.\nA railway line, built in 1905, bridges the Mohokare River to connect Maseru with Marseilles on South Africa's Bloemfontein\u2013Bethlehem main line. There is no passenger traffic.\nKingsway, the road joining the former Leabua Jonathan Airport, now Mejametalana Airport and the Royal Palace in Maseru, was the first paved road in Lesotho. Having previously been just a dirt path, it was renovated in 1947 for the visit of members of the British royal family. It remained the only paved road in the country until Lesotho's independence in 1966. Two main roads lead outside of Maseru, Main North 1 to the northeast and Main South 1 to the southeast toward Mazenod and Roma. The South African N8 road leads from the Maseru Bridge border post west towards Ladybrand and Bloemfontein.\nAn international airport called the Moshoeshoe I International Airport is nearby, at Thoteng-ea-Moli, Mazenod. The National University of Lesotho is located in Roma, from Maseru.\nEconomy.\nThe commerce in the city is centred on two neighbouring central business districts, which have developed around Kingsway and serve as major employment centres. The western business district holds larger office buildings, department stores and several banks. The eastern business district hosts mainly smaller businesses, markets and street vendors. The central business districts are the largest employment centres within the city.\nMaseru's economy is one that is growing at a very rapid speed, which is notable particularly in terms of foreign investment and tourism since independence from Britain, and economic ruin when political violence broke out in 1998. Since the riots, the city has worked hard to undo the damage caused.\nMaseru's industry is split into two main areas. The one to the north of the central business districts along Moshoeshoe Road holds flour mills and other major companies. The other industrial sector lies to the south of the central business districts, at the Thetsane district, and houses mainly textile and footwear companies.\nUp until 2004 Maseru had a growing textile industry supported by and invested in by Chinese manufacturing concerns. Since the expiration of the Multi Fibre Arrangement the textile industry in Lesotho has diminished. The city's products once included candles, carpets and mohair products but these have been overshadowed by South African industries.\nPlaces of worship.\nMost places of worship in the city are Christian churches and temples, including churches of the Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa, Zion Christian Church, Anglican Church of Southern Africa, and Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Maseru (including its cathedral, Our Lady of Victories Cathedral). There are also Muslim mosques.\nArchitecture.\nMost of the traditional thatched-roof mud-brick houses, called rondavels, have been replaced with modern housing and office blocks which have a tint of traditional architecture. There have recently been some new buildings in the centre of the city, particularly the building across LNDC centre which now house shops, offices and the new building of the Ministry of Health which was completed in late 2007.\nBuildings destroyed in the 1998 political uprising have been rebuilt. The New Lehakoe National sports centre, which is in between the central Bank of Lesotho and the colonial parliament building is equipped with tennis courts, swimming pools, conference centres, bars and gymnasiums. In November 2009, Pioneer Mall opened, providing Maseru with a South African style shopping mall, with many stores, such as a four-screen cinema-which later closed- and restaurants. Pioneer Mall opened way for more modern buildings in the city, the likes of Maseru mall and City Square centre\nThere are some colonial era buildings around the centre of the city, most notably the Cathedral of Our Lady of Victories of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Maseru, and the Anglican St. John's Church. Other sights include the Royal Palace, the Parliament building and the State House.\nSports.\nLesotho's national stadium, the multi-purpose Setsoto Stadium, is located in Maseru. It has a capacity of between 20,000 and 25,000 people. The stadium is mostly used for football matches and houses the Lesotho national football team, but also holds events in athletics.\n12 out of 16 of the teams playing in the Lesotho Premier League reside in Maseru. As of 2020[ [update]], 36 out of the 51 championships contested in the league have gone to Maseru-based teams. Most successful of these have been Matlama FC with ten championship wins and the football team of the Royal Lesotho Defence Force, with eight championship wins.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nList of sister cities of Maseru, designated by Sister Cities International.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57048", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57048", "title": "Mbabane, Swaziland", "text": ""}
{"id": "57049", "revid": "39769597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57049", "title": "Mbabane", "text": "Mbabane () is the most populous city in Eswatini (previously called Swaziland), and is one of the two capitals (along with Lobamba), serving as the executive capital.\nIt has an estimated population of 94,874 (2010). It is located on the Mbabane River and its tributary the Polinjane River in the Mdzimba Mountains. It is located in the Hhohho Region, of which it is also the capital. The average elevation of the city is 1,243 meters. It lies on the MR3 road.\nHistory.\nThe town grew after the nation's administrative centre moved from Bremersdorp (now called Manzini) in january of 1902. It derives its name from a chief, Mbabane Kunene, who lived in the area when some British settlers arrived.\nMbabane was founded in 1887 by Mickey Wells, on the spot where the Transvaal-to-Mozambique route crossed the Mbabane river. It was declared the capital of the new Protectorate of Swaziland in 1902. During this time, Mbabane consisted of a few shops, churches and schools founded by white settlers. Black Africans were not allowed to live in the town and had to reside in nearby rural districts. By the 1930s, Mbabane had electricity, running water, telephone connection and a hospital.\nPrior to WW2, most Swazis lived in rural districts and worked outside Eswatini, which prevented the town from growing. After the war, the creation of trade schools in the city, the arrival of the Goba railway connecting Maputo to the mines in South Africa and Lesotho, and foreign investment resources within Eswatini (particularly sugar) all contributed to the city's growth. Mbabane became the central hub for development in Hhohho.\nIn the years following independence, governmental buildings such as the British Consulate were built in Mbabane. Further growth has been achieved through the growth of the tourism industry in Eswatini, of which Mbabane has become the centre. Mbabane today is home to hotels and recreational sites such as clubs and golf courses tending to tourists.\nGeography.\nMbabane is located in the district of Hhohho, of which it is also the capital, and lies on the Mbabane River and its tributary the Polinjane River in the Mdzimba Mountains. The average elevation of the city is 1,243 metres. Neighbourhoods and suburbs include Mbangweni, Sidvwashini, Kent Rock, Sandla, Westridge Park, Malunge, New Checkers, Msunduza and Vukutentele.\nClimate.\nDue to its altitude, Mbabane features a moderate subtropical highland climate (K\u00f6ppen\": Cwb\"). The city has a mild climate and snow is a rare event, occurring only three times since 1900. The city averages only four days of frost a year. The average temperature is in July and in January. The thermal range is low, but the winter night is cold for a subtropical climate in general. Most of the precipitation is concentrated in the summer. The difference in the driest month (June) and the wettest (January) is 210\u00a0mm.\nEconomy.\nMbabane's closest border crossing to South Africa is Ngwenya-Oshoek, and though siSwati is the primary language, English is widespread. Mbabane, and Eswatini itself, depend on tourism and sugar exports. It is also a commercial hub for the surrounding region, while tin and iron were mined nearby. The city has two sites for light industries.\nThe financial service sector in Mbabane is also a key driver of economic growth, providing a wide array of services such as banking, investment management, and insurance, The continuous growth of the financial services sector in Mbabane has positioned the city as a key financial hub in the region, contributing to the overall economic progress of Eswatini.\nCulture.\nIndingilizi Gallery is an art gallery in Mbabane, established in 1982 and showcases a range of Swazi art, including sculptures, paintings, batiks, mohair, ethnic jewellery and pottery.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, there are predominantly Christian churches: Roman Catholic Diocese of Manzini (Catholic Church), Swaziland Reformed Church (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Zion Christian Church. There are also Muslim mosques.\nEducation.\nMbabane is the home of the Waterford-Kamhlaba United World College of Southern Africa, as well as one of the three campuses of the University of Eswatini. Limkokwing University of Creative Technology is a private international university that lies by the South African-Eswatini border.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMbabane is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57050", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57050", "title": "Monrovia (disambiguation)", "text": "Monrovia is the capital city of the West African country of Liberia.\nMonrovia may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57053", "revid": "45203278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57053", "title": "Muscat", "text": "Capital and largest city of Oman\nMuscat ( , ; , ) is the capital and most populous city in Oman. It is the seat of the Governorate of Muscat. According to the National Centre for Statistics and Information (NCSI), the population of the Muscat Governorate in 2022 was 1.72 million. The metropolitan area includes six provinces, called , and spans approximately . Known since the early 1st century CE as a leading port for trade between the west and the east, Muscat was ruled successively by various indigenous tribes, as well as by foreign powers such as the Persians, the Portuguese Empire and the Ottoman Empire. In the 18th century, Muscat was a regional military power: its influence extended as far as East Africa and Zanzibar. As an important port town in the Gulf of Oman, Muscat attracted foreign traders and settlers such as the Persians, the Balochs and the Sindhis. Beginning in 1970, after the accession of Qaboos bin Said as the Sultan of Oman, Muscat experienced rapid infrastructural development; it developed a vibrant economy and became a multi-ethnic society. The Globalization and World Cities Research Network classifies Muscat as a Beta-level Global City.\nThe Hajar Mountains dominate the view from Muscat. The city lies on the Arabian Sea, along the Gulf of Oman, near the strategically important Straits of Hormuz. Low-lying white buildings are a typical feature of its architecture. The city's port district of Muttrah, with its corniche and harbour, are at the north-eastern edge of the city. Muscat's economy is dominated by trade, petroleum, liquified natural gas and porting.\nToponymy.\nPtolemy's \"Map of Arabia\" identifies the territories of \"Cryptus Portus\" and \"Moscha Portus\". Scholars are divided in opinion on which of the two is related to the city of \"Muscat\". Similarly, Arrianus references \"Omana\" and \"Moscha\" in \"Voyage of Nearchus\". Interpretations of Arrianus' work by William Vincent and Jean Baptiste Bourguignon d'Anville conclude that \"Omana\" was a reference to \"Oman\", while \"Moscha\" referred to \"Muscat\". Similarly, other scholars identify Pliny the Elder's reference to \"Amithoscuta\" to be \"Muscat\".\nThe origin of the word \"Muscat\" is disputed. Some authors claim that the word has Arabic origins \u2013 from \"moscha\", meaning an \"inflated hide\" or \"skin\". Other authors claim that the name \"Muscat\" means \"anchorage\" or \"the place of \"letting fall the anchor\"\". Other derivations include \"muscat\" from Old Persian, meaning \"strong-scented\", or from Arabic, meaning \"falling-place\", or \"hidden\". \"Cryptus Portus\" is synonymous with Oman (\"hidden land\"). But \"Ov-man\" (Omman), and the old Sumerian name \"Magan (Maa-kan)\", means sea-people in Arabic. An inhabitant is a \"Muscatter\", \"Muscatian\", \"Muscatite\" or \"Muscatan\". In 1793 AD the capital was transferred from Rustaq to Muscat.\nHistory.\nEvidence of communal activity in the area around Muscat dates back to the 6th millennium BC in Ras al-Hamra, where burial sites of fishermen have been found. The graves appear to be well formed and indicate the existence of burial rituals. South of Muscat, remnants of Harappan pottery indicate some level of contact with the Indus Valley civilisation. Muscat's notability as a port was acknowledged as early as the 1st century AD by the Greek geographer Ptolemy, who referred to it as \"Cryptus Portus\" (the \"Hidden Port\"), and by Pliny the Elder, who called it \"Amithoscuta\".\nThe port fell to a Sassanid invasion in the 3rd century AD, under the rule of Shapur I, while conversion to Islam occurred during the 7th century. Muscat's importance as a trading port continued to grow in the centuries that followed, under the influence of the Azd dynasty, a local tribe. The establishment of the First Imamate in the 9th century was the first step in consolidating disparate Omani tribal factions under the banner of an Ibadi state. However, tribal skirmishes continued, allowing the Abbasids of Baghdad to conquer Oman. The Abbasids occupied the region until the 11th century, when they were driven out by the local Yahmad tribe. Power over Oman shifted from the Yahmad tribe to the Azdi Nabahinah clan, during whose rule, the people of coastal ports such as Muscat prospered from maritime trade and close alliances with the Indian subcontinent, at the cost of the alienation of the people of the interior of Oman. The Portuguese admiral Afonso de Albuquerque sailed to Muscat in 1507, in an attempt to establish trade relations. As he approached the harbour, his ships were fired on. He then decided to conquer Muscat. Most of the city burned to the ground during and after the fighting.\n The Portuguese maintained a hold on Muscat for over a century, despite challenges from Persia and a bombardment of the town by the Ottoman Turks in 1546. The Turks twice captured Muscat from the Portuguese, in the Capture of Muscat (1552) and 1581\u201388. The election of Nasir bin Murshid Al-Ya'rubi as Imam of Oman in 1624 changed the balance of power again in the region, from the Persians and the Portuguese to local Omanis. Among the most important castles and forts in Muscat, the Al Jalali Fort and the Al-Mirani Fort are the most prominent buildings left by the Portuguese. On August 16, 1648, the Imam dispatched an army to Muscat, which captured and demolished the high towers of the Portuguese, weakening their grip over the town. Decisively, in 1650, a small but determined body of the Imam's troops attacked the port at night, forcing an eventual Portuguese surrender on January 23, 1650. A civil war and repeated incursions by the Persian king Nader Shah in the 18th century destabilised the region, and further strained relations between the interior and Muscat. This power vacuum in Oman led to the emergence of the Al Bu Sa\u2018id dynasty, which has ruled Oman ever since.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Muscat is a large and very populous town, flanked on both sides with high mountains and the front is close to the water's edge; behind, towards the interior, there is a plain as large as the square of Lisbon, all covered with salt pans. [T]here are orchards, gardens, and palm groves with wells for watering them by means of swipes and other engines. The harbour is small, shaped like a horse-shoe and sheltered from every wind.\"\nMuscat's naval and military supremacy was re-established in the 19th century by Said bin Sultan, who signed a treaty with U.S. President Andrew Jackson's representative Edmund Roberts on September 21, 1833. Having gained control over Zanzibar, in 1840 Said moved his capital to Stone Town, the ancient quarter of Zanzibar City; however, after his death in 1856, control over Zanzibar was lost when it became an independent sultanate under his sixth son, Majid bin Said (1834/5\u20131870), while the third son, Thuwaini bin Said, became the Sultan of Oman.\nBy the 19th century, a large Hindu merchant community in the port city dominated its commercial life. It is argued that their settlement at least since the fifteenth century; one of the reasons is that the Portuguese relied heavily on them to secure a trade monopoly in the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf area. The Sindhis were amongst the first during this era, followed by the Kutchis. The merchant community played an important role in expelling the Europeans in 1650. They were not affected by civil war that established the Al Bu Sa\u2018id dynasty and continued to prosper under Ahmad bin Said al-Busaidi. Important trade existed between the city and Thatta, and later, Kutch, expanding to other parts of India.\nDuring the second half of the 19th century, the fortunes of the Al Bu Sa\u2018id declined and friction with the Imams of the interior resurfaced. Muscat and Muttrah were attacked by tribes from the interior in 1895 and again in 1915. A tentative ceasefire was brokered by the British, which gave the interior more autonomy. However, conflicts among the disparate tribes of the interior, and with the Sultan of Muscat and Oman continued into the 1950s, and eventually escalated into the Dhofar Rebellion (1962). The rebellion forced the Sultan Said bin Taimur to seek the assistance of the British in quelling the uprisings from the interior. The failed assassination attempt of April 26, 1966 on Said bin Taimur led to the further isolation of the Sultan, who had moved his residence from Muscat to Salalah, amidst the civilian armed conflict. On July 23, 1970, Qaboos bin Said, son of the Sultan, staged a bloodless \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" in the Salalah palace with the assistance of the British, and took over as ruler.\nWith the assistance of the British, Qaboos bin Said put an end to the Dhofar uprising and consolidated disparate tribal territories. He renamed the country the \"Sultanate of Oman\" (called \"Muscat and Oman\" hitherto), in an attempt to end to the interior's isolation from Muscat. Qaboos enlisted the services of capable Omanis to fill positions in his new government, drawing from such corporations as Petroleum Development Oman. New ministries for social services such as health and education were established. The construction of Mina Qaboos, a new port conceived initially by Sa\u2018id bin Taimur, was developed during the early days of Qaboos' rule. Similarly, a new international airport was developed in Muscat's Seeb district. A complex of offices, warehouses, shops and homes transformed the old village of Ruwi in Muttrah into a commercial district. The first five-year development plan in 1976 emphasised infrastructural development of Muscat, which provided new opportunities for trade and tourism in the 1980s\u20131990s, attracting migrants from around the region. On June 6, 2007, Cyclone Gonu hit Muscat causing extensive damage to property, infrastructure and commercial activity.\nEarly photographs of the city and harbour, taken in the early 20th century by German explorer and photographer, Hermann Burchardt, are now held at the Ethnological Museum of Berlin.\nGeography and geology.\nMuscat is located in northeast Oman. The Tropic of Cancer passes south of the area. It is bordered to its west by the plains of the Al Batinah Region and to its east by Ash Sharqiyah Region. The interior plains of Ad Dakhiliyah Region border Muscat to the south, while the Gulf of Oman forms the northern and western periphery of the city. The water along the coast of Muscat runs deep, forming two natural harbours, in Muttrah and Muscat. The Central Hajar Mountains run through the northern coastline of the city.\nVolcanic rocks, predominantly serpentinite and diorite are apparent in the Muscat area and extend along the Gulf of Oman coast for ten or twelve from the district of Darsait to Yiti. Plutonic rocks constitute the hills and mountains of Muscat and span approximately from Darsait to Ras Jissah. These igneous rocks consists of serpentinite, greenstone, and basalt, typical of rocks in southeastern regions of the Arabian Peninsula. South of Muscat, the volcanic rock strata are broken up and distorted, rising to a maximum height of in Al-Dakhiliyah, a region which includes Jebel Akhdar, the country's highest range. The hills in Muscat are mostly devoid of vegetation but are rich in iron.\nThe halophytic \"sabkha\" type desert vegetation is predominant in Muscat. The Qurum Nature Reserve contains plants such as the \"Arthrocnemum Macrostachyum\" and \"Halopeplis Perfoliata\". Coral reefs are common in Muscat. \"Acropora\" reefs exist in the sheltered bays of the satellite towns of Jussah and Khairan. Additionally, smaller \"Porites\" reef colonies exist in Khairan, which have fused to form a flat-top pavement that is visible at low tide. Crabs and spiny crayfish are found in the waters of the Muscat area, as are sardines and bonito. Glassfish are common in freshwater estuaries, such as the Qurum Nature Reserve.\nThe Sultan Qaboos Street forms the main artery of Muscat, running west-to-east through the city. The street eventually becomes Al Nahdah Street near Al Wattayah. Several inter-city roads such as Nizwa Road and Al Amrat Road, intersect with Al Sultan Qaboos Road (in Rusail and Ruwi, respectively). Muttrah, with the Muscat Harbour, Corniche, and Mina Qaboos, is located in the north-eastern coastline of the city, adjacent to the Gulf of Oman. Other coastal districts of Muscat include Darsait, Mina Al Fahal, Ras Al Hamar, Al Qurum Heights, Al Khuwair, and Al Seeb. Residential and commercial districts further inland include Al Hamriyah, Al Wadi Al Kabir, Ruwi, Al Wattayah, Madinat Qaboos, Al Azaiba and Al Ghubra.\nClimate.\nMuscat features a hot, arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BWh\") with long, sweltering summers and warm winters. Annual rainfall in Muscat is about , falling mostly from December to April. In general, precipitation is scarce in Muscat, with the months May to November typically receiving only a trace of rainfall. However, in recent years, heavy precipitation events from tropical systems originating in the Arabian Sea have struck the city. Cyclone Gonu in June 2007 and Cyclone Phet in June 2010 affected the city with damaging winds and rainfall amounts exceeding in just a single day. The climate generally is very hot and also very humid in the summer, with temperatures sometimes reaching as high as .\nEconomy.\nMuscat's economy, like that of Oman, is dominated by trade. The more traditional exports of the city included dates, mother of pearl, and fish. Many of the souks of Muttrah sell these items and traditional Omani artefacts. Petroleum Development Oman has been central to Muscat's economy since at least 1962 and is the country's second largest employer, after the government. Its major shareholders include Shell, Total, and Partex and its production is estimated to be about . Muscat also has major trading companies such as the Suhail Bahwan Group, which is a trading partner for corporations such as Toshiba, Subaru, Seiko, Hewlett-Packard, General Motors, RAK Ceramics; Saud Bahwan Group whose trading partners are Toyota, Daihatsu, KIA and Hertz Rent-a-Car; Zubair Automotive whose trading partners include Mitsubishi, and Chrysler brands such as Dodge; and Moosa AbdulRahman Hassan which operates as one of the oldest automotive agencies in the entire region having been established in 1927. The private Health Care sector of Muscat, Oman has numerous hospitals and clinics.\nThe Muscat Securities Market is the principal stock exchange of Oman. It is located in Central Business District of Muscat and it was established in 1988, and has since distinguished itself as a pioneer among its regional peers in terms of transparency and disclosure regulations and requirements.\nMina'a Sultan Qaboos, Muscat's main trading port, is a trading hub between the Persian Gulf, the Indian subcontinent and the Far East with an annual volume of about 1.6 million tons. However, the emergence of the Jebel Ali Free Zone in neighboring Dubai, United Arab Emirates, has made that port the premier maritime trading port of the region with about 44 million tons traded in cargo annually. Many infrastructural facilities are owned and operated by the government of Oman. Omantel is the major telecommunications organization in Oman and provides local, long-distance and international dialing facilities and operates as the country's only ISP. Recent liberalization of the mobile telephone market has seen the establishment of a second provider, Ooredoo.\nMuscat is home to multibillion-dollar conglomerate CK Industries with their headquarters located in Ruwi. Ajman based Amtek Industries also have a couple of offices around the city. It is also home to Galfar Engineering, headed by P. Mohammed Ali.\nThe airline Oman Air has its head office on the grounds of Muscat International Airport.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2003 census conducted by the Oman Ministry of National Economy, the population of Muscat is over 630,000, which included 370,000 males and 260,000 females. Muscat formed the second largest governorate in the country, after Al Batinah, accounting for 27% of the total population of Oman. As of 2003, Omanis constituted 60% of the total population of Muscat, while expatriates accounted for about 40%. The population density of the city was 162.1 per km2.\nThe governorate of Muscat comprises six : Muttrah, Bawshar, Seeb, Al Amrat, Muscat and Qurayyat. Seeb, located in the western section of the governorate, was the most populous (with over 220,000 residents), while Muttrah had the highest number of expatriates (with over 100,000). Approximately 71% of the population was within the 15\u201364 age group, with the average Omani age being 23 years. About 10% of the population is illiterate, an improvement when compared to the 18% illiteracy rate recorded during the 1993 census. Expatriates accounted for over 60% of the labour force, dominated by males, who accounted for 80% of the city's total labour. A majority of expatriates (34%) was in engineering-related occupations, while most Omanis worked in engineering, clerical, scientific or technical fields. The defense sector was the largest employer for Omanis, while construction, wholesale and retail trade employed the largest number of expatriates.\nThe ethnic makeup of Muscat has historically been influenced by people not native to the Arabian Peninsula. British Parliamentary papers dating back to the 19th century indicate the presence of a significant Hindu Gujarati merchants in the city. Indeed, four Hindu temples existed in Muscat ca. 1760. Christianity flourished in Oman (B\u0113\u1e6f Maz\u016bn\u0101y\u0113 \"land of the Maganites\"; a name deriving from its Sumerian designation) from the late 4th century to the 7th century. Missionary activity by the Assyrians of the Church of the East resulted in a significant Christian population living in the region, with a bishop being attested by 424 AD under the Metropolitan of Fars and Arabia. The rise of Islam saw the Syriac and Arabic-speaking Christian population eventually disappear. It is thought to have been brought back in by the Portuguese in 1507. Protestant missionaries established a hospital in Muscat in the 19th century.\nLike the rest of Oman, Arabic is the predominant language of the city. In addition, English, Balochi, Sindhi, Swahili and Indian languages such as Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Konkani, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, Tulu, Telugu and Urdu are spoken by the residents of Muscat.\nIslam is the predominant religion in the city, with most followers being Ibadi Muslims. Non-Muslims are allowed to practise their religion, but may not proselytize publicly or distribute religious literature. In 2017 the Sultanate of Oman unveiled the \"Mushaf Muscat\", an interactive calligraphic Quran following a brief from the Omani Ministry of Endowments and Religious Affairs.\nNotable landmarks.\nThe city has numerous mosques including the Sultan Qaboos Grand Mosque, Ruwi Mosque, Saeed bin Taimoor and Zawawi Mosque. A few Shi'ite mosques also exist here. Muscat has a number of museums. These include Museum of Omani Heritage, National Museum of Oman, Oman Children's Museum, Bait Al Zubair, Oman Oil and Gas Exhibition Centre, Omani French Museum, Sultan's Armed Forces Museum and the Omani Aquarium and Marine Science and Fisheries Centre. The Bait Al Falaj Fort played an important role in Muscat's military history.\nRecent projects include an opera house which opened on October 14, 2011. One of the most notable new projects is the Oman National Museum. It is expected to be an architectural jewel along with the Sultan Qaboos Grand Mosque. Visitors are also encouraged to visit Old Muscat and the Old Palace. The main shopping district is situated in Al Qurum Commercial Area. However, shopping malls are found throughout the city. One of the largest malls in Oman is Oman Avenues Mall, located in Ghubra. The fourth largest mall is in Seeb, near the international airport, called City Centre Muscat, housing all major international brands and the largest Carrefour hypermarket. Two new megamalls opened during 2019 and 2020: in the Mabela area of Muscat are Al Araimi Boulevard and Mall of Muscat. The Mall of Muscat is also home to the Oman Aquarium. Mall Of Oman, the largest shopping mall in Oman was opened in Summer 2021 housing over 100+ stores including Snow Oman, Vox Cinemas, an arcade (Magic Planet) and various food chains.\nThe Al Khuwair Square Flagpole, which was inaugurated on 22 May 2025, is the 13th tallest flagpole in the world, standing at 126 metres into the sky, the equivalent of a 40-storey building. This monumental structure now stands as the highest man-made feature in the country.\nTransport.\nSultan Qaboos Port serves as one of the most important ports of Muscat Governorate, which is well known for being sailing of many commercial ships and boats. Here also, the traditional boats of Arabian Peninsula named Dhows can be also seen. This port since many centuries have been a main commercial and financial centre in terms of its international maritime trade.\nThe main airport is Muscat International Airport (formerly known as Seeb International Airport) around from the city's business district of Ruwi and 15 to 20\u00a0km from the main residential localities of Al-Khuwair, Madinat Al Sultan Qaboos, Shati Al-Qurm and Al-Qurm. Muscat is the headquarters for the local Oman Air, which flies to several destinations within the Middle East, the Indian Subcontinent, East Africa and Europe.\nThe Muscat area is well serviced by paved roads and dual-carriageway connects most major cities and towns in the country. \nSince November 2015, Public transportation in Muscat has been revamped with a bus network connecting most important parts of the city with a fleet of modern Mwasalat (earlier Oman National Transport Company buses. \nMwasalat buses procured from VDL of the Netherlands and MAN of Germany have several hi-tech features, including free Wi-Fi. \nSeveral forms of public transport are popular in Oman. Most popular are the \"Baiza\" buses, so named for the lower denomination of the Omani rial, the baiza (an adaptation of the Indian lower denomination paisa). These are relatively inexpensive and service all major roadways, as well as a wide and loose network of smaller byways in the greater Muscat metropolitan area, opportunistically dropping off and picking up passengers at any location. Less popular and slightly more expensive are large public buses, coloured red and green, whose service is limited to major roadways and point-to-point travel routes between Oman's major cities and towns. Taxis, also colour-coded orange and white, provide semi-personal transportation in the form of both individual hire and the same opportunistic roadway service as Baiza buses.\nBaiza buses and colour-coded orange-and-white taxis are unmetered, after several government initiatives to introduce meters were rejected. The fare is set by way of negotiation, although taxi drivers usually adhere to certain unwritten rules for fares within the city. In many countries, one is advised to negotiate a fare with the driver before getting into a taxi. However, in Oman, asking for the fare beforehand often demonstrates a passenger's newness and unfamiliarity with the area. One should always find out the normally accepted fare for one's journey from one's hotel or host before looking for a taxi. Taxis also generally take passengers to locations out of the city, including Sohar, Buraimi and Dubai.\nCulture.\nOutwardly, Oman shares many of the cultural characteristics of its Arab neighbours, particularly those in the Gulf Cooperation Council. Despite these similarities, important factors make Oman unique in the Middle East. These result as much from geography and history as from culture and economics. The relatively recent and artificial nature of the state of Oman makes it difficult to describe a national culture; however, sufficient cultural heterogeneity exists within its national boundaries to make Oman distinct from other Arab States of the Persian Gulf. Oman's cultural diversity is greater than that of its Arab neighbours, given its historical expansion to the Swahili Coast and the Indian Ocean.\nOman has a long tradition of shipbuilding, as maritime travel played a major role in the Omanis' ability to stay in contact with the civilisations of the ancient world. Sur was one of the most famous shipbuilding cities of the Indian Ocean. The Al Ghanja ship takes one whole year to build. Other types of Omani ship include As Sunbouq and Al Badan.In March 2016, archaeologists working off Al-Hallaniyah Island identified a shipwreck believed to be that of the \"Esmeralda\" from Vasco da Gama's 1502\u20131503 fleet. The wreck was initially discovered in 1998. Later underwater excavations took place between 2013 and 2015 through a partnership between the Oman Ministry of Heritage and Culture and Blue Water Recoveries Ltd., a shipwreck recovery company. The vessel was identified through such artifacts as a \"Portuguese coin minted for trade with India (one of only two coins of this type known to exist) and stone cannonballs engraved with what appear to be the initials of Vincente Sodr\u00e9, da Gama's maternal uncle and the commander of the \"Esmeralda\"\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57054", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57054", "title": "NDjamena", "text": ""}
{"id": "57055", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57055", "title": "Uzbekistan/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "57056", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57056", "title": "Uzbekistan/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "57058", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57058", "title": "Niamey, Niger", "text": ""}
{"id": "57059", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57059", "title": "N'Djamena", "text": "Capital and largest city of Chad\nN'Djamena ( ) is the capital and largest city of Chad. It is also a special statute region, divided into 10 districts or \"arrondissements\", similar to the city of Paris.\nOriginally called Fort-Lamy, it was founded in 1900 by the French during their colonization of Central Africa. The city was renamed N'Djamena in 1973, reflecting its local Chadian heritage. Throughout its history, N'Djamena has grown from a small trading hub into the political and economic center of Chad, playing a vital role in the country's development. Its strategic location near the borders of Cameroon and Nigeria has historically made it an important crossroads for trade and cultural exchange in the region.\nN'Djamena is situated on the Chari River in the southwestern part of Chad, near Lake Chad. The city lies within a semi-arid region characterized by a hot climate with a distinct dry season. Its location on the river provides vital water resources for agriculture and daily life, although the surrounding landscape is largely flat and arid. The city's proximity to Lake Chad also influences its climate and ecology, making it an important area for both local agriculture and regional trade. The geography of N'Djamena has shaped its development as a key urban center in Chad, with its strategic position contributing to its historical and economic significance.\nThe city serves as the centre of economic activity in Chad. Meat, fish and cotton processing are the chief industries, and it is a regional market for livestock, salt, dates, and grains.\nIt is a port city located at the confluence of the Logone River with the Chari River, forming a transborder agglomeration with the city of Kouss\u00e9ri (in Cameroon), capital of the Department of Logone-et-Chari, which is on the west bank of both rivers.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"N'Djamena\" is derived from the Arabic term \"Ni\u01e7\u0101m\u012bn\u0101\" (\u0646\u062c\u0627\u0645\u064a\u0646\u0627), meaning \"place of rest\" or \"place of peace\".\nBefore its renaming in 1973, the city was known as Fort-Lamy, named after French army officer Am\u00e9d\u00e9e-Fran\u00e7ois Lamy. The change to N'Djamena was part of a broader movement to replace colonial names with indigenous ones, reflecting the local Arabic heritage and cultural identity.\nThe name itself reflects the blending of Arabic linguistic influence and local Chadian culture, illustrating the region\u2019s complex historical and cultural interactions.\nHistory.\nEarly 20th century.\nN'Djamena was founded as Fort-Lamy by French commander \u00c9mile Gentil on 29 May 1900, and named after Am\u00e9d\u00e9e-Fran\u00e7ois Lamy, an army officer who had been killed in the Battle of Kouss\u00e9ri about a month earlier. It was merely a colonial outpost in its early days, and until the 1920s, the city was entirely under French military rule. It has since expanded into a major trading city and became the capital of the region and nation.\nDuring the Second World War, the French relied upon the city's airport to move troops and supplies. On 21 January 1942, a lone German Heinkel He 111 of the Sonderkommando Blaich successfully bombed the airfield at Fort-Lamy, destroying oil supplies and ten aircraft.\nFort-Lamy received its first bank branch in 1950, when the Paris-based Banque de l'Afrique Occidentale opened a branch there.\nLate 20th century.\nChad gained its independence from France in 1960. On 6 April 1973, President Fran\u00e7ois Tombalbaye changed the city's name to N'Djamena (taken from the Arabic name of a nearby village, \"Ni\u01e7\u0101m\u012bn\u0101\", meaning \"place of rest\") as part of his \"authenticit\u00e9\" program of Africanization. The city was occupied by Libya during the 1980\u201381 Libyan intervention as part of the Chadian\u2013Libyan conflict, and the associated Transitional Government of National Unity.\nThe city was partly destroyed during the Chadian Civil War, in 1979 and again in 1980. In these years, almost all of the population fled the town, seeking refuge on the opposite bank of the Chari River in Cameroon, next to the city of Kouss\u00e9ri. The residents did not return until 1981\u201382, after the end of the clashes. Until 1984, facilities and services were subject to strict rationing, and schools remained closed.\nThe period of turmoil in the city was started by the abortive coup attempted by the northerner Prime Minister Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9 against the southerner President F\u00e9lix Malloum: while Malloum and the national army loyal to him were defeated, the intervention in the battle of other northern factions rival to that of Habr\u00e9 complicated the situation. A temporary truce was reached in 1979 through international mediation, establishing the warlord Goukouni Oueddei as head of a government of national unity with his rival Habr\u00e9 as Defense Minister. The intense rivalry between Goukouni and Habr\u00e9 caused the eruption of new clashes in the city in 1980; N'Djamena found itself divided into sectors controlled by the various warlords. The tug-of-war reached a conclusion after many months only when Goukouni asked for the intervention of the Libyans, whose tanks overwhelmed Habr\u00e9's defenses in the capital.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFollowing differences between Goukouni and Muammar Gaddafi and international disapproval of Libyan intervention, the Libyan troops left the capital and Chad in 1981. This opened the door to Habr\u00e9, who marched on N'Djamena, occupying the city with little resistance in 1982 and installing himself as the new president. He was eventually dislodged in a similar fashion in 1990 by a former general of his, Idriss D\u00e9by.\nThe city had only 9,976 inhabitants in 1937, but a decade later, in 1947, the population had almost doubled to 18,435. In 1968, after independence, the population reached 126,483. In 1993, it surpassed half a million with 529,555. A good deal of this growth has been due to refugees fleeing into N'Djamena for security, although many people fled N'Djamena, also depending on the political situation. The city surpassed the million mark in population by the early 2010s.\n21st century.\nOn 13 April 2006, a rebel United Front for Democratic Change attack on the city was defeated in the Battle of N'Djamena. The city was once again attacked on 2 February 2008, by UFDD and RFC rebels in the Battle of N'Djamena (2008). As of 2020[ [update]], French military forces maintained a base in N'Djamena to counter rebels from the Sahel.\nGeography.\nN'Djamena is located at , on the confluence of the Chari and Logone rivers.\nThe city is formally divided into 10 administrative districts, which are loosely grouped into three distinct areas of the city. There is an old colonial core along the Chari River which houses much of the administrative institutions that fulfill N'Djamena's role as national capital. To the north and east of the core, there is newer construction, referred to by some residents as the \"African city\", with mixed-class residents and much of the city's trade. Most of the city's current growth is in the third area, even further east, with limited formal infrastructure.\nWhile primarily an administrative centre, the city includes the Nassara Strip commercial centre and residential areas, such as Mbololo, Chagoua, Paris Congo and Moursal. The main commercial avenue of the city is the Avenue Charles de Gaulle.\nClimate.\nN'Djamena has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BSh\") with a short wet season and a lengthy dry season. Despite the fact that the city receives on average approximately of rainfall annually, due to the area's very high evapotranspiration, N'Djamena still falls into the semi-arid climate category. The wet season lasts from June to September, with the heaviest rain occurring in August. The dry season essentially covers the remaining eight months. Based on annual temperatures, N'Djamena is one of the hottest major cities on the planet. In only one month of the year (August) do average monthly high temperatures fail to cross the mark. The city's highest temperatures are usually seen between March and May, just before the onset of the heavier rains.\nN'Djamena's climate is affected by the collision of two large air masses over Chad, one continental and one maritime, whose interactions can produce unpredictable weather. According to the World Air Quality Report 2024, N'Djamena is one of the world's 20 most polluted cities. The water in the Chara River also contains high levels of some heavy metal contaminants, increasing downstream of the city and during the dry season.\nEconomy.\nN'Djamena's primary economic source is agricultural work. About 80% of the population within N'Djamena works within farming-based industries, including cultivation of crops and growing livestock. The economy in N'Djamena is therefore almost totally reliant on good weather, making the economy struggle in years with low rainfall. N'Djamena receives financial aid from the World Bank, as well as the African Development Bank. There is a high demand for skilled laborers within N'Djamena to work for oil and gas sectors, as well as laborers for foreign non-governmental organizations, medical services, and English teaching. Residents of N'Djamena are liable to pay tax up to a maximum amount of 60% of all net income.\nCulture.\nAttractions in the city include the Chad National Museum, the Al-Mouna Cultural Center, Our Lady of Peace Cathedral, and several mosques. Within the Chad National Museum, one can view the partial skull of a \"Sahelanthropus\", called by locals as \"Touma\u00ef\". This skull was discovered in the northern part of Chad and is considered to be from one of the earliest human ancestors. Views of sunset across the Chari River can also be spectacular. N'Djamena was named Capital of Islamic Culture in 2009.\nEducation.\nIn N'Djamena, education can be thought of as a luxury even though it is compulsory and free and has been since Chad's independence in 1960. Not more than forty percent of elementary age children in Chad have an opportunity to attend classes and with N'Djamena's poor state stability it is even harder for children to get an education. After progressing through elementary school, some students go on to a university. N'Djamena has two universities: the University of N'Djamena with French as the language of instruction, built in 1971; and King Faisal University - Chad with Arabic as the language of instruction, built in 1991. Secondary schools include the long established Lyc\u00e9e F\u00e9lix \u00c9bou\u00e9 and Lyc\u00e9e technique commercial, the Lyc\u00e9e Montaigne de N'Djamena (French international school). Secondary school within Chad is mandatory, however only 68% of students over the age of 12 attend school. Of that 68%, 70% of these students attend school in N'Djamena. Many of the students in international schools are children of executives, diplomats, and non-governmental organization employees.\nPlaces of worship.\nThe places of worship are predominantly Muslim mosques. There are also Christian churches and temples of Roman Catholic Archdiocese of N'Djam\u00e9na, Evangelical Church of Chad, Christian Assemblies in Chad (Plymouth Brethren).\nGovernment.\nN'Djamena is the home of the National Assembly of Chad, along with many political organisations and parties, and every national ministry. The Supreme Court and Court of Appeal are also in N'Djamena, along with every major embassy in Chad, including the French and US embassies. It is sometimes considered within the region of Chari-Baguirmi, although separate.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe city is the eastern terminus of the Trans-Sahelian Highway, and is linked to East Africa by the (largely unpaved) N'Djamena\u2013Djibouti Highway. The Tripoli-Cape Town Highway also passes through N'Djamena, making it a key Central African location in the Trans-African Highway network. N'Djamena is linked by road bridge to Kouss\u00e9ri in Cameroon.\nAirport.\nN'Djamena International Airport Hassan Djamous (IATA code NDJ) is located on the outskirts of the city. The airport lists nine passenger destinations served by direct flights: Paris, Istanbul, Sharjah, Cairo, Khartoum, Addis Ababa, Douala, Abuja, and Niamey.\nRiver travel.\nHistorically, N'Djamena's main link to the exterior was by river boat up the Chari and Logone rivers, but these now carry little trade.\nRailway.\nThe city has no railway links. However, railways have been proposed. In 2011, Chad signed a contract with a Chinese civil engineering group to build a railway to eventually connect N'Djamena to Sudan and Cameroon, as well as other Chadian cities. In 2017, a further feasibility study was funded, but as of 2025[ [update]], no railroads have been built.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57061", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57061", "title": "Niamey", "text": "Capital and the largest city of Niger\nNiamey () is the capital and largest city of Niger. It is in the western part of the country, surrounded by the Tillab\u00e9ri Region. Niamey lies on the Niger River, primarily situated on the river's left bank (east side). The capital of Niger since the colonial era, Niamey is an ethnically diverse city and the country's main economic centre.\nBefore the French developed it as a colonial centre, Niamey was the site of villages inhabited by Fula, Zarma, Maouri, and Songhai people. French expeditions first visited the location in the 1890s before Captain Henri Salaman established a military post in 1901. Niamey replaced Zinder as the territorial capital from 1903 to 1911 and again in 1926, after which large-scale development occurred. The first city plan in 1930 relocated neighbourhoods and enacted segregation of European and indigenous neighbourhoods, which remained separate until the 1950s. Niamey held Niger's first municipal elections in 1956, electing Djibo Bakary as the first mayor. In the decade following independence in 1960, urban planning introduced infrastructure such as the Kennedy Bridge, which connected the city to the right bank. In the 1970s and 1980s, Niamey's growth was fuelled by a boom in the national uranium industry and by droughts that brought rural migrants. Protests in Niamey contributed to the democratisation of Niger in the 1990s. This era saw an Islamic revival.\nNiamey has a dense city centre and includes some villages in the periphery. Due to rapid population growth, the city has many informal settlements, allocated semi-legally from chiefs of traditional governments, which are often excluded from public utilities. The city's economy is dominated by commerce, largely in the informal economy. The city also has extensive urban agriculture. Alongside the Zarma people, Niamey has a large Hausa population, who often seasonally migrate from rural Niger. Both groups' languages are used as lingua francas. Most of the population follows Islam\u2014including the Tariqa movement of Sufism and the newer Izala movement of Salafism\u2014with a Christian minority. Niamey is one of the hottest major cities in the world. It is prone to droughts and floods. The Niger River is the city's only permanent river and the sole source of its municipal water supply.\nNiamey comprises the Niamey Urban Community (, CUN), a first-level division of Niger, led by the Governor of Niamey. It is divided into five communes: Niamey I, II, III, and IV on the left bank, and V on the right bank. The city also has a municipal government, though it was dissolved in 2024. Transportation links include Diori Hamani International Airport, highways including RN1, and the unused Niamey railway station. Niamey is home to Abdou Moumouni University, Niger's most important university, and Niamey National Hospital, the country's largest referral hospital.\nHistory.\nBackground and foundation.\nThe area of modern Niamey was of little importance before Niger's colonial era. As the Sahelian kingdoms fought for control over the Sahel, the Niamey area was a buffer zone that was not urbanised. Late-sixteenth-century residents of this area included the Zarma and other Songhai refugees from the Moroccan invasion of the Songhai Empire, Hausa-speaking Maouri hunters who migrated westward from the Dogondoutchi area, and the regionally dominant Fula people. These ethnic groups comprise the population of modern Niamey.\nThe villages of Goudel and Gamkal\u00e9 were founded on the left bank (east side) of the Niger River in the sixteenth century. The site that would become Niamey was situated between these villages, around the gully of Gounti Y\u00e9na. Various other villages sprouted here around the early nineteenth century; the Hausa village of Maourey, the Zarma village of Kalley, and the Songhai village of Gaweye were on the left bank, while the Fula villages of Lamord\u00e9, Nogar\u00e9, and Kirkissoye were on the right bank.\nOral histories differ on the chronology of Niamey's early settlement and the etymology of its name. The Maouri believe that the city's Maouri founders were driven away from the nearby river island of N\u00e9ni Goungou by the Fula villagers of Bitinkodji; they say the city was built next to a landmark tree called and was thus named \"place of the Gna\", or . The Zarma believe that the founder, a Kall\u00e9 Zarma chief from the Zarmaganda region named Kouri Mali, acquired land between Yantala and Gamkal\u00e9 Sebangay\u00e9; they say the city's name is derived from his exclamation of \"\", meaning \"clear out here\" or \"settle here\". The Songhai believe that the founders were two fishermen from Gao, who were gifted the river island of Yama Gungu by the local Fula herders before settling on the left bank.\nColonial era.\nFrench invasion and military rule.\nBy the time of the Scramble for Africa, when France laid claim to Niger, western Niger had been weakened by local conflicts and had no major political powers. This facilitated the French invasion of Niger, which began in 1891. The first European mentions of Niamey were by the 1897 mission of \u00c9mile Auguste L\u00e9on Hourst, then the 1899 Voulet\u2013Chanoine Mission, which set fire to Niamey. A local account mentioned earlier contact with Europeans, identified as the expedition of Georges Joseph Tout\u00e9e.\nThe first French post in Niamey was established in 1901 by Henri Salaman, a captain overseeing the Niger\u2013Chad road. The administration chose the location\u2014above a river bend\u2014to provide a port between Zinder and Timbuktu and to facilitate securing control over the inland part of the territory. Salaman was the first to refer to the whole cluster of villages as Niamey. Niamey's residents viewed him as a bringer of peace and development, and the city became known in Hausa as \"\", meaning \"Captain Salaman's city\". French settlement of Niamey began on an empty plateau on the left bank (the modern-day quartier of Terminus). Salaman's administration led construction in this area and drew in migrants through incentives, which included suspending taxation and forced labour for residents.\nNiamey replaced Zinder as the capital of Niger in 1903, after a Tuareg revolt had weakened the eastern part of the territory. The French government incorporated several former chiefdoms into the Canton of Niamey. The first chief, a commoner named Bagniou, was unpopular as he had been a guide for the Voulet\u2013Chanoine Mission, and the chiefdom of Karma protested losing autonomy to the new canton; it was replaced by the Canton of Karma in 1908. Niamey had about 1,800 inhabitants in 1904, when it became the capital of the Third Military Territory of Niger. The first city limits were then drawn. Niamey was not yet a focus of development as the capital's location was intended to be temporary, and officials debated whether the capital should be Niamey or Zinder. The capital moved back to Zinder in 1911, after violence in the eastern region had subsided and reorganisation had drawn Niamey further away from the center of the territory. From that year, Niamey's population began to decline from a peak of 3,000.\nColony of Niger.\nThe Colony of Niger was founded in 1922. Zinder's proximity to the Nigerian border and its distance from French-controlled ports prompted the French to move the capital back to Niamey. Although Niamey was isolated from most of the colony, it was near French Dahomey. The official reason for the move was that Zinder had insufficient potable water. Other reasons included the resistance of Zinder's unified Hausa population to French rule, Niamey's more comfortable climate, and its river location, which officials believed was the only place suitable for agriculture. The governor of Niger, Jules Br\u00e9vi\u00e9, made Niamey the capital on 28 December 1926, by which time the city had 3,142 inhabitants. Construction of the new capital\u2014including the governor's palace\u2014began the year prior, mostly using forced labour.\nIn the decades following Niamey's establishment as the capital, the government developed agriculture and trade routes in western Niger, largely ignoring the rest of the territory. The government planned to extend Dahomey's rail network to link Parakou to Niamey, but this project was not completed. As capital, Niamey also became the center for the educated class of mostly Songhai and Zarma people, with the first regional school opening in 1930. Niamey's first city plan in 1930 designated an indigenous quarter near the river and a European quarter further inland, separated by a park used as a (isolation zone). Government construction, including the completion of the governor's palace, took place in late 1930 and early 1931 using forced labour.\nBefore the 1930s, most migrants to Niamey were from western Niger. Low rainfall in 1930 caused a famine that brought internally displaced people to Niamey starting in May 1931. These migrants increased the city's population tenfold, but most left after the famine ended. Those who remained established informal settlements with mostly thatched mud buildings on the edge of the indigenous quarter. The growth led colonial administrators to increase policing of hygiene. Urban planning in the 1930s introduced health initiatives that involved the relocation of existing neighbourhoods, except for Gaweye, to the plateau. Most residents wished to stay on the river bank, but, after a 1935 fire destroyed many straw buildings, they were forcibly moved to mudbrick houses, resulting in multiethnic neighbourhoods. An urban plan implemented in 1937 divided Niamey into the European city, the indigenous city, and a commercial and industrial zone by the river.\nMost of the urban plan was cancelled during the Second World War, when colonial officials left for the war and the administration prioritised commercial farming over infrastructure. As the city's population increased\u2014from 5,000 in 1941 to 7,500 in 1945\u2014the remaining colonial administrators were unable to enforce property ownership laws, resulting in many people acquiring land from indigenous chiefs. In the 1940s, the administration used taxation and forced labour to disincentivise immigration to the city. This labour was used for public works such as a central hospital and maternity ward. Forced labour was permitted under the until its abolishment in 1946, after which rural immigration increased. The same year, Niger gained autonomy as an overseas territory, leading to the formation of political parties in Niamey. The French government reorganised Niamey in response to political unrest, and Gamkal\u00e9 and Yantala were incorporated into the city.\nA new urban plan in 1952, the (lit.\u2009'Grassy Plan'), divided the city into several zones. The indigenous side included dense city blocks, while the European side was more open and green. This plan also formalised a marketplace of land plots, replacing traditional ownership. Niamey was the first settlement in Niger to become an urban centre, doubling in size between 1945 and 1955 to about 15,000 people. The became outdated amid rapid urban growth and a wave of migrants from a 1954 famine. The city grew inward into the , eliminating the distinction between the European and indigenous cities by 1955.\nNiamey was named as a , with a partially elected council, on 14 February 1954. It was upgraded to Niger's only on 18 December 1955, leading to municipal elections on 18 November 1956, the first in the country. The newly formed coalition (later renamed Sawaba) won a majority in these elections. Djibo Bakary\u2014the leader of a popular trade union in Niamey\u2014thus became the first mayor. Boubou Hama was his deputy mayor. As mayor, Bakary campaigned in support of immediate independence in the 1958 referendum and unsuccessfully ran for Niamey's seat in the 1958 Nigerien Territorial Assembly election.\nPost-independence era.\nIndependence, economic growth, and population boom.\nBy 1960, the year of Niger's independence, Niamey's population had grown to 33,816. A new city plan was drafted in 1961 by the French firm Kalt, Pourdaier-Duteil, and Raymond, which zoned the former indigenous quarter for a higher density than the former European quarter. Niamey received the country's only asphalt highway, spanning a few kilometres between Diori Hamani International Airport and the Presidential Palace\u2014the former governor's palace. The French military base in the city was transferred to the Niger Armed Forces in 1961, becoming the (; transl.\u20091st Company of Command, Support, and Service), but Niamey's gendarmerie unit remained under French control. The led a rebellion against the French units in the city on 3 December 1963.\nPublic-sector employees in Niamey comprised a large part of Niger's workforce in the mid-1960s, and the proportion grew to 14% by 1980. The government of Hamani Diori aimed to increase the country's industrial activities; Niamey received a textile production facility and a refrigerated slaughterhouse. Niamey's groundnut industry rapidly grew around this time, which contributed to increasing the capital's population to 108,000 in 1972. Diori's government established a party militia in 1964, stationing personnel in each of the city's seventeen quartiers. An urban plan in the 1960s introduced developments including a greenbelt. The plan ended the distinction between European and indigenous neighbourhoods, aiming to lower the disparity within the city's population density. Despite this, housing insecurity increased, and the informal settlement of Talladj\u00e9 was created in 1966. Diori led the inaugural summit of the in 1969 in Niamey, giving the city unprecedented media coverage, after which Diori launched a rebranding campaign for the city, which included naming of streets. The Kennedy Bridge opened in 1970 and connected the left bank of Niamey to the much less populated right bank, which then began to urbanise.\nA national uranium boom in the 1970s and 1980s improved the economy of Niamey. The city's public spending was then invested in modern buildings, resulting in an era of opulent architecture in a revival of the Sudanese style. The economic situation caused a baby boom. Meanwhile, a drought in 1972\u201373 brought a wave of migrants that led to rapid urban sprawl, and Malian immigrants settled in the outer parts of the city. As a result, the population of Niamey grew from 108,000 to 398,365 inhabitants, and the city limits expanded from in 1970 to by 1977, annexing peripheral villages.\nAfter the military government of Seyni Kountch\u00e9 took power in the 1974 coup, there were strict controls on residency and the government would regularly round up and deport those without permits back to their villages. The government established a daily curfew and placed 10,000 political agents in the city, which had a population of 400,000. A second drought occurred in 1983\u201384, bringing about 150,000 migrants to Niamey. Kountch\u00e9's government responded to the ensuing housing crisis with eviction and resettlement to new districts including Lazaret and Madina, but the crisis continued. Kountch\u00e9's government also constructed water sources in the city's periphery and led the construction of the Grand Mosque of Niamey, funded by the Libyan government. In 1984, the (transl.\u2009Master Plan for Urban Planning and Development) divided Niamey into five districts, subordinate to the Prefect Mayor, to manage the large population. These were reorganised into the Niamey Urban Community (, CUN), with three municipalities, in 1989. In the 1990s, with further reorganisation and decentralisation, the city's growth rate slightly declined.\nDemocratisation era and urban reorganisation.\nIn the 1990 Kennedy Bridge massacre, soldiers killed three student protestors. This event propelled protests and political participation in support of democracy. That November, 100,000 people in Niamey participated in a general strike against president Ali Saibou, after which he agreed to establish a democratic council. In 1993, the year Mahamane Ousmane became the first democratically elected president, Niamey had high rates of poverty and unemployment as public-sector jobs decreased. Niger's democratisation effected an upsurge in the popularity of private radio and in Islamic discourse. Islamic groups based in Niamey, including Izala Society supporters, played major roles in protests against the Ousmane government's proposed family law in 1994 and against the city's hosting of the International Festival of African Fashion in 2000. A coup d'\u00e9tat organised in Niamey in February 1996 installed Ibrahim Bar\u00e9 Ma\u00efnassara as president. Bar\u00e9 was unpopular in Niamey as public-sector employment decreased and state-run urban services declined. On 9 April 1999, Bar\u00e9 was ambushed, shot, and killed at Niamey's airport during a coup d'\u00e9tat.\nThe CUN was reorganised in 1996 amid a wide reorganisation of the country's municipalities. The CUN became a first-level region of Niger and was divided into five municipalities. The plan allowed the region to shrink to centralise the area managed, but a 2002 plan instead allowed each municipality to expand within a perimeter to benefit from urban growth. This plan redrew municipalities' boundaries based on pre-colonial settlements, with consulting from traditional chiefs. Administrative decentralisation in 2004 gave these municipalities control over zoning, leading to a dispute with the CUN. Residents of the village of Saga disagreed with being incorporated into the CUN. In 2011, the municipalities were reorganised as municipal districts, undoing the decentralisation.\nUrban development projects in the 2010s involved the expropriation and destruction of neighbourhoods. These projects included president Mahamadou Issoufou's initiative, launched in 2011, and preparation for the city's hosting of an African Union summit in 2019. In 2013, American and French military bases were established at adjacent parts of Diori Hamani International Airport. Niamey was the site of protests against the 2021 presidential election and president-elect Mohamed Bazoum; most Niameyans believed he had stolen the election as the city had overwhelmingly voted for Ousmane. Air force units in the city led a failed coup against Bazoum before his inauguration. In July 2023, the Niger junta began renaming street names from the colonial era to more local names, such as replacing the name of Charles de Gaulle with that of Bakary. In April 2024, the junta's leader, Abdourahamane Tchiani, declared the dissolution of local governments, replacing the mayor of Niamey, Oumarou Dogari, with an army official. The same month, hundreds rallied in Niamey to demand the withdrawal of the US military from the country. The US withdrew its troops from Niamey in July 2024.\nGeography.\nNiamey is in the western part of Niger, surrounded by the Tillab\u00e9ri Region. Located between the longitudes 2\u00b003' E and 2\u00b015' E and the latitudes 13\u00b035' S and 13\u00b024' S, it covers an area of , of which is urban, as of 2022[ [update]]. It is located on the Niger River, mostly on the plateau of the left bank (east side), with a few developments on the alluvial plain of the right bank. The city's height above sea level mostly ranges from 190\u00a0m to 230\u00a0m on the left bank and from 180\u00a0m to 185\u00a0m on the right bank; the highest point, Trois S\u0153urs, reaches 250\u00a0m.\nThe Niger is Niamey's only permanent river. (wadis) form temporarily, mostly on the left bank, and have become more common since the 1970s due to human activity. The river is fed by in the Inner Niger Delta, with the flow in the city mainly coming from three on the right bank: Gorouol, Dargol, and Sirba. The plateau of Niamey pushes the river's flow to be straight. Niamey is downriver from the S\u00e9lingu\u00e9 Dam in Mali, which has regulated the river's water level and prevented the city from losing water during droughts. A series of sandy islands lies from Niamey upstream to Karma; the largest are Boubon, Kanazi, and N\u00e9ni Goungou. As form alluvial fans, the river is prone to flooding. Erosion and sedimentary deposits cause high siltation of the river, preventing it from flowing during periods of dryness, which threatens agriculture in Niamey.\nNiamey is between the geological regions of Liptako on the west and the Iullemmeden Basin on the east. It sits atop plateaus of sand and laterite, which are extracted by the city's quarries. The city centre is built on bedrock formed by the West African Craton on the east bank, while the porous sediment of the Iullemmeden lies on both banks.\nNiamey's vegetation consists of tiger bush shrubland on the plateau and millet fields and savanna in the valleys. Some trees are planted by government projects; a greenbelt was created in the 1960s, and areas in the city centre were planted in the mid-1970s by the Kountch\u00e9 administration. The greenbelt covers of the peri-urban area, though most of its original space is no longer forested, and nine other green spaces each cover . Most trees in the city are maintained by residents, who use them for shade (which provides space for outdoor events) and for fruit. Common trees planted by residents include neem, mango, and \u00e9tag\u00e8re. Most of the city's tree coverage is of introduced species; some were introduced during the colonial era, and others, including neem, were planted for the greenbelt. The predominant natural trees are \"Combretaceae\", including the species \"Acacia albida\", which is maintained for soil regeneration. Urban gardens take up , as of 2007[ [update]]. The city's woodland and shrubland coverage decreased from 35% in 1968 to 7% in 2009, despite a stagnant area of agricultural land.\nCityscape.\nThe density of Niamey decreases with distance from the built-up city centre, with some rural settlements within and surrounding the locality. The Niamey Urban Community incorporates several surrounding towns and villages that have been annexed. Niamey's grid plan includes wide boulevards linking roundabouts, alongside dirt roads in residential areas.\nHouses in Niamey have building materials associated with their inhabitants' social strata, ranging from huts to European-style villas. Most houses are fenced. Mudbrick is popular as an inexpensive, local construction method, having replaced lighter materials as the colonial city was established. In the post-independence era, more expensive, imported materials such as cement and reinforced concrete became more popular. Urban planning authorities favour cement over mudbrick, which is associated with poverty. The vast majority of the population in the 2000s lived in mudbrick buildings. Many neighbourhoods, both formal and informal, have dense populations who rent multifamily compounds made of mudbrick with shared courtyards. Most of these compounds are not connected to the electricity grid or running water.\nMunicipally allocated land lots typically measure 300 to 400 square metres. Much of Niamey's urban expansion involves informal neighbourhoods, or , which are constructed by their residents without administrative approval and are allocated and zoned by traditional chiefs (See ). This kind of settlement became popular during the 1970s housing crisis and proliferated during the 1990s economic decline. Government zoning and public housing projects often focus on middle-class residents, motivating lower-class residents to live in informal settlements. Though Niger recognises traditional ownership, the parallel land market violates the city code, so these neighbourhoods have ambiguous government approval. The government variably rebuilds such neighbourhoods or destroys them for new development.\nNiamey is a polycentric city. The city centre has poor, dense neighbourhoods that have existed since the 1930s and 1940s. Some were replaced by business districts with multi-story buildings in the 2010s. Such developments have caused poor residents of the area to sell their homes or be pressured to leave by gentrification projects. The northernmost part of Niamey contains the poor neighbourhood of Koira T\u00e9gui, which was relocated from the city centre in 1989. The city's eastern periphery is centered around the industrial zone, military barracks, commercial establishments, and Diori Hamani International Airport. On the opposite side of the industrial zone is the village of Saga, 5\u00a0km from downtown Niamey, which has become a peri-urban area due to nearby developments. The city's largest informal neighbourhood, Pays Bas, is built on a ravine near the airport, allocated by Saga's chief; informal settlements expand eastward to the neighbourhood of Tondigamay, built on existing roads. In the west of the city, Commune I is the wealthiest part of Niamey, with many foreign embassy workers. The right bank of Niamey contains traditional Fula villages, as well as neighbourhoods that arose after the construction of Kennedy Bridge (such as Karadj\u00e9 and Banga Bana) and relocated neighbourhoods such as Gaweye. The right bank also contains higher education institutions including Abdou Moumouni University.\nClimate.\nWith monthly highs ranging from 32\u00a0\u00b0C in January to 41\u00a0\u00b0C in April, Niamey is one of the hottest parts of Niger and of the Sahel, and it is one of the world's hottest major cities. With an expected rainfall of 500 to 750\u00a0mm in a year, it is drier than areas further west in West Africa. Rainfall mostly begins with a few storms in May, then transitions to a rainy season from early June to early September, and there is practically no rain from October to April. The dry season is divided into a cool dry season from November to February and a hot dry season from March to May.\nNiamey has a pattern of two floods. The first, termed the \"local flood\" or \"red flood\", flows from the Inner Niger Delta, usually from August to October. A smaller flood, called the \"Guinean flood\", is caused by rainfall that flows from Guinea's Fouta Djallon region, usually from January to March. The region around Niamey has seen increases in surface water levels following decreases in rainfall\u2014a phenomenon known as the Niamey paradox\u2014which has caused decreased durations of the two floods. The river's flow has increased since the 1970s, which led to the distinguishment of the two floods, with the red flood shifting ahead by 40 days. The two-flood cycle causes significant flooding events, exacerbated by inadequate drainage systems, and damage is intensified when the floods overlap. In the 2000s and 2010s, the red flood increased in strength due to increased runoff, causing extreme floods in 2010, 2012, and 2013. Rainfall across the city is uneven. The city is affected by droughts, especially the northern, central, and southwestern parts. The driest years on record are 1972, 1982, and 1984.\nLeading up to the rainy season, Niamey is dry with low cloud cover, leading to significant diurnal temperature variation. In June, the temperature rises quickly in the morning and slows down by the afternoon; in August, there is a slower temperature rise in the morning and a slight decrease in the afternoon. Temperatures in the hot dry season regularly exceed 40\u00a0\u00b0C and may come near the unsafe threshold of 45\u00a0\u00b0C. In the cool dry season, average nighttime lows range from 14 to 18\u00a0\u00b0C. Climate change led to a 1.4-degree increase in annual minimum temperatures between 1965 and 2013. Winds of the African easterly jet (AEJ) contribute to the convective boundary layer in Niamey, whose depth is about 1,000 to 2,000\u00a0m (with a pressure of 850\u00a0hPa) during the rainy season and 2,000 to 3,000\u00a0m (750\u00a0hPa) leading up to the rainy season. Air masses caused by small-scale burning in Niamey have been observed. Land clearing in the area has led to erosion, forming and alluvial cones. The city's heat leads to a high risk of malaria near water pools, while dust storms contribute to meningitis.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2022, Niamey had an estimated population of 1,407,635 (700,722 males and 706,913 females) and a population density of 2,549 per square kilometre. Niamey has a high population growth rate, correlated with the national rate, which is one of the highest in the world. Oxford Economics estimated that Niamey was the world's fastest growing city in 2015, predicting a growth rate of 5.2% each year until 2030. Niamey's population is largely young; its age distribution has a median of 14 years and a third quartile of 24 years, as of 2013[ [update]].\nMost people in Niamey work in the informal economy. The city has high wealth disparity, and neighbourhoods have strong class divisions. The average income is about 500 CFA francs (1 US dollar) per day, as of 2019[ [update]]. The living wage is about 100 US dollars per month, as of 2016[ [update]]. Since the 1990s, the city's cost of living has increased while employment has decreased. The number of government jobs has decreased amid neoliberal economic programs. People without formal education have few job opportunities. Job market saturation has made it difficult for young migrants to find employment.\nMost residents of Niamey rent their homes and frequently move within the urban area based on finances. Some seasonal residents arrange to keep a property within a group of roommates. About 20% of households in the city have a woman as the head of household. The city has many nuclear households, but preference for a large family size is widespread, with an average of 4.2 children per woman in 2021[ [update]]. Expectations of marriage limit the social status of many young men in Niamey who cannot afford to marry.\nInformal settlements and squatting are common throughout the city. It does not have extensive slums, although the United Nations definition of slums includes 80% of the city. The city centre has visible groups of beggars, particularly within the more trafficked neighbourhoods. Beggars have formed a well-regulated hierarchical system in which they garner money according to cultural perceptions that view groups such as disabled people as being worthy of begging.\nEthnicity and language.\nNiamey is a cosmopolitan, highly ethnically integrated city with residents from every ethnic group of Niger and others from across West Africa. According to anthropologist Scott M. Youngstedt, Hausa people have comprised over half of the city's population since about 1980, having increased from 12% in 1960. Despite this, the Hausa largely identify as a diaspora community within a Zarma city, which lies about 150 kilometres west of Hausaland. Members of the Bella caste of Tuareg people have assimilated into the Zarma and Songhai cultures in the area since coming to Saga from the village of Sona Bella in the late 19th century.\nThe Hausa and Zarma languages are Niamey's lingua francas. An overwhelming majority of the city speaks Hausa, including international immigrants. The variety of Hausa used in the city is influenced by Zarma grammar. Code switching between Hausa, Zarma, and French is common. Other languages used include Fula and Tamasheq.\nMigration.\nSince Niamey's establishment as a city, the vast majority of its population has been migrants and their children. This is due to its political status as well as the effects of droughts and famines. The city's population increases by 200,000 or 300,000 during the dry season due to circular migration from rural Niger. During the dry season, many Hausa residents work in the city's informal economy. For rural Nigerien Hausas, Niamey is the most popular place to migrate due to its ease of travel. Many Hausa migrants stay in Niamey for a few years. Most do not consider it their home, but youths in the 21st century often feel stronger connections to the city. Those who stay in the city permanently are seen within the community as \"left behind\". Many such people prefer Niamey for its standard of living and lack of violence, despite difficulties with employment and affordability. Others cannot afford to return home.\nMany Niamey residents desire to move out of the country, and social groups are formed with this goal. These groups often fund emigrations to receive remittances in return. It is common for international emigrants to return to the city after long periods. Hausa migrants to Niamey often emigrate internationally, comprising a large part of the international Hausa diaspora. Hausa migrants within Niger are composed about equally of men and women, but, as men emigrate internationally, women typically stay in Niamey, often with their in-laws. Some Niameyans are educated in Western cities such as Paris, Hamburg, New York City, and Greensboro, the latter being nicknamed Little Niamey.\nThe foreign-born population of Niger is mostly centered in Niamey and Tillab\u00e9ri. Nigerian Yoruba businesspeople come to Niamey because it has less competition than other cities in Niger. Yoruba people first came to Niamey in the 1950s, immigrating from Shaki and Igboho. They comprised 2.4% of the city in 1961 before large-scale immigration began in the 1970s. Niamey has had waves of Tuareg refugees from northern Mali since the 1960s, caused by war or drought. The city has about 4,000 such people, as of 2022[ [update]], and they formed an advocacy group in 2012. Many upper-caste Tuaregs experience lower social status in Niamey than in Mali. Many Tuareg migrants work as brickmakers or water vendors (see ). Niamey has Niger's largest Chinese population, composed of mostly short-term residents. The city's first Chinese women came in the 1980s with their Nigerien husbands, who they met at universities in Guangzhou. Some Chinese women are employed by the public sector or by Chinese corporations; they come from cities or provinces that have relations with Niger. Others, largely from southern China, establish businesses.\nReligion.\nIslam.\nAn Islamic revival in West Africa began in the 1990s, turning Niamey into a centre of religious activism. This occurred during the era of democratisation and the breakdown of formal education in Niger, and the city saw an increase in political Islam and support for Islamic education centres, known locally as . In subsequent decades, the city saw an increase in hijab use, mosque constructions, public sermons, and Arabic language students. In neighbourhoods such as Boukoki, the Islamic revival has increased the popularity of traditionalist gender roles that require women to stay at home, which are promoted by most Islamic educators in the city.\nSufism is popular in Niamey, and most are affiliated with the movement. Izala, a Salafi movement opposed to Sufism, is much smaller than the Tariqa Sufi movement in Niamey, but theological debates between the two are frequent. Izala gained traction in Niamey in the early 1990s and was present across the city by the 2000s. The movement established educational institutions, and its preachers became celebrities. Many congregations in the city became more conservative as they shifted from Sufism from Izala. Shiism came to Niamey later and became the target of anti-Shiism by Izala supporters. A reformist Izala faction known as Sunnance is centered on teaching its view on the sunnah rather than establishing political presence. It is popular among youths who reject the traditionalism of mainstream Izala.\n largely target the city's women and young people. During the Islamic revival, these provided the first Islamic education for many women in the city. Women with formal employment are one of the largest contingents of Islamic education proponents in the city. The city's Islamic broadcast media largely targets women. Public sermons, known as , typically take place on Thursdays. Sunnance preachers in Niamey perform , a form of Islamic outreach that involves preaching to large gatherings, with a nontraditional, dramatic style that involves narrative, humour, and colloquialisms. Popularised in the 2000s and 2010s, it is opposed by many Sufi and mainstream Izala leaders in the city. Many mosques in Niamey prohibit , which is often instead performed in public places, increasing its visibility. Sunnance followers in the city also hold theological discussion groups they call .\nChristianity.\nChristians in Niger are mostly concentrated in Niamey and Maradi. Niamey has a Christian community descended from migrants. A large church is run by wealthy Christians with ties to Maradi and Tibiri. Francophone African immigrants are served by a French-language church and the , a library run by the organisation SIM. Pentecostalism has a widespread media presence, paralleling that of Izala. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Niamey was founded in 1942 and has been the metropolitan diocese of the ecclesiastical province of Niger since 2014.\nNiamey's first Catholic mission was established in 1931 by Father Fran\u00e7ois Faroud. The Catholic mission has run secular schools in Niamey since 1949, having been supported by the colonial government as Islam overtook animism in the area. Initially teaching only boys, the Catholic school became coeducational in 1961. The Baptist Church became active in the city in the late 20th century. The , a Christian group established in 1989, is primarily active in Niamey.\nEconomy.\nNiamey is the primate city of Niger. Its economic development was limited during the colonial era due to its lack of connections to other cities. Urban expansion in the 1970s and 1980s led to it becoming a regional economic centre, though its economic power is limited by its distance from larger centres, emigration to other countries, and the instability of the region. The jihadist insurgency in Niger has limited foreign demand for goods in the country, hindering some commerce in Niamey.\nNiamey's main economic activities are commercial. Most people in the city rely on informal peddlers and street markets for common purchases, including food, clothing, water (see ), and pharmaceuticals (see ). These vendors typically sell a single product or service. The Niamey Grand Market () is the city's largest commercial site, and the in the city centre is the largest vegetable market. Street food vendors, mostly women, sell cowpea-based foods such as kossa\u00ef, primarily at breakfast time.\nNiamey has extensive urban agriculture including animal husbandry. The city is located in a pearl millet and cowpea growing region; agricultural products include millet, meat, eggs, and dairy. Rice is grown on the floodplains the Niger River in neighbourhoods including Saga, Kirkissoye, and Losso Goungou, though rice is mostly imported. Niamey's agricultural infrastructure enables the farming of more resource-intensive vegetables than in rural parts of Niger. Demand for food in Niamey has led to an increase in farming of potatoes, which had previously been a luxury in the region. Farmers in nearby villages purchase potato seeds primarily from the and sell potatoes for a higher profit than more common crops. Livestock includes sheep and goats in the urban area and cattle in the periphery.\nNiamey has little industrial activity, and most products are imported. Manufacturing industries include leatherworking, chemicals, and soap production. Food processing activities include brewing, dairy, meatpacking, and syrup production. Financial investment is primarily from Nigerien citizens. The city has about ten commercial banks, as well as a housing bank and an agricultural bank.\nCulture.\nResidents of Niamey have various kinds of conversation groups. Tea drinking groups for young men, known as , are located at many spaces in the city. originated in Niamey during the 1990s democratisation era before spreading to other Nigerien cities; some members of attribute their creation to the protests against the Kennedy Bridge massacre. Being active at night, defend their neighbourhoods, especially in areas without police patrols. are primarily a phenomenon of unemployed men, though many in the city consist of students, and some include women. Many women in the city instead form smaller gatherings or financially supportive social groups called . The city's Hausa conversation groups, or groups, usually assemble at streetside spots. These groups, often formed through hometown connections, are single-gender and mostly male. Most of the city's Hausa men lack full-time employment, so they spend most of their time with these groups. The city's groups include seasonal and long-term migrants, and some include non-Hausa people. Many people are members of multiple groups.\nNew Year's Eve is a popular holiday in Niamey due to global influence, though conservative Muslims reject it for its associations with Christmas and alcohol. It was rarely celebrated in Niamey until widespread festivities a few weeks after the city hosted the 2005 Jeux de la Francophonie. New Year's Eve provides an economic boost, being the most popular day for live music and nightlife, the only secular holiday to feature feasts, and, for many Niameyans, the only day they drink alcohol.\nArts and architecture.\n, a form of oration built on improvising details, is popular among the city's youth. With the influence of global popular culture in Niamey, some musicians perform Nigerien hip-hop music in Hausa or Zarma, and hip-hop fashion is popular among young men. Organisations such as the support hip-hop production. The orchestra Tal National performs at its own concert hall in Niamey. Niamey's Islamic revival increased the popularity of women's Islamic fashion, including clothing imported from the Middle East and Asia; women who wear expensive Islamic clothing are known idiomatically as . Meanwhile, Western fashions became popular among wealthy, Western-educated women, as well as a group of young women known as (transl.\u2009hotel mice).\nNiamey is the Nigerien city with the most photography studios. Most photographers in the city are Togolese, Beninese, or Nigerian Yoruba immigrants, with the latter running 75% of the city's studios in 2000. Apprenticeships led to the spread of Yoruba photography across the city. Niamey is a centre for pottery markets, with Saga historically being a centre of Bella Tuareg pottery. Most of the pottery sold in Niamey is made in the nearby village of Boubon. Niamey has a large market for Tuareg craftwork and art, often purchased by Western expatriates, which has motivated Tuareg artisans to work in the city; the market of Ch\u00e2teau 1 became a popular place for such products in the 1990s.\nMost of Niamey's tall buildings were built during the uranium boom of the 1970s and 1980s. In addition to storefronts and high-rise office buildings, the city centre contains stadiums, cultural centers, and the Mus\u00e9e National Boubou Hama. Niger being a predominantly Muslim country, mosques are the most common places of worship, with the Grande Mosqu\u00e9e being the largest in the city. There are also various Christian churches, including Our Lady of Perpetual Help Cathedral, the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Niamey, and the Cathedral de Maourey. The Niamey 2000 neighbourhood, the first dense housing estate in the city, was designed by the firm united4design for middle-class residents. It was built with local materials and was one of the first projects in the city to use compressed earth block construction.\nSport.\nMany men in Niamey are fans of football. The national stadium, Stade G\u00e9n\u00e9ral Seyni Kountch\u00e9, holds matches between Nigerien football teams as well as international matches. Football clubs were established in each quartier of Niamey in 1964, under Diori Hamani. Prominent football clubs in Niamey's neighbourhoods include Olympic FC de Niamey in Lacouroussou, Sahel SC in the neighbourhood, AS Renaissance in Boukoki, and in Talladj\u00e9. Niamey also holds the annual national traditional wrestling competition. The city's basketball league is the only one in operation in the Nigerien Basketball Federation, as of 2024[ [update]].\nMedia.\nThe press in Niger is predominantly centred in Niamey. The government ran radio broadcasts in the city since independence; the Office of Radio and Television of Niger was formed in 1967 to broadcast government propaganda, which continued until democratisation in 1990. Niamey had the country's first commercial radio in 1994. Radio networks based in Niamey include Studio Tamani and Studio Kalangou. Many Hausa residents consume international news media such as BBC Hausa. The first television programming in Niamey was the Niger School Television Program in 1966.\nGovernance.\nAdministration.\nNiamey makes up a capital district of Niger, the Niamey Urban Community (CUN), a first-level subdivision equal to the seven regions of Niger. The CUN's administration, appointed by national leaders, is led by the Governor of Niamey, accompanied by the Secretary General and Assistant Secretary General. On a municipal level, forty-five councillors are popularly elected and in turn elect the Prefect Mayor; the first mayor under this system was Oumarou Dogari in 2011. The City Council and Mayor have limited roles compared to the CUN Governor. The city was placed under military rule in 2024, with the municipal government being dissolved. Before, the municipal government was largely funded through sale of land. The CUN also has three traditional chiefdoms: Saga lies entirely within the community, while Karma and Lamord\u00e9 extend into Tillab\u00e9ri Region. Traditional chiefs have less power than in other parts of Niger; they perform tax collection and act as community representatives. Neighbourhood chiefs () also exist without government recognition, mostly in lower-class neighbourhoods.\nNiamey has one of two courts of appeal in the judiciary of Niger (with the other in Zinder). The Court of Appeal of Niamey oversees four district courts, including the Higher District Court of Niamey, which has the largest caseload in Niger. Other courts located in Niamey include the Niamey Regional Court, the Council of State and the Constitutional Court.\nNiamey has a low rate of violent crime. The city's public spaces, including greenspaces and market neighbourhoods, have criminal reputations in public discourse. With increased police presence after the 2010 coup, Niamey was divided into three sectors with night patrols by different state police groups: the Gendarmerie Nationale on the right bank, Police Nationale on the left bank, and Garde Nationale on the north side. Niamey has a higher proportion of women in police, customs, and forest service positions than most of the country, and the gendarmerie has noted \"a large proportion of single women and a preference to reside there.\" In addition to state police, Niamey has most of the country's private security companies; the oldest, GED Services, was founded in 1988. , informal defence forces, exist in peripheral neighbourhoods, where they are sometimes established by chiefs. These belong to specific neighbourhoods, unlike police, though some lose the support of their neighbourhoods.\nDivisions.\nUnder Law No. 2002-15, passed on 11 June 2002, the CUN contains five municipal districts. These districts were labelled as communes of Niger, although the Niamey Urban Community is the central authority. Each commune elects a council and a mayor with administrative duties. The urban area of the CUN is organised into 90 quartiers, and the rural area consists of 37 attached villages, as of 2023[ [update]]. Each quartier has an elected government.\nThe boundaries of Niamey's communes are based on historic villages: Niamey I contains Goudel and Yantala; Niamey II contains Maourey, across the gully of Gounti Y\u00e9na from Niamey I; Commune III contains Kalley; Commune IV contains Gamkal\u00e9 and Saga; and Commune V, on the right bank, was the site of Fula settlements.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nNiamey's roads are traversed by cars, motorcycles, pedestrians, goats, and camels. Most of the population travels primarily by foot, while about 9% own cars, and another 9% own motorbikes, as of 1996[ [update]]. Roads are the main mode of transportation between Niamey and the rest of Niger. Niamey is crossed by the RN1 highway (or ), connecting it to N'guigmi on the eastern edge of Niger. Niamey is located on routes connecting northern Niger to coastal West Africa and the Sahara. The route between Niamey and Agadez, which takes approximately one day of driving, is a significant path for trans-Saharan migrants.\nCargo frequently travels via Benin as it has the closest seaport to Niamey, the Port of Cotonou. Boats are infrequently used to travel the Niger River as it traverses little of Niger. A freight company has operated along the Niger River since 1975 but, as of 2008[ [update]], has an annual load of only a few thousand tons, and there is a lack of support for a planned connection to the coast. The main highway in western Niger connects Niamey to Benin, linking to the country's rail system. Following plans from the 1970s for a railway to Benin, Niamey railway station, the first one built in Niger, was inaugurated in April 2014, and rails between Niamey and Dosso, Niger, were completed in January 2016. However, the extension to Benin failed, the rails fell into disrepair, and disassembly began in 2024. Niamey is served by Diori Hamani International Airport, located to the southeast of the city centre. The airport houses a military base, .\nHealthcare.\nMost people in Niamey have experience with biomedicine, Islamic medicine, and folk medicine (including medicinal plants and spiritual healing), with uncertainty about health issues requiring them to seek multiple providers. The city has better healthcare than rural Niger, though patients are often unhappy with medical professionals whose behaviour is impersonal or violates social norms. As of 2012[ [update]], Niamey has one doctor for every 6,774 people, one nurse for every 3,765 patients, and one midwife for every 832 women of reproductive age, lower than WHO recommendations. Scarcity of required medications, materials, and labour leads to a high level of improvisation among the city's medical professionals. Marabouts who act as folk healers are common the city, advertising their treatments to the population with limited access to biomedicine. Most pharmaceuticals are purchased from street vendors, known in Hausa as (lit.\u2009'clerk'), who sell generic drugs in individual portions for much lower prices than licensed pharmacies. These began operating in the 1990s and became widespread in the 2010s. The city's are universally male and largely Zarma, and they carry products in pushcarts or on their heads. They lack pharmaceutical expertise and buy from unlicensed wholesalers, mostly at the Grand Market. Despite widespread views of medical professionals as charlatans, Niameyans largely rely on when facing health problems.\nThe largest medical facilities in Niamey are the Niamey National Hospital and the Lamord\u00e9 National Hospital. The Niamey National Hospital, Niger's main referral hospital, treats mostly outpatients, particularly in the specialisations of dentistry, ophthalmology, and ENT. A national economic decline in the late 1990s caused low funding for the National Hospital. Maternit\u00e9 Issaka Gazoby (MIG) is the national-level obstetric and gynaecological referral hospital. Additional maternity wards are in the Talladj\u00e9 and Poudri\u00e8re neighbourhoods. Other health centres include the Magori Clinic and the Lakouroussou Clinic. Blood transfusions are performed at the Niamey Regional Blood Transfusion Center, with plans to be implemented at the National Hospital and MIG, as of 2016[ [update]]. Niamey is also home to Niger's reference hospital for tuberculosis, the National Anti-Tuberculosis Center.\nDespite the presence of maternal health centres, Niamey has high maternal mortality, with a rate of 30.7 per 100,000 births in 2022[ [update]]. Many patients seeking prenatal care get inadequate treatment. Biomedical contraception is widely availabile in pharmacies and medical facilities but is used less frequently than plant-based folk medicine, as many people view it as foreign. Many Niameyan women use contraception or abortion to control birth spacing, despite norms favouring large families. As abortion is illegal in the country, they often seek abortions abroad.\nPublic utilities.\nAs of 2005[ [update]], 54.4% of households in Niamey have electricity, while 38.3% have water. Niamey's electrical grid is run by NIGELEC, a state-owned enterprise. The city's water supply is operated by the private firm (SEEN) and runs on infrastructure owned by the state-owned (SPEN). Many residents of Niamey lack connections to these utilities because urban expansion has outpaced the expansion of the grids. Many informal neighbourhoods are excluded from utilities as their residents lack legal recognition. Some residents of informal neighbourhoods negotiate with the public utility firms or invest their own funds to connect to the grids. The grids are unreliable during the hot dry season, especially on the right bank.\nEnergy.\nEnergy in Niger, including in Niamey, is dependent on imports from Nigeria, which were halted in the 2020s due to tensions between the countries. A 132-kilovolt connection to Niamey from Birnin Kebbi, Nigeria, has a capacity of 120 megawatts. The city's grid is also powered by the thermal power plants of Gorou Banda (80 megawatts) and Istithmar (89 megawatts) as well as a solar power plant (30 megawatts). The United Nations Economic and Social Council began solar power development in the city in 1964, the first in West Africa. The city has a climate conducive to solar panels but lacks financial incentives for widespread implementation.\nNiamey has typical electricity usage for a city. Its average electrical load is about 90 megawatts, with a peak of about 123 megawatts during extreme heat. Niamey frequently experiences power outages, despite government plans for the country's oil industry to improve electricity access. Some residents who are not connected to the electrical grid install electric generators, solar panels, or unauthorised wiring that connects to the grid, while others rely on portable lights and mobile phone charging services. Firewood is a vital energy source in the city, with annual usage increasing from 70,000 tons in 1977 to 200,000 tons in 2007. It is harvested from distant forests, with the largest source being the municipality of Torodi.\nWater.\nThe Niger River is the sole source of Niamey's water supply. Increased use resulted in a decline in the river's water quality in the late 20th century. Unlike most of Niger, Niamey has a central water supply, so the resource is sold as a commodity. According to official sources, pipes serve about 65% of Niamey's population as of 2008[ [update]]. The rest receive water from sources such as publicly funded standpipes or water towers funded by charities or Islamic organisations. Standpipes are the cheapest source of water, with a cost of 15 francs (3 US cents) for 25 litres, as of 2014[ [update]]. Niamey's neighbourhoods have uneven access to water. Neighbourhoods in both the periphery and the city centre have low use of taps; SEEN does not operate in these neighbourhoods due to their topography or lack of legal recognition. Hand-dug wells exist in lower-class neighbourhoods of the periphery and are often polluted, though they have become rare as neighbourhoods install communally funded boreholes. More affluent neighbourhoods in the periphery are connected to the pipe system. In such neighbourhoods, wealthy residents often supply water for their poorer neighbours. Compounds have taps in courtyards; only upper-class residents have taps inside their houses. Access to piped water is unreliable during the dry season, when water usage increases due to heat. During this time, water is supplied by water towers, installed by SEEN in most neighbourhoods, or smaller tanks in some households and compounds.\nPeople whose homes lack piped water purchase water from vendors, leading to higher water prices for poorer residents. Water deliverers, known in Hausa as (lit.\u2009'there is water'), purchase water from standpipes to fill 25-litre jugs, which they deliver to households via pushcart. Providing over half of the city's drinking water, operate in groups on regular routes and make an above-average income. are universally male; most are immigrants from around eastern Mali who are predominantly Tuareg or Fula. They receive annual municipal licences and operate informal guilds and apprenticeships. Other vendors sell water sachets, known in Hausa as (from the English \"pure water\"). Water sachet vendors arose around the 1990s, manually filling sachets imported from Nigeria; factories were established by the early 2000s and supplanted manual production by the 2010s. Water sachets are sold by street vendors with coolers, especially in poor neighbourhoods; this is a common entry-level job in the city, with many boys employed by female relatives. Water sachets are also sold at shops, including in wealthy neighbourhoods. Vendors purchase water sachets from small-scale producers, which purchase water from , and more popularly from large-scale producers, which use printed labels and piped water. Bottled water is rare and expensive. The bottled water market is dominated by local brands\u2014which are more contaminated than piped water\u2014alongside high-end French brands. Most households store water in clay pots.\nStandpipes were installed in the 1950s by the French semi-public , the predecessor of NIGELEC. These offered subscription pricing, leading to the business model. The water utility became independent from NIGELEC during the Kountch\u00e9 administration, forming the ) (SNE, transl.\u2009National Water Company) under the Ministry of Hydraulics. Droughts of the 1980s dried the Niger River, and construction of wells increased. After the privatisation of SNE under Bar\u00e9, Niamey's water supply became unreliable; in 1990, an estimated 22% of the city's inhabitants had access to water taps, though the government gave this figure as 45%. SEEN began operating the city's water utility in 2001, under a plan from the World Bank. The French firm Veolia Water purchased a 51% share in SEEN the same year. The World Bank's plan increased the price of water, with the intention that wealthier users pay for more water, which critics say does not account for the needs of large, poor households. Investment in the 2000s and 2010s led to a large increase in standpipes, but access to water in the city remained low.\nWaste management and sanitation.\nNiamey produces about 1,400 tonnes of waste per day, as of 2020[ [update]]. Most waste consists of sand and organic matter such as pruned branches, leaves, and food waste. The city does not have a standardised waste collection system. Plastic litter is common, including used water sachets. Waste is often burned or enters the Niger River. Residents of some wealthy neighbourhoods hire private waste collectors, who often dump waste in poor neighbourhoods in the absence of recycling facilities. Reuse of materials is common in the city; scrap metal is often recycled at the .\nNiamey's sanitation system drains wastewater with rainwater along the Gounti Y\u00e9na valley. Waste dumped on the ground pollutes the river and groundwater, and litter often obstructs drainage pipes. As of 2020[ [update]], municipal wastewater treatment has been non-functional for over a decade; some factories and hospitals treat their wastewater themselves. Contamination of the water supply is exacerbated during the rainy season due to flooding.\nEducation.\nAbdou Moumouni University (AMU) in Niamey is the most prominent university in Niger. It has 29,605 students, as of 2022[ [update]], most of whom come from outside of the city. The university was founded as the in 1971 and became a university in 1973. It has a large political influence, having been the site of Marxist-Leninist activism in the 1990s and Salafi activism in the 2010s, and some protests at the university have resulted in military intervention.\nThe city has several types of secular and Islamic education. Quranic education, both formal and informal, is popular. Such education is not publicly funded, and some children in the city engage in begging to pay for it. The , one of the most prestigious secondary schools in Niger, was founded during the colonial era by the Catholic Church. Informal neighbourhoods often lack public services such as schools. After widespread advocacy from residents, the first school in the Pays Bas opened in 2008, serving 1,000 students, followed by another in Pays Bas and one in Tondigamay in 2010.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57062", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57062", "title": "Nicosia, Cyprus", "text": ""}
{"id": "57063", "revid": "46203229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57063", "title": "Samarqand", "text": ""}
{"id": "57064", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57064", "title": "Nicosia", "text": "Capital of Cyprus and Northern Cyprus\nNicosia, also known as Lefkosia or Lefko\u015fa, is the capital of Cyprus and the \"de jure\" capital of Northern Cyprus, which is geographically located in Asia. It is the southeasternmost capital city among European Union member states.\nNicosia has been continuously inhabited for over 5,500 years and has been the capital of Cyprus since the 10th century. It is the last divided capital in Europe; three years after Cyprus gained independence from British rule in 1960, the Bloody Christmas conflict between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots triggered island-wide intercommunal violence, and Nicosia's Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities segregated into its south and north respectively in 1964. A decade later, Turkey invaded Cyprus following Greece's successful attempt to take over the island. The leaders of the takeover would later step down, but the dividing line running through Nicosia (and the rest of the island, interrupted only briefly by British military bases) became a demilitarised zone that remains under the control of Cyprus while heavily policed by the United Nations; it is now known as the United Nations Buffer Zone in Cyprus between the Republic of Cyprus, which is internationally recognised, and Northern Cyprus, which is recognised only by Turkey. The ongoing dispute between the two communities is known as the Cyprus problem.\nApart from its legislative and administrative functions, Nicosia has established itself as the island's financial capital and its main international business centre. In 2018, Nicosia was the 32nd richest city in the world in relative purchasing power. In the 2022 GaWC ranking, Nicosia was classified as a \"Beta \u2212\" city (lit.\u2009'global city').\nNames.\nThe earliest mention of the city appears on a clay prism of the Assyrian king Esarhaddon, dated to 672 BC, which refers to it as Lidir. The local form of the name was later variously hellenised as Ledra (, \"L\u1e17dra\"), Ledrae (, \"L\u00e9drai\"), Ledroi (, \"L\u1e17droi\"), and Ledron (, \"Ledr\u014d\u0302n\", and , \"L\u0113\u0302dron\").\nBy late antiquity, early Christian sources were recording the location as Leuteon (, \"Leute\u014d\u0302n\") and as Leucon (, \"Leuk\u014d\u0302n\"), Leucotheon (, \"Leukoth\u00e9on\"), Leucoi Theoi (, \"Leuko\u00ed Theo\u00ed\"), and Leucopolis (, \"Leuko\u00fapolis\"), incorporating forms of the Greek words for \"white\" (, \"leuk\u00f3s\") or \"poplar\" (, \"le\u00fak\u0113\") and for \"God\" (, \"The\u00f3s\"), \"god\" (, \"the\u00f3s\"), or \"goddess\" (, \"the\u00e1\"), with possible allusion to a supposed son of Ptolemy I Soter or to the sea goddess Leucothea. During the Byzantine period, the form Leucosia (, \"Leukous\u00eda\")\u2014usually parsed as intending \"the white estate\" (, \"h\u0113 leuk\u1e17 ous\u00eda\")\u2014became common; this developed into modern Greek Lefkosia (, \"Lefkos\u00eda\", ) and Turkish Lefko\u015fa ().\nThe Latin and English name Nicosia appeared under the medieval Crusader Lusignan dynasty, around the same time the Cypriot port Limassol replaced its previous initial N with an L for similarly unknown reasons. Hill provides several other examples of interchanging /l/ and /n/ as far back as the Phoenician Cypriots, suggesting the exchange may have arisen from a variable native pronunciation. The name is also preserved as the Armenian Nikosia () and the Cypriot Arabic Nikusiya.\nThe town also appears as Callinicesis (, \"Kallinik\u0113sis\", or , \"Kallineik\u0113sis\") in some of the hagiographies concerning the saints Tryphillius and Spyridon (fl.\u20094th century).\nHistory.\nPrehistoric Nicosia.\nNicosia has been continuously inhabited since around 2500 BC, near the beginning of the Bronze Age, when the first inhabitants settled in the fertile plain of Mesaoria.\nThe city-state of Ledra is similarly connected with the area of Nicosia, although the larger share of Mycenaean-era ruins in the area are at the broad hill of Ayia Paraskevi or Leondari Voun\u00f2 southeast of central Nicosia. Ledra is reported as one of the twelve kingdoms of ancient Cyprus built by the Achaeans after the end of the Trojan War. The kingdom was quickly destroyed. The Cypriot vassal state transcribed as \"Lidir\" in a 672 BC Assyrian text is generally identified with the remains which have been found nearer to the modern city. Its ruler Onasagoras was recorded paying tribute to the Assyrian king Esarhaddon.\nAncient Nicosia.\nBy 330 BC, Ledra was recorded to be a small unimportant town. It is thought that the settlement was economically and politically dependent on the nearby town of Chytri. The main activity of the town's inhabitants was farming. During this era, Ledra did not have the huge growth that the other Cypriot coastal towns had, which was primarily based on trade. Some sources record that it was restored and improved by Leucos, son of Ptolemy I Soter of Egypt around 280 BC, although Hill considered this an early modern \"fancy\" based solely on pseudoetymological speculations.\nIn the 4th century, the town was the seat of a bishopric under the name Ledron, Leuteon, or Leucotheon. Its bishop Saint Triphyllius was a student of Saint Spyridon. Archaeological evidence indicates that the town regained much of its earlier significance in the early Christian period, and the presence of two or three basilicas with \"opus sectile\" decorations, along with marbles decorated with high relief indicate the presence of a relatively prosperous and sophisticated Christian society.\nMedieval Nicosia.\nAfter the destruction of Cyprus's capital, Salamis, by Arab raids in 647 \u2014 and the extensive damage to other coastal settlements \u2014 the economy of the island became more internalised and inland towns gained relative significance. Nicosia benefited from this and functioned as an outlet of agricultural products from its hinterland, the Mesaoria plain. It further was at an advantageous position due to its ample water supply. As such, the town developed enough for the Byzantine Empire to choose Nicosia as the capital of the island around 965, when the Byzantine navy restored full Byzantine control over the island and it was organised as a theme of the empire. The Byzantines moved the island's administration seat to Nicosia primarily for security reasons as coastal towns often suffered from raids. From that point on it remained as the capital of Cyprus and was the seat of the Byzantine governor of Cyprus. The last such governor was Isaac Komnenos, who declared himself emperor on the island and ruled it from 1183 to 1191. Testimony as late as 1211 indicates that Nicosia was not a walled city at that point and thus that the Byzantines did not build a city wall, thinking that the city's inland location would be sufficient for defence purposes. The Byzantines did, however, build a relatively weak fort within the city. The economy under Byzantine rule consisted mostly of the trading of agricultural goods, but the town also produced luxury items and metalware due to the presence of the imperial administration.\nOn his way to the Holy Land during the Third Crusade in 1187, Richard I of England's fleet was plagued by storms, making him stop first at Crete and then at Rhodes. Three ships continued on, one of which was carrying Joan of England, Queen of Sicily and Berengaria of Navarre, Richard's bride-to-be. Two of the ships were wrecked off Cyprus, but the ship bearing Joan and Berengaria made it safely to Limassol. Joan refused to come ashore, fearing she would be captured and held hostage by Isaac Komnenos, who hated Franks. Her ship sat at anchor for a full week before Richard arrived on 8 May. Outraged at the treatment of his sister and his future bride, Richard invaded. Richard laid siege to Nicosia, met and defeated Komnenos at Tremetousia and became ruler of the island, but sold it to the Knights Templar.\nFrankish rule of Cyprus started from 1192 and lasted until 1489. During this time, Nicosia was the capital of the medieval Kingdom of Cyprus, the seat of Lusignan kings, the Latin Church and the Frankish administration of the island. During Frankish rule, the walls of the city were built along with many other palaces and buildings, including the gothic Cathedral of Saint Sophia. The tombs of the Lusignan kings can be found there.\nIn 1373/1374, Nicosia was occupied and ravaged by the Republic of Genoa and in 1426 by the Mamluk Sultanate.\nIn 1489, when Cyprus came under the rule of the Republic of Venice, Nicosia became their administrative centre and the seat of the republic. The Venetian governors saw it as a necessity for all the cities of Cyprus to be fortified due to the Ottoman threat. In 1567 Venetians built new fortifications in Nicosia \u2014which are well-preserved to this day\u2014 demolishing the old walls built by the Franks as well as other important buildings of the Frankish era including the King's Palace, other private palaces and churches and monasteries of both Orthodox and Latin Christians. The new walls took the shape of a star with eleven bastions. The design of the bastion is more suitable for artillery and a better control for the defenders. The walls have three gates, to the north Kyrenia Gate, to the west Paphos Gate and to the east Famagusta Gate. The river Pedieos used to flow through the Venetian walled city. In 1567 it was diverted outside onto the newly built moat for strategic reasons, due to the expected Ottoman attack.\nOttoman rule.\nOn 1 July 1570, the city came under the rule of the Ottomans. On 22 July, Piali Pasha, having captured Paphos, Limassol and Larnaca, marched his army towards Nicosia and laid siege to the city. The city lasted 40 days under siege until its fall on 9 September 1570. The story of the Cypriot martyr Arnaude de Rocas dates from the fall of Nicosia. Some 20,000 residents died during the siege and every church, public building, and palace was looted. Nicosia had an estimated population of 21,000 before the Ottoman conquest, and based on the Ottoman census data of 1572, the population had been reduced to 1,100\u20131,200. The devastation of the city was so extensive that for a few years after the conquest, a number of villages on the island had a larger population than Nicosia. The main Latin churches were converted into mosques, such as the conversion of the Cathedral of Saint Sophia.\nNicosia was the seat of the pasha, the Greek archbishop, the dragoman and the qadi. The of Venetian times became the seat of the pasha, the governor of Cyprus, and the building was renamed as the konak or seraglio (saray). The square outside was known as Seraglio Square or Sarayonu (literally front of the Saray), as it is known to the present day. The saray was demolished in 1904 and the present block of government offices built on the site.\nWhen the newly settled Turkish population arrived, they generally lived in the north of the old riverbed. Greek Cypriots remained concentrated in the south, where the Archbishopric of the Orthodox Church was built. Other ethnic minority groups such as the Armenians and Latins came to be settled near the western entry into the city at Paphos Gate.\nThe names of the 12 quarters into which Nicosia was originally divided at the time of the Ottoman Conquest are said to be derived from the 12 generals in command of divisions of the Ottoman army at the time. Each general being posted to a quarter, that quarter (with two exceptions) was known by his name as follows:\nThe names of the generals in command of the last two-quarters are not known:\nLater the number of neighbourhoods was increased to 24. Each neighbourhood was organised around a mosque or a church, where mainly the respective Muslim and Christian communities lived.\nBritish rule.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNicosia came under British rule on 5 July 1878 in consequence of the Cyprus Convention, in exchange for the British supporting the Ottoman Empire at the Congress of Berlin.\nThe old Ottoman administrative headquarters (the saray) was replaced in 1904 by a new building containing law courts, the land registry, and the forestry, customs, and Nicosia commissioner's offices. Adjacent was the Nicosia Police headquarters, while opposite were the general post office and the telegraph office. A Venetian column, previously in a fenced courtyard near the saray, was restored on a new site in the summer of 1915 in the middle of Saray Square. The Nicosia column was presumably erected in compliment to the reigning Doge Francesco Donato around 1550.\nJust after the British occupation a municipal council was constituted in Nicosia in 1882 for the general administration of public affairs within the city and for an area outside the walls, under the presidency of a mayor. The first municipal offices were in Municipality Square (now the Central Municipal Market), but in 1944 the offices were transferred temporarily to the d'Avila bastion and in 1952 this was made permanent with a decision to renovate the building.\nIn 1923 the municipal limits were extended further, and this new area was divided among several of the existing intramural neighbourhoods. In 1938 the boundary was extended to the present limits in the west and to the boundaries of Ayii Omoloyites, Palouriotissa, Kaimakli and Omorfita. In 1944 the village authority of Ayii Omoloyites was absorbed, then, Palouriotissa, Kaimakli and Omorfita were annexed to the city in 1968.\nNicosia International Airport was opened in 1947. It remained the location for the air station until its abandonment in 1974.\nIn 1955 an armed struggle against British rule began aiming to unite the island with Greece, (\"enosis\"). The struggle was led by EOKA, a Greek Cypriot nationalist military resistance organisation, and supported by the vast majority of Greek Cypriots. The unification with Greece failed and instead the independence of Cyprus was declared in 1960. During the period of the struggle, Nicosia was the scene of violent protests against British rule.\nIndependence and division.\nIn 1960, Nicosia became the capital of the Republic of Cyprus, a state established by the Greek and Turkish Cypriots. In 1963, the Greek Cypriot side proposed amendments to the constitution, which were rejected by the Turkish Cypriot community. During the aftermath of this crisis, on 21 December 1963, intercommunal violence broke out between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. Nicosia was divided into Greek and Turkish Cypriot quarters with the Green Line, named after the colour of the pen used by the United Nations officer to draw the line on a map of the city. This resulted in Turkish Cypriots withdrawing from the government, and following more intercommunal violence in 1964, a number of Turkish Cypriots moved to the Turkish quarter of Nicosia, causing serious overcrowding.\nOn 15 July 1974, there was a coup d'\u00e9tat led by the Greek military junta to unite the island with Greece. The coup ousted president Makarios III and replaced him with pro-\"enosis\" nationalist Nikos Sampson.\nThe coup d'\u00e9tat precipitated the invasion of the island by the Turkish army, on 20 July 1974. The operation included two phases. The second phase of the Turkish invasion was performed on 14 August 1974, where the Turkish army advanced their positions, eventually capturing 37% of Cypriot territory including the northern part of Nicosia. The fighting left the island with a massive refugee problem on both sides.\nOn 13 February 1975, the Turkish Cypriot community declared the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus in the area occupied by Turkish forces. On 15 November 1983, Turkish Cypriots proclaimed their independence as the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, recognised only by Turkey and seen by the international community as a part of the Republic of Cyprus but not under its effective control.\nOn 23 April 2003, the Ledra Palace crossing was opened through the Green Line, the first time that crossing was allowed since 1974. This was followed by the opening of Ayios Dometios/Metehan crossing point on 9 May 2003. On 3 April 2008, the Ledra Street crossing was also reopened.\nOn 30 October 2016, Nicosia became the only capital city in the world with two time zones, after the parliament of the de facto Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus abolished standard time and decided that Northern Cyprus remains at year-round, following Turkey's example. The following year, due to criticism from the Turkish Cypriot public in the north, the Turkish Cypriot government decided to go back to standard time, following the rest of Europe.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nBeing in the rain shadow of the Troodos Mountains, Nicosia has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSh\") due to its low annual precipitation totals and average annual temperature. The city experiences long, hot to sweltering, dry summers, and mild winters, with most of the rainfall occurring in winter. Winter precipitation is occasionally accompanied by sleet and rarely by snow. The accumulation of snow is particularly rare (last events occurred in 1950, 1974, 1997, 2015 and 2022). There is occasionally light frost during the winter nights. On 4 September 2020, Nicosia recorded a temperature of , which is the highest temperature to have ever been recorded in Cyprus. On 25 February 2025, Nicosia recorded which is the lowest temperature in the city since 1983 when records began for the Athalassa meteorological station.\nCityscape.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], Nicosia is the European capital city with the fewest green spaces, with only three per cent of the city covered by trees.\nSouth of the Green Line.\nLedra Street is in the middle of the walled city. The street has historically been the busiest shopping street of the capital and adjacent streets lead to the most lively part of the old city with narrow streets, boutiques, bars and art-caf\u00e9s. The street today is a historic monument on its own. It is about in length and connects the north and south parts of the old city. During the EOKA struggle that ran from 1955 to 1959, the street acquired the informal nickname \"The Murder Mile\" in reference to the frequent targeting of the British colonialists by nationalist fighters along its course. In 1963, during the outbreak of hostilities between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities, following the announcement of amendments to the Cypriot Constitution, Turkish Cypriots withdrew to the northern part of Nicosia which became one of the many Turkish Cypriot enclaves which existed throughout the island. Various streets which ran between the northern and southern part of the city, including Ledra Street, were blockaded. During the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974, Turkish troops occupied northern Nicosia (as well as the northern part of Cyprus). A buffer zone was established across the island along the ceasefire line to separate the northern Turkish controlled part of the island, and the south. The buffer zone runs through Ledra Street. After many failed attempts on reaching agreement between the two communities, Ledra Street was reopened on 3 April 2008.\nTo the east of Ledra Street, Faneromeni Square was the centre of Nicosia before 1974. It hosts a number of historical buildings and monuments including Faneromeni Church, Faneromeni School, Faneromeni Library and the Marble Mausoleum. Faneromeni Church, is a church built in 1872 in the stead of another church located at the same site, constructed with the remains of La Cava castle and a convent. There rest the archbishop and the other bishops who were executed by the Ottomans in the Saray Square during the 1821 revolt. The Palace of the Archbishop can be found at Archbishop Kyprianos Square. Although it seems very old, it is a wonderful imitation of typical Venetian style, built in 1956. Next to the palace is the late Gothic St. John's Cathedral (1665) with picturesque frescos. The square leads to Onasagorou Street, another busy shopping street in the historical centre.\nThe walls surrounding the old city have three gates. The Kyrenia Gate which was responsible for transport to the north, and especially Kyrenia, the Famagusta Gate which was responsible for transport from Famagusta, Larnaca and Limassol and Karpasia, and the Paphos Gate for transport to the west, especially Paphos. All three gates are well-preserved, with the Famagusta Gate functioning as a venue for art exhibitions and concerts. The historic centre is clearly present inside the walls, but the modern city has grown beyond.\nPresently, the main square of the city is Eleftheria Square, with the city hall, the post office and the library. The square, which has been redesigned by Zaha Hadid Architects and was delivered to the public in 2021, connects the old city with the new city where one can find the main shopping streets such as Stasikratous Street, Themistokli Dervi Avenue and Makariou Avenue.\nThe Archbishop's Palace contains a Byzantine museum containing the largest collection of religious icons on the island. Leventis Municipal Museum is the only historical museum of Nicosia and revives the old ways of life in the capital from ancient times up to our days. Other museums include the Cyprus Ethnological Museum.\nNicosia also hosts an Armenian archbishopric, a small Buddhist temple, a Maronite archbishopric, and a Roman Catholic church.\nNorth of the Green Line.\nAt the centre of the walled city lies the Saray\u00f6n\u00fc Square. The square has been dubbed as \"the heart of Nicosia\" and historically has been the cultural centre of the Turkish Cypriot community. In the middle of the square stands the Venetian Column, known simply as \"the Obelisk\" (\"Dikilta\u015f\") to the locals and symbolic of the country's government. The column was brought from the ancient city of Salamis by the Venetians in 1550. The Girne Avenue connects Saray\u00f6n\u00fc to the Kyrenia Gate and the \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc Square in front of it. The avenue has been described as \"the symbol of the walled city\", and is filled with numerous shops and restaurants.\nNext to the Ledra Street checkpoint is the Arasta area. The area was pedestrianised in 2013 and is home to a network of historic shopping streets, reflecting an eastern shopping tradition with food and traditional items. Nearby B\u00fcy\u00fck Han, the largest caravanserai on the island, was built in 1572 by the Ottomans and functions as a cultural centre. To the west of the Girne Avenue lies the Samanbah\u00e7e neighbourhood, built in the 19th century by the government, considered to be the first example of social housing in the island. Still a residential area. Another central point in the walled city is the Selimiye Mosque, originally built as the Cathedral of Saint Sophia. The mosque is the chief religious centre in Northern Cyprus. It was built between 1209 and 1228 by the Latin Church of Cyprus, in a Gothic style resembling French cathedrals. Next to the mosque is the Bedesten, a large Greek church in the Byzantine and Gothic styles, built in the 14th century. It was used as a marketplace in the Ottoman era. Today, it is used as a cultural centre where various cultural activities such as concerts and festivals take place.\nThe quarters of Nicosia outside the walled city are more spacious than the walled city, with wider roads and junctions. These areas are characterised by multi-floor concrete buildings. In the outskirts of the city, a number large and imposing villas have been built that belong to the middle and upper-classes. Dereboyu Avenue serves as the modern heart of the northern part and is its centre of entertainment.\nPolitics and administration.\nGovernance of the metropolitan area.\nGreater Nicosia is administered by several municipalities. In the centre is the city municipality of Nicosia itself. Other municipalities are Strovolos, Lakatamia, Latsia, Aglandjia, Engomi, Ayios Dhometios and, as of 2011 Geri and Tseri.\nThe population of the urban area is 300,000 (2011 census, plus Turkish Cypriot administered census of 2006) of which 100,000 live within the Nicosia municipal area. Because Nicosia municipality has separate communal municipal administrations, the population of Strovolos (67,904 (2011 Census)) is actually the largest of all the local authorities in Greater Nicosia.\nWithin Nicosia municipality, most of the population resides in the more recently annexed outlying areas of Kaimakli, Pallouriotissa, Omorfita and Ayii Omoloyites.\nThere is no metropolitan authority for Greater Nicosia and various roles, responsibilities and functions for the wider area are undertaken by the Nicosia District administration, bodies such as the Nicosia Water Board and, to some extent, Nicosia municipality.\nThe Nicosia Water Board supplies water to the following municipalities: Nicosia, Strovolos, Aglandjia, Engomi, Ayios Dhometios, Latsia, Geri and Tseri. The board consists of three persons nominated by the council of each municipality, plus three members appointed by the government, who are usually the District Officer of Nicosia District, who chairs the board, the Accountant General and the Director of the Water Department. The board also supply Anthoupolis and Ergates, for whom the government provide representatives. Thus the board is in the majority controlled by the municipalities of Greater Nicosia.\nThe Nicosia Sewerage Board, is likewise majority controlled by the municipalities of Greater Nicosia. It is chaired \"ex officio\" by the Mayor of Nicosia and consists of members chosen by the municipalities of Nicosia (6 members), Strovolos (5 members), Aglandjia (2 members), Lakatamia (2 members), Ayios Dhometios (2 members), Engomi (2 members), Latsia (1 member). The sewage treatment plant is in Haspolat. The Nicosia Sewerage System serves a population of approximately 140,000 and an area of . Approximately 30% of the influent is contributed by the Turkish Cypriot side.\nPublic transport is not controlled by the local authorities, but comes under the Nicosia District administration, which is an arm of the Ministry of the Interior. Transport services (primarily bus and taxi) are provided by private operators such as OSEL. In late 2019 the contract for providing transport services in the district of Nicosia was awarded via tender to a private consortium which was expected to take over the system on 5 July 2020.\nNicosia Municipality.\nNicosia Municipality is responsible for all the municipal duties within the walled city and the immediately adjacent areas. The constitution states that various main government buildings and headquarters must be situated within the Nicosia municipal boundaries. However separate municipalities are prescribed by the constitution for the five largest towns, including Nicosia, and in the case of Nicosia the separate administration was established in 1958. The Turkish Municipal Committees (Temporary Provisions) Law, 1959 established a municipal authority run by a \"Turkish Municipal Committee\", defined as \"the body of persons set up on or after the first day of July, 1958, in the towns of Nicosia, Limassol, Famagusta, Larnaca and Paphos by the Turkish inhabitants thereof for the purpose of performing municipal functions within the municipal limits of such towns\". The Nicosia Turkish Municipality, founded in 1958, carries out municipal duties in the northern and north-western part of city. The remaining areas, in the south and east of the city, are administered by Nicosia Municipality.\nNicosia Turkish Municipality.\nThe first attempt to establish a Nicosia Turkish Municipality was made in 1958. In October 1959, the British Colonial Administration passed the Turkish Municipality Committees law. In 1960 with the declaration of independence of Cyprus, the Constitution of the Republic of Cyprus gave Turkish Cypriots the right to establish their own municipality. As negotiations between the two sides to establish separate municipalities failed in 1962, implementing legislation was never passed. Since the complete division of Nicosia following the Turkish Invasion in 1974, the Nicosia Turkish Municipality has become the de facto local authority of northern Nicosia. The Nicosia Turkish Municipality is a member of the Union of Cyprus Turkish Municipalities. The mayor is Mehmet Harmanc\u0131 from the Communal Democracy Party.\nOther municipalities in Greater Nicosia.\nUntil 1986 there were no suburban municipalities. Then, following the procedures in the Municipal Law 111/1985, Strovolos, Engomi, Ayios Dhometios, Aglandjia, Latsia and Lakatamia were made into municipalities. Each municipal council has the number of members described in the Municipal Law 111/1985 depending on the population figures. All members of the council are elected directly by the people for a period of 5 years.\nAdministrative divisions and demographics.\nNicosia within the city limits is divided into 29 administrative units, according to the latest census. This unit is termed in English as \"quarter, neighbourhood, parish, enoria\" or \"mahalla\". These units are: Ayios Andreas (formerly Tophane), Trypiotis, Nebethane, Tabakhane, Phaneromeni, Ayios Savvas, Omerie, Ayios Antonios (St. Anthony), St. John, Taht-el-kale, Chrysaliniotissa, Ayios Kassianos (Kafesli), Ka\u00efmakli, Panayia, St Constantine &amp; Helen, Agioi Omologites, Arab Ahmet, Yeni Jami, Omorfita, Ibrahim Pasha, Mahmut Pasha, Abu Kavouk, St. Luke, Abdi Chavush, Iplik Pazar and Korkut Effendi, Ayia Sophia, Haydar Pasha, Karamanzade, and Yeni\u015fehir/Neapolis.\nThe municipality of Strovolos, established in 1986, is the second largest municipal authority in Cyprus in terms of population after Limassol and encompasses the southern suburbs of the capital immediately adjacent to Nicosia municipality. Lakatamia, Latsia, Geri and Aglandjia are other separate municipalities in the Nicosia metropolitan area.\nThe town of G\u00f6nyeli is now conurbated with the northern suburbs. Previously a village authority, it now functions as a municipality within the same area. The suburbs immediately to the north of the city have not organised into municipalities. The village authority of Hamitk\u00f6y (also known as Hamid Mandres) is highly urbanised and was included within the borders of Nicosia Turkish Municipality as a Nicosia neighbourhood headed by a muhtar. Ortakeuy Village authority has similarly been redefined as a neighbourhood of Nicosia Turkish Municipality.\nDemographics.\nReligion.\nArmenian Apostolic Church.\nOne of the oldest Armenian churches, known as the Benedictine Abbey of Our Lady of Tyre, was founded in the 13th century as a principal convent following the fall of Jerusalem. In 1308, the Lusignan king, Henry II of Jerusalem, repaired the church after it was destroyed by an earthquake. As many of the nuns were Armenian in origin, it came under the Armenian Church before 1504. Since 1963, the church has been located in North Nicosia, under Turkish Cypriot administration. The church suffered the collapse of some parts and greatly deteriorated until 2007, when restoration work began.The renovation was completed in 2013 and won the EU Prize For Cultural Heritage (Europa Nostra Award) in 2015. With the help of the World Council of Churches, the Church of Westphalia, the Government of Cyprus and the faithful, a new church was built in Strovolos, also called \"Sourp Asdvadzadzin\". Its foundation stone was laid on 25 September 1976 by Archbishop Makarios III and Archbishop Nerses Pakhdigian. It was officially inaugurated on 22 November 1981 by Catholicos of Cilicia Khoren I and Coadjutor Catholicos of Cilicia Karekin II, in the presence of Archbishop Chrysostomos I, Bishop Zareh Aznavorian and Representative Antranik L. Ashdjian.\nMaronite Catholic Church.\nThe Maronite community is a traditional community in Nicosia. The archeparchy extends its jurisdiction over all Maronites on Cyprus. Its arcieparchial seat is the city of Nicosia, where Our Lady of Grace Cathedral is located.\nAt the end of 2013 out of a population of 838,897, 10,400 had been baptised, corresponding to 1.2% of the total. The church's territory is divided into 12 parishes. Our Lady of Grace Cathedral is the main Maronite church of Nicosia, and is the cathedral of the Maronite Catholic Archeparchy of Cyprus.\nThe first cathedral was dedicated to Satin John, but during the Ottoman period it was turned into a mosque. The Lebanese Maronite community erected the church of Santa Croce, later entrusted to the Franciscans, and the current Our Lady of Grace Cathedral is near the Franciscan church. In 1960, the seat of the vicarage and the surrounding buildings were built. On 6 June 2010 Pope Benedict XVI, the first pope to make an apostolic trip to Cyprus, visited the cathedral of Nicosia.\nAnglican Church.\nThe church of St. Paul was built in 1893 when Cyprus was a protectorate of the British Empire. The influence of politics on architecture is evident by the structural elements of the building, which is reminiscent of an English parish church. The Christian church today is part of the Diocese of Cyprus and the Gulf.\nGreek Evangelical Church.\nThe Greek Evangelical Church of Nicosia uses relatively modern architecture and serves the local Protestant community. Along with special hours dedicated to services of the Greek Evangelical community, it serves as a worship centre of local Protestants of other nationalities, such as Armenian, American, Romanian, Korean, Chinese. It is located on Gladstone Street.\nArmenian Evangelical Church.\nThe first Armenian Evangelicals in Cyprus came after the arrival of the British in July 1878. As they were not committed, and very few in number, they quickly became associated with the \"Mother Church\" (Armenian Apostolic Church), such as Apisoghom Utidjian, the official state documents translator and the son of Stepan Utidjian, one of the original founders of the Armenian Evangelical Church, who served as chairman of the Nicosia parish council for 30 years. With the influx of more Protestants, Armenian Evangelicals became affiliated with the Reformed Presbyterian Church as early as 1887. Although the main centres were Nicosia and Larnaca, gatherings were occasionally held in Limassol, Famagusta, and Amiantos.\nThere was also a small Armenian Evangelical church, located on Mahmoud Pasha Street, in the Turkish-occupied part of the walled city of Nicosia\u2014behind the old American Academy building, near the Arab Ahmet Mosque. Prior to its erection, Armenian Evangelicals used to worship at the Reformed Presbyterian Church on Apostolos Varnavas Street, opposite the old Powerhouse and behind the building of the Holy Archbishopric of Cyprus. The church \u2014 a vision already since the early 1930s \u2014 was eventually built thanks to the initiative of pastor Yohanna Der Megerditchian, with the financial contribution of the Reformed Presbyterian Church and the Armenian Evangelical faithful; its architect was Dickran H. Davidian. Its foundation stone was laid on 28 July 1946 by pastor Yohanna Der Megerditchian, who dedicated it on 1 July 1947. On the lower part of the right wall to the side of the entrance, there is an inscription in Armenian.\nConverted cathedral.\nPerhaps the most iconic religious architecture of Nicosia is the Selimiye Mosque. Originally constructed as the Cathedral of Saint Sophia, it was also known as the Agia Sophia of Nicosia and was constructed in 1326 as a Catholic church. It was converted into a mosque in 1570 and it is located in North Nicosia. It has historically been the main mosque of the city and is housed in the largest and oldest surviving Gothic church in Cyprus (interior dimensions: ) possibly constructed on the site of an earlier Byzantine church. During the 50-day Ottoman siege of the city in 1570, the cathedral provided refuge for a great number of people. When the city fell on 9 September, Francesco Contarini, the Bishop of Paphos, delivered the last Christian sermon in the building, in which he asked for divine help and exhorted the people. The cathedral was stormed by Ottoman soldiers, who broke the door and killed the bishop among others. They smashed or threw out Christian items, such as furniture and ornaments in the cathedral and destroyed the choir as well as the nave. Then, they washed the interior of the mosque to make it ready for the first Friday prayer that it would host on 15 September, which was attended by the commander Lala Mustafa Pasha and saw the official conversion of the cathedral into a mosque. During the same year, the two minarets were added, as well as Islamic features such as the mihrab (prayer niche) and the minbar (sermon pulpit).\nThe first imam of the mosque was Moravizade Ahmet Efendi, who hailed from the Morea province of the Ottoman Empire. All imams maintained the tradition of climbing the stairs to the minbar before Friday sermons while leaning on a sword used during the conquest of Nicosia to signify that Nicosia was captured by conquest.\nFollowing its conversion, the mosque became the property of the Sultan Selim Foundation, which was responsible for maintaining it. Other donors formed a number of foundations to help with the maintenance. Ok\u00e7uzade Mehmed Pa\u015fa, a governor of Cyprus in the 16th century, donated a shop to provide income for the Sultan Selim Foundation; other donations include estates in the countryside and other shops. The foundation employed trustees (\"m\u00fctevelli\") to look after the funds and transferred 40,000 \"ak\u00e7e\" annually to Medina in late 16th century. During the Ottoman period, it was the largest mosque on the island, and was used weekly by the Ottoman governor, administrators and elite for Friday prayers. In the late 18th century, a large procession that consisted of the leading officials in the front on horseback, followed by lower-ranking officials on foot, came to the mosque every Friday.\nIslam.\nHistorically Nicosia (both north and south) hosts over 15 mosques, either originally constructed as such or converted from a church. The \u00d6meriye Mosque, formerly known as the Augustinian Church of Saint Mary is a mosque in the walled city of Nicosia, currently located in the south section of Nicosia. Following the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, the mosque gained significance as one of the most important sites of Muslim worship in the non-Muslim section of the island and the city. Currently, the mosque is functioning and open for both worshippers and visitors.\nFormerly, the site of the mosque was occupied by the Augustinian Church of Saint Mary, which dated back to the 14th century. During the Ottoman-Venetian War of 1570\u20131573, the church was first heavily damaged during the siege of Nicosia in 1570, and was eventually levelled after the war.\nAfter the Turkish conquest of Cyprus, Lala Mustafa Pasha, the Ottoman commander, ordered a mosque to be built on the site of the former church, based on a popular belief that Umar, second caliph of Islam, was buried at this site in 7th century.\nAccording to Turkish Cypriot folklore, the \u00d6meriye Mosque is the first mosque where Turks prayed on the island following its conquest in 1571.\nCulture.\nThe Cyprus Museum is the largest and oldest archaeological museum in Cyprus. In old Nicosia, the Ethnological Museum (Hadjigeorgakis Kornesios Mansion) is the most important example of surviving urban architecture of the late Ottoman rule. Today, the mansion which was awarded the Europa Nostra prize for its exemplary renovation work, functions as a museum where a collection of artifacts from the Byzantine, Medieval and Ottoman periods are displayed. Other museums in Nicosia include the Cyprus Museum of Natural History and the Leventis Municipal Museum of Nicosia and Von World Pens Hall in the south. In the north, the Dervish Pasha Mansion, similar in architecture to the Hadjigeorgakis Kornesios Mansion, serves as an ethnological museum, displaying Ottoman and archaeological artifacts. Other museums include the Lusignan House, the Mevlevi Tekke Museum, associated with the sect of the Whirling Dervishes, and the Lapidary Museum.\nArt galleries in Nicosia include the Leventis Gallery, which hosts over 800 paintings from Cypriot, Greek or European artists.\nNicosia offers a wide variety of musical and theatrical events, organised either by the municipality or independent organisations. Halls and theatres used for this purpose include:\nNicosia's universities also boast an array of facilities, and many churches and outdoor spaces are used to host cultural events. The Near East University hosts the Atat\u00fcrk Cultural and Conference centre, with 700 seats.\nNicosia hosted the Miss Universe 2000 pageant.\nIn June 2011, Nicosia launched a failed campaign to become the European Capital of Culture for 2017.\nHuman resources.\nEducation.\nNicosia has a large student community as it is the seat of five universities, the University of Cyprus (UCY), the University of Nicosia, the European University Cyprus, the Open University of Cyprus and Frederick University. In addition, the city is home to the oldest still-operational high-school in Cyprus, Pancyprian Gymnasium.\nNicosia is also home to one of the largest historic Armenian schools, the Melkonian Educational Institute established in 1926 and operated until 2005. The Melkonian Institution was created as an orphanage in the aftermath of the Armenian genocide of 1915\u20131923.\nEconomy.\nNicosia is the financial and business heart of Cyprus. The city hosts the headquarters of all Cypriot banks, namely the former Cyprus Popular Bank (also known as Laiki Bank), Bank of Cyprus, and the Hellenic Bank and the Central Bank of Cyprus. A number of international businesses base their Cypriot headquarters in Nicosia, such as the big four accounting firms PWC, Deloitte, KPMG and Ernst &amp; Young. International technology companies such as NCR and TSYS have their regional headquarters in Nicosia. The city is also home to local financial newspapers such as the Financial Mirror and Stockwatch. Cyprus Airways had its head offices in the entrance of Makariou Avenue. The largest mall in Cyprus, Nicosia Mall, is located in the city. According to a UBS survey in August 2011, Nicosia is the wealthiest per capita city of the Eastern Mediterranean and the tenth richest city in the world by purchasing power in 2011.\nTransport.\nRapid transit.\nBus transport.\nPublic transport within the district is served by Nicosia Public Transport, a subsidiary of Cyprus Public Transport. Bus service used to be operated by OSEL (Nicosia District Transport Organisation) until 2020, but the company ceased to operate after fraud claims.\nIn the northern part, LETTA\u015e provides this service.\nTrain.\nThere is no operating train network in Cyprus. Plans for the creation of an intercity railway have been made, but none has materialised. The first railway line on the island was the Cyprus Government Railway which operated from 1905 to 1951. It was closed down due to financial reasons. It used to stop in the city.\nMotorways.\nNicosia is linked with other major cities in Cyprus via a modern motorway network. The A1 motorway to the south, connects Nicosia with Limassol, which continues onto the A6 going from Limassol to Paphos. The A2 to the southeast, links Nicosia with Larnaca, continuing onto the A3 going from Larnaca to Ayia Napa. The A9 to the west, connects Nicosia to the western Nicosia district villages and the Troodos mountains. The A22 Ring Road is currently under construction, which is planned to bypass the city.\nAirports.\nThe capital is linked, via road, to the 2 international airports under the Republic's administration, Larnaca International Airport (located &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; south-east from the city) and Paphos International Airport (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; south-west).\nThe island's largest airport in the past, Nicosia International Airport, ceased commercial operations in 1974, after the Turkish invasion. It is located within the Green Line buffer zone, and is used as the headquarters of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.\nErcan International Airport is away from Nicosia. Flights to the airport are banned internationally due to the ongoing Cyprus dispute. Non-stop flights only take place from Turkey, and all planes that fly to Northern Cyprus from other countries have to stop over in Turkey. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus considers the use of Ercan Airport to enter or exit the island illegal, and could result in facing criminal charges when entering (or exiting) the Republic of Cyprus.\nTaxis and trams.\nIn 2010, as part of the Nicosia Integrated Mobility Plan, a pre-feasibility study for a proposed tram network has taken place and sponsored by the Ministry of Communications and Works. The study compared two scenarios, with and without the operation of a tramway in terms of emitted polluting loads.\nMany taxi companies operate in Nicosia. Fares are regulated by law and taxi drivers are obliged to use a taximeter.\nCycling.\nIn 2011, the Nicosia Municipality introduced the Bike in Action scheme, a bicycle sharing system which covers the Greater Nicosia area. The scheme is run by the Inter-Municipal Bicycle Company of Nicosia.\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Cyprus, and Nicosia is home of three major teams of the island; APOEL, Omonia and Olympiakos. APOEL and Omonia are dominant in Cypriot football. There are also many other football clubs in Nicosia and the suburbs. The city also hosts \u00c7etinkaya, Yenicami, K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaymakl\u0131 and G\u00f6nyeli, four of the major Turkish Cypriot clubs. Nicosia is also home to AGBU Ararat Nicosia FC, the island's only Armenian FC.\nNicosia is also the home for many clubs for basketball, handball and other sports. APOEL and Omonia have basketball and volleyball sections and Keravnos is one of the major basketball teams on the island. The Gymnastic Club Pancypria (GSP), the owner of the Neo GSP Stadium, is one of the major athletics clubs on the island. Also, all teams in the Futsal First Division are from Nicosia. In addition, two handball teams, European University and SPE Strovolou, are located in Nicosia.\nNicosia has some of the biggest venues on the island; the Neo GSP Stadium, with a capacity of 23,400, is the home for the national team, APOEL, Olympiakos and Omonia. Makario Stadium has a capacity of 16,000. In the north, the Nicosia Atat\u00fcrk Stadium has a capacity of 28,000.\nThe Eleftheria Indoor Hall is the biggest basketball stadium in Cyprus, with a capacity of 6,500 seats, and is the home for the national team, APOEL and Omonia. The Lefkotheo indoor arena is the volleyball stadium for APOEL and Omonia.\nThe Nicosia Marathon took place in 2010 and 2012, organised by Athanasios Ktorides Foundation, and attracted more than 7,000 participants.\nNicosia hosted the 2000 ISSF World Cup Final shotgun shooting events. Also, the city hosted two basketball events; the European Saporta Cup in 1997 and the 2005 FIBA Europe All-Star Game in the Eleftheria Indoor Hall. Another event that was hosted in Nicosia was the Games of the Small States of Europe in 1989 and 2009.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nNicosia Municipality.\nNicosia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNicosia Turkish Municipality.\nNorth Nicosia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly cities.\nNicosia Municipality.\nNicosia also cooperates with:\nForeign embassies and consulates.\nNicosia.\nAt present, Nicosia hosts 42 embassies and 3 high commissions (in bold), 12 consulate generals, 44 consulates and 2 vice consulates (in \"italics\"), and 1 representation office.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNorth Nicosia.\nThe \"de facto\" unrecognised state of Northern Cyprus hosts a limited diplomatic community in its capital in the \"de facto\" northern part of Nicosia. Foreign missions located in North Nicosia are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57065", "revid": "38706409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57065", "title": "Lome (disambiguation)", "text": "Lom\u00e9 is the capital and largest city of Togo.\nLome may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57067", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57067", "title": "Lom\u00e9", "text": "Capital and largest city of Togo\nLom\u00e9 ( , ) is the capital and largest city of Togo. It has an urban population of 837,437 while there were 2,188,376 permanent residents in its metropolitan area as of the 2022 census. Located on the Gulf of Guinea at the southwest corner of the country, with its entire western border along the easternmost edge of Ghana's Volta Region, Lom\u00e9 is the country's administrative and industrial center, which includes an oil refinery. It is also the country's chief port, from where it exports coffee, cocoa, copra, and oil palm kernels.\nIts city limits extends to the border with Ghana, located a few hundred meters west of the city center, to the Ghanaian city of Aflao and the South Ketu district where the city is situated, had 160,756 inhabitants in 2010. The cross-border agglomeration of which Lom\u00e9 is the centre has about 2 million inhabitants as of 2020.\nEtymology.\nThe name 'Lom\u00e9' comes from \"Alo(ti)m\u00e9\" or (shorter) \"Alom\u00e9\", which in the Ewe language, literally, means \"in the alo trees\", or \"within the alo trees\", to designate simply the forest of alo.\nHistory.\nThe city was founded by the Ewes and expanded in the 19th century by German, British and African traders, becoming the capital of Togoland in 1897. At the end of the 19th century, British customs duties on imported products (especially on alcohol and tobacco) weighed very heavily. The traders, mainly maritime Ewe or Anlo from the area between Aflao and Keta in the east of the British colony of Gold Coast, then looking for an alternative place to unload goods while being out of reach of British customs officers, naturally targeted the coastal site of Lom\u00e9, nearby. This commercial dynamic of customs circumvention and tax evasion then favored the expansion of Lom\u00e9 around 1880. The calm and sparsely inhabited Lom\u00e9en coastline began to be populated rapidly. The Ewes were soon joined by European, British and especially German companies, as well as itinerant merchants from the interior, such as the Hausa caravans from the cola roads. Many people were attracted by the new economic hub that Lom\u00e9 represented. The rapid growth of the city was reinforced, and Lom\u00e9 quickly earned a reputation as a place where good business was done.\nColonial period.\nIt was the threats of the British present in the neighboring Gold Coast (now Ghana) that put an end to the competition that Lom\u00e9 provoked for their colony, which then provoked a call for the protection of Germany. Togoland was thus created as an entity of international law within the German colonial empire on 5 July 1884, by the Treaty of Togoville, signed by Gustav Nachtigal and King Mlapa III.\nLom\u00e9 continued to prosper freely as a centre of import, thus becoming the main gateway to the North, whose major axis of penetration was then the Volta Valley; it was to access it that the construction of the first real road in the country, Lom\u00e9-Kpalim\u00e9, was undertaken from 1892. It was this major economic role that led the German administration to transfer the capital of the territory to a city that already had more than 2,000 inhabitants.\nLom\u00e9 benefited from 1904 from a port that made it the only maritime contact point of Togo, ruining its rival, An\u00e9ho, until then much more important. From this development, a network of railways could be deployed: to An\u00e9ho in 1905, to Kpalim\u00e9 in 1907 and to Atakpam\u00e9 in 1909. All the \"useful Togo\" was now organized in a funnel around Lom\u00e9, whose preponderance on the Togolese urban network was definitively established and growth assured. The city reached a population of 8,000 in 1914. But, if the infrastructure set up by the Germans - which consisted of a post office in 1890, the telephone in 1894, the cathedral in 1904, a bank in 1906 and the intercontinental telegraph in 1913 - could benefit everyone, a system of discriminatory patents and licenses gradually ousted African traders from the most lucrative activities, that is the trade or import-export business.\nApart from the rich Octaviano Olympio, with his large Cocoterais, the first in the city, his herds, his brickyard and his construction company, most Togolese merchants had to put themselves at the service of foreign firms as managers of their agencies in other cities, or enjoying more autonomy as buyers of agricultural export products in the interior. The smallest had been hired in large numbers as clerks in the main factories (headquarters of the offices of a trading company abroad). Firms in other African territories looked with envy at Togo, which had an abundant skilled workforce, while elsewhere, it was necessary to entrust all positions to expatriates, much more expensive for the employer.\nThe First World War completely spared the city. However, in 1916, it led to the eviction of German companies, gradually replaced by British and French firms. Many Togolese traders returned to Lom\u00e9. Their flourishing businesses, their vast coconut groves, and their large land holdings made them a bourgeoisie with which the new French colonial authorities had to reckon, prompting the creation of the council of notables in 1922 (elective from 1925), which gave Lom\u00e9 a remarkably early political life in French-speaking Africa. It is also quite exceptional that an African capital has been so marked by its indigenous bourgeoisie, both in the production practices of urban space, so original in Lom\u00e9, and in the singularities of its popular architecture.\nThe French renewed the infrastructure left by the Germans, repairing railways, building more roads, constructing a new quay, etc. They added electrification in 1926 and drinking water supply in 1940. However, they took years to fill the void left in the schools by the German verbist missionaries when they left. The level of students enrolled in 1945, at the death of Jean-Marie Cassou, reached that of 1914.\nIn the 1920s, a policy of systematic low taxation ushered in a long period of prosperity. In January 1923, a R\u00e9volte des femmes de Lom\u00e9 took place against the arrest of two Duawo leaders and forced their release.\nLom\u00e9 reached 15,000 inhabitants around 1930. But the global economic crisis of the early 1930s led to a brutal recession. Many businesses closed or had to consolidate. Investments stopped, like the Northern Railway, definitively stopped in Blitta in 1934. A plan for a sharp tax increase, while the people's resources were falling, provoked the riots of January 1933, which were undoubtedly a major political break in the history of Togo. It was only after World War II, following a decade of postwar stagnation, that boom times resumed in Lom\u00e9.\nIndependence.\nThe population of the city increased rapidly in the second half of the 20th century. It had only a population of 30,000 in 1950, which increased to 80,000 in 1960, the year when Togo became independent. A decade later, it stood at 200,000 people, in 1970. Within two decades, the population of Lom\u00e9 increased by seven-fold. The city, as throughout the country, the very high prices of export products operate the markets, the significant investments of the colonial administration (the \"FIDES\" plan created a large number of roads, bridges, schools, hospitals) ensured full employment. The constructions were rapidly expanding at the expense of the old coconut groves, the hope animated each of an imminent take-off.\nFrom the mid-1970s, investments became more and more gigantic, but not always in well-targeted areas, Togo, a small open country and hub of trade between its powerful neighbors, did not have the protected market that would have been needed for the large industries that were built for it, nor the stable tourism potential for the luxurious hotels that were coming up. At the same time, the railways were allowed to deteriorate, even though they had an important role, especially for serving the outlying districts of the city.\nBut, the economic activity of an African city is not just an accumulation of large companies, banks and factories. There is also the very vast field of the popular economy, these innumerable activities of production, exchange, service, repair, which are in fact the livelihood of the majority of the population, and the only way for it to access services commensurate with its modest resources. Difficult to grasp in the statistical tools of economists, the informal sector is increasingly affecting the real economic life of African city dwellers. In addition, the development of market gardening around the city, stimulated by growing unemployment, arose rural exodus and demand for vegetables. Market gardening, first extended to the north, is mainly on the beach (as the sand is too less salty), planting protective hedges. The various studies of the city's land market indicate that the neighborhoods are relatively heterogeneous, mixing opulent villas and modest housing, without social and spatial division of the city. This is explained by the fact that Lomeans are very attached to their plot of land and what they call their \"home\" (their home). This, therefore, led to a land freeze. However, if the city is not a socially divided city, the fact remains that Lom\u00e9 is experiencing more and more problems related to the collection of household waste, the fight against urban insalubrity has become one of the priorities of the city and its inhabitants.\nClimate.\nOwing to its location in the Dahomey Gap, Lom\u00e9 has a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Aw\"/\"As\") despite its latitude close to the equator. The capital of Togo is relatively dry with an annual average rainfall of and on average 59 rainy days per year. Despite this, the city experiences heavy fog most of the year from the northern extension of the Benguela Current and receives a total of 2,330 bright sunshine hours annually. Comparably dry inland West African cities like Bamako or Kano expect between 2,900 and 3,000 hours of sunshine annually.\nThe annual mean temperature is about but heat is constant as monthly mean temperatures range from in July, the least hot month of the year to in February and in April, the hottest months of the year.\nClimate change.\nA 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a \"moderate\" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Lom\u00e9 in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Managua in Nicaragua. The annual temperature would increase by , the temperature of the warmest month by , and of the coldest month by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.\nMoreover, according to the 2022 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, Lom\u00e9 is one of 12 major African cities (Abidjan, Alexandria, Algiers, Cape Town, Casablanca, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Durban, Lagos, Lom\u00e9, Luanda and Maputo) which would be the most severely affected by the future sea level rise. It estimates that they would collectively sustain cumulative damages of USD 65 billion under RCP 4.5 and USD 86.5 billion for the high-emission scenario RCP 8.5 by the year 2050. Additionally, RCP 8.5 combined with the hypothetical impact from marine ice sheet instability at high levels of warming would involve up to 137.5 billion USD in damages, while the additional accounting for the \"low-probability, high-damage events\" may increase aggregate risks to USD 187 billion for the \"moderate\" RCP4.5, USD 206 billion for RCP8.5 and USD 397 billion under the high-end ice sheet instability scenario. Since sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years under every scenario of climate change, future costs of sea level rise would only increase, especially without adaptation measures.\nGeography.\nAt its creation, the commune of Lom\u00e9 was wedged between the lagoon to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the south, the village of B\u00e8 to the east and the border of Aflao to the west.\nToday, it has experienced a vertiginous extension, and is bounded by the Togolese Insurance Group (GTA) to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the south, the oil refinery to the east, and the Togo-Ghana border to the west. The agglomeration spreads over an area of 333 sq.km. including 30 sq.km. in the lagoon area.\nThe services of the municipality of Lom\u00e9 go far beyond the limits of the gulf and the municipality to the north and east of the city.\nDistance between Lom\u00e9 and the rest of the country's cities\nLom\u00e9/Ts\u00e9vi\u00e9 : 35\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/An\u00e9ho : 45\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Tabligbo : 90\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Nots\u00e9 : 100\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Kpalim\u00e9 : 121\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Atakpam\u00e9 : 167\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Blitta : 273\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Sokod\u00e9 : 355\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Bafilo : 404\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Bassar : 412\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Kara : 428\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Kand\u00e9 503\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Mango : 592\u00a0km\nLom\u00e9/Dapaong : 662\u00a0km\nDistricts and cities of Lom\u00e9.\nThe city of Lom\u00e9 is subdivided into 5 arrondissements grouping 69 administrative districts :\n1st arrondissement: To the south along the ocean, it is the historic city, which is surrounded by the circular boulevard (Boulevard du 13 juillet) and includes the 11 districts of:Abobokom\u00e9, Adawlato, Adoboukom\u00e9, Agbadahonou, Aguia Kom\u00e9, B\u00e9niglato, Fr\u00e9au Jardin, Kok\u00e9tim\u00e9, Quartier Administratif, Sangu\u00e9ra and W\u00e9trivi Kondji.\n2nd arrondissement: From the north to northeast and bordering the maritime region, it includes the 18 districts of:\nAdakpam\u00e9, Akodess\u00e9wa-Kponou, Akodess\u00e9wa-Kpota, Anfam\u00e9, Ati\u00e9gou, Av\u00e9nou (Batome), B\u00e8-Kpota, H\u00e9dzranawo\u00e9, Kagnikop\u00e9, K\u00e9l\u00e9gougan, Lom\u00e9 2, N'tifafakom\u00e9, R\u00e9sidence du B\u00e9nin, Saint-Joseph, Tokoin-N'kafu (Noukafou), Tokoin-A\u00e9roport, Tokoin-Forever, Tokoin-Tam\u00e9 and Tokoin-Wuiti.\n3rd arrondissement: To the east, along the sea, it includes the 17 districts of:\nAblogam\u00e9, Akod\u00e9ss\u00e9wa (and the fetish market), Amoutiv\u00e9, Anthonio N\u00e9tim\u00e9, Bassadji, B\u00e8, B\u00e8-Ahligo, B\u00e8-Ap\u00e9h\u00e9m\u00e9, B\u00e8-H\u00e9dj\u00e9, Doulassam\u00e9, Gb\u00e9ny\u00e9di, Kotokou Kondji, Kp\u00e9h\u00e9nou, Lom Nava, Souza N\u00e9tim\u00e9, W\u00e9t\u00e9 and Port Area.\n4th arrondissement: In the southwest, along the sea and bordering Ghana, it includes the 4 districts of:\nHanukope, Kodjoviakop\u00e9, Ny\u00e9konakpo\u00e9 and Octaviano N\u00e9tim\u00e9.\n5th arrondissement: To the northwest and bordering Ghana to the east and the maritime region to the north, it includes the 19 districts of:\nAbov\u00e9, Aflao Gakli, Agbal\u00e9p\u00e9dogan, Akossombo, B\u00e8-Klikam\u00e9, Cassablanca, Dogb\u00e9avou, Doumass\u00e9ss\u00e9, Gbonvi\u00e9, Sovi\u00e9p\u00e9, Tokoin-Elavagnon, Tokoin-Gbadago, Tokoin-Hopital, Tokoin-Lyc\u00e9e, Tokoin-Ouest, Tokoin-Solidarit\u00e9 and Totsi (includes Totsigan and Totsivi).\nThe former districts (now subdivided) are D\u00e9kon, Tokoin, X\u00e9dranawoe, Adjangbakom\u00e9 and Adidogom\u00e9. The other cities composing the agglomeration of Lom\u00e9 are Adewi, Agbal\u00e9p\u00e9dogan, Ago\u00e8, Attikoum\u00e8, Av\u00e9dji, Baguida, Djidjol\u00e9, K\u00e9l\u00e9kougan and Kpogan.\nInternational agreements.\nLom\u00e9 Convention.\nThe Lom\u00e9 Convention is a trade and aid agreement between the European Union (EU) and 71 African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) countries. It was first signed on 28 February 1975, in Lom\u00e9.\nLom\u00e9 Peace Accord.\nThe Lom\u00e9 Peace Accord between the warring parties in the civil war in Sierra Leone was signed in Lom\u00e9. With the assistance of the international community, Sierra Leone President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and Revolutionary United Front leader Foday Sankoh signed the Peace Accord on 7 July 1999. However, the agreement did not last and the war continued for two more years.\nEconomy.\nLocated 200\u00a0km from Accra and 150\u00a0km from Cotonou, Lom\u00e9 has an important port, including a free zone opened in 1968. Phosphates, coffee, cocoa, cotton and palm oil are exported and much of the transit is on behalf of Ghana, Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso. The port is also home to an oil refinery and, since 1989, a shipyard. The concession of two container terminals to the Bollor\u00e9 group gave rise to police custody and indictment of Vincent Bollor\u00e9 in France in April 2018.\nThe city produces building materials, including cement from the German group, HeidelbergCement.\nHowever, the political instability that began in the 1990s and continues today has severely affected the country's tourism sector. In 2003, the country received 57,539 visitors, an increase of 1 per cent over 2002. 22% of tourists came from France, 10% from Burkina Faso and 9% from Benin.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nThe Togo National Museum is in the Palais de Congr\u00e8s. The museum contains collections such as jewellery, musical instruments, dolls, pottery, weapons and many other materials showing arts and traditions.\nLOL 867, also known as \"Defenders of Lome,\" is a historic Orange Lodge that was formed in September 1915 in the city. It holds a unique place in the history of the Orange Order as it was the first lodge to be established in that country. Its founder was a local man named John Amate Atayi. They focus on positive evangelism, youth development, and community philanthropy. Members view the victory of William of Orange not as a political symbol but as one of civil and religious freedom.\nArchitecture.\nThe city center dates from the early twentieth century. There are some remains of colonial architecture, such as the Palace of the Governors or the Sacred Heart Cathedral, in German neo-Gothic style.\nThere are also many modern buildings such as the headquarters of the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO), the West African Development Bank (BOAD), the Togolese Bank for Trade and Industry (BTCI), the Economic Community of West African States (ECoWAS) or hotel buildings such as the Hotel de la Paix, the Mercure Sarakawa Hotel, the Palm Beach Hotel or the famous Hotel du 2 F\u00e9vrier, a modernist building mixing concrete and glass panels, culminating at 102 meters with 36 floors, and is the tallest building in Togo.\nNot far away is the Grand Market, with a three-storey hall. There are red peppers, limes, dried fish, combs, travel bags, traditional medicinal remedies. On the first floor is the kingdom of the famous \"Nana Benz\", sellers of multiple loincloths made locally, in Europe or India. To the west of the city is a residential area which, facing the sea, unfolds long arteries, punctuated by official buildings such as the Palace of Justice and various embassies and consulates.\nFurther north, next to the Independence Monument, is the headquarters of the Rally of the Togolese People (RPT) and an important convention center.\nMore eccentric, compared to the center of the city, we find in Akodess\u00e9wa, a much more specialized market than the large market and for good reason, it is the fetish market. Fetishes, gongons, gray-gray are found here. The port of Lom\u00e9 serves most of the landlocked countries of the Sahel, especially since the political problems experienced by C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and which deprives Abidjan of an economic outlet for countries such as Mali or Burkina Faso. Lom\u00e9 is therefore taking advantage of the difficult political situation in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire.\nPlaces of worship.\nAmong the places of worship, they are predominantly Christian churches and temples : Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lom\u00e9 (Catholic Church), Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Togo (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Togo Baptist Convention (Baptist World Alliance), Living Faith Church Worldwide, Redeemed Christian Church of God, Assemblies of God. There are also Muslim mosques.\nEducation.\nThe University of Lom\u00e9 (previously called University of Benin), located in Lom\u00e9 Tokoin, was founded in 1970.\nSchools located in the city include American International School of Lom\u00e9, British School of Lom\u00e9, Ecole Internationale Arc-en-Ciel, Saint-Joseph College of Lom\u00e9 and Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais de Lom\u00e9.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nFor urban transport, there are a few taxis; however, motorcycle taxis (z\u00e9midjans) are more commonly used.\nRail.\nThe city, which had no rail service since 1997, has seen since 2014, the return of trains, with a new station: those of Blueline Togo, constructed by the French international firm, Bollor\u00e9. The inaugural train on 26 April 2014 ran on the short distance Lom\u00e9 to Cacav\u00e9li. The under-construction of the Lom\u00e9-Cotonou link, as part of a rail loop project from Lom\u00e9, Cotonou, Niamey, Ouagadougou and to Abidjan, is expected to be completed by 2024.\nAir.\nThe city is served by Lom\u00e9-Tokoin International Airport, located northeast from the city centre. ASKY Airlines, a subsidiary of Ethiopian Airlines, and itself, operates at the airport.\nWater.\nThe city has the Port of Lom\u00e9, which is the only commercial port of Togo that carries out trade and export-import activities in the country. It also has a cruise terminal where passengers are also served.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLom\u00e9 is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
