{"id": "50185", "revid": "7316185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50185", "title": "Jellyfish", "text": "Soft-bodied, aquatic invertebrates\nJellyfish, also known as sea jellies or simply jellies, are the medusa-phase of certain gelatinous members of the subphylum Medusozoa, which is a major part of the phylum Cnidaria. Jellyfish are mainly free-swimming marine animals, although a few are anchored to the seabed by stalks rather than being motile. They are made of an umbrella-shaped main body made of mesoglea, known as the \"bell\", and a collection of trailing tentacles on the underside. \nVia pulsating contractions, the bell can provide propulsion for locomotion through open water. The tentacles are armed with stinging cells and may be used to capture prey or to defend against predators. Jellyfish have a complex life cycle, and the medusa is normally the sexual phase, which produces planula larvae. These then disperse widely and enter a sedentary polyp phase which may include asexual budding before reaching sexual maturity. \nJellyfish are found all over the world, from surface waters to the deep sea. Scyphozoans (the \"true jellyfish\") are exclusively marine, but some hydrozoans with a similar appearance live in fresh water. Large, often colorful, jellyfish are common in coastal zones worldwide. The medusae of most species are fast-growing, and mature within a few months then die soon after breeding, but the polyp stage, attached to the seabed, may be much more long-lived. Jellyfish have been in existence for at least 500 million years, and possibly 700 million years or more, making them the oldest multi-organ animal group.\nJellyfish are eaten by humans in certain cultures. They are considered a delicacy in some Asian countries, where species in the Rhizostomeae order are pressed and salted to remove excess water. Australian researchers have described them as a \"perfect food\": sustainable and protein-rich but relatively low in food energy.\nThey are also used in cell and molecular biology research, especially the green fluorescent protein used by some species for bioluminescence. This protein has been adapted as a fluorescent reporter for inserted genes and has had a large impact on fluorescence microscopy. \nThe stinging cells used by jellyfish to subdue their prey can injure humans. Thousands of swimmers worldwide are stung every year, with effects ranging from mild discomfort to serious injury or even death. When conditions are favourable, jellyfish can form vast swarms, which may damage fishing gear by filling fishing nets, and sometimes clog the cooling systems of power and desalination plants which draw their water from the sea.\nNames.\nThe name jellyfish, in use since 1796, has traditionally been applied to medusae and all similar animals including the comb jellies (ctenophores, another phylum). The term \"jellies\" or \"sea jellies\" is more recent, having been introduced by public aquaria in an effort to avoid use of the word \"fish\" with its modern connotation of an animal with a backbone, though shellfish, cuttlefish and starfish are not vertebrates either. In scientific literature, \"jelly\" and \"jellyfish\" have been used interchangeably. Many sources refer to only scyphozoans as \"true jellyfish\".\nA group of jellyfish is called a \"smack\" or a \"smuck\".\nMapping to taxonomic groups.\nPhylogeny.\nDefinition.\nThe term jellyfish broadly corresponds to medusae, that is, a life-cycle stage in the Medusozoa. The American evolutionary biologist Paulyn Cartwright gives the following general definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Typically, medusozoan cnidarians have a pelagic, predatory jellyfish stage in their life cycle; staurozoans are the exceptions [as they are stalked].\nThe Merriam-Webster dictionary defines jellyfish as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A free-swimming marine coelenterate that is the sexually reproducing form of a hydrozoan or scyphozoan and has a nearly transparent saucer-shaped body and extensible marginal tentacles studded with stinging cells.\nGiven that jellyfish is a common name, its mapping to biological groups is inexact. Some authorities have called the comb jellies and certain salps jellyfish, though other authorities state that neither of these are jellyfish, which they consider should be limited to certain groups within the medusozoa.\nThe non-medusozoan clades called jellyfish by some but not all authorities (both agreeing and disagreeing citations are given in each case) are indicated with \"???\" on the following cladogram of the animal kingdom:\nMedusozoan jellyfish.\nJellyfish are not a clade, as they include most of the Medusozoa, barring some of the Hydrozoa. The medusozoan groups included by authorities are indicated on the following phylogenetic tree by the presence of citations. Names of included jellyfish, in English where possible, are shown in boldface; the presence of a named and cited example indicates that at least that species within its group has been called a jellyfish.\nTaxonomy.\nThe subphylum Medusozoa includes all cnidarians with a medusa stage in their life cycle. The basic cycle is egg, planula larva, polyp, medusa, with the medusa being the sexual stage. The polyp stage is sometimes secondarily lost. The subphylum include the major taxa, Scyphozoa (large jellyfish), Cubozoa (box jellyfish) and Hydrozoa (small jellyfish), and excludes Anthozoa (corals and sea anemones). This suggests that the medusa form evolved after the polyps. Medusozoans have tetramerous symmetry, with parts in fours or multiples of four.\nThe four major classes of medusozoan Cnidaria are:\nThere are over 200 species of Scyphozoa, about 50 species of Staurozoa, about 50 species of Cubozoa, and the Hydrozoa includes about 1000\u20131500 species that produce medusae, but many more species that do not.\nFossil history.\nSince jellyfish have no hard parts, fossils are rare. The oldest unambiguous fossil of a free-swimming medusa is \"Burgessomedusa\" from the mid-Cambrian Burgess Shale of Canada, which is likely either a stem group of box jellyfish (Cubozoa) or Acraspeda (the clade including Staurozoa, Cubozoa, and Scyphozoa). Other claimed records from the Cambrian of China and Utah in the United States are uncertain, and possibly represent ctenophores instead.\nAnatomy.\nThe main feature of a true jellyfish is the umbrella-shaped bell. This is a hollow structure consisting of a mass of transparent jelly-like matter known as mesoglea, which forms the hydrostatic skeleton of the animal. The mesoglea is 95% or more composed of water, and also contains collagen and other fibrous proteins, as well as wandering amebocytes that can engulf debris and bacteria. The mesoglea is bordered by the epidermis on the outside and the gastrodermis on the inside. The edge of the bell is often divided into rounded lobes known as lappets, which allow the bell to flex. In the gaps or niches between the lappets are dangling rudimentary sense organs known as rhopalia, and the margin of the bell often bears tentacles.\nOn the underside of the bell is the manubrium, a stalk-like structure hanging down from the centre, with the mouth, which also functions as the anus, at its tip. There are often four oral arms connected to the manubrium, streaming away into the water below. The mouth opens into the gastrovascular cavity, where digestion takes place and nutrients are absorbed. This is subdivided by four thick septa into a central stomach and four gastric pockets. The four pairs of gonads are attached to the septa, and close to them four septal funnels open to the exterior, perhaps supplying good oxygenation to the gonads. Near the free edges of the septa, gastric filaments extend into the gastric cavity; these are armed with nematocysts and enzyme-producing cells and play a role in subduing and digesting the prey. In some scyphozoans, the gastric cavity is joined to radial canals which branch extensively and may join a marginal ring canal. Cilia in these canals circulate the fluid in a regular direction.\nThe box jellyfish is largely similar in structure. It has a squarish, box-like bell. A short pedalium or stalk hangs from each of the four lower corners. One or more long, slender tentacles are attached to each pedalium. The rim of the bell is folded inwards to form a shelf known as a velarium which restricts the bell's aperture and creates a powerful jet when the bell pulsates, allowing box jellyfish to swim faster than true jellyfish. Hydrozoans are also similar, usually with just four tentacles at the edge of the bell, although many hydrozoans are colonial and may not have a free-living medusal stage. In some species, a non-detachable bud known as a gonophore is formed that contains a gonad but is missing many other medusal features such as tentacles and rhopalia. Stalked jellyfish are attached to a solid surface by a basal disk, and resemble a polyp, the oral end of which has partially developed into a medusa with tentacle-bearing lobes and a central manubrium with four-sided mouth.\nMost jellyfish do not have specialized systems for osmoregulation, respiration and circulation, and do not have a central nervous system. Nematocysts, which deliver the sting, are located mostly on the tentacles; true jellyfish also have them around the mouth and stomach. Jellyfish do not need a respiratory system because sufficient oxygen diffuses through the epidermis. They have limited control over their movement, but can navigate with the pulsations of the bell-like body; some species are active swimmers most of the time, while others largely drift. The rhopalia contain rudimentary sense organs which are able to detect light, water-borne vibrations, odour and orientation. A loose network of nerves called a \"nerve net\" is located in the epidermis. Although jellyfish are traditionally thought not to have a central nervous system, nerve net concentration and ganglion-like structures could be considered to constitute one in most species. A jellyfish detects stimuli, and transmits impulses both throughout the nerve net and around a circular nerve ring, to other nerve cells. The rhopalial ganglia contain pacemaker neurones which control swimming rate and direction.\nIn many species of jellyfish, the rhopalia include ocelli, light-sensitive organs able to tell light from dark. These are generally pigment spot ocelli, which have some of their cells pigmented. The rhopalia are suspended on stalks with heavy crystals of calcium carbonate at one end, acting like gyroscopes to orient the eyes skyward. Certain jellyfish look upward at the mangrove canopy while making a daily migration from mangrove swamps into the open lagoon, where they feed, and back again.\nBox jellyfish have more advanced vision than the other groups. Each individual has 24 eyes, two of which are capable of seeing colour, and four parallel information processing areas that act in competition, supposedly making them one of the few kinds of animal to have a 360-degree view of its environment.\nBox jellyfish eye.\nThe study of jellyfish eye evolution is an intermediary to a better understanding of how visual systems evolved on Earth. Jellyfish exhibit immense variation in visual systems ranging from photoreceptive cell patches seen in simple photoreceptive systems to more derived complex eyes seen in box jellyfish. Major topics of jellyfish visual system research (with an emphasis on box jellyfish) include: the evolution of jellyfish vision from simple to complex visual systems), the eye morphology and molecular structures of box jellyfish (including comparisons to vertebrate eyes), and various uses of vision including task-guided behaviors and niche specialization.\nEvolution.\nExperimental evidence for photosensitivity and photoreception in cnidarians antecedes the mid 1900s, and a rich body of research has since covered evolution of visual systems in jellyfish. Jellyfish visual systems range from simple photoreceptive cells to complex image-forming eyes. More ancestral visual systems incorporate extraocular vision (vision without eyes) that encompass numerous receptors dedicated to single-function behaviors. More derived visual systems comprise perception that is capable of multiple task-guided behaviors.\nAlthough they lack a true brain, cnidarian jellyfish have a \"ring\" nervous system that plays a significant role in motor and sensory activity. This net of nerves is responsible for muscle contraction and movement and culminates the emergence of photosensitive structures. Across Cnidaria, there is large variation in the systems that underlie photosensitivity. Photosensitive structures range from non-specialized groups of cells, to more \"conventional\" eyes similar to those of vertebrates. The general evolutionary steps to develop complex vision include (from more ancestral to more derived states): non-directional photoreception, directional photoreception, low-resolution vision, and high-resolution vision. Increased habitat and task complexity has favored the high-resolution visual systems common in derived cnidarians such as box jellyfish.\nBasal visual systems observed in various cnidarians exhibit photosensitivity representative of a single task or behavior. Extraocular photoreception (a form of non-directional photoreception), is the most basic form of light sensitivity and guides a variety of behaviors among cnidarians. It can function to regulate circadian rhythm (as seen in eyeless hydrozoans) and other light-guided behaviors responsive to the intensity and spectrum of light. Extraocular photoreception can function additionally in positive phototaxis (in planula larvae of hydrozoans), as well as in avoiding harmful amounts of UV radiation via negative phototaxis. Directional photoreception (the ability to perceive direction of incoming light) allows for more complex phototactic responses to light, and likely evolved by means of membrane stacking. The resulting behavioral responses can range from guided spawning events timed by moonlight to shadow responses for potential predator avoidance. Light-guided behaviors are observed in numerous scyphozoans including the common moon jelly, \"Aurelia aurita\", which migrates in response to changes in ambient light and solar position even though they lack proper eyes.\nThe low-resolution visual system of box jellyfish is more derived than directional photoreception, and thus box jellyfish vision represents the most basic form of true vision in which multiple directional photoreceptors combine to create the first imaging and spatial resolution. This is different from the high-resolution vision that is observed in camera or compound eyes of vertebrates and cephalopods that rely on focusing optics. Critically, the visual systems of box jellyfish are responsible for guiding multiple tasks or behaviors in contrast to less derived visual systems in other jellyfish that guide single behavioral functions. These behaviors include phototaxis based on sunlight (positive) or shadows (negative), obstacle avoidance, and control of swim-pulse rate.\nBox jellyfish possess \"proper eyes\" (similar to vertebrates) that allow them to inhabit environments that lesser derived medusae cannot. In fact, they are considered the only class in the clade \"Medusozoa\" that have behaviors necessitating spatial resolution and genuine vision. However, the lens in their eyes are more functionally similar to cup-eyes exhibited in low-resolution organisms, and have very little to no focusing capability. The lack of the ability to focus is due to the focal length exceeding the distance to the retina, thus generating unfocused images and limiting spatial resolution. The visual system is still sufficient for box jellyfish to produce an image to help with tasks such as object avoidance.\nUtility as a model organism.\nBox jellyfish eyes are a visual system that is sophisticated in numerous ways. These intricacies include the considerable variation within the morphology of box jellyfishes' eyes (including their task/behavior specification), and the molecular makeup of their eyes including: photoreceptors, opsins, lenses, and synapses. The comparison of these attributes to more derived visual systems can allow for a further understanding of how the evolution of more derived visual systems may have occurred, and puts into perspective how box jellyfish can play the role as an evolutionary/developmental model for all visual systems.\nCharacteristics.\nBox jellyfish visual systems are both diverse and complex, comprising multiple photosystems. There is likely considerable variation in visual properties between species of box jellyfish given the significant inter-species morphological and physiological variation. Eyes tend to differ in size and shape, along with number of receptors (including opsins), and physiology across species of box jellyfish.\nBox jellyfish have a series of intricate lensed eyes that are similar to those of more derived multicellular organisms such as vertebrates. Their 24 eyes fit into four different morphological categories. These categories consist of two large, morphologically different medial eyes (a lower and upper lensed eye) containing spherical lenses, a lateral pair of pigment slit eyes, and a lateral pair of pigment pit eyes. The eyes are situated on rhopalia (small sensory structures) which serve sensory functions of the box jellyfish and arise from the cavities of the exumbrella (the surface of the body) on the side of the bells of the jellyfish. The two large eyes are located on the mid-line of the club and are considered complex because they contain lenses. The four remaining eyes lie laterally on either side of each rhopalia and are considered simple. The simple eyes are observed as small invaginated cups of epithelium that have developed pigmentation. The larger of the complex eyes contains a cellular cornea created by a mono ciliated epithelium, cellular lens, homogenous capsule to the lens, vitreous body with prismatic elements, and a retina of pigmented cells. The smaller of the complex eyes is said to be slightly less complex given that it lacks a capsule but otherwise contains the same structure as the larger eye.\nBox jellyfish have multiple photosystems that comprise different sets of eyes. Evidence includes immunocytochemical and molecular data that show photopigment differences among the different morphological eye types, and physiological experiments done on box jellyfish to suggest behavioral differences among photosystems. Each individual eye type constitutes photosystems that work collectively to control visually guided behaviors.\nBox jellyfish eyes primarily use c-PRCs (ciliary photoreceptor cells) similar to that of vertebrate eyes. These cells undergo phototransduction cascades (process of light absorption by photoreceptors) that are triggered by c-opsins. Available opsin sequences suggest that there are two types of opsins possessed by all cnidarians including an ancient phylogenetic opsin, and a sister ciliary opsin to the c-opsins group. Box jellyfish could have both ciliary and cnidops (cnidarian opsins), which is something not previously believed to appear in the same retina. Nevertheless, it is not entirely evident whether cnidarians possess multiple opsins that are capable of having distinctive spectral sensitivities.\nComparison with other organisms.\nComparative research on genetic and molecular makeup of box jellyfishes' eyes versus more derived eyes seen in vertebrates and cephalopods focuses on: lenses and crystallin composition, synapses, and Pax genes and their implied evidence for shared primordial (ancestral) genes in eye evolution.\nBox jellyfish eyes are said to be an evolutionary/developmental model of all eyes based on their evolutionary recruitment of crystallins and Pax genes. Research done on box jellyfish including \"Tripedalia cystophora\" has suggested that they possess a single Pax gene, PaxB. PaxB functions by binding to crystallin promoters and activating them. PaxB in situ hybridization resulted in PaxB expression in the lens, retina, and statocysts. These results and the rejection of the prior hypothesis that Pax6 was an ancestral Pax gene in eyes has led to the conclusion that PaxB was a primordial gene in eye evolution, and that the eyes of all organisms likely share a common ancestor.\nThe lens structure of box jellyfish appears very similar to those of other organisms, but the crystallins are distinct in both function and appearance. Weak reactions were seen within the sera and there were very weak sequence similarities within the crystallins among vertebrate and invertebrate lenses. This is likely due to differences in lower molecular weight proteins and the subsequent lack of immunological reactions with antisera that other organisms' lenses exhibit.\nAll four of the visual systems of box jellyfish species investigated with detail (\"Carybdea marsupialis, Chiropsalmus quadrumanus, Tamoya haplonema and Tripedalia cystophora\") have invaginated synapses, but only in the upper and lower lensed eyes. Different densities were found between the upper and lower lenses, and between species. Four types of chemical synapses have been discovered within the rhopalia which could help in understanding neural organization including: clear unidirectional, dense-core unidirectional, clear bidirectional, and clear and dense-core bidirectional. The synapses of the lensed eyes could be useful as markers to learn more about the neural circuit in box jellyfish retinal areas.\nEvolution as a response to natural stimuli.\nThe primary adaptive responses to environmental variation observed in box jellyfish eyes include pupillary constriction speeds in response to light environments, as well as photoreceptor tuning and lens adaptations to better respond to shifts between light environments and darkness. Some box jellyfish species' eyes appear to have evolved more focused vision in response to their habitat.\nPupillary contraction appears to have evolved in response to variation in the light environment across ecological niches across three species of box jellyfish (\"Chironex fleckeri\", \"Chiropsella bronzie\", and \"Carukia barnesi\"). Behavioral studies suggest that faster pupil contraction rates allow for greater object avoidance, and in fact, species with more complex habitats exhibit faster rates. \"Ch. bronzie\" inhabit shallow beach fronts that have low visibility and very few obstacles, thus, faster pupil contraction in response to objects in their environment is not important. \"Ca. barnesi\" and \"Ch. fleckeri\" are found in more three-dimensionally complex environments like mangroves with an abundance of natural obstacles, where faster pupil contraction is more adaptive. Behavioral studies support the idea that faster pupillary contraction rates assist with obstacle avoidance as well as depth adjustments in response to differing light intensities.\nLight/dark adaptation via pupillary light reflexes is an additional form of an evolutionary response to the light environment. This relates to the pupil's response to shifts between light intensity (generally from sunlight to darkness). In the process of light/dark adaptation, the upper and lower lens eyes of different box jellyfish species vary in specific function. The lower lens-eyes contain pigmented photoreceptors and long pigment cells with dark pigments that migrate on light/dark adaptation, while the upper-lens eyes play a concentrated role in light direction and phototaxis given that they face upward towards the water surface (towards the sun or moon). The upper lens of \"Ch. bronzie\" does not exhibit any considerable optical power while \"Tr. cystophora\" (a box jellyfish species that tends to live in mangroves) does. The ability to use light to visually guide behavior is not of as much importance to \"Ch. bronzie\" as it is to species in more obstacle-filled environments. Differences in visually guided behavior serve as evidence that species that share the same number and structure of eyes can exhibit differences in how they control behavior.\nLargest and smallest.\nJellyfish range from about one millimeter in bell height and diameter, to nearly in bell height and diameter; the tentacles and mouth parts usually extend beyond this bell dimension.\nThe smallest jellyfish are the peculiar creeping jellyfish in the genera \"Staurocladia\" and \"Eleutheria\", which have bell disks from to a few millimeters in diameter, with short tentacles that extend out beyond this, which these jellyfish use to move across the surface of seaweed or the bottoms of rocky pools; many of these tiny creeping jellyfish cannot be seen in the field without a hand lens or microscope. They can reproduce asexually by fission (splitting in half). Other very small jellyfish, which have bells about one millimeter, are the hydromedusae of many species that have just been released from their parent polyps; some of these live only a few minutes before shedding their gametes in the plankton and then dying, while others will grow in the plankton for weeks or months. The hydromedusae \"Cladonema radiatum\" and \"Cladonema californicum\" are also very small, living for months, yet never growing beyond a few mm in bell height and diameter.\nThe lion's mane jellyfish, \"Cyanea capillata\", was long-cited as the largest jellyfish, and arguably the longest animal in the world, with fine, thread-like tentacles that may extend up to long (though most are nowhere near that large). They have a moderately painful, but rarely fatal, sting. The increasingly common giant Nomura's jellyfish, \"Nemopilema nomurai\", found in some, but not all years in the waters of Japan, Korea and China in summer and autumn is another candidate for \"largest jellyfish\", in terms of diameter and weight, since the largest Nomura's jellyfish in late autumn can reach in bell (body) diameter and about in weight, with average specimens frequently reaching in bell diameter and about in weight. The large bell mass of the giant Nomura's jellyfish can dwarf a diver and is nearly always much greater than the Lion's Mane, whose bell diameter can reach .\nThe rarely encountered deep-sea jellyfish \"Stygiomedusa gigantea\" is another candidate for \"largest jellyfish\", with its thick, massive bell up to wide, and four thick, \"strap-like\" oral arms extending up to in length, very different from the typical fine, threadlike tentacles that rim the umbrella of more-typical-looking jellyfish, including the Lion's Mane.\n\"Desmonema glaciale\", which lives in the Antarctic region, can reach a very large size (several meters). Purple-striped jelly (\"Chrysaora colorata\") can also be extremely long (up to 15 feet).\nLife history and behavior.\nLife cycle.\nJellyfish have a complex life cycle which includes both sexual and asexual phases, with the medusa being the sexual stage in most instances. Sperm fertilize eggs, which develop into larval planulae, become polyps, bud into ephyrae and then transform into adult medusae. In some species certain stages may be skipped.\nUpon reaching adult size, jellyfish spawn regularly if there is a sufficient supply of food. In most species, spawning is controlled by light, with all individuals spawning at about the same time of day; in many instances this is at dawn or dusk. Jellyfish are usually either male or female (with occasional hermaphrodites). In most cases, adults release sperm and eggs into the surrounding water, where the unprotected eggs are fertilized and develop into larvae. In a few species, the sperm swim into the female's mouth, fertilizing the eggs within her body, where they remain during early development stages. In moon jellies, the eggs lodge in pits on the oral arms, which form a temporary brood chamber for the developing planula larvae.\nThe planula is a small larva covered with cilia. When sufficiently developed, it settles onto a firm surface and develops into a polyp. The polyp generally consists of a small stalk topped by a mouth that is ringed by upward-facing tentacles. The polyps resemble those of closely related anthozoans, such as sea anemones and corals. The jellyfish polyp may be sessile, living on the bottom of boat hulls or other substrates, or it may be free-floating or attached to tiny bits of free-living plankton or rarely, fish or other invertebrates. Polyps may be solitary or colonial. Most polyps are only millimetres in diameter and feed continuously. The polyp stage may last for years.\nAfter an interval and stimulated by seasonal or hormonal changes, the polyp may begin reproducing asexually by budding and, in the Scyphozoa, is called a segmenting polyp, or a scyphistoma. Budding produces more scyphistomae and also ephyrae. Budding sites vary by species; from the tentacle bulbs, the manubrium (above the mouth), or the gonads of hydromedusae. In a process known as strobilation, the polyp's tentacles are reabsorbed and the body starts to narrow, forming transverse constrictions, in several places near the upper extremity of the polyp. These deepen as the constriction sites migrate down the body, and separate segments known as ephyra detach. These are free-swimming precursors of the adult medusa stage, which is the life stage that is typically identified as a jellyfish. The ephyrae, usually only a millimeter or two across initially, swim away from the polyp and grow. Limnomedusae polyps can asexually produce a creeping \"frustule\" larval form, which crawls away before developing into another polyp. A few species can produce new medusae by budding directly from the medusan stage. Some hydromedusae reproduce by fission.\nLifespan.\nLittle is known of the life histories of many jellyfish as the places on the seabed where the benthic forms of those species live have not been found. However, an asexually reproducing strobila form can sometimes live for several years, producing new medusae (ephyra larvae) each year.\nAn unusual species, \"Turritopsis dohrnii\", formerly classified as \"Turritopsis nutricula\", might be effectively immortal because of its ability under certain circumstances to transform from medusa back to the polyp stage, thereby escaping the death that typically awaits medusae after reproduction if they have not otherwise been eaten by some other organism. So far this reversal has been observed only in the laboratory.\nLocomotion.\nUsing the moon jelly \"Aurelia aurita\" as an example, jellyfish have been shown to be the most energy-efficient swimmers of all animals. They move through the water by radially expanding and contracting their bell-shaped bodies to push water behind them. They pause between the contraction and expansion phases to create two vortex rings. Muscles are used for the contraction of the body, which creates the first vortex and pushes the animal forward, but the mesoglea is so elastic that the expansion is powered exclusively by relaxing the bell, which releases the energy stored from the contraction. Meanwhile, the second vortex ring starts to spin faster, sucking water into the bell and pushing against the centre of the body, giving a secondary and \"free\" boost forward. The mechanism, called passive energy recapture, only works in relatively small jellyfish moving at low speeds, allowing the animal to travel 30 percent farther on each swimming cycle. Jellyfish achieved a 48 percent lower cost of transport (food and oxygen intake versus energy spent in movement) than other animals in similar studies. One reason for this is that most of the gelatinous tissue of the bell is inactive, using no energy during swimming.\nEcology.\nDiet.\nJellyfish are, like other cnidarians, generally carnivorous (or parasitic), feeding on planktonic organisms, crustaceans, small fish, fish eggs and larvae, and other jellyfish, ingesting food and voiding undigested waste through the mouth. They hunt passively using their tentacles as drift lines, or sink through the water with their tentacles spread widely; the tentacles, which contain nematocysts to stun or kill the prey, may then flex to help bring it to the mouth. Their swimming technique also helps them to capture prey; when their bell expands it sucks in water which brings more potential prey within reach of the tentacles.\nA few species such as \"Aglaura hemistoma\" are omnivorous, feeding on microplankton which is a mixture of zooplankton and phytoplankton (microscopic plants) such as dinoflagellates. Others harbour mutualistic algae (Zooxanthellae) in their tissues; the spotted jellyfish (\"Mastigias papua\") is typical of these, deriving part of its nutrition from the products of photosynthesis, and part from captured zooplankton. The upside-down jellyfish (\"Cassiopea andromeda\") also has a symbiotic relationship with microalgae, but captures tiny animals to supplement their diet. This is done by releasing tiny balls of living cells composed of mesoglea. These use cilia to drive them through water and stinging cells which stun the prey. The blobs also seem to have digestive capabilities.\nPredation.\nOther species of jellyfish are among the most common and important jellyfish predators. Sea anemones may eat jellyfish that drift into their range. Other predators include tunas, sharks, swordfish, sea turtles and penguins. Jellyfish washed up on the beach are consumed by foxes, other terrestrial mammals and birds. In general however, few animals prey on jellyfish; they can broadly be considered to be top predators in the food chain. Once jellyfish have become dominant in an ecosystem, for example through overfishing which removes predators of jellyfish larvae, there may be no obvious way for the previous balance to be restored: they eat fish eggs and juvenile fish, and compete with fish for food, preventing fish stocks from recovering.\nSymbiosis.\nSome small fish are immune to the stings of the jellyfish and live among the tentacles, serving as bait in a fish trap; they are safe from potential predators and are able to share the fish caught by the jellyfish. The cannonball jellyfish has a symbiotic relationship with ten different species of fish, and with the longnose spider crab, which lives inside the bell, sharing the jellyfish's food and nibbling its tissues.\nBlooms.\nJellyfish form large masses or blooms in certain environmental conditions of ocean currents, nutrients, sunshine, temperature, season, prey availability, reduced predation and oxygen concentration. Currents collect jellyfish together, especially in years with unusually high populations. Jellyfish can detect marine currents and swim against the current to congregate in blooms. Jellyfish are better able to survive in nutrient-rich, oxygen-poor water than competitors, and thus can feast on plankton without competition. Jellyfish may also benefit from saltier waters, as saltier waters contain more iodine, which is necessary for polyps to turn into jellyfish. Rising sea temperatures caused by climate change may also contribute to jellyfish blooms, because many species of jellyfish are able to survive in warmer waters. Increased nutrients from agricultural or urban runoff with nutrients including nitrogen and phosphorus compounds increase the growth of phytoplankton, causing eutrophication and algal blooms. When the phytoplankton die, they may create dead zones, so-called because they are hypoxic (low in oxygen). This in turn kills fish and other animals, but not jellyfish, allowing them to bloom. Jellyfish populations may be expanding globally as a result of land runoff and overfishing of their natural predators. Jellyfish are well placed to benefit from disturbance of marine ecosystems. They reproduce rapidly; they prey upon many species, while few species prey on them; and they feed via touch rather than visually, so they can feed effectively at night and in turbid waters. It may be difficult for fish stocks to re-establish themselves in marine ecosystems once they have become dominated by jellyfish, because jellyfish feed on plankton, which includes fish eggs and larvae.\nAs suspected at the turn of this century, jellyfish blooms are increasing in frequency. Between 2013 and 2020 the Mediterranean Science Commission monitored on a weekly basis the frequency of such outbreaks in coastal waters from Morocco to the Black Sea, revealing a relatively high frequency of these blooms nearly all year round, with peaks observed from March to July and often again in the autumn. The blooms are caused by different jellyfish species, depending on their localisation within the Basin: one observes a clear dominance of \"Pelagia noctiluca\" and \"Velella velella\" outbreaks in the western Mediterranean, of \"Rhizostoma pulmo\" and \"Rhopilema nomadica\" outbreaks in the eastern Mediterranean, and of \"Aurelia aurita\" and \"Mnemiopsis leidyi\" outbreaks in the Black Sea. \nSome jellyfish populations that have shown clear increases in the past few decades are invasive species, newly arrived from other habitats: examples include the Black Sea, Caspian Sea, Baltic Sea, central and eastern Mediterranean, Hawaii, and tropical and subtropical parts of the West Atlantic (including the Caribbean, Gulf of Mexico and Brazil).\nJellyfish blooms can have significant impact on community structure. Some carnivorous jellyfish species prey on zooplankton while others graze on primary producers. Reductions in zooplankton and ichthyoplankton due to a jellyfish bloom can ripple through the trophic levels. High-density jellyfish populations can outcompete other predators and reduce fish recruitment. Increased grazing on primary producers by jellyfish can also interrupt energy transfer to higher trophic levels.\nDuring blooms, jellyfish significantly alter the nutrient availability in their environment. Blooms require large amounts of available organic nutrients in the water column to grow, limiting availability for other organisms. Some jellyfish have a symbiotic relationship with single-celled dinoflagellates, allowing them to assimilate inorganic carbon, phosphorus, and nitrogen creating competition for phytoplankton. Their large biomass makes them an important source of dissolved and particulate organic matter for microbial communities through excretion, mucus production, and decomposition. The microbes break down the organic matter into inorganic ammonium and phosphate. However, the low carbon availability shifts the process from production to respiration creating low oxygen areas making the dissolved inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus largely unavailable for primary production.\nThese blooms have very real impacts on industries. Jellyfish can outcompete fish by utilizing open niches in over-fished fisheries. Catch of jellyfish can strain fishing gear and lead to expenses relating to damaged gear. Power plants have been shut down due to jellyfish blocking the flow of cooling water. Blooms have also been harmful for tourism, causing a rise in stings and sometimes the closure of beaches.\nJellyfish form a component of jelly-falls, events where gelatinous zooplankton fall to the seafloor, providing food for the benthic organisms there. In temperate and subpolar regions, jelly-falls usually follow immediately after a bloom.\nHabitats.\nMost jellyfish are marine animals, although a few hydromedusae inhabit freshwater. The best known freshwater example is the cosmopolitan hydrozoan jellyfish, \"Craspedacusta sowerbii\". It is less than an inch (2.5\u00a0cm) in diameter, colorless and does not sting. Some jellyfish populations have become restricted to coastal saltwater lakes, such as Jellyfish Lake in Palau. Jellyfish Lake is a marine lake where millions of golden jellyfish (\"Mastigias\" spp.) migrate horizontally across the lake daily.\nAlthough most jellyfish live well off the ocean floor and form part of the plankton, a few species are closely associated with the bottom for much of their lives and can be considered benthic. The upside-down jellyfish in the genus \"Cassiopea\" typically lie on the bottom of shallow lagoons where they sometimes pulsate gently with their umbrella top facing down. Even some deep-sea species of hydromedusae and scyphomedusae are usually collected on or near the bottom. All of the stauromedusae are found attached to either seaweed or rocky or other firm material on the bottom.\nSome species explicitly adapt to tidal flux. In Roscoe Bay, jellyfish ride the current at ebb tide until they hit a gravel bar, and then descend below the current. They remain in still waters until the tide rises, ascending and allowing it to sweep them back into the bay. They also actively avoid fresh water from mountain snowmelt, diving until they find enough salt.\nParasites.\nJellyfish are hosts to a wide variety of parasitic organisms. They act as intermediate hosts of endoparasitic helminths, with the infection being transferred to the definitive host fish after predation. Some digenean trematodes, especially species in the family Lepocreadiidae, use jellyfish as their second intermediate hosts. Fish become infected by the trematodes when they feed on infected jellyfish.\nRelation to humans.\nFisheries.\nJellyfish have long been eaten in some parts of the world. Fisheries have begun harvesting the American cannonball jellyfish, \"Stomolophus meleagris\", along the southern Atlantic coast of the United States and in the Gulf of Mexico for export to Asia.\nJellyfish are also harvested for their collagen, which is being investigated for use in a variety of applications including the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.\nAquaculture and fisheries of other species often suffer severe losses \u2013 and so losses of productivity \u2013 due to jellyfish.\nProducts.\nAristotle stated in the \"Parts of Animals\" IV, 6 that jellyfish (sea-nettles) were eaten in wintertime in a fish stew.\nIn some countries, including China, Japan, and Korea, jellyfish are a delicacy. The jellyfish is dried to prevent spoiling. Only some 12 species of scyphozoan jellyfish belonging to the order Rhizostomeae are harvested for food, mostly in southeast Asia. Rhizostomes, especially \"Rhopilema esculentum\" in China ( \"h\u01ceizh\u00e9\", 'sea stingers') and \"Stomolophus meleagris\" (cannonball jellyfish) in the United States, are favored because of their larger and more rigid bodies and because their toxins are harmless to humans.\nTraditional processing methods, carried out by a jellyfish master, involve a 20- to 40-day multi-phase procedure in which, after removing the gonads and mucous membranes, the umbrella and oral arms are treated with a mixture of table salt and alum, and compressed. Processing makes the jellyfish drier and more acidic, producing a crisp texture. Jellyfish prepared this way retain 7\u201310% of their original weight, and the processed product consists of approximately 94% water and 6% protein. Freshly processed jellyfish has a white, creamy color and turns yellow or brown during prolonged storage.\nIn China, processed jellyfish are desalted by soaking in water overnight and eaten cooked or raw. The dish is often served shredded with a dressing of oil, soy sauce, vinegar and sugar, or as a salad with vegetables. In Japan, cured jellyfish are rinsed, cut into strips and served with vinegar as an appetizer. Desalted, ready-to-eat products are also available.\nBiotechnology.\nPliny the Elder reported in his \"Natural History\" that the slime of the jellyfish \"\" produced light when rubbed on a walking stick.\nIn 1961, Osamu Shimomura extracted green fluorescent protein (GFP) and another bioluminescent protein, called aequorin, from the large and abundant hydromedusa \"Aequorea victoria\", while studying photoproteins that cause bioluminescence in this species. Three decades later, Douglas Prasher sequenced and cloned the gene for GFP. Martin Chalfie figured out how to use GFP as a fluorescent marker of genes inserted into other cells or organisms. Roger Tsien later chemically manipulated GFP to produce other fluorescent colors to use as markers. In 2008, Shimomura, Chalfie and Tsien won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work with GFP. Man-made GFP became widely used as a fluorescent tag to show which cells or tissues express specific genes. The genetic engineering technique fuses the gene of interest to the GFP gene. The fused DNA is then put into a cell, to generate either a cell line or (via IVF techniques) an entire animal bearing the gene. In the cell or animal, the artificial gene turns on in the same tissues and the same time as the normal gene, making a fusion of the normal protein with GFP attached to the end, illuminating the animal or cell reveals what tissues express that protein\u2014or at what stage of development. The fluorescence shows where the gene is expressed.\nAquarium display.\nJellyfish are displayed in many public aquariums. Often the tank's background is blue and the animals are illuminated by side light, increasing the contrast between the animal and the background. In natural conditions, many jellies are so transparent that they are nearly invisible. Jellyfish are not adapted to closed spaces. They depend on currents to transport them from place to place. Professional exhibits as in the Monterey Bay Aquarium feature precise water flows, typically in circular tanks to avoid trapping specimens in corners. The outflow is spread out over a large surface area and the inflow enters as a sheet of water in front of the outflow, so the jellyfish do not get sucked into it. As of 2009, jellyfish were becoming popular in home aquariums, where they require similar equipment.\nStings.\nJellyfish are armed with nematocysts, a type of specialized stinging cell. Contact with a jellyfish tentacle can trigger millions of nematocysts to pierce the skin and inject venom, but only some species' venom causes an adverse reaction in humans. In a study published in Communications Biology, researchers found a jellyfish species called \"Cassiopea xamachana\" which when triggered will release tiny balls of cells that swim around the jellyfish stinging everything in their path. Researchers described these as \"self-propelling microscopic grenades\" and named them cassiosomes.\nThe effects of stings range from mild discomfort to extreme pain and death. Most jellyfish stings are not deadly, but stings of some box jellyfish (Irukandji jellyfish), such as the sea wasp, can be deadly. Stings may cause anaphylaxis (a form of shock), which can be fatal. Jellyfish kill 20 to 40 people a year in the Philippines alone. In 2006 the Spanish Red Cross treated 19,000 stung swimmers along the Costa Brava.\nVinegar (3\u201310% aqueous acetic acid) may help with box jellyfish stings but not the stings of the Portuguese man o' war. Clearing the area of jelly and tentacles reduces nematocyst firing. Scraping the affected skin, such as with the edge of a credit card, may remove remaining nematocysts. Once the skin has been cleaned of nematocysts, hydrocortisone cream applied locally reduces pain and inflammation. Antihistamines may help to control itching. Immunobased antivenins are used for serious box jellyfish stings.\nIn Elba Island and Corsica dittrichia viscosa is now used by residents and tourists to heal stings from jellyfish, bees and wasps by pressing fresh leaves on the skin with quick results.\nMechanical issues.\nJellyfish in large quantities can fill and split fishing nets and crush captured fish. They can clog cooling equipment, having disabled power stations in several countries; jellyfish caused a cascading blackout in the Philippines in 1999, as well as damaging the Diablo Canyon Power Plant in California in 2008. They can also stop desalination plants and ships' engines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50187", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50187", "title": "Mantua", "text": "City in Lombardy, Italy\nMantua ( ; ; Lombard and ) is a \"comune\" (municipality) in the Italian region of Lombardy, and capital of the eponymous province.\nIn 2016, Mantua was designated as the \"Italian Capital of Culture\". In 2017, it was named as the \"European Capital of Gastronomy\", included in the Eastern Lombardy District (together with the cities of Bergamo, Brescia, and Cremona).\nIn 2008, Mantua's \"centro storico\" (old town) and the nearby of Sabbioneta were declared by UNESCO to be a World Heritage Site. Mantua's historic power and influence under the Gonzaga family between 1328 and 1708 made it one of the main artistic, cultural, and especially musical hubs of Northern Italy and of Italy as a whole. It had one of the most splendid courts of Europe of the fifteenth, sixteenth, and early seventeenth centuries. Mantua is noted for its significant role in the history of opera; the city is also known for its architectural treasures and artifacts, elegant palaces, and the medieval and Renaissance cityscape. It is the city where the composer Monteverdi premiered his 1607 opera \"L'Orfeo\". It is the nearest town to the birthplace of the Roman classical poet Virgil, who is commemorated by a statue at the lakeside park \"Piazza Virgiliana\".\nMantua is surrounded on three sides by artificial lakes, created during the 12th century as the city's defence system. These lakes receive water from the River Mincio, a tributary of the River Po, which descends from Lake Garda. The three lakes are called \"Lago Superiore\", \"Lago di Mezzo\", and \"Lago Inferiore\" (\"Upper\", \"Middle\", and \"Lower\" Lakes, respectively). A fourth lake, Lake Pajolo, which once served as a defensive water ring around the city, dried up at the end of the 18th century.\nThe area and its environs are important not only in naturalistic terms, but also anthropologically and historically; research has highlighted a number of human settlements scattered between Barche di Solferino and Bande di Cavriana, Castellaro, and Isolone del Mincio. These dated, without interruption, from Neolithic times (5th\u20134th millennium BC) to the Bronze Age (2nd\u20131st millennium BC) and the Gallic phases (2nd\u20131st centuries BC), and ended with Roman residential settlements, which can be traced to the 3rd\u00a0century AD.\nIn 2017, Legambiente ranked Mantua as the best Italian city for quality of life and environment.\nGeography.\nMantua lies in the east of the region of Lombardy, halfway between Milan and Venice, on the River Mincio. It is south of Verona, east of Cremona, north-east of Parma, northwest of Ferrara, and west-southwest of Padua.\nHistory.\nMantua was an island settlement which was first established about the year 2000 BC on the banks of River Mincio, which flows from Lake Garda to the Adriatic Sea. In the 6th century BC, Mantua was an Etruscan village which, in the Etruscan tradition, was re-founded by Ocnus.\nThe name may derive from the Etruscan god Mantus. After being conquered by the Cenomani, a Gallic tribe, Mantua was subsequently fought between the first and second Punic Wars against the Romans, who attributed its name to Manto, a daughter of Tiresias. This territory was later populated by veteran soldiers of Augustus. Mantua's most famous ancient citizen is the poet Virgil, or Publius Vergilius Maro (\"Mantua me genuit\"), who was born in the year 70 BC at a village near the city which is now known as Virgilio.\nAfter the Fall of the Roman Empire.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire at the hands of Odoacer in 476\u00a0AD, Mantua was, along with the rest of Italy, conquered by the Ostrogoths. It was retaken by the Eastern Roman Empire in the middle of the 6th century following the Gothic War but was subsequently lost again to the Lombards. They were in turn conquered by Charlemagne in 774, thus incorporating Mantua into the Frankish Empire. Partitions of the empire (due to the Franks' use of partible inheritance) in the Treaties of Verdun and Pr\u00fcm led to Mantua passing to Middle Francia in 843, then the Kingdom of Italy in 855. In 962 Italy was invaded by King Otto I of Germany, and Mantua thus became a vassal of the newly formed Holy Roman Empire.\nIn the 11th century, Mantua became a possession of Boniface of Canossa, marquis of Tuscany. The last ruler of that family was the countess Matilda of Canossa (d. 1115), who, according to legend, ordered the construction of the precious Rotonda di San Lorenzo (or St. Lawrence's Roundchurch) in 1082. The Rotonda still exists today and was renovated in 2013.\nFree Imperial City of Mantua.\nAfter the death of Matilda of Canossa, Mantua became a free commune and strenuously defended itself from the influence of the Holy Roman Empire during the 12th and 13th centuries. In 1198, Alberto Pitentino altered the course of River Mincio, creating what the Mantuans call \"the four lakes\" to reinforce the city's natural protection. Three of these lakes still remain today and the fourth one, which ran through the centre of town, was reclaimed during the 18th century.\nPodesteria Rule.\nFrom 1215, the city was ruled under the \"podesteria\" of the Guelph poet-statesman Rambertino Buvalelli.\nDuring the struggle between the Guelphs and the Ghibellines, Pinamonte Bonacolsi took advantage of the chaotic situation to seize power of the podesteria in 1273. He was declared the \"Captain General of the People\". The Bonacolsi family ruled Mantua for the next two generations and made it more prosperous and artistically beautiful. On 16 August 1328 Luigi Gonzaga, an official in Bonacolsi's podesteria, and his family staged a public revolt in Mantua and forced a coup d'\u00e9tat on the last Bonacolsi ruler, Rinaldo.\nHouse of Gonzaga.\nLudovico Gonzaga, who had been Podest\u00e0 of Mantua since 1318, was duly elected Capitano del popolo. The Gonzagas built new walls with five gates and renovated the city in the 14th century; however, the political situation did not settle until the governance of the third ruler of Gonzaga, Ludovico III Gonzaga, who eliminated his relatives and centralised power to himself. During the Italian Renaissance, the Gonzaga family softened their despotic rule and further raised the level of culture and refinement in Mantua. \nMantua became a significant center of Renaissance art and humanism. Gianfrancesco Gonzaga had brought Vittorino da Feltre to Mantua in 1423 to open his famous humanist school, the Casa Giocosa. Through a payment of 120,000 golden florins in 1433, he was appointed Marquis of Mantua, Gianfrancesco I by the Emperor Sigismund, whose niece Barbara of Brandenburg was married to his son, Ludovico. In 1459, Pope Pius II held the Council of Mantua to proclaim a crusade against the Turks. Under Ludovico and his heirs, the famous Renaissance painter Andrea Mantegna worked in Mantua as court painter, producing some of his most outstanding works.\nIsabella d'Este, Marchioness of Mantua, married Francesco II Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua in 1490. When she moved to Mantua from Ferrara (she was the daughter of Duke Ercole the ruler of Ferrara) she created her famous studiolo firstly in Castello di San Giorgio for which she commissioned paintings from Mantegna, Perugino and Lorenzo Costa. She later moved her studiolo to the Corte Vecchia and commissioned two paintings from Correggio to join the five from Castello di San Giorgio. It was unusual for a woman to have a studiolo in 15th century Italy given they were regarded as masculine spaces. Isabella was a vociferous collector and such was her reputation that Niccol\u00f2 da Corregio called her 'la prima donna del mondo'.\nDuchy of Mantua.\nThe first Duke of Mantua was Federico II Gonzaga, who acquired the title from the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in 1530. Federico commissioned Giulio Romano to build the famous Palazzo Te, on the periphery of the city, and profoundly improved the city. In the late 16th century, Claudio Monteverdi came to Mantua from his native Cremona. He worked for the court of Vincenzo I Gonzaga, first as a singer and violist, then as music director, marrying the court singer Claudia Cattaneo in 1599.\nFrom Gonzaga to Habsburg.\nIn 1627, the direct line of the Gonzaga family came to an end with the vicious and weak Vincenzo II, and Mantua slowly declined under the new rulers, the Gonzaga-Nevers, a cadet French branch of the family. The War of the Mantuan Succession broke out, and in 1630 an Imperial army of 36,000 mercenaries under Matthias Gallas and Johann von Aldringen besieged and sacked Mantua, bringing the plague with them. Ferdinand Carlo IV, an inept ruler, whose only interest was in holding parties and theatrical shows, allied with France in the War of the Spanish Succession. After the French defeat, he took refuge in Venice and carried with him a thousand pictures. At his death in 1708, the Duke of Mantua was declared deposed and his family of Gonzaga lost Mantua forever in favour of the Habsburgs of Austria.\nUnder Austrian rule, Mantua enjoyed a revival and during this period the Royal Academy of Sciences, Letters and Arts, the Scientific Theatre, and numerous palaces were built.\nNapoleonic Wars.\nIn 1786, ten years before Napoleon Bonaparte's campaign in Italy, the Austrian Duchy of Mantua briefly united with the Duchy of Milan until 1791.\nOn 4 June 1796 during the War of the First Coalition, Mantua was besieged by Napoleon Bonaparte's French army. The first Austrian attempt to break the siege was successful and the siege was abandoned on 1 August. The Austrian army was defeated at the Battle of Castiglione on 5 August and left the area. The French resumed the siege on August 27 and accepted surrender of the city on 2 February 1797. The city was recaptured by the Austrians in the War of the Second Coalition after a siege lasting from 8 April to 28 July 1799.\nLater, the city again passed into Napoleon's control and became a part of Napoleon's Kingdom of Italy. In 1810 Andreas Hofer was shot by Porta Giulia, a gate of the town at Borgo di Porto (Cittadella) for leading the insurrection in the County of Tyrol against Napoleon.\nKingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia.\nAfter the brief period of French rule, Mantua returned to Austria in 1814, becoming one of the Quadrilatero fortress cities in northern Italy. Under the Congress of Vienna (1815), Mantua became a province in the Austrian Empire's Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia. Agitation against Austria, however, culminated in a revolt which lasted from 1851 to 1855, but it was finally suppressed by the Austrian army. One of the most famous episodes of the Italian Risorgimento took place in the valley of the Belfiore, where a group of rebels was hanged by the Austrians.\nUnification of Italy.\nAt the Battle of Solferino (Second Italian War of Independence) in 1859, the House of Savoy's Piedmont-Sardinia sided with the French Emperor Napoleon III against the Austrian Empire. Following Austria's defeat, Lombardy was ceded to France, who transferred Lombardy to Piedmont-Sardinia in return for Nice and Savoy.\nMantua, although a constituent province of Lombardy, still remained under the Austrian Empire along with Venetia. In 1866, Prussia-led North German Confederation sided with the newly established, Piedmont-led Kingdom of Italy against the Austrian Empire in the Third Italian War of Independence. The quick defeat of Austria led to its withdrawal of the Kingdom of Venetia (including the capital city, Venice). Mantua reconnected with the region of Lombardy and was incorporated into the Kingdom of Italy.\n20th century.\nDuring World War II, in November 1943, Nazi Germany relocated the Stalag 337 prisoner-of-war camp from Le\u015bna in German-occupied Poland to Mantua. The camp was dissolved in February 1944, and in April 1944 the Dulag 339 transit camp for British, Italian, American, French, Greek and Yugoslav POWs was established in its place, and remained operational until April 1945.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMonuments and sites of interest.\nThe Gonzagas protected the arts and culture, and were hosts to several important artists such as Leone Battista Alberti, Andrea Mantegna, Giulio Romano, Donatello, Peter Paul Rubens, Pisanello, Domenico Fetti, Luca Fancelli, and Nicol\u00f2 Sebregondi. Though many of the masterworks have been dispersed, the cultural value of Mantua is nonetheless outstanding, with many of Mantua's patrician and ecclesiastical buildings being uniquely important examples of Italian architecture.\nTransport.\nCar.\nBy car, Mantova can be reached on the A4 (Milan-Venice) Highway up to Verona, then the A22 (Brennero-Modena) Highway. Alternatively, the city can be reached from Milan on the State Road 415 (Milan-Cremona) to Cremona and from there State Road 10 (Cremona-Mantova), or from Verona on the State Road 62.\nRailway.\nMantova railway station, opened in 1873, lies on the train routes of Milan-Codogno-Cremona-Mantua and Verona-Mantua-Modena. The station is a terminus for three regional lines, to Cremona and Milan, to Monselice, and to Verona Porta Nuova and Modena. Trenitalia operates a daily high-speed connection with Rome.\nAir.\nThe closest airport is Verona-Villafranca Airport. The direct shuttle bus service running to and from Mantova railway station was canceled on 1 January 2015. Public connection is now provided by the airport bus running to and from Verona Porta Nuova railway station, and the Verona-Mantova railway line.\nBus.\nLocal bus services, \"urbano\" (within the city area and suburbs) and \"interurbano\" (within the surrounding towns and villages) are provided by APAM.\nGovernment.\nSince local government political reorganization in 1993, Mantua has been governed by the City Council of Mantua. Voters elect directly 33 councilors and the mayor of Mantua every five years. The current mayor of Mantua is Mattia Palazzi (PD), elected on 15 June 2015.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nMantua is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50189", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50189", "title": "Town drunk", "text": "Stock character; male in a small town who is drunk more often than sober\nThe town drunk (also called a tavern fool) is a stock character in Anglo-Saxon culture, almost always male, who is drunk more often than exhibiting sobriety.\nThe town drunk is frequently depicted in a humorous light, often portrayed as a harmless and lovable character whose social failings stem from their excessive consumption of alcohol. However, some portrayals can be more nuanced, exploring the social and personal costs associated with alcoholism.\nUses in fiction.\nIn fiction, the town drunk character serves a number of functions.\nThe town drunk may serve merely as a moral example and object lesson on the evils of drunkenness. This approach to the character is associated with the temperance movement, and peaked at the start of the twentieth century. The Prohibition film \"Ten Nights in a Barroom\" portrays the inevitable fall into destitute drunkenness of a person who dared to take that \"Fatal Glass of Beer\", the title of another period drama working this vein. A town drunk appears in \"Our Town\" by Thornton Wilder. Pap Finn in \"The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" is another example. In modern fiction, which tends to reflect the contemporary influences of the sobriety movement, the town drunk may get sober and set about revitalizing his life.\nThe town drunk may play the role of the fool as a source of comic relief. \"Otis\" from \"The Andy Griffith Show\" is this type of town drunk, as is the character of Bobby Singer in The CW series \"Supernatural,\" as well as many of the denizens of Moe's Tavern from \"The Simpsons\" such as Barney Gumble. In 1971's \"The Andromeda Strain\" the only adult survivor is a Town Drunk. In Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\", the Porter who appears in Act II, Scene 3, is also a type of \"comic relief\" drunk who serves to temporarily lighten the mood of the play right after a heinous regicide has taken place.\nThe town drunk may disrupt public meetings, either for comic effect, or by dispensing what proves to be wisdom in a garbled and comic form. Or, in this incarnation, the character may introduce the hero to some of the worldlier sorts of wisdom, as well as forming a contrast to his truly heroic character. One prototype for this version of the town drunk is supplied by Shakespeare's Falstaff, who appears in both parts of \"Henry IV\" and in \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\". Another would be the drunk who appears in \"\" at the low point of the film, where his drunken ramblings inspire the hero to save the world. In the 1722 Danish play \"Jeppe on the Hill\", the eponymous wise fool main character, declares that \"everybody says that Jeppe drinks, but nobody asks why Jeppe drinks\""}
{"id": "50190", "revid": "173996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50190", "title": "Pizzicato", "text": "Playing technique for string instruments\nPizzicato (, ; translated as 'pinched', and sometimes roughly as 'plucked') is a playing technique that involves plucking the strings of a string instrument. The exact technique varies somewhat depending on the type of instrument:\nWhen a string is struck or plucked, including pizzicato, sound waves are generated that do not belong to a harmonic series as when a string is bowed. This complex timbre is called inharmonicity. The inharmonicity of a string depends on its physical characteristics, such as tension, composition, diameter and length. The inharmonicity disappears when strings are bowed because the bow's stick-slip action is periodic, so it drives all of the resonances of the string at exactly harmonic ratios, even if it has to drive them slightly off their natural frequency.\nHistory.\nThe first recognised use in Classical Music is found in Tobias Hume\u2019s The First Part of Ayres 1605. Instruction is given to \u2018\u2018play one straine with your fingers, the other with your Bow\u2019, \u2018to be plaide with your fingers \u2026 your Bow ever in your hand\u2019\u2019. (Morrow et al. 2021)\nAnother early use is found in Claudio Monteverdi's \"Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda\" (around 1638), in which the players are instructed to use two fingers of their right hand to pluck the strings. Later, in 1756, Leopold Mozart in his \"Versuch einer gr\u00fcndlichen Violinschule\" instructs the player to use the index finger of the right hand. This has remained the most usual way to execute a pizzicato, though sometimes the middle finger is used. The bow is held in the hand at the same time unless there is enough time to put it down and pick it up again between bowed passages.\nUses in various styles of music.\nIn jazz and bluegrass, and the few popular music styles which use double bass (such as French modern chanson, American psychobilly and rockabilly), pizzicato is the usual way to play the double bass. This is unusual for a violin-family instrument, because regardless whether violin-family instruments are being used in jazz (e.g., jazz violin), popular, traditional (e.g., Bluegrass fiddle) or Classical music, they are usually played with the bow for most of a performance. In classical double bass playing, pizzicato is often performed with the bow held in the hand; as such, the string is usually only plucked with a single finger. In contrast, in jazz, bluegrass, and other non-Classical styles, the player is not usually holding a bow and is therefore free to use two or three fingers to pluck the string.\nIn classical music, however, string instruments are most usually played with the bow, and composers give specific indications to play pizzicato where required. Pieces in classical music that are played entirely pizzicato include:\nAntonio Vivaldi, in the \"Ah Ch'Infelice Sempre\" section of his cantata \"Cessate, omai cessate\", combined both pizzicato and bowed instruments to create a unique sound. He also included pizzicato in the second movement of \"Winter\" from \"The Four Seasons\".\nNotation.\nIn music notation, a composer will normally indicate the performer should use pizzicato with the abbreviation \"pizz.\" A return to bowing is indicated by the Italian term \"arco\" or \"bog\". A left-hand pizzicato is usually indicated by writing a small cross above the note, and a Bart\u00f3k pizzicato is often indicated by a circle with a small vertical line through the top of it above the note in question or by writing \"Bart\u00f3k pizz\" at the start of the relevant passage. \nIn classical music, arco playing is the default assumption; thus, if a music notation part starts and no indication is given as to whether the notes are arco or pizz, the player assumes that the notes are bowed.\nBowed string instrument technique.\nPractical implications.\nIf a string player has to play pizzicato for a long period of time, the performer may put down the bow. Violinists and violists may also hold the instrument in the \"banjo position\" (resting horizontally on the lap), and pluck the strings with the thumb of the right hand. This technique is rarely used, and usually only in movements which are pizzicato throughout. A technique similar to this, where the strings are actually strummed like a guitar, is called for in the 4th movement of Rimsky-Korsakov's \"Capriccio Espagnol\" (Scena e canto gitano), where the violins, violas, and cellos are instructed to play pizzicato \"quasi guitara\", the music here consists of three and four-note chords, which are fingered and strummed much like the instrument being imitated.\nOther pizzicato techniques.\nAnother colorful pizzicato technique used in the Rimsky-Korsakov piece mentioned above is two-handed pizzicato, indicated by the markings \"m.s.\" and \"m.d.\" (for \"mano sinistra\", 'left hand', and \"mano destra\", 'right hand'); here, the open E string is plucked alternately in rapid succession by the left and right hands.\n&lt;score&gt;{\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n \\relative c\" {\n c4-+^\\markup \"pizz.\"\n&lt;/score&gt; The music notation for left hand pizzicato\nOne can also use the left hand fingers for pizzicato, either when they are not in use or as they are leaving their previous position. This allows pizzicati in places where there would not normally be time to bring the right hand from or to the bowing position. Use of left-hand pizzicato is relatively uncommon and is most often found in the violin solo repertoire; two famous examples of left-hand pizzicato are Paganini's 24th Caprice and Sarasate's Zigeunerweisen. Left hand pizzicato can also be used while bowed notes are being held, an effect appearing primarily in repertoire of the late 19th century and beyond. Examples of this technique can be found in the works of Wieniawski, Berg (\"Violin Concerto\"), Stravinsky (\"Three Pieces for String Quartet\") and many others. \nMaurice Delage calls for slurred pizzicati in the cello part of his \"Quatre po\u00e8mes hindous\" for soprano and chamber orchestra. This is achieved by playing one note, and then stopping a new note on the same string without plucking the string again. This technique (known as \"hammering-on\" on guitar) is rarely used on bowed instruments.\n&lt;score&gt;{\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n \\relative c\" {\n c4\\snappizzicato\n&lt;/score&gt; Musical notation for Bart\u00f3k pizzicato\nA further variation is a particularly strong pizzicato where the string is plucked vertically by snapping and rebounds off the fingerboard of the instrument. This is known as \"snap pizzicato\" or \"Bart\u00f3k pizzicato\", after one of the first composers to use it extensively (e.g. in the 4th movement of his Fourth String Quartet, 1928). Gustav Mahler famously employs this kind of pizzicato in the third movement of his Seventh Symphony, in which he provides the cellos and double basses with the footnote \"pluck so hard that the strings hit the wood\" in bar 401.\nOn the double bass, this style of snap pizzicato, or \"slapping\", was used in jazz since the 1920s and later used in rockabilly. Because an unamplified double bass is generally the quietest instrument in a jazz band, many players of the 1920s and 1930s used the slap style, slapping and pulling the strings so that they make a rhythmic \"slap\" sound against the fingerboard. The slap style cuts through the sound of a band better than simply plucking the strings, and allowed the bass to be more easily heard on early sound recordings, as the recording equipment of that time did not favor low frequencies.\nBart\u00f3k also made use of pizzicato glissandi, executed by plucking a note and then sliding the stopping finger up or down the string. This technique can be heard in his \"Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta\".\nRoman Kim made pizzicatos using his mouth.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n5. Morrow, Michael, Colette Harris, and Frank Traficante. 2021. \u2018Hume, Tobias.\u2019 in Grove Music Online. Accessed March 22, 2025. Oxford Music Online. https://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/grovemusic/view/10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.001.0001/omo-9781561592630-e-0000013542."}
{"id": "50192", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50192", "title": "Mary Shelly", "text": ""}
{"id": "50196", "revid": "44727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50196", "title": "X-Men movie", "text": ""}
{"id": "50201", "revid": "985782206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50201", "title": "First countable", "text": ""}
{"id": "50202", "revid": "38042249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50202", "title": "V5", "text": "V5, V-5, or V.5 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "50203", "revid": "24013162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50203", "title": "William Harvey", "text": "English physician (1578\u20131657)\nWilliam Harvey (1 April 1578 \u2013 3 June 1657) was an English physician who made influential contributions to anatomy and physiology. He was the first known physician to describe completely, and in detail, pulmonary and systemic circulation as well as the specific process of blood being pumped to the brain and the rest of the body by the heart (though earlier writers, such as Realdo Colombo, Michael Servetus, and Jacques Dubois, had provided precursors to some of his theories).\nFamily.\nWilliam's father, Thomas Harvey, was a jurat of Folkestone where he served as mayor in 1600. Records and personal descriptions delineate him as an overall calm, diligent, and intelligent man whose sons \u201c... revered, consulted and implicitly trusted in him...\u201d (they) made their father the treasurer of their wealth when they acquired great estates...(He) kept, employed, and improved their gainings to their great advantage.\" Thomas Harvey's portrait can still be seen in the central panel of a wall of the dining room at Rolls Park, Chigwell, in Essex. William was the eldest of nine children, seven sons and two daughters, of Thomas and his wife Joan Halke.\nNotable family connections include Heneage Finch, 1st Earl of Nottingham, who married William's niece Elizabeth Harvey, and the diplomat Sir Daniel Harvey. His great nephew was the naval hero Eliab Harvey, captain of HMS \"Temeraire\".\nBiography.\nEarly life and the University of Padua.\nHarvey's initial education was carried out in Folkestone, where he learned Latin. He then entered the King's School (Canterbury). Harvey stayed at the King's School for five years, after which he matriculated at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge in 1593.\nHarvey graduated as a Bachelor of Arts from Caius in 1597. He then travelled through France and Germany to Italy, where he entered the University of Padua, in 1599.\nDuring Harvey's years of study there, he developed a relationship with Fabricius and read Fabricius's \"De Venarum Ostiolis\".\nHarvey graduated as a Doctor of Medicine at the age of 24 from the University of Padua on 25 April 1602. Harvey had\nconducted himself so wonderfully well in the examination and had shown such skill, memory and learning that he had far surpassed even the great hopes which his examiners had formed of him.\nThe College of Physicians, marriage and Saint Bartholomew's Hospital.\nAfter graduating from Padua, Harvey immediately returned to England, where he obtained the degree of Doctor of Medicine from the University of Cambridge that same year, and became a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Following this, Harvey established himself in London, joining the Royal College of Physicians on 5 October 1604.\nA few weeks after his admission, Harvey married Elizabeth Browne, \"daughter of Lancelot Browne Dr. Physic\" (a medical doctor). They had no children.\nHarvey was elected a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians on 5 June 1607, which earned him the Post-nominal letters FRCP. He then accepted a position at St Bartholomew's Hospital that he was to occupy for almost all the rest of his life. Succeeding Dr Wilkinson on 14 October 1609, he became the Physician in charge at St\u00a0Bartholomew's Hospital, which enjoined him, \"in God's most holy name\" to \"endeavor yourself to do the best of your knowledge in the profession of physic to the poor then present, or any other of the poor at any time of the week which shall be sent home unto you by the Hospitaller... You shall not, for favor, lucre or gain, appoint or write anything for the poor but such good and wholesome things as you shall think with your best advice will do the poor good, without any affection or respect to be had to the apothecary. And you shall take no gift or reward... for your counsel... This you will promise to do as you shall answer before God... \"\nHarvey earned around thirty-three pounds a year and lived in a small house in Ludgate, although two houses in West Smithfield were attached as fringe benefits to the post of Physician. At this point, the physician's function consisted of a simple but thorough analysis of patients who were brought to the hospital once a week and the subsequent writing of prescriptions.\nLumleian lecturer.\nThe next important phase of Harvey's life began with his appointment to the office of Lumleian lecturer on 4 August 1615. The Lumleian lectureship, founded by Lord Lumley and Dr. Richard Caldwell in 1582, consisted in giving lectures for a period of seven years, with the purpose of \"spreading light\" and increasing the general knowledge of anatomy throughout England.\nHarvey began his lectures in April 1616, and also compiled his lecture notes in a notebook. At this time, at the age of thirty-seven, he was described as \"a man of lowest stature, round faced; his eyes small, round, very black and full of spirit; his hair as black as a raven and curling\". The notes which he used at the time are preserved in the British Museum.\nAt the beginning of his lectures, Harvey laid down the canons for his guidance:\nPhysician to James I.\nHarvey continued to participate in the Lumleian lectures while also taking care of his patients at St Bartholomew's Hospital; he thus soon attained an important and fairly lucrative practice, which climaxed with his appointment as 'Physician Extraordinary' to King James I on 3 February 1618. He seems to have similarly served various aristocrats, including Lord Chancellor Bacon. Bacon entirely failed to impress the more practical-minded Harvey, who refused to regard him as a great philosopher. He said of him \"He writes philosophy like a Lord Chancellor.\"\nIn 1628 he published in Frankfurt his completed treatise on the circulation of the blood, the \"De Motu Cordis\". As a result of negative comments by other physicians Harvey \"fell mightily in his practice\", but continued advancing his career. He was re-elected 'Censor' of the College of Physicians in 1629, having been elected for the first time in 1613 and the second time in 1625. Eventually, Harvey was also elected Treasurer of the College.\nWitchcraft trials.\nHarvey was a prominent sceptic regarding allegations of witchcraft. He was one of the examiners of four women from Lancashire accused of witchcraft in 1634, and as a consequence of his report, all of them were acquitted. Earlier, in 1632, while travelling with the King to Newmarket, he had been sent to investigate a woman accused of being a witch. Initially, he told her that he was a wizard and had come to discuss the Craft with her, and asked whether she had a familiar. She put down a saucer of milk and called to a toad which came out and drank the milk. He then sent her out to fetch some ale, killed the toad and dissected it, concluding that it was a perfectly ordinary animal and not supernatural in any way. When the woman returned she was naturally very angry and upset, but Harvey eventually silenced her by stating that he was the King's Physician, sent to discover whether she was a witch, and if she were, to have her apprehended.\nExcursions abroad, election as physician to Charles I and the English Civil War.\nAt the age of fifty-two, Harvey received commands from the king to accompany the Duke of Lennox during his trip abroad. This voyage \u2013 the first after Harvey's return from Padua \u2013 lasted three years, taking Harvey through the countries of France and Spain during the Mantuan War and Plague. During this journey he wrote to Viscount Dorchester:\nI can complain that by the way we could scarce see a dog, crow, kite, raven or any other bird, or anything to anatomize, only some few miserable people, the relics of the war and the plague where famine had made anatomies before I came. It is scarce credible in so rich, populous, and plentiful countries as these were that so much misery and desolation, poverty and famine should in so short a time be, as we have seen. I interpret it well that it will be a great motive for all here to have and procure assurance of settled peace. It is time to leave fighting when there is nothing to eat, nothing to be kept, and nothing to be gotten.\nHaving returned to England in 1632. Harvey accompanied King Charles I wherever he went as 'Physician in Ordinary'. In particular, Charles's hunting expeditions gave Harvey access to many deer carcasses; it was upon them that Harvey made many observations and developed his theories. Harvey returned to Italy in October 1636, dining at the English College, Rome, as a guest of the Jesuits there. It is possible he met Galileo in Florence en route.\nDuring the English Civil War a mob of citizen-soldiers opposed to the King entered Harvey's lodgings, stole his goods, and scattered his papers. The papers consisted of \"the records of a large number of dissections ... of diseased bodies, with his observations on the development on insects, and a series of notes on comparative anatomy.\" During this period, Harvey maintained his position, helped the wounded on several occasions and protected the King's children during the Battle of Edgehill.\nThe conflicts of the Civil War soon led King Charles to Oxford, with Harvey attending, where the physician was made \"Doctor of Physic\" in 1642 and later Warden of Merton College in 1645. \"In Oxford he (Harvey) very soon settled down to his accustomed pursuits, unmindful of the clatter of arms and of the constant marching and countermarching around him, for the city remained the base of operations until its surrender... \"\nHarvey's later years, death and burial.\nThe surrender of Oxford in 1645 marks the beginning of Harvey's gradual retirement from public life and duties. Now sixty-eight years old and childless, Harvey had lost three brothers and his wife by this time. He thus decided to return to London, and lived with his brothers Eliab and Daniel at different periods. Having retired from St Bartholomew's Hospital and his various other aforementioned positions, he passed most of this time reading general literature. Several attempts to bring Harvey back into the 'working world' were made, however; here is an excerpt of one of Harvey's answers:\nWould you be the man who should recommend me to quit the peaceful haven where I now pass my life and launch again upon the faithless sea? You know full well what a storm my former lucubrations raised. Much better is it oftentimes to grow wise at home and in private, than by publishing what you have amassed with infinite labour, to stir up tempests that may rob you of peace and quiet for the rest of your days.\nHarvey died at Roehampton in the house of his brother Eliab on 3 June 1657. Descriptions of the event seem to show that he died of a cerebral haemorrhage from vessels long injured by gout: it is highly probable that the left middle cerebral artery malfunctioned, leading to a gradual accumulation of blood in the brain which eventually overwhelmed it. There exists a fairly detailed account of what happened on that day. Harvey\nwent to speak and found that he had the dead palsy in his tongue; then he saw what was to become of him. He knew there were then no hopes of his recovery, so presently he sends for his young nephews to come up to him. He then made signs (for seized with the dead palsy in his tongue he could not speak) to let him blood his tongue, which did him little or no good, and so ended his days, dying in the evening of the day on which he was stricken, the palsy giving him an easy passport.\nHis will distributed his material goods and wealth throughout his extended family and also left a substantial amount of money to the Royal College of Physicians. Harvey bequeathed coffee worth \u00a356 to them dictating that they should meet monthly and commemorate his death with coffee.\nHarvey was buried in St. Andrew's Church in Hempstead in northern Essex. The funeral procession started on 26 June 1657, leading Harvey to be placed in the 'Harvey Chapel' built by Eliab. The conditions of Harvey's burial are also known: \"Harvey was laid in the chapel between the bodies of his two nieces, and like them he was lapt in lead, coffin less\". On St. Luke's Day, 18 October 1883, Harvey's remains were reinterred, the leaden case carried from the vault by eight Fellows of the College of Physicians, and deposited in a sarcophagus containing his works and an inscription:\nThe body of William Harvey lapt in lead, simply soldered, was laid without shell or enclosure of any kind in the Harvey vault of this Church of Hempstead, Essex, in June 1657. In the course of time the lead enclosing the remains was, from expose and natural decay, so seriously damaged as to endanger its preservation, rendering some repair of it the duty of those interested in the memory of the illustrious discoverer of the circulation of the Blood. The Royal College of Physicians, of which corporate body Harvey was a munificent Benefactor did in the years 1882\u20131883, by permission of the Representatives of the Harvey family, undertake this duty. In accordance with this determination the leaden mortuary chest containing the remains of Harvey was repaired, and was, as far as possible, restored to its original state...\n\"De Motu Cordis\".\nPublished in 1628 in the city of Frankfurt (host to an annual book fair that Harvey knew would allow immediate dispersion of his work), the 72-page \"Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus\" contains the mature account of the circulation of the blood. Opening with a dedication to King Charles I, the quarto has 17 chapters which give a clear and connected account of the action of the heart and the consequent movement of the blood around the body in a circuit. Having only a tiny lens at his disposal, Harvey was not able to reach the adequate pictures that were attained through such microscopes used by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek; thus he had to resort to theory \u2013 and not practical evidence \u2013 in certain parts of his book. After the first chapter, which simply outlines past ideas and accepted rules regarding the heart and lungs, Harvey moves on to a fundamental premise to his treatise, stating that it was important to study the heart when it was active in order to truly comprehend its true movement; a task which even he found of great difficulty, as he says:\n...I found the task so truly arduous... that I was almost tempted to think... that the movement of the heart was only to be comprehended by God. For I could neither rightly perceive at first when the systole and when the diastole took place by reason of the rapidity of the movement...\nThis initial thought led Harvey's ambition and assiduousness to a detailed analysis of the overall structure of the heart (studied with fewer hindrances in cold-blooded animals). After this, Harvey analyses the arteries, showing how their pulsation depends upon the contraction of the left ventricle, while the contraction of the right ventricle propels its charge of blood into the pulmonary artery. Whilst doing this, the physician reiterates the fact that these two ventricles move together almost simultaneously and not independently as had been thought previously by his predecessors. This discovery was made while observing the heart of such animals as the eel and several other types of fish; indeed, the general study of countless animals was of utmost importance to Harvey's research: among the ones already cited, one can add the study of the snail, the invisible shrimp, the chick before its hatching and even the pigeon. A digression to an experiment can be made to this note: using the inactive heart of a dead pigeon and placing upon it a finger wet with saliva, Harvey was able to witness a transitory and yet incontrovertible pulsation. He had just witnessed the heart's ability to recover from fatigue.\nAs early as the 17th century, William Harvey had already discerned the existence of the Ductus arteriosus and explained its relative function. Here he says, \"...in embryos, whilst the lungs are in a state of inaction, performing no function, subject to no movement any more than if they had not been present, Nature uses the two ventricles of the heart as if they formed but one for the transmission of the blood.\" However, the apex of Harvey's work is probably the eighth chapter, in which he deals with the actual quantity of blood passing through the heart from the veins to the arteries. Coming into conflict with Galen's accepted view of the liver as the origin of venous blood, Harvey estimated the capacity of the heart, how much blood is expelled through each pump of the heart, and the number of times the heart beats in a half an hour. All of these estimates were purposefully low, so that people could see the vast amount of blood Galen's theory required the liver to produce. He estimated that the capacity of the heart was , and that every time the heart pumps, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448 of that blood is expelled. This led to Harvey's estimate that about of blood went through the heart every time it pumped. The next estimate he used was that the heart beats 1,000 times every half an hour, which gave 10 pounds 6 ounces of blood in a half an hour, and when this number was multiplied by 48 half hours in a day he realised that the liver would have to produce 498 pounds of blood in a day, more than the weight of the whole body.\nHaving this simple but essential mathematical proportion at hand \u2013 which proved the overall impossible aforementioned role of the liver \u2013 Harvey went on to prove how the blood circulated in a circle by means of countless experiments initially done on serpents and fish: tying their veins and arteries in separate periods of time, Harvey noticed the modifications which occurred; indeed, as he tied the veins, the heart would become empty, while as he did the same to the arteries, the organ would swell up.\nThis process was later performed on the human body (in the image on the right): the physician tied a tight ligature onto the upper arm of a person. This would cut off blood flow from the arteries and the veins. When this was done, the arm below the ligature was cool and pale, while above the ligature it was warm and swollen. The ligature was loosened slightly, which allowed blood from the arteries to come into the arm, since arteries are deeper in the flesh than the veins. When this was done, the opposite effect was seen in the lower arm. It was now warm and swollen. The veins were also more visible since now they were full of blood. Harvey then noticed little bumps in the veins, which he realised were the valves of the veins discovered by his teacher, Hieronymus Fabricius. Harvey tried to push blood in the vein down the arm, but to no avail. When he tried to push it up the arm, it moved quite easily. The same effect was seen in other veins of the body, except the veins in the neck. Those veins were different from the others \u2013 they did not allow blood to flow up, but only down. This led Harvey to believe that the veins allowed blood to flow to the heart, and the valves maintained the one-way flow.\nContrary to a popular misconception, Harvey did not predict the existence of capillaries. His observations convinced him that direct connection between veins and arteries are unnecessary; he wrote \"blood permeates the pores\" in the flesh and it is \"absorbed and imbibed from every part\" by the veins.\nHarvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood was based on inference, not direct observation, and was incompatible with the prevailing paradigm at the time. That paradigm held, among other things, that the blood could flow from one side of the heart to the other. Harvey knew that he was facing an uphill battle:\nBut what remains to be said about the quantity and source of the blood which thus passes, is of so novel and unheard-of character that I not only fear injury to myself from the envy of a few, but I tremble lest I have mankind at large for my enemies, so much doth want and custom, that become as another nature, and doctrine once sown and that hath struck deep root, and respect for antiquity, influence all men : still the die is cast, and my trust is in my love of truth, and the candour that inheres in cultivated minds.\nHarvey's premonitions that his discovery would be met with scepticism, derision, and abuse, were entirely justified. It took twenty years for his theory of the circulation of the blood to be generally accepted.\nViews of the circulation of blood before Harvey.\nAt the time of Harvey's publication, Galen had been an influential medical authority for several centuries. Galen believed that blood passed between the ventricles by means of invisible pores. According to Galen's views, the venous system was quite separate from the arterial system, except when they came in contact through the unseen pores. Arabic scholar Ibn al-Nafis had disputed aspects of Galen's views, providing a model that seems to imply a form of pulmonary circulation in his Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon (1242). Al-Nafis stated that blood moved from the heart to the lungs, where it mixed with air, and then back to the heart, from which it spread to the rest of the body. Harvey's discoveries inevitably and historically came into conflict with Galen's teachings and the publication of his treatise \"De Motu Cordis\" incited considerable controversy within the medical community. Some doctors affirmed they would \"rather err with Galen than proclaim the truth with Harvey.\" Galen incompletely perceived the function of the heart, believing it a \"productor of heat\", while the function of its affluents, the arteries, was that of cooling the blood as the lungs \"...fanned and cooled the heart itself\". Galen thought that during dilation the arteries sucked in air, while during their contraction they discharged vapours through pores in the flesh and skin.\nUntil the 17th century, two separate systems were thought to be involved in blood circulation: the \"natural\" system, containing venous blood which had its origin in the liver, and the \"vital\" system, containing arterial blood and the 'spirits' which flowed from the heart, distributing heat and life to all parts. Like bellows, it was thought the lungs fanned and cooled this vital blood.\nIndependently of Ibn Al-Nafis, Michael Servetus identified pulmonary circulation, but this discovery did not reach the public because it was written down for the first time in the Manuscript of Paris in 1546. It was later published in the theological work which caused his execution in 1553, almost all copies of which were destroyed. In: \"Christianismi Restitutio\", Book V, the Aragonese Miguel Servet (Michel de Villeneuve, 1509?\u20131553) wrote: 'The blood is passed through the pulmonary artery to the pulmonary vein for a lengthy pass through the lungs, during which it becomes red, and gets rid of the sooty fumes by the act of exhalation'. Ideas on circulation of blood were also proposed by the Spanish veterinarian-farrier Francisco de la Reyna in 1546.\nPulmonary circulation was described by Renaldus Columbus, Andrea Cesalpino and Vesalius, before Harvey would provide a refined and complete description of the circulatory system.\n\"On Animal Generation\".\nHarvey's other major work was \"Exercitationes de generatione animalium\" (\"On Animal Generation\"), published in 1651. He had been working on it for many years but might never have finished it without the encouragement of his friend George Ent.\nThe book starts with a description of the development of the hen's egg. The major part is theoretical, dealing with Aristotle's theories and the work of the physicians following Galen and up to Fabricius. Finally, he deals with embryogenesis in viviparous animals, especially hinds and does. The treatment is generally Aristotelian and limited by use of a simple magnifying lens.\nNeedham claims the following achievements for this work.\nLegacy.\nHarvey's whalebone demonstration rod, tipped with silver, resides in the silver room of the museum of the Royal College of Physicians. He used it to point to objects during his lectures.\nSeveral medical buildings and institutions are named after or otherwise commemorate Harvey. The Harveian Society of Edinburgh was founded in 1782 by Dr Andrew Duncan. The Society holds an annual Festival in honour of Harvey where the President of the Society delivers the Harveian Oration, followed by a formal dinner. The venue for the Festival alternates between the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. The Harveian Society of London is a medical society founded in 1831 based in The Medical Society of London, Chandos Street, in Cavendish Square.\nThe Royal College of Physicians of London holds an annual lecture established by William Harvey in 1656 called the Harveian Oration. \nThe Harvey Club of London was founded in Canada in 1919 and is based in the University of Western Ontario. \nThe Harvey Society, found in 1905, is based in New York City and hosts an annual lecture series on recent advances in biomedical sciences. The main lecture theatre of the School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge is named after William Harvey, who was an alumnus of the institute. William Harvey Research Institute at Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry is a research facility focussing on biochemical pharmacology, orthopaedic diseases, endocrinology, genomics, clinical pharmacology and translational medicine and therapeutics. William Harvey Hospital in Ashford, Kent is named after him. Harvey's hometown of Folkestone, Kent also has a statue of him.\nPersonality.\nHarvey was seen as a \"...humorous but extremely precise man...\", and that he was often so immersed in his own thoughts that he would often suffer from insomnia (cured with a simple walk through the house), and how he was always ready for an open and direct conversation. He also loved the darkness, for it is said that it was there where \"...he could best contemplate\", thus sometimes hiding out in caves. A heavy drinker of coffee, Harvey would walk out combing his hair every morning full of energy and enthusiastic spirit through the fields. We have also come to understand Harvey's somewhat unorthodox method of dealing with his gout, here cited completely: \"...his [Harvey's] cure was thus: he would sit with his legs bare...put them into a pail of water till he was almost dead with cold, then betake himself to his stove, and so 'twas gone\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50204", "revid": "7061136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50204", "title": "Squash", "text": "Squash most often refers to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSquash may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50205", "revid": "965257746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50205", "title": "1184 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "50206", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50206", "title": "Fulgencio Batista", "text": "President of Cuba (1940\u20131944; 1952\u20131959)\nFulgencio Batista y Zald\u00edvar (born Rub\u00e9n Zald\u00edvar; January 16, 1901 \u2013 August 6, 1973) was a Cuban military officer, political leader and dictator who played a dominant role in Cuban politics from his initial rise to power in the 1930s until his overthrow in the Cuban Revolution in 1959. He served as president of Cuba from 1940 to 1944, and again from 1952 to his 1959 resignation.\nBatista first came to prominence in the Revolt of the Sergeants, which overthrew the provisional government of Carlos Manuel de C\u00e9spedes y Quesada. Batista then appointed himself chief of the armed forces, with the rank of colonel, and effectively controlled the five-member \"pentarchy\" that functioned as the collective head of state. He maintained control through a series of puppet presidents until 1940, when he was elected president on a populist platform. He then instated the 1940 Constitution of Cuba and presided over Cuban support for the Allies during World War II. After finishing his term in 1944, Batista moved to Florida, returning to Cuba to run for president in 1952. Facing certain electoral defeat, he led a military coup against President Carlos Pr\u00edo Socarr\u00e1s that pre-empted the election.\nBack in power and receiving financial, military and logistical support from the United States government, Batista suspended the 1940 Constitution and revoked most political liberties, including the right to strike. He then aligned with the wealthiest landowners who owned the largest sugar plantations, and presided over a stagnating economy that widened the gap between rich and poor Cubans. Eventually, it reached the point where most of the sugar industry was in U.S. hands, and foreigners owned 70% of the arable land. Batista's repressive government then began to systematically profit from the exploitation of Cuba's commercial interests, by negotiating lucrative relationships both with the American Mafia, who controlled the drug, gambling, and prostitution businesses in Havana, and with large U.S.-based multinational companies who were awarded lucrative contracts. \nTo quell the growing discontent amongst the populace\u2014which was subsequently displayed through frequent student riots and demonstrations\u2014Batista established tighter censorship of the media, while also utilizing his Bureau for the Repression of Communist Activities secret police to carry out wide-scale violence, torture and public executions. These murders mounted in 1957, as socialist ideas became more influential. While exact numbers are unclear, estimates of the death toll attributed to Batista range from hundreds to up to 20,000 victims.\nBatista's efforts to quell the unrest proved not only ineffective, but his tactics were the catalyst to even wider resistance against his regime. During this time, revolutionary leaders Fidel Castro and Che Guevara, founders of the 26th of July Movement, began a revolution that saw a combination of peaceful protests and guerrilla warfare in both rural and urban areas of Cuba between 1956 and 1958. After almost two years of fighting, rebel forces led by Guevara defeated Batista's forces at the Battle of Santa Clara on New Year's Eve, 1958, effectively collapsing the regime. On January 1, 1959, Batista announced his resignation, fleeing the country to the Dominican Republic under the protection of Rafael Trujillo, before settling in Portugal, spending the rest of his life in exile until his death in 1973.\nEarly life.\nBatista was born in the town of Veguita, located in the municipality of Banes, Cuba, in 1901 to Belisario Batista Palermo and Carmela Zald\u00edvar Gonz\u00e1lez, who had fought in the Cuban War of Independence. He was of Spanish, African, Chinese, and possibly some Ta\u00edno descent. Both Batista's parents are believed to have been of mixed race and one may have had Indigenous Caribbean blood. His mother named him Rub\u00e9n and gave him her last name, Zald\u00edvar. His father did not want to register him as a Batista. In the registration records of the Banes courthouse, he was legally Rub\u00e9n Zald\u00edvar until 1939, when he tried to register as a presidential candidate under the name Fulgencio Batista. When it was discovered that no birth certificate existed for a \"Fulgencio Batista\", he had to postpone his candidacy registration and pay 15,000 pesos to the local judge.\nBatista was initially educated at a public school in Banes and later attended night classes at an American Quaker school. He left home at age 14, after the death of his mother. Coming from a humble background, he earned a living as a laborer in the cane fields, docks, and railroads. He was a tailor, mechanic, charcoal vendor and fruit peddler. In 1921, he traveled to Havana, and in April joined the army as a private. After learning shorthand and typing, Batista left the army in 1923, working briefly as a teacher of stenography before enlisting in the \"Guardia Rural\" (rural police). He transferred back to the army as a corporal, becoming secretary to a regimental colonel. In September 1933, he held the rank of sergeant stenographer and as such acted as the secretary of a group of non-commissioned officers who led a \"sergeants' conspiracy\" for better conditions and improved prospects of promotion.\n1933 coup.\nIn 1933, Batista led an uprising called the Sergeants' Revolt, as part of the coup that overthrew the government of Gerardo Machado. Machado was succeeded by Carlos Manuel de C\u00e9spedes y Quesada, who lacked a political coalition that could sustain him and was soon replaced.\nBatista was not originally the leader of the movement. His contemporaries have claimed that he was called to join the conspiracy mainly because he was the only sergeant who had a car.\nA short-lived five-member presidency, known as the Pentarchy of 1933, was established. The Pentarchy included a representative from each anti-Machado faction. Batista was not a member, but controlled Cuba's armed forces. Within days, the representative for the students and professors of the University of Havana, Ram\u00f3n Grau San Mart\u00edn, was made president\u2014and Batista became the Army Chief of Staff, with the rank of colonel, effectively putting him in control of the presidency. The majority of the commissioned officer corps were forced to retire or, some speculate, were killed.\nGrau remained president for just over 100 days before Batista, conspiring with the U.S. envoy Sumner Welles, forced him to resign in January 1934. Grau was replaced by Carlos Mendieta, and within five days the U.S. recognized Cuba's new government, which lasted eleven months. Batista then became the strongman behind a succession of puppet presidents until he was elected president in 1940. After Mendieta, succeeding governments were led by Jos\u00e9 Agripino Barnet (five months) and Miguel Mariano G\u00f3mez (seven months) before Federico Laredo Br\u00fa ruled from December 1936 to October 1940.\nConstitutional presidency (1940\u20131944).\nBatista defeated Grau in the first presidential election (1940) under the new Cuban constitution, and served a four-year term as President of Cuba, the first and to this day only non-white Cuban in that office. Batista was endorsed by the Democratic Socialist Coalition and the original Cuban Communist Party (later known as the Popular Socialist Party), which at the time had little significance and no probability of an electoral victory. This support was primarily due to Batista's early advocacy of strengthening labor laws and his support for labor unions, with which the Communists had close ties, as well as the pro-Allied stance in World War II. Batista also supported corporatism and statism in his first term. Communists attacked the anti-Batista opposition, saying Grau and others were \"fascists\" and \"reactionaries.\" During this term in office, Batista carried out major social reforms and established numerous economic regulations and pro-union policies.\nCuba entered World War II on the side of the Allies on December 9, 1941, declaring war on Japan two days after the attack on Pearl Harbor. On December 11, the Batista government declared war on Germany and Italy. In December 1942, after a friendly visit to Washington, Batista said Latin America would applaud if the Declaration by United Nations called for war with Francisco Franco's Spain, calling the regime fascist.\nBetween presidencies (1944-1952).\nIn 1944, Batista's handpicked successor, Carlos Saladrigas Zayas, was defeated by Grau. In the final months of his presidency, Batista sought to handicap the incoming Grau administration. In a July 17, 1944, dispatch to the U.S. Secretary of State, U.S. Ambassador Spruille Braden wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is becoming increasingly apparent that President Batista intends to discomfit the incoming Administration in every way possible, particularly financially. A systematic raid on the Treasury is in full swing with the result that Dr. Grau will probably find empty coffers when he takes office on October 10. It is blatant that President Batista desires that Dr. Grau San Martin should assume obligations which in fairness and equity should be a matter of settlement by the present Administration.\nShortly after, Batista left Cuba for the United States. \"I just felt safer there,\" he said. He divorced his wife, Elisa God\u00ednez, and married Marta Fern\u00e1ndez in 1945. Two of their four children were born in the United States. For the next eight years, Batista remained in the background, spending time in the Waldorf-Astoria in New York City and a home in Daytona Beach, Florida.\nBatista continued to participate in Cuban politics and was elected to the Cuban Senate \"in absentia\" in 1948. Returning to Cuba, he decided to run for president and received permission from President Grau, whereupon he formed the United Action Party. On taking power he founded the Progressive Action Party, but he never regained his former popular support, though the unions supported him until the end.\nMilitary coup and dictatorship (1952\u20131959).\nIn 1952, Batista again ran for president. In a three-way race, Roberto Agramonte of the Orthodox Party led in all the polls, followed by Carlos Hevia of the Authentic Party. Batista's United Action coalition was running a distant third.\nOn March 10, 1952, three months before the elections, Batista, with army backing, staged a coup and seized power. He ousted outgoing President Carlos Pr\u00edo Socarr\u00e1s, canceled the elections and took control of the government as a provisional president. The United States recognized his government on March 27. When asked by the U.S. government to analyze Batista's Cuba, Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. said:\nThe corruption of the Government, the brutality of the police, the government's indifference to the needs of the people for education, medical care, housing, for social justice and economic justice\u00a0... is an open invitation to revolution.\nEconomy of Cuba.\nUpon his seizure of power, Batista inherited a country that was relatively prosperous for Latin America. According to Batista's government, although a third of Cubans still lived in poverty, Cuba was one of the five most developed countries in the region. In the 1950s, Cuba's gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was roughly equal to that of Italy at the time, although still only a sixth of that of the United States. Moreover, although corruption and inequality were rife under Batista, Cuban industrial workers' wages rose significantly. In 1953, the average Cuban family only had an income of $6.00 a week, 15% to 20% of the labor force was chronically unemployed, and only a third of the homes had running water. Despite this, according to the International Labour Organization, the average industrial salary in Cuba became the world's eighth-highest in 1958, and the average agricultural wage was higher than some European nations (although, according to one sample from 1956 to 1957, agricultural workers could only find employment for an average of 123 days per year while farm owners, rural tenants and sharecroppers worked an average of only 135 days per year). Not like in his first term, where he advocated for Corporatism, he began to advocate for Economic liberalism.\nRelationship with organized crime.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Brothels flourished. A major industry grew up around them; government officials received bribes, policemen collected protection money. Prostitutes could be seen standing in doorways, strolling the streets, or leaning from windows. One report estimated that 11,500 of them worked their trade in Havana. Beyond the outskirts of the capital, beyond the slot machines, was one of the poorest, and most beautiful countries in the Western world.\u2014\u200a\nThroughout the 1950s, Havana served as \"a hedonistic playground for the world's elite\", producing sizable gambling, prostitution and drug profits for the American mafia, corrupt law-enforcement officials, and their politically elected cronies. In the assessment of the Cuban-American historian Louis Perez, \"Havana was then what Las Vegas has become.\" Relatedly, it is estimated that by the end of the 1950s the city of Havana had 270 brothels. In addition, drugs, be it marijuana or cocaine, were so plentiful at the time that one American magazine in 1950 proclaimed \"Narcotics are hardly more difficult to obtain in Cuba than a shot of rum. And only slightly more expensive.\" As a result, the playwright Arthur Miller described Batista's Cuba in \"The Nation\" as \"hopelessly corrupt, a Mafia playground, (and) a bordello for Americans and other foreigners.\"\nIn a bid to profit from such an environment, Batista established lasting relationships with organized crime, notably with American mobsters Meyer Lansky and Lucky Luciano, and under his rule Havana became known as \"the Latin \". Batista and Lansky formed a friendship and business relationship that flourished for a decade. During a stay at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York in the late 1940s, it was mutually agreed that, in return for kickbacks, Batista would give Lansky and the Mafia control of Havana's racetracks and casinos. After World War II, Luciano was paroled from prison on the condition that he permanently return to Sicily. Luciano secretly moved to Cuba, where he worked to resume control over American Mafia operations. Luciano also ran a number of casinos in Cuba with the sanction of Batista, though the American government eventually succeeded in pressuring the Batista government to deport him.\nBatista encouraged large-scale gambling in Havana. In 1955, he announced that Cuba would grant a gaming license to anyone who invested US$1\u00a0million in a hotel or $200,000 in a new nightclub\u2014and that the government would provide matching public funds for construction, a 10-year tax exemption, and waive duties on imported equipment and furnishings for new hotels. Each casino would pay the government $250,000 for the license, plus a percentage of the profits. The policy omitted background checks, as required for casino operations in the United States, which opened the door for casino investors with illegally obtained funds. Cuban contractors with the right connections made windfalls by importing, duty-free, more materials than needed for new hotels and selling the surplus to others. It was rumored that, besides the $250,000 to obtain a license, an additional \"under the table\" fee was sometimes required.\nLansky became a prominent figure in Cuba's gambling operations, and exerted influence over Batista's casino policies. The Mafia's Havana Conference was held on December 22, 1946, at the Hotel Nacional de Cuba; this was the first full-scale meeting of American underworld leaders since the Chicago meeting in 1932. Lansky set about cleaning up the games at the Montmartre Club, which soon became the \"place to be\" in Havana. He also wanted to open a casino in the Hotel Nacional, the most elegant hotel in Havana. Batista endorsed Lansky's idea over the objections of American expatriates such as Ernest Hemingway, and the renovated casino wing opened for business in 1955 with a show by Eartha Kitt. The casino was an immediate success.\nAs the new hotels, nightclubs, and casinos opened, Batista collected his share of the profits. Nightly, the \"bagman\" for his wife collected 10% of the profits at Santo Trafficante's casinos, the Sans Souci cabaret, and the casinos in the hotels Sevilla-Biltmore, Commodoro, Deauville, and Capri (partly owned by the actor George Raft). His take from the Lansky casinos\u2014his prized Habana Riviera, the Hotel Nacional, the Montmartre Club, and others\u2014was said to be 30%. Lansky was said to have personally contributed millions of dollars per year to Batista's Swiss bank accounts.\nSupport of U.S. business and government.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the beginning of 1959 United States companies owned about 40 percent of the Cuban sugar lands\u2014almost all the cattle ranches\u201490 percent of the mines and mineral concessions\u201480 percent of the utilities\u2014practically all the oil industry\u2014and supplied two-thirds of Cuba's imports.\nIn a manner that antagonized the Cuban people, the U.S. government used its influence to advance the interests of and increase the profits of the private American companies, which \"dominated the island's economy\". By the late 1950s, U.S. financial interests owned 90% of Cuban mines, 80% of its public utilities, 50% of its railways, 40% of its sugar production and 25% of its bank deposits\u2014some $1 billion in total. U.S. financial interests in the region were aided by Batista\u2019s announcement of a decree in September 1958 which allowed U.S. corporations to control \"all transactions originating or consummated outside of Cuba without being subject to Cuban taxes\" by setting up a central office in the country. According to historian Louis A. P\u00e9rez Jr., author of the book \"On Becoming Cuban\", \"Daily life had developed into a relentless degradation, with the complicity of political leaders and public officials who operated at the behest of American interests.\"\nBy 1957, U.S. private investments made since the military coup totaled in excess of $350 million, aided by a series of measures introduced by Batista meant to encourage foreign investment through tax and customs duty exemptions in a mutually beneficial deal, wherein U.S. companies were able to hold monopolies in public utilities and consumer goods in exchange for financial aid and rebuilding of infrastructure. As a symbol of this relationship, ITT Corporation, an American-owned multinational telephone company, presented Batista with a Gold Plated Telephone, as an \"expression of gratitude\" for the \"excessive telephone rate increase\", at least according to Senator John F. Kennedy, that Batista granted at the urging of the U.S. government.\nEarl E.T. Smith, former U.S. Ambassador to Cuba, testified to the U.S. Senate in 1960 that, \"Until Castro, the U.S. was so overwhelmingly influential in Cuba that the American ambassador was the second most important man, sometimes even more important than the Cuban president.\" In addition, nearly \"all aid\" from the U.S. to Batista's government was in the \"form of weapons assistance\", which \"merely strengthened the Batista dictatorship\" and \"completely failed to advance the economic welfare of the Cuban people\". The U.S. Department of Defense provided equipment and arms valued over $16 million and organized officer training for over 500 Cuban officers during the Batista period. Such actions later \"enabled Castro and the Communists to encourage the growing belief that America was indifferent to Cuban aspirations for a decent life.\"\nAccording to historian and author James S. Olson, the U.S. government essentially became a \"co-conspirator\" in the arrangement because of Batista's strong opposition to communism, which, in the rhetoric of the Cold War, seemed to maintain business stability and a pro-U.S. posture on the island. Thus, in the view of Olson, \"The U.S. government had no difficulty in dealing with him, even if he was a hopeless despot.\" On October 6, 1960, Senator John F. Kennedy, in the midst of his campaign for the U.S. presidency, decried Batista's relationship with the U.S. government and criticized the Eisenhower administration for supporting him. The Eisenhower administration\u2019s expenses on military aid for Batista\u2019s regime increased from $400,000 in 1953 to $3 million by 1958. The U.S. subsequently suspended the shipment of combat arms to the Cuban government in March 1958, with the Acting Secretary of State Christian A. Herter asserting that \"in our best judgement, we could not continue to supply weapons to a government which was resorting to such repressive measures of internal security as to have alienated some 80 percent of the Cuban people.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cI loved Havana and was horrified by the way this lovely city had unfortunately been transformed into a huge casino and brothel for American businessmen [\u2026]. My fellow countrymen walked the streets, picked up fourteen-year-old Cuban girls and threw coins just for the pleasure of watching men roll around in the sewers and picking them up. One wondered how Cubans \u2013 seeing this reality \u2013 could regard the United States in any other way than with hatred.\u201d\u2014\u200a\nBatista, Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe that there is no country in the world including any and all the countries under colonial domination, where economic colonization, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, in part owing to my country's policies during the Batista regime. I approved the proclamation which Fidel Castro made in the Sierra Maestra, when he justifiably called for justice and especially yearned to rid Cuba of corruption. I will even go further: to some extent it is as though Batista was the incarnation of a number of sins on the part of the United States. Now we shall have to pay for those sins. In the matter of the Batista regime, I am in agreement with the first Cuban revolutionaries. That is perfectly clear.\u2014\u200a\nOn July 26, 1953, just over a year after Batista's second coup, a small group of revolutionaries attacked the Moncada Barracks in Santiago. Government forces easily defeated the assault and jailed its leaders, while many others fled the country. The primary leader of the attack, Fidel Castro, was a young attorney who had run for parliament in the canceled 1952 elections. Although Castro was never officially nominated, he felt that Batista's coup had sidetracked what would have been a promising political career for him. In the wake of the Moncada assault, Batista suspended constitutional guarantees and increasingly relied on police tactics in an attempt to \"frighten the population through open displays of brutality.\"\nBatista held an election in 1954, running as the candidate of a political coalition that included the Progressive Action Party, the Radical Union Party and the Liberal Party. The opposition divided into abstentionists and electoralists. The abstentionists favored boycotting the elections regardless of the circumstances in which they were held, whereas the electoralists sought certain rights and guarantees to participate. The CIA had predicted that Batista would use any means necessary to ensure he won the election. Batista lived up to their expectations, utilizing fraud and intimidation to secure his presidency. This led most of the other parties to boycott the elections. Former President Ram\u00f3n Grau San Mart\u00edn, leading the electoralist factions of the Cuban Revolutionary Party, participated through the political campaign but withdrew from the campaign days before election day, charging that his supporters had been terrorized. Thus Batista was elected president with the support of 45.6% of registered voters. Despite the boycott, Grau received the support of 6.8% of those who voted. The remaining voters abstained.\nBy late 1955, student riots and anti-Batista demonstrations had become frequent, and unemployment became a problem as graduates entering the workforce could not find jobs. These were dealt with through increasing repression. All youth were seen as suspected revolutionaries. Due to its continued opposition to Batista and the large amount of revolutionary activity taking place on its campus, the University of Havana was temporarily closed on November 30, 1956 (it did not reopen until 1959 under the first revolutionary government). On March 13, 1957, student leader Jos\u00e9 Antonio Echeverr\u00eda was killed by police outside Radio Reloj in Havana after announcing that Batista had been killed in a student attack on the Presidential Palace. In reality, Batista survived, and the students of the Federation of University Students (FEU) and the Directorio Revolucionario (DR) who led the attack were killed in the response by the military and police. Castro quickly condemned the attack, since July 26 Movement had not participated in it.\nIn April 1956, Batista called popular military leader Col. Ram\u00f3n Barqu\u00edn back to Cuba from his post as military attach\u00e9 to the United States. Believing Barqu\u00edn would support his rule, Batista promoted him to General. However, Barqu\u00edn's \"Conspiraci\u00f3n de los Puros\" (Conspiracy of the Pure) was already underway and had already progressed too far. On April 6, 1956, Barqu\u00edn led hundreds of career officers in a coup attempt, but was frustrated by Lieutenant R\u00edos Morej\u00f3n, who betrayed the plan. Barqu\u00edn was sentenced to solitary confinement for eight years on the Isle of Pines, while some officers were sentenced to death for treason. Many others were allowed to remain in the military without reprimand.\nThe purge of the officer corps contributed to the inability of the Cuban army to successfully combat Castro and his guerrillas. Batista's police responded to increasing popular unrest by torturing and killing young men in the cities. However, his army was ineffective against the rebels based in the Sierra Maestra and Escambray Mountains. Another possible explanation for the failure to crush the rebellion was offered by author Carlos Alberto Montaner: \"Batista does not finish Fidel out of greed\u00a0... His is a government of thieves. To have this small guerrilla band in the mountains is to his advantage, so that he can order special defense expenditures that they can steal.\" Batista's rule became increasingly unpopular among the population, and the Soviet Union began to secretly support Castro. Some of Batista's generals also criticized him in later years, saying that Batista's excessive interference in his generals' military plans to defeat the rebels hampered Army morale and rendered all operations ineffective.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn an effort to gather information about Castro's army, Batista's secret police pulled in people for questioning. Many innocent people were tortured by Batista's secret police, while suspects, including youth, were publicly executed as a warning to others who were considering joining the insurgency. Additionally, \"Hundreds of mangled bodies were left hanging from lamp posts or dumped in the streets in a grotesque variation of the Spanish colonial practice of public executions.\" The brutal behavior backfired and increased support for the guerrillas. In 1958, 45 organizations signed an open letter supporting July 26 Movement, among them national bodies representing lawyers, architects, dentists, accountants, and social workers.\nThe United States supplied Batista with planes, ships, tanks and the latest technology, such as napalm, which he used against the insurgency. However, in March 1958, the U.S. announced it would stop selling arms to the Cuban government. Soon after, the U.S. imposed an arms embargo, further weakening the government's position, although landowners and others who benefited from the government continued to support Batista.\nElections were scheduled for June 1958, as required by the Constitution, but were delayed until November 1958, when Castro and the revolutionaries called for a general strike and placed several bombs in several areas of the country. Three main candidates ran in the elections: Carlos M\u00e1rquez Sterling of the Party of the Free People, former President Ram\u00f3n Grau San Mart\u00edn of the Cuban Revolutionary Party-Authentic, and Andr\u00e9s Rivero Ag\u00fcero of the government coalition. According to Carlos M\u00e1rquez Sterling, all three were threatened by Castro, and several assassination attempts were made on both Ram\u00f3n Grau San Mart\u00edn and Carlos M\u00e1rquez Sterling. On Election Day, estimates on the turnout range from 30 to 50% in the areas where voting took place, which did not include parts of Las Villas and Oriente, which were controlled by Castro. M\u00e1rquez Sterling also stated that the initial results were favorable to him, but the military ordered the counting to stop as they changed the actual ballots for fraudulent ones. However, Grau San Mart\u00edn, as he had previously done in the 1954 elections, withdrew his candidacy within a few hours of the election day. Batista declared Rivero Ag\u00fcero the winner.\nThe U.S. rejected the results of the elections and announced plans to withhold diplomatic recognition of the Rivero Ag\u00fcero government. The American ambassador to Cuba Earl Smith informed Ag\u00fcero that the United States would not give aid and support to his government. Smith also informed Batista that the U.S. believed him incapable of maintaining effective control and that he should retire.\nThroughout December 1958, in the leadup to the Battle of Santa Clara, top military commanders began plotting the removal of Batista. On December 24, General Eulogio Cantillo secretly met with Fidel Castro and agreed to arrest Batista. Cantillo also agreed that his new government would merge with the 26th of July Movement to create a new united government.\nOn December 30, 1958, Cantillo notified Castro that coup plans had changed. Cantillo privately advised Batista that he should flee the country. Around midnight on January 1, 1959, during the Triumph of the Revolution, Batista, realizing that his presidency could not continue, informed his cabinet and top officials at Camp Columbia, the Havana headquarters of the Cuban Constitutional Army, that he was resigning and would leave the country. At about 3:00\u00a0a.m., Batista boarded a plane in the Camp Columbia airfield with 40 of his supporters and immediate family members and flew to Ciudad Trujillo in the Dominican Republic. A second plane flew out of Havana later in the night, carrying ministers, officers, and the Governor of Havana, and a third plane followed. Batista took along a personal fortune of more than $300\u00a0million that he had amassed through bribery and corruption. Critics accused Batista and his supporters of taking as much as $700\u00a0million in fine art and cash with them as they fled into exile.\nAs news of the fall of Batista's government spread through Havana, \"The New York Times\" described jubilant crowds pouring into the streets and automobile horns honking. The black and red flag of the July 26 Movement waved on cars and buildings. The atmosphere was chaotic. On January 8, 1959, Castro and his army rolled victoriously into Havana. Already denied entry to the United States, Batista sought asylum in Mexico, which also refused him. Portugal's dictator Ant\u00f3nio Salazar allowed him to settle there on the condition that he completely abstain from politics.\nHistorians and primary documents estimate between hundreds and 20,000 Cubans were killed under the Batista regime.\nHowever, the 20,000 number is disputed by several historians, which considered it as \u2018propaganda\u2019. According to French historian Jeannine Verd\u00e8s-Leroux:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDisputed death count.\nPeople were killed, with estimates ranging from hundreds to a maximum of 20,000, although this high figure is disputed.\nThe figure of 20,000 was first written in \"Bohemia\" \u2013 the most popular magazine in Cuba \u2013 by Enrique de la Osa. Historical consensus maintains that De la Osa \u2013 a hardline communist and fierce friend to Fidel Castro \u2013 completely fabricated this figure, among many other fabrications he wrote in the famous section of \"Bohemia\" he directed that was called \"\"En Cuba.\"\" Fidel Castro later positioned Enrique de la Osa to become director of \"Bohemia,\" and forced Miguel \u00c1ngel Quevedo into exile.\nThese tactics ultimately failed to quell unrest and instead were the catalyst for more widespread resistance. For two years (December 1956 \u2013 December 1958) Fidel Castro's 26th of July Movement and other rebelling elements led an urban- and rural-based guerrilla uprising against Batista's government, which culminated in his eventual defeat by the rebels under the command of Che Guevara at the Battle of Santa Clara on New Year's Day 1959. Batista immediately fled the island with an amassed personal fortune to the Dominican Republic, where strongman and previous military ally Rafael Trujillo held power. Batista eventually found political asylum in Ant\u00f3nio Salazar's Portugal, where he first lived on the island of Madeira and then in Estoril. He was involved in business activities in Francoist Spain and was staying there in Marbella at the time of his death from a heart attack in 1973.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nBatista married Elisa God\u00ednez y G\u00f3mez on July 10, 1926. They had three children: Mirta Caridad (1927\u20132010), Elisa Aleida (born 1933), and Fulgencio Rub\u00e9n Batista God\u00ednez (1933\u20132007). By all accounts, she was devoted to him and their children throughout their marriage, and their daughter remembered them as a \"happy, young couple\" until their sudden divorce. Much to her surprise, he divorced her in October 1945 against her will in order to marry his longtime mistress Marta Fern\u00e1ndez Miranda.\nHe married Fern\u00e1ndez on November 28, 1945, shortly after his divorce became final, and they had five children: Jorge Luis (born 1942), Roberto Francisco (born 1947), Carlos Manuel (1950\u20131969), Fulgencio Jos\u00e9 (born 1953) and Marta Mar\u00eda Batista Fern\u00e1ndez (born 1957).\nExtramarital affairs.\nBatista was an inveterate philanderer who engaged in numerous extramarital affairs throughout his first marriage. He cheated on his first wife with multiple women, and his children eventually became aware of his relationships. His first wife, who supported her husband throughout his political career and found his philandering humiliating, never considered divorce and tolerated his multiple affairs. However, Batista became enamored with the much younger Marta Fern\u00e1ndez Miranda, who became his longtime mistress. He filed divorce papers shortly before his first grandchild was born. His first wife and their children were astounded and devastated by the divorce.\nIn 1935, he had with his mistress Marina Est\u00e9vez an illegitimate daughter, Fermina L\u00e1zara Carmela de las Mercedes Batista Est\u00e9vez, whom he supported financially.\nDeath.\nAfter he fled to Portugal, Batista lived in Madeira, then later in Estoril. He died of a heart attack on August 6, 1973, in Marbella, Spain.\nMarta Fern\u00e1ndez Miranda de Batista, Batista's widow, died on October 2, 2006. Roberto Batista, her son, said that she died at her home in West Palm Beach, Florida, US. She had suffered from Alzheimer's disease.\nPolitical and economics views.\nDuring his first term he advocated for corporatism and statism, however after his first term he began to embrace economic liberalism.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50208", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50208", "title": "Porvoo", "text": "City in Uusimaa, Finland\nPorvoo (; ; ) is a city in Finland. It is located on the south coast of the country, on the Gulf of Finland. Porvoo lies in the eastern part of the Uusimaa region. The population of Porvoo is approximately , while the sub-region has a population of approximately . It is the most populous municipality in Finland, and the 15th most populous urban area in the country.\nPorvoo is located on the southern coast of Finland, approximately east of the city border of Helsinki and about from the city centre. Porvoo was one of the six medieval towns of Finland, along with Turku, Ulvila, Rauma, Naantali and Vyborg, and is first mentioned as a city in texts from the 14th century. Porvoo is the seat of the Swedish-speaking Diocese of Borg\u00e5 of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. Porvoo briefly served as the capital of the former Eastern Uusimaa region.\nPorvoo Old Town (; ) is a popular tourist destination, known for its well-preserved 18th- and 19th-century buildings, and the 15th-century Porvoo Cathedral. The Old Town and the Porvoonjoki River Valley are recognized as, together, one of the National landscapes of Finland. \nPorvoo is a bilingual municipality with Finnish and Swedish as its official languages. The population consists of Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages.\nThe municipalities neighbouring Porvoo are Askola, Loviisa, Myrskyl\u00e4, Pornainen, and Sipoo; and the sub-region maintained by Porvoo includes Askola, Myrskyl\u00e4 and Pukkila.\nEtymology.\nThe town received its name from a Swedish medieval fortress near the river Porvoonjoki, which flows through the town. The name \"Porvoo\" is the Fennicised version of the Swedish name \"\", which is derived from , meaning \"castle\" and , \"river\".\nHeraldry.\nThe coat of arms of Porvoo, based on the medieval seal of the city, is \"Azure [blue], a tulip-shaped letter C argent [silver].\" The main object in the arms has been interpreted as either a fire iron or the letter C, referring to the Latin word for \"castle\" (). A version of the arms redrawn by Gustaf von Numers was approved for official use by the Porvoo City Council on March 23, 1960, and the Ministry of the Interior confirmed the use of the coat of arms on June 1 the same year.\nHistory.\nThe area of Porvoo has been inhabited since the Stone Age. In prehistoric times, the river Porvoonjoki was a route of commerce for Finnish tribal Tavastians who primarily inhabited the inland regions. The Tavastians also had some permanent settlements in the area, such as the village of Hattula (later Str\u00f6msberg), which was named after an inland Tavastian village. The original name of the river Porvoonjoki was possibly \"Kukinjoki\". The name derives from the name of the trade vessel cog which was a common merchant ship in the Baltic Sea in medieval times. The early center of the area was \"Saksala\", meaning \"the place of the Germans\", and deriving from the merchants who were trading in Saksala.\nPorvoo was colonised by Swedes in the 13th and 14th centuries after the so-called Second Crusade against Tavastians in 1249\u20131250. The colonisation was led by the Catholic Church and the kingdom of Sweden. The colonists originated from Svealand, and were provided with seeds, cattle and, tax exemption for four years.\nThe oldest known written mentions of Porvoo are from the early 14th century. In circa 1380, Porvoo became the third town in Finland to be granted official town rights, after Turku in 1229 and Ulvila in 1365. However, it is also claimed to have been founded as early as 1347, which would make it the second oldest after Turku. Due to land rise and loss of shipping access, Ulvila lost town rights to nearby Pori in 1558.\nWhen Sweden lost the city of Vyborg to Russia in 1721, the episcopal see was moved to Porvoo in 1723. At this time, Porvoo was the second largest city in Finland.\nIn 1760, roughly two-thirds of all buildings in Porvoo burned to the ground in a conflagration. During rebuilding, the city planning wasn't altered, instead new buildings were built upon the existing medieval foundations.\nAfter the conquest of Finland by Russian armies in 1808, Sweden had to cede Finland to Russia in 1809 (the Treaty of Fredrikshamn). The Diet of Porvoo in 1809 was a landmark in the History of Finland as tsar Alexander I made Finland an autonomous Grand Duchy. In 1923, six years after Finland's independence, the former Diocese of Vyborg, which operated in Porvoo, was replaced by a current Swedish-speaking diocese of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, the Diocese of Porvoo.\nThe \"Porvoo Common Statement\" is a report issued at the conclusion of theological conversations by official representatives of four Anglican churches and eight Nordic and Baltic Lutheran churches in 1989\u20131992. It established the Porvoo Communion, so named after the Porvoo Cathedral where the Eucharist was celebrated on the final Sunday of the conversations leading to the Statement.\nThe old city of Porvoo was formally disestablished and the new city of Porvoo founded in 1997, when the city of Porvoo and the rural municipality of Porvoo were consolidated.\nUrban development.\nOld Town.\nThe town is famed for its \"Old Town\" (' in Finnish, ' in Swedish), a dense medieval street pattern with predominantly wooden houses from the 17th and 18th centuries. The Old Town came close to being demolished in the 19th century by a new urban plan for the city, but the plan was canceled due to a popular resistance headed by Count Louis Sparre. With the need for growth, a plan was envisioned for a new town built adjacent to the Old Town, following a grid plan, but with houses also built of wood. Jokikatu (located eastside of the Porvoonjoki River) is one of Porvoo's pedestrian streets, and like the other similar streets of the Old Town, it also includes a variety of restaurants, coffeehouses, antique shops and other stores.\nThe central point of the old town is the medieval, stone and brick Porvoo Cathedral. The cathedral gave its name to the Porvoo Communion, an inter-church agreement between a number of Anglican and Lutheran denominations. The cathedral is reminiscent of similarly aged churches across Finland, such as the Church of St. Lawrence, Vantaa, as they were designed by the same person, the anonymous German architect \"Pernajan mestari\". The Diocese of Borg\u00e5 that unites the Swedish speaking lutheran congregations, resides here. The cathedral has burned down 5 times. The latest fire happened on 29 May 2006; the roof was totally destroyed but the interior is largely intact. A drunken youth had started a fire at the church, unaware of recent tar work and nearby tar containers, accidentally causing a large conflagration. He was later sentenced to a short prison term and restitutions of 4.3 million euro.\nThe Old Town is a significant source of tourism in the area. Visitors to the capital Helsinki can embark on day trips to visit the older city. The Old Town also hosts various events, such as an annual Christmas market.\nLater developments.\nBy the end of the 20th century, there was pressure to develop the essentially untouched western side of the river. There was concern that growth would necessitate the construction of a second bridge across the river into the town, thus putting further strain on the aging wooden town. An architectural competition was held in 1990, the winning entry of which proposed building the second bridge. Plans for the western side of the river have progressed under the direction of architect Tuomas Siitonen, and both a vehicle bridge and a pedestrian bridge have been built. The design for new housing is based on a typology derived from the old storehouses on the opposite side of the river. Yet another new development entails the construction of a large business park called King's Gate (, ), which is under construction.\nThe Porvoo railway station does not have a regular train service, but special museum trains from Kerava (either with steam locomotives or former VR diesel railcars from the 1950s) operate on summer weekends.\nThe new hotel called Runo Hotel was opened in the old town of Porvoo on May 31, 2021.\nSubdivisions.\nDistricts.\nHornhattula, Joonaanm\u00e4ki (Jonasbacken), Jernb\u00f6le, Kaupunginhaka (Stadshagen), Keskusta (Centrum), Etel\u00e4-Kev\u00e4tkumpu (S\u00f6dra V\u00e5rberga), Pohjois-Kev\u00e4tkumpu (Norra V\u00e5rberga), Myllym\u00e4ki (Kvarnbacken), N\u00e4si (N\u00e4se), Pappilanm\u00e4ki (Pr\u00e4stg\u00e5rdsbacken), Skaftk\u00e4rr, Suistola, Vanha Porvoo (Gamla Borg\u00e5).\nSuburbs.\nHamari (Hammars), Aunela (\u00c5n\u00e4s), Eestinm\u00e4ki (Estbacka), Gammelbacka, Huhtinen (Huktis), Katajam\u00e4ki (Ensbacka), Kev\u00e4tkumpu (V\u00e5rberga), Kokonniemi (Uddas), Kuninkaanportti (Kungsporten), Pappilanpelto, Peippola (Pepot), Tarkkinen (Tarkis), Tarmola (\u00d6stermalm).\nVillages.\nSuomenkyl\u00e4.\nSuomenkyl\u00e4 () is a village north of the centre of Porvoo and beside the Porvoo river. Suomenkyl\u00e4 has an old school founded by Johannes Linnankoski in 1898. The village of Suomenkyl\u00e4 also has two burial places from the Bronze Age.\nKerkkoo.\nKerkkoo () is a village north of the centre of Porvoo and beside the Porvoo river. It has an active school that is over 100 years old. In the village of Kerkkoo, archeologists and townspeople found a stone axe from the Bronze Age.\nOther.\nAli-Vekkoski (S\u00f6derveckoski), Anttila (Andersb\u00f6le), Baggb\u00f6le, Bengtsby (Pentinkyl\u00e4), Bjurb\u00f6le, Boe (H\u00e4ih\u00e4), Bosg\u00e5rd, Brattn\u00e4s, Eerola (Eriksdal), Eestinm\u00e4ki (Estbacka), Em\u00e4salo (Emsal\u00f6), Epoo (Ebbo), Fagersta, Gammelbacka, Gr\u00e4nn\u00e4s, G\u00e4ddrag, Haikkoo (Haiko), Henttala, Hinthaara (Hindh\u00e5r), Homman\u00e4s, Huhtinen, Hummelsund, Ilola (Illby), Jakari (Jackarby), J\u00e4rnb\u00f6le, Kaarenkyl\u00e4 (Karsby), Kalax (Kaalahti), Kallola, Kardrag, Karleby (Kaarlenkyl\u00e4), Kiiala (Kiala), Kilpilahti (Sk\u00f6ldvik), Klemetti (Klemetsby), Kortisbacka, Kreppelby, Kroksn\u00e4s, Kr\u00e5k\u00f6, Kulloo (Kullo), Kurb\u00f6le, Kuris, Londb\u00f6le, Mickelsb\u00f6le, Munkkala (Munkby), Mustijoki (Svarts\u00e5), Myllykyl\u00e4 (Molnby), Norike, Nyg\u00e5rd, Onas, Orrby (Orrenkyl\u00e4), Pappilanm\u00e4ki (Pr\u00e4stg\u00e5rdsbacken), Peippola (Pepot), Pellinki (Pellinge), Piirlahti (Pirlax), Ramsholmen, Renum, Saksala (Saxby), Sannainen (Sann\u00e4s), Seitlahti (Seitlax), Sikil\u00e4 (Siggb\u00f6le), Skavarb\u00f6le, Sondby, Stensb\u00f6le, Sund\u00f6 (Suni), Svartb\u00e4ck, Tamminiemi (Ekn\u00e4s), Tarkkinen (Tarkis), Teissala (Teisala), Tolkkinen (Tolkis), Tirmo (Tirmoo), Treksil\u00e4 (Dr\u00e4gsby), Tuorila (Torasbacka), Tyysteri (Tjusterby), Vaarlahti (Varlax), Vanhamoisio (Gammelg\u00e5rd), Veckj\u00e4rvi (Vekj\u00e4rvi), Virtaala (Str\u00f6msberg), Virvik, Voolahti (V\u00e5lax), V\u00e4stermunkby, Ylike, Yli-Vekkoski (Norrveckoski), \u00c5by, \u00c5minsby.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Porvoo has inhabitants, making it the most populous municipality in Finland. The Porvoo region has a population of .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Porvoo is officially bilingual, with both Finnish and Swedish as official languages. As of 2024[ [update]], the majority of the population, persons (), spoke Finnish as their first language. The number of Swedish speakers was persons () of the population. Foreign languages were spoken by of the population. As English and Swedish - or Finnish for Swedish speakers - are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon.\nAt least 50 different languages are spoken in Porvoo. The most common foreign languages are Russian (1.4%), Estonian (1.2%), Arabic (0.8%) and Albanian (0.8%).\nImmigration.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there were 4,972 persons with a foreign background living in Porvoo, or 9% of the population. The number of residents who were born abroad was 4,840, or 9% of the population. The number of persons with foreign citizenship living in Porvoo was 3,299. Most foreign-born citizens came from the former Soviet Union, Estonia, Sweden, Vietnam and Ukraine.\nThe relative share of immigrants in Porvoo's population is slightly below the national average. Moreover, the city's new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years.\nReligion.\nIn 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 64.8% of the population of Porvoo. Other religious groups accounted for 2.2% of the population. 33.0% of the population had no religious affiliation.\nEconomy.\nIn 2011, there were 20,312 jobs in Porvoo, distributed as follows: primary production 1.6 per cent, processing 32.5 per cent and services 64.7 per cent. In December 2012, the unemployment rate in Porvoo was 8.4 per cent, compared to an average of 10.7 per cent in the rest of the country. At that time, there were 3,389 business locations in the city. According to Statistics Finland, more companies were established in Porvoo in 2009\u20132013 than closed down, and the number of companies has increased by about 140 each year. According to the Eastern Uusimaa Viability Survey, in 2013 there were a few large companies and a few medium-sized companies in the Porvoo region, but the majority (86 per cent) were companies with less than five employees.\nIn 2014, the largest employers in Porvoo were Neste (2,000 jobs in Porvoo), Borealis Polymers (962), Ensto (430), Viessman Refrigeration Systems (414), Varuboden-Osla (300) and Bilfinger Industrial Services Finland (299).\nThe Satakuntaliitto's Satamittari measures the competitiveness of Finnish regions annually. In 2012, the Porvoo region ranked number one. In 2013, there were 70 sub-regions involved, which were assessed using six factors: labor productivity, employment rate, innovation, level of education, business dynamics and industrial dominance. The Porvoo region ranked fourth after Vaasa, Helsinki and Tampere. The region's labor productivity and industrial intensity were the highest in Finland, but the employment rate and level of education were also at the highest level.\nSports.\nThe local team Borg\u00e5 Akilles plays the sport of bandy, in the highest division, Bandyliiga, and has become Finnish champions twice. The American football team Porvoo Butchers has been operating in Porvoo since 1986, and it is one of the most successful teams in Vaahteraliiga.\nSami Hyypi\u00e4, a former football player for Liverpool and the Finnish national team, originated from Porvoo.\nLauri Happonen, better known as Cyanide, a retired League of Legends professional player, is from Porvoo.\nCulture.\nFood.\nA well-known Porvoo delicacy, a Runeberg torte, was developed by a local pastry master, and it is said that J. L. Runeberg ate them for breakfast. Fredrika Runeberg, the wife of the national poet also made tortes for her husband using the substances that happened to be found in the cupboards: wheat and breadcrumbs, biscuit crumbs, almonds, apple jam and sugar.\nIn addition to Runeberg torte, the second parish dish in Porvoo was grilled herring with onion rings and dill in the 1980s. Pellinki's fish soup and nettle soup were chosen as the main dishes of the Porvoo countryside.\nPorvoo is also known for its local confectionery and ice cream factories, the most notable being the Brunberg Chocolate Factory and the Old Porvoo Ice Cream Factory ().\nLiterature.\nJ. L. Runeberg, today known as the \"national poet of Finland\", lived in Porvoo from 1837 until his death. His home has served as a museum since 1882.\nBorg\u00e5 Gymnasium in Porvoo is home to Finland's oldest public library from 1728. The oldest works in the library, which consists of rare works, are from the 15th century, and the collection includes, among other things, Mikael Agricola's original \"Se Wsi Testamenti\" from 1548. Today it functions as a museum library and is not open to the public.\nTransport.\nPorvoo is on the route of the E18 road from Helsinki to Saint Petersburg, and the Porvoo Highway (part of the Finnish national road 7) along that route is one of the most important transport connections to Helsinki. Other important road connections are the Finnish Regional road 170 going via Sipoo to Helsinki, which continues from the East Helsinki area to the capital under the name It\u00e4v\u00e4yl\u00e4, and the main road 55 leading northwest, via Monninkyl\u00e4 of Askola, to the M\u00e4nts\u00e4l\u00e4 municipality.\nIt is currently the largest Finnish municipality without scheduled railway services, since passenger rail services to Porvoo ended in 1981 and freight services in 1990, however proposals exist to link Porvoo to the rail network as part of a new rail line from Helsinki to Kouvola via a tunnel between Pasila and Helsinki Airport, the It\u00e4rata. There is no airport at all in Porvoo, but another airport in the Helsinki metropolitan area is planned for the Backas area, which would serve the traffic of cargo and small airlines.\nFinland's biggest port by total cargo tonnage is the Port of Kilpilahti (Sk\u00f6ldvik) located on the outskirts of Porvoo. In Porvoo River, on the eastern bank of the river right in the city center, there is a guest marina. In the village of Hamari, there is also an opportunity for visiting boats to anchor in the breakwater. Also, the ferry connection favored by tourism runs between Helsinki and Porvoo on the MS \"J. L. Runeberg\" ferry.\nPolitics.\nResults of the 2015 Finnish parliamentary election in Porvoo:\nDistribution of the city council seats following the 2012 Finnish municipal elections:\nIn media.\nIn the 1967 British-American espionage film \"Billion Dollar Brain\", a small part of the plot takes place in Riga, the capital of Latvia, which is actually filmed in Porvoo. Also the 1997 American film \"The Jackal\" features scenes depicting Russia, which are partly shot in Porvoo.\nIn the 2021 Disney+ series \"Loki\", Porvoo is listed as a location to which a time reset device was sent.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPorvoo is twinned with the following cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50213", "revid": "50861664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50213", "title": "Morganatic marriage", "text": "Type of marriage between people of unequal social rank\nMorganatic marriage, sometimes called a left-handed marriage, is a marriage between people of unequal social rank, which in the context of royalty or other inherited title prevents the principal's position or privileges being passed to the spouse or to any children born of the marriage. The concept is most prevalent in German-speaking territories and countries most influenced by the customs of the German-speaking realms.\nGenerally, this is a marriage between a man of high birth (such as from a reigning, deposed or mediatised dynasty) and a woman of lesser status (such as a daughter of a low-ranked noble family or a commoner). Usually, neither the bride nor any children of the marriage has a claim on the husband's succession rights, titles, precedence, or entailed property. The children are considered legitimate for all other purposes and the prohibition against bigamy applies. In some countries, a woman could also marry a man of lower rank morganatically. \nEtymology.\n\"Morganatic\", already in use in English by 1727 (according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\"), is derived from the medieval Latin \"morganaticus\" from the Late Latin phrase \"matrimonium ad morganaticam\" and refers to the gift given by the groom to the bride on the morning after the wedding, the morning gift, i.e., dower. The Latin term, applied to a Germanic custom, was adopted from the Old High German term \"*morgangeba\" (modern German \"Morgengabe\"), corresponding to Early English \"morgengifu\". The literal meaning is explained in a 16th-century passage quoted by Du Cange as, \"a marriage by which the wife and the children that may be born are entitled to no share in the husband's possessions beyond the 'morning-gift'\".\nThe \"morning gift\" has been a customary property arrangement for marriage found first in early medieval Germanic cultures (such as the Lombards) and also among ancient Germanic tribes, and the church drove its adoption into other countries in order to improve the wife's security by this \"additional\" benefit. The bride received property from the bridegroom's clan. It was intended to ensure her livelihood in widowhood, and it was to be kept separate as the wife's discrete possession. However, when a marriage contract is made wherein the bride and the children of the marriage will not receive anything else (other than the dower) from the bridegroom or from his inheritance or clan, that sort of marriage was dubbed as \"marriage with only the dower and no other inheritance\", i.e., \"matrimonium morganaticum\".\nHistory.\nDenmark.\nSuccession to the Danish throne followed the specifications of the \"King's Law\" until the Danish Act of Succession was passed in 1953. Prominent morganatic marriages include the 1615 marriage of King Christian IV of Denmark to noblewoman Kirsten Munk. Kirsten was titled \"Countess of Schleswig-Holstein\" and bore the King 12 children, all styled \"Count/Countess of Schleswig-Holstein\". King Frederick VII married the ballerina Louise Rasmussen, who was raised to the rank of \"Countess Danner\" in 1850. There were no children of this marriage. When Christian IX of Denmark's brother, Prince Julius of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glucksburg married Elisabeth von Ziegesar in 1883, the king granted her the title \"Countess of R\u00f8st\".\nUntil 1971, Danish princes who married women who did not belong to a royal or noble family were refused the sovereign's authorization, renouncing their right of succession to the throne and royal title (Prince Aage of Denmark morganatically eloped with Matilda Calvi, daughter of Count Carlo Giorgio di Bergolo, in January 1914 but renounced his dynastic rights and titles subsequently). They were granted the non-royal prefix of \"Prince\" and their descendants bear the title Count af Rosenborg in the Danish nobility.\nNeither of the children of Queen Margrethe II has married a person of either royal birth or of the titled aristocracy. Members of the Royal Family may still lose their place in the line of succession for themselves and their descendants if they marry without the monarch's permission.\nFrance.\nMorganatic marriage was not recognized as a concept in French law. Since the law did not distinguish, for marital purposes, between ruler and subjects, marriages between royalty and the noble heiresses to great fiefs became the norm from no later than the 12th century through the 16th century. The practice of marrying non-royal noble heiresses helped to aggrandize the royal demesne and the House of Capet while gradually diminishing the number of large domains held in theoretical vassalage by nobles who were, in practice, virtually independent of the French crown. The last of these marriages, of Catherine de' Medici to the future King Henry II in 1533, brought the last of these lands, the county of Auvergne, to the crown of France.\nAntiquity of nobility in the legitimate male line, not noble quarterings, was the main criterion of rank in the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\". Unlike the status of a British peer's wife and descendants (yet typical of the nobility of every continental European country), the legitimate children and male-line descendants of any French nobleman (whether titled or not, whether possessing a French peerage or not) were also legally noble \"ad infinitum\". Rank was not based on hereditary titles, which were often assumed or acquired by purchase of a noble estate rather than granted by the Crown. Rather, the main determinant of relative rank among the French nobility was how far back the nobility of a family's male line could be verifiably traced. Other factors influencing rank included the family's history of military command, high-ranking offices held at court and marriages into other high-ranking families. A specific exception was made for bearers of the title of duke who, regardless of their origin, outranked all other nobles. But the ducal title in post-medieval France (even when embellished with the still higher status of \"peer\") ranked its holder and his family among France's nobility and not, as in Germany and Scandinavia (and, occasionally, Italy, viz. Savoy, Medici, Este, della Rovere, Farnese and Cybo-Malaspina) among Europe's reigning dynasties which habitually intermarried with one another.\nOnce the Bourbons inherited the throne of France from the House of Valois in 1589, their dynasts married daughters of even the oldest ducal families of France \u2014 let alone noblewomen of lower rank \u2014 quite rarely (viz., Anne de Montafi\u00e9 in 1601, Charlotte Marguerite de Montmorency in 1609 and, in exile from revolutionary France, Maria Caterina Brignole in 1798). Exceptions were made for equal royal intermarriage with the \"princes \u00e9trangers\" and, by royal command, with the so-called \"princes l\u00e9gitim\u00e9s\" (i.e., out-of-wedlock but legitimised descendants of Henry IV and Louis XIV), as well as with the nieces of Cardinal-prime ministers (i.e., Richelieu, Mazarin). Just as the French king could authorize a royal marriage that would otherwise have been deemed unsuitable, by 1635 it had been established by Louis XIII that the king could also legally void the canonically valid, equal marriage of a French dynast to which he had not given consent (e.g., Marguerite of Lorraine, Duchess of Orl\u00e9ans).\nMoreover, there was a French practice, legally distinct from morganatic marriage but used in similar situations of inequality in status between a member of the royal family and a spouse of lower rank: an \"openly secret\" marriage. French kings authorized such marriages only when the bride was past child-bearing or the marrying prince already had dynastic heirs by a previous spouse of royal descent. The marriage ceremony took place without banns, in private (with only a priest, the bride and groom, and a few legal witnesses present), and the marriage was never officially acknowledged (although sometimes widely known). Thus, the wife never publicly shared in her husband's titles, rank, or coat of arms. The lower-ranked spouse, male or female, could only receive from the royal spouse what property the king allowed.\nIn secret marriage, Louis XIV wed his second wife, Madame de Maintenon, in 1683 (she was nearly 50, so no children were likely); Louis the Grand Dauphin wed Marie \u00c9milie de Joly de Choin in 1695; Anne Marie d'Orl\u00e9ans (\"La Grande Mademoiselle\") wed Antoine, Duke de Lauzun in 1682; and Louis Philippe I, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans wed the Marquise de Montesson in 1773. The mechanism of the \"secret marriage\" rendered it unnecessary for France to legislate the morganatic marriage \"per se\". Within post-monarchical dynasties, until the end of the 20th century the heads of the Spanish and Italian Bourbon branches, the Orl\u00e9ans of both France and Brazil, and the Imperial Bonapartes have, in exile, exercised claimed authority to exclude from their dynasty descendants born of unapproved marriages \u2014 albeit without calling these marriages \"morganatic\".\nGerman-speaking Europe.\nThe practice of morganatic marriage was most common in the German-speaking parts of Europe, where equality of birth (\"Ebenb\u00fcrtigkeit\") between the spouses was considered an important principle among the reigning houses and high nobility. The German name was \"Ehe zur linken Hand\" (\"marriage by the left hand\") and the husband gave his left hand during the wedding ceremony instead of the right.\nPerhaps the most famous example in modern times was the 1900 marriage of the heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and Bohemian aristocrat Countess Sophie Chotek von Chotkowa. The marriage was initially resisted by Emperor Franz Joseph I, but after pressure from family members and other European rulers, he relented in 1899 (but did not attend the wedding himself). The bride was made Princess (later Duchess) of Hohenberg, their children took their mother's new name and rank, but were excluded from the imperial succession. The Sarajevo assassination in 1914, killing both the Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie, triggered the First World War.\nAlthough the issue of morganatic marriages were ineligible to succeed to their families' respective thrones, children of morganatic marriages have gone on to achieve dynastic success elsewhere in Europe. Descendants of the 1851 marriage of Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine to the German-Polish noblewoman Countess Julia von Hauke (created Princess of Battenberg) include Alexander, sovereign prince of Bulgaria, queen-consorts of Spain (Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg) and of Sweden (Louise Mountbatten), and, in the female line, Charles III (through his paternal grandmother, Alice of Battenberg).\nLikewise, from the morganatic marriage of Duke Alexander of W\u00fcrttemberg and Countess Claudine Rh\u00e9dey de Kis-Rh\u00e9de (created Countess von Hohenstein) descends Mary of Teck, who became Britain's queen in 1911 as the consort of King George V.\nOccasionally, children of morganatic marriages have overcome their non-dynastic origins and succeeded to their family's realms. Margrave Leopold inherited the throne of Baden, despite being born of a morganatic marriage, after all dynastic males of the House of Z\u00e4hringen died out. The son of Charles Frederick, Grand Duke of Baden, by his second wife Louise Caroline Geyer von Geyersberg, who belonged to the minor nobility, Leopold became a prince in 1817, at the age of 27, as the result of a new law of succession. Baden's grand-ducal family faced extinction, so Leopold was enfranchised by international treaty and married to a princess, ascending the throne in 1830. His descendants ruled the grand duchy until the abolition of the monarchy in 1918.\nOther reigning German families adopted similar approaches when facing a lack of male heirs. In 1896 the Princely House of Schwarzburg, with the Sondershausen branch numbering two elderly childless princes and Rudolstadt just one childless prince, recognised Prince Sizzo von Leutenberg, morganatic son of Friedrich G\u00fcnther, Prince of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt, as a Prince of Schwarzburg and heir to the two principalities.\nThe senior line of the dynasty ruling the Principality of Lippe was bordering on extinction as the 20th century approached, prompting a succession dispute between the Lippe-Biesterfeld and Schaumburg-Lippe branches of the dynasty which evoked international intervention and troop movements. It centered on whether some ancestresses of the Biesterfeld branch had been legally dynastic; if so, that line stood next to inherit the princely crown according to primogeniture. If not, the Biesterfelds would be deemed morganatic and the Schaumburg-Lippes would inherit the throne. Lippe's Parliament was blocked from voting on the matter by the German Empire's \"Reichstag\", which instead created a panel of jurists selected by the King of Saxony to evaluate the evidence concerning the historical marital rules of the House of Lippe and render a decision in the matter, all parties agreeing to abide by their judgment. In 1897 and 1905 panels ruled in favour of the dynasticity of the challenged ancestresses and their descendants, largely because, although neither had been of dynastic rank, the Lippes had historically accepted such marriages for the junior lines when approved by the Head of House.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a few families considered in Germany to be morganatic were considered for crowns elsewhere, constituting unexpected rehabilitation of their status. The first of these was Prince Alexander of Battenberg, who in 1877 was agreed upon by the Great Powers as the best candidate for the new throne of Bulgaria. He was, however, unable to hold onto his crown, and was also unable to obtain the hand in marriage of Princess Viktoria of Prussia despite the efforts of her imperial mother and grandmother.\nWilhelm, Duke of Urach (1864\u20131928), whose father was the morganatic son of a W\u00fcrttemberg prince, had the distinction of being under consideration for the crowns of five realms at different times: the Kingdom of W\u00fcrttemberg in the 1890s, as the senior agnate by primogeniture when it became likely that King William II would die without male descendants, leaving as heir Duke Albrecht of W\u00fcrttemberg, a more distantly related, albeit dynastic, royal kinsman; the Principality of Albania in 1913; the Principality of Monaco at turn of the 20th century, as the next heir by proximity of blood following the Hereditary Prince Louis, until the Monaco succession crisis of 1918 was resolved as the First World War ended; the prospective Grand Duchy of Alsace-Lorraine in 1917; and his abortive election by the \"Taryba\" as King Mindaugas II of Lithuania in July 1918. In the event, Duke Wilhelm was offered none of these thrones.\nRelying upon the \"Almanach de Gotha\" to gazette dynastic events, Germany's deposed heads of state continued to notify its editors of changes in family members' status and traditional titles. In 1919 the morganatic wife and children of Prince Oskar of Prussia, the counts and countesses von Ruppin, were upgraded to princes and princesses of Prussia by the exiled Kaiser Wilhelm II. In 1928 Georg, Count von Carlow, morganatic son of Duke George Alexander of Mecklenburg and commoner Natalia Vanljarskaya, became a duke of Mecklenburg and heir to his uncle Duke Charles Michael. In 1949, and again in 1999, various morganatic members of the Bavarian Royal House were recognised as princes and princesses of Bavaria, with the current head of the house, Franz von Bayern, being among the beneficiaries of his father's ruling, having been born of a marriage initially deemed morganatic.\nIn the former royal family of Saxony Maria Emanuel, Margrave of Meissen adopted and designated as his heir his nephew Alexander Afif, thus bypassing his agnatic cousin's morganatic son, R\u00fcdiger von Sachsen, and his three sons.\nAfter World War I, the heads of both ruling and formerly reigning German dynasties initially continued the practice of rejecting dynastic titles and/or rights for descendants of \"morganatic\" unions, but gradually allowed them, sometimes retroactively, effectively de-morganatizing the wives and children. This was accommodated by Perthes' \"Almanach de Gotha\" (which categorised German princely families by rank until it ceased publication after 1944) by inserting the offspring of such marriages in a third section of the almanac under entries denoted by a symbol (a dot within a circle) that \"signifies some princely houses which, possessing no specific princely patent, have passed from the first part, A, or from the second part into the third part in virtue of special agreements\". The \"F\u00fcrstliche H\u00e4user\" (\"Princely Houses\") series of the \"Genealogisches Handbuch des Adels\" (\"Genealogical Manual of the Nobility\") has followed this lead, likewise enrolling some issue of unapproved marriages in its third section, \"III B\", with a similar explanation: \"Families in this section, although verified, received no specific decree, but have been included by special agreement in the 1st and 2nd sections\".\nLuxembourg.\nWhen the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg found itself without a male heir at the beginning of the 20th century, the morganatic counts von Merenberg proposed themselves as heirs, being the last legitimate descendants in the male line of the House of Nassau. Grand Duke William IV, however, chose to confirm the law of succession stipulated in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna to allow a female descendant in the Nassau male line to become successor to the throne (his own daughter Marie-Ad\u00e9la\u00efde) instead.\nIn 2006, Prince Louis, the third child of then-reigning Grand Duke Henri, married Tessy Antony, an ordinary citizen. Prince Louis was required to renounce his succession rights and those of the couple's children.\nRussia.\nPaul I of Russia promulgated a strict new house law for Russia in 1797, eliminating the sovereign's right to designate the heir to the throne, but requiring that dynasts be born of authorized marriages. In 1820 a new law also stipulated that only children of Romanovs born of marriages with persons of equal status, i.e., members of a \"royal or sovereign family\", could transmit succession rights and titles to descendants. Alexander III forbade Romanov morganatic marriages altogether by issuance of \"ukase\" #5868 on 24 March 1889 amending article #63 of the Statute on the Imperial Family in the Pauline laws. By \"ukase\" #35731, dated 11 August 1911, Nicholas II amended the amendment, reducing application of this restriction from all members of the Imperial Family to grand dukes and grand duchesses only. This decree allowed marriages of the princes and princesses of the Blood Imperial with non-royal spouses, on the conditions that the emperor's consent be obtained, that the dynast renounce his or her personal succession rights, and that the Pauline laws restricting succession rights to those born of equal marriages continue in force.\nAn early victim of the Pauline laws was Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich, grandson of Catherine the Great, and viceroy of Poland. On 20 March 1820 his marriage to Princess Juliane of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld was annulled to allow him to morganatically wed his longtime mistress, Countess Joanna Grudna-Grudzi\u0144ska, in Warsaw on 24 May 1820, who was elevated to the title \"Princess \u0141owicza\" upon marriage, which produced no children.\nOne emperor, Alexander II, married morganatically in 1880. Princess Ekaterina Mihailovna Dolgorukova, Alexander's second bride, had previously been his long-term mistress and the mother of his three legitimised children, the princes and princesses Yurievsky.\nBeginning a novel tradition, one of that couple's daughters, Princess Olga Aleksandrovna Yurievskaya (1873\u20131925), in 1895 married the child of an 1868 morganatic marriage in the House of Nassau, George, Count von Merenberg (1871\u20131965). His mother was a daughter of renowned author Alexander Pushkin but, despite being of noble birth, she could not in 1868 dynastically marry the younger brother of a then-exiled Duke of Nassau. The count filed a futile suit to establish that his morganatic status in Germany should not exclude him from succession to the throne of Luxembourg after the last male of the House of Orange, King William III of the Netherlands, died in 1890 and it became apparent that the House of Nassau faced the imminent extinction of its male members, as well, upon the eventual death of Grand Duke William IV. Olga's brother, Prince George Aleksandrovich Yurievsky (1872\u20131913), in 1900 wed Countess Alexandra von Zarnekau (1883\u20131957), daughter of the morganatic marriage of the Russo-German Duke Constantine Petrovich of Oldenburg with Agrafena Djaparidize. Merenberg's sister, Sophia (1868\u20131927), likewise contracted a morganatic marriage in 1891, with Grand Duke Michael Mikhailovich of Russia, whose cousin, Emperor Nicholas II banished them to England, unwittingly saving the couple from the maelstrom of the Russian Revolution which proved fatal to so many Romanovs. She and her children were made \"counts de Torby\", her younger daughter, Countess Nada (1896\u20131963) marrying, in 1916 Prince George of Battenberg, future Marquess of Milford Haven and scion of the House of Battenberg, a morganatic branch of the grandducal House of Hesse which had settled in England and inter-married with descendants of Queen Victoria.\nLess fortunate among the Romanovs was Grand Duke Paul Aleksandrovich, who went into exile in Paris to marry a commoner, Olga Valerianovna Karnovich in 1902. Paul returned to serve in the Russian army during the First World War, and Nicholas II rewarded his uncle's loyalty by elevating Olga and her children as Princess and Princes Paley in 1915. Paul's patriotism, however, sealed his fate, and he died at the hands of Russia's revolutionaries in 1919. One of his daughters, Princess Irene Pavlovna Paley (1903\u20131990), was married while in exile in 1923, to her cousin, Prince Theodor Aleksandrovich of Russia, (1898-1968).\nNicholas II forbade his brother, Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich of Russia, from marrying twice-divorced noblewoman Natalya Sergeyevna Wulfert (\"n\u00e9e\" Sheremetevskaya), but the couple eloped abroad in 1911. The Tsar refused his brother's request to grant the bride or their son, George Mikhailovich (1910\u20131931) a title, but legitimated George and incorporated him into the Russian nobility under the surname \"Brassov\" in 1915: nonetheless he and his mother used the comital title from 1915, only being granted a princely prefix in exile by Cyril Vladimirovich, Grand Duke of Russia in 1928. In the throes of the First World War, Nicholas II allowed his sister Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia to end her loveless marriage to her social equal, Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg, and quietly marry commoner Colonel Nikolai Alexandrovich Kulikovsky. Both Michael's and Olga's descendants from these marriages were excluded from the succession.\nAfter the murder of Nicholas II and his children, the Imperial Family's morganatic marriages restricted the number of possible claimants. Grand Duke Cyril Vladimirovich, Nicholas's cousin, proclaimed himself as Emperor in exile. Controversy accompanied the marriage of his son Grand Duke Vladimir Cyrillovich to Princess Leonida Georgievna Bagration-Mukhransky, a descendant of the deposed Royal House of Georgia. After the annexation of Georgia in 1801, Leonida's family were deemed ordinary nobility in Imperial Russia rather than royalty, leading to claims that her 1948 marriage to Vladimir (who, however, also belonged to a deposed dynasty by then) was unequal and should be considered morganatic. As a result, some factions within Russia's monarchist movement did not support the couple's daughter, Grand Duchess Maria Vladimirovna, as the rightful heir to the Romanov dynasty.\nSweden.\nThe concept of morganatic marriages was never established under Swedish law. The 1810 Act of Succession did, until late 20th century, prohibit princes of the royal house from entering unequal marriages with \"enskild mans dotter\" (daughter of a private man);i.e. excluding those not belonging to a reigning or mediatised royal house. Those princes that did so anyway lost all rights of succession to the throne themselves, and were no longer considered dynastic members of the royal house; their marriages were never considered morganatic but simply \"unequal\".\nTranskei.\nStandards of social classification and marital rules resembling the traditions of dynastic Europe can also be found in a number of sovereign nations in Africa. Here, a number of its peoples have legalized traditional authority as manifested in the recognized hereditary transmission of chieftaincy in historically relevant regions of the continent (e.g., the Asantehene of Ghana).\nAn example of the form that morganatic unions tend to take amongst African royalty can be found in the biography of Nelson Mandela, the late leader of South Africa. Mandela, a nobleman by birth of the Xhosa Thembus that reside in the Transkei region of the Cape coast, was nevertheless unable to ascend the throne of the \"Kumkani\" (or king) of the entire Thembu tribe, even though he descended in the legitimate, male line from the holders of this title. Nearly two centuries ago, Ngubengcuka (d. 1832), who ruled as the \"Kumkani\" of the Thembu people, married and subsequently left a son named Mandela, who became Nelson's grandfather and the source of his surname. However, because Mandela was only the Inkosi's child by a wife of the \"Ixhiba\" lineage, a so-called \"Left-Hand House\", the descendants of his cadet branch of the Thembu royal family remain ineligible to succeed to the Thembu throne, which is itself one of the several traditional seats that are still officially recognized by South Africa's government. Instead, the Mandelas were given the chiefdom of Mvezo and made hereditary counsellors to the \"Kumkani\" (i.e., privy counsellors) in deference to their royal ancestry. Following the loss of this chiefdom (which has since been restored to the family) in the Apartheid era, the Mandelas retained their positions as nobles of the Transkei. This status entailed, however, a degree of subjugation to the head of the dynasty, in particular in the matter of marital selection, which proved so onerous an issue to Nelson Mandela that it prompted the departure to Johannesburg that eventually led to his political career. Like the House of Battenberg in Europe, Mandela's family has since rehabilitated its dynastic status to some extent: Mandela was still in prison when his daughter Zenani was married to Prince Thumbumuzi Dlamini in 1973, elder brother of both King Mswati III of Swaziland and Queen Mantfombi, Great Wife of Goodwill Zwelithini, King of the Zulus.\nTravancore and Cochin.\nIn the erstwhile princely state of Travancore, in India, the male members of the Travancore Royal Family were, under the existing matrilineal Marumakkathayam system of inheritance and family, permitted to contract marriages with women of the Nair caste only. These were morganatic marriages called Sambandhams wherein the children gained their mother's caste and family name, due to Marumakkathayam. Although they could not inherit the throne, they did receive a title of nobility, Thampi (son of the Maharajah) and Kochamma (daughter of the Maharajah). These were the members of the Ammaveedus and their titles ensured a comfortable lifestyle and all other luxuries. The descendants of these Ammaveedu members were simply called Thampi and Thankachi and they didn't get any other distinguishing privileges.\nThe Cochin Royal family also followed the system of Marumakkatayam. Traditionally the female members of the family married Namboodiri Brahmins while male members marry ladies of the Nair caste. These wives of the male members are not royalty or didn't receive any royal titles or power, per the matrilineal system but instead get the title of Nethyar Amma. Their position ceases when the Maharaja dies. The children born to Neytharammas will be known by their mother's caste and hold no key royal titles. Currently the family marries mostly within the Kerala Kshatriya class.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe concept of morganatic marriage has never clearly existed in any part of the United Kingdom, and historically the English crown descended through marriages with commoners as late as the 17th century. Only two of the six marriages Henry VIII made to secure an heir were with royal brides, and Elizabeth Woodville, queen of Edward IV of England, was also a commoner.\nAnother link in the English succession involving marriage with a commoner was between John of Gaunt and Katherine Swynford. When they married after co-habiting for several years all children born previously were subsequently legitimated by Act of Parliament. King Henry IV later declared that they could not inherit the crown, but it is not clear that he had the right to do this. This marriage was important, as King Henry VII was descended from it, but Parliament still declared that he was king, so some issues remained unresolved.\nThe marriage of George IV as Prince of Wales to Maria Fitzherbert in 1785 is frequently referred to as morganatic: it was in fact doubly in breach of law, as a marriage to a Catholic and one not having been sanctioned by the king.\nAs in nearly all European monarchies extant in the 21st century, most approved marriages in the British royal family are with untitled commoners and have been for several generations. In 1923, the future George VI (then second in line to the throne as Duke of York), was the first future British monarch to marry a non-princess or prince since 1659 when the future James VII &amp; II eloped with Anne Hyde. Wives of British peers are entitled to use the feminine form of their husbands' peerages under English common law, while wives of royal princes share their husbands' styles by custom unless the Sovereign formally objects.\nFor example, Catherine Middleton, a commoner, became the Duchess of Cambridge upon her marriage on 29 April 2011 to Prince William, who had been created Duke of Cambridge that morning. Camilla Parker Bowles, second wife of Charles, Prince of Wales (as he was at the time), legally held the title \"Princess of Wales\" but at the time that the engagement was announced it was declared that she would be known by the title \"Duchess of Cornwall\" and, in Scotland, Duchess of Rothesay (derived from other titles her husband held as heir apparent) in deference, it has been reported, to public feelings about the title's previous holder, the Prince's first wife Lady Diana Spencer. It was simultaneously stated that at such time, if any, her husband acceded to the throne, she would be known as \"Princess Consort\" rather than \"Queen\", although as the king's wife she would legally be queen. However, in her 2022 Accession Day message, Queen Elizabeth\u00a0II stated that it was her \"sincere wish\" for Camilla to be \"known as Queen Consort\", and, on Charles' accession, Camilla took this title.\nEdward VIII and Wallis Simpson.\nOn 16 November 1936 Edward VIII informed Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin that he intended to marry the American divorc\u00e9e Wallis Simpson, proposing that he be allowed to do so morganatically and remain king. Baldwin expressed his belief that Mrs. Simpson would be unacceptable to the British people as queen due to her status as a divorcee, which contradicted Church of England doctrine at the time, but agreed to take further soundings. The prospect of the marriage was rejected by the British Cabinet. The other Dominion governments were consulted pursuant to the Statute of Westminster 1931, which provided in part that \"any alteration in the law touching the Succession to the Throne or the Royal Style and Titles shall hereafter require the assent as well of the Parliaments of all the Dominions as of the Parliament of the United Kingdom.\" Baldwin suggested three options to the prime ministers of the five Dominions of which Edward was also king: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and the Irish Free State. The options were:\nThe second option had European precedents, including Edward's own maternal great-grandfather, Duke Alexander of W\u00fcrttemberg, but no unambiguous parallel in British constitutional history. William Lyon Mackenzie King (Prime Minister of Canada), Joseph Lyons (Prime Minister of Australia) and J. B. M. Hertzog (Prime Minister of South Africa) opposed options 1 and 2. Michael Joseph Savage (Prime Minister of New Zealand) rejected option 1 but thought that option 2 \"might be possible\u00a0... if some solution along these lines were found to be practicable\" but \"would be guided by the decision of the Home government\". Thus the majority of the Commonwealth's prime ministers agreed that there was \"no alternative to course (3)\". On 24 November, Baldwin consulted the three leading opposition politicians in Britain: Leader of the Opposition Clement Attlee, Liberal leader Sir Archibald Sinclair and Winston Churchill. Sinclair and Attlee agreed that options 1 and 2 were unacceptable and Churchill pledged to support the government.\nThe letters and diaries of working-class people and ex-servicemen generally demonstrate support for the King, while those from the middle and upper classes tend to express indignation and distaste. \"The Times\", \"The Morning Post\", the \"Daily Herald\", and newspapers owned by Lord Kemsley, such as \"The Daily Telegraph\", opposed the marriage. On the other hand, the \"Express\" and \"Mail\" newspapers, owned by Lord Beaverbrook and Lord Rothermere, respectively, appeared to support a morganatic marriage. The King estimated that the newspapers in favour had a circulation of 12.5\u00a0million, and those against had 8.5\u00a0million.\nBacked by Churchill and Beaverbrook, Edward proposed to broadcast a speech indicating his desire to remain on the throne or to be recalled to it if forced to abdicate, while marrying Mrs Simpson morganatically. In one section, Edward proposed to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Neither Mrs. Simpson nor I have ever sought to insist that she should be queen. All we desired was that our married happiness should carry with it a proper title and dignity for her, befitting my wife. Now that I have at last been able to take you into my confidence, I feel it is best to go away for a while, so that you may reflect calmly and quietly, but without undue delay, on what I have said.\nBaldwin and the British Cabinet blocked the speech, saying that it would shock many people and would be a grave breach of constitutional principles.\nUltimately, Edward decided to give up the throne for \"the woman I love\", whereupon he and his descendants were deprived of all right to the Crown by Parliament's passage of His Majesty's Declaration of Abdication Act 1936. He was created Duke of Windsor on 8 March 1937 by his brother, the new George VI. He would marry Wallis Simpson in France on 3 June 1937, after her second divorce became final. In the meantime, however, letters patent dated 27 May 1937, which re-conferred upon the Duke of Windsor the \"title, style, or attribute of Royal Highness\", specifically stated that \"his wife and descendants, if any, shall not hold said title or attribute\". This decree was issued by the new king and unanimously supported by the Dominion governments. The king's authority to withhold from the lawful wife of a prince the attribute hitherto accorded to the wives of other modern British princes was addressed by the Crown's legal authorities: On 14 April 1937, Attorney General Sir Donald Somervell submitted to Home Secretary Sir John Simon a memorandum summarising the views of Lord Advocate T. M. Cooper, Parliamentary Counsel Sir Granville Ram, and himself:\nThe new King's firm view, that the Duchess should not be given a royal title, was shared by Queen Mary and George's wife, Queen Elizabeth. The Duchess bitterly resented the denial of the royal title and the refusal of the Duke's relatives to accept her as part of the family. In the early days of George VI's reign the Duke telephoned daily, importuning for money and urging that the Duchess be granted the style of Royal Highness, until the harassed King ordered that the calls not be put through. However, within the household of the Duke and Duchess, the style \"Her Royal Highness\" was used by those who were close to the couple.\nMorganatic vs. invalid.\nThe Royal Marriages Act 1772 made it illegal for all persons born into the British royal family to marry without the permission of the sovereign, and any marriage contracted without the sovereign's consent was considered invalid. This led to several prominent cases of British princes who had gone through marriage ceremonies, and who cohabited with their partners as if married, but whose relationships were not legally recognised. As a result, their partners and children (which would be considered illegitimate) held no titles, and had no succession rights. This differs from morganatic marriages, which are considered legally valid.\nEngland/Scotland.\nJames II/VII and Anne Hyde.\nIt has been suggested that William, Prince of Orange, expected to have a strong claim to the throne of England after the Duke of York during the reign of Charles II. In fact, the Duke's two daughters from his first marriage, Princess Mary and Princess Anne, were considered to have the stronger claim by the English establishment. William's expectation was based on the continental practice of morganatic marriage, since the mother of both princesses, Anne Hyde, was a commoner and a lady-in-waiting to William's mother, Princess Mary. It was through his mother, a sister of Charles II and the Duke of York, that William claimed the throne, because, to his mind, the son of a princess had a stronger claim than the daughter of a commoner. It was to shore up his own claim to the throne that he agreed to marry his first cousin, Princess Mary. When James II fled at the Glorious Revolution, William refused to accept the title of king consort (which Philip II of Spain had been granted under Queen Mary I in the 1550s) and insisted on being named King in his own right. The compromise solution involved naming both to the crown as had rarely happened in the past (see for example King Henry II and his son Young King Henry, who ruled England simultaneously).\nElsewhere.\nVariations of morganatic marriage were also practised by non-European dynasties, such as the Royal Family of Thailand, the polygamous Mongols as to their non-principal wives, and other families of Africa and Asia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50214", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50214", "title": "Alice in Chains", "text": "American rock band\nAlice in Chains (often abbreviated as AiC) is an American rock band formed in Seattle in 1987. Since 2006, the band's lineup has consisted of vocalist/guitarists Jerry Cantrell and William DuVall, bassist Mike Inez, and drummer Sean Kinney. Vocalist Layne Staley and bassist Mike Starr are former members of the band. Often associated with grunge music, Alice in Chains' sound and style is rooted in heavy metal. The band is known for its distinctive vocal style, which often included the harmonized vocals between Staley and Cantrell (and later Cantrell and DuVall). They are one of the most popular rock bands from the 1990s.\nAlice in Chains' original lineup consisted of Cantrell, Kinney, Staley, and Starr. They took the name from Staley's previous band, Alice N' Chains. The band rose to international fame as part of the grunge movement of the early 1990s, along with other Seattle bands such as Nirvana, Pearl Jam, and Soundgarden. They broke through on MTV and mainstream rock radio with the single \"Man in the Box\" (from their 1990 debut album \"Facelift\"). After releasing the EP \"Sap\" in early 1992, the band achieved major mainstream and commercial success with their follow-up album \"Dirt\" later that same year. \"Dirt\" contained the popular singles \"Rooster\" and \"Would?\", among others. Starr was replaced on bass by Inez in early 1993. The following two records, 1994's \"Jar of Flies\" (which included the popular singles \"I Stay Away\" and \"No Excuses\") and 1995's \"Alice in Chains\" (also contained radio hits such as \"Heaven Beside You\" and \"Grind\"), both topped the US \"Billboard\" 200 chart and earned the band several Grammy Award nominations.\nAlice in Chains was plagued by extended inactivity from 1996 onward, largely due to Staley's substance abuse, which resulted in his death in 2002 and caused the band to go on hiatus. Alice in Chains reunited in 2005, with DuVall joining in 2006 as rhythm guitarist and sharing lead vocal duties; the band has since released three more albums: \"Black Gives Way to Blue\" (2009), \"The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here\" (2013), and \"Rainier Fog\" (2018).\nIn the US alone, Alice in Chains has sold over 30 million RIAA-certified records. They have had 18 Top 10 songs on \"Billboard\"'s Mainstream Rock Tracks chart and five No. 1 hits, and has received 11 Grammy Award nominations. The band has been included in numerous greatest of all time lists, including a position of No. 34 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\" special and No. 15 in \"Hit Parader\"'s \"Greatest Live Bands\" list.\nHistory.\n1984\u20131989: Formation and early years.\nBefore the formation of Alice in Chains, Layne Staley, a drummer at the time, landed his first gig as a vocalist when he auditioned to sing for a local glam metal band known as Sleze after receiving some encouragement from his stepbrother Ken Elmer. Other members of this group at that time were guitarists Johnny Bacolas and Zoli Semanate, drummer James Bergstrom, and bassist Byron Hansen.\nThis band went through several lineup changes culminating with Nick Pollock as their sole guitarist and Bacolas switching to bass before discussions arose about changing their name to \"Alice in Chains\". This was prompted by a conversation that Bacolas had with Russ Klatt, the lead singer of Slaughter Haus 5, about backstage passes. One of the passes said \"Welcome to Wonderland\", and they started talking about that being a reference to Alice in Wonderland, until Klatt said, \"What about Alice in Chains? Put her in bondage and stuff like that.\"\nBacolas liked the name \"Alice in Chains\" and brought it up to his bandmates; they agreed and decided to change the band's name. Due to concerns over the reference to female bondage, the group ultimately chose to spell it differently as Alice N' Chains to allay any parental concerns, though Staley's mother Nancy McCallum has said she was still not happy with this name at first. According to Bacolas, the decision to use the apostrophe-N combination in their name had nothing to do with the band Guns N' Roses. The name change happened a year before Guns N' Roses became a household name with their first album, \"Appetite for Destruction\", released in July 1987.\nStaley met guitarist Jerry Cantrell at a party in Seattle around August 1987. A few months prior, Cantrell had watched a concert of Alice N' Chains in his hometown at the Tacoma Little Theatre, and was impressed by Staley's voice. Cantrell was homeless after being kicked out of his family's house, so Staley invited Cantrell to live with him at the rehearsal studio Music Bank.\nAlice N' Chains soon disbanded, and Staley joined a funk band. Cantrell's band, Diamond Lie, broke up and he wanted to form a new band, so Staley gave him the phone number of Melinda Starr, the girlfriend of drummer Sean Kinney, so that Cantrell could set up a meeting with Kinney. Kinney and his girlfriend went to the Music Bank and listened to Cantrell's demos, who mentioned that they needed a bass player to jam with them, and he had someone in mind: Mike Starr, with whom Cantrell had played in a band in Burien called Gypsy Rose. Kinney mentioned that his girlfriend was actually Mike Starr's sister, and that he had been playing in bands together with Starr since they were kids. Kinney called Starr and a few days later he started jamming with him and Cantrell at the Music Bank.\nStaley's funk band also required a guitarist at the time, and Staley asked Cantrell to join as a sideman. Cantrell agreed on condition that Staley join his band. Because Cantrell, Starr and Kinney wanted Staley to be their lead singer, they started auditioning terrible lead singers in front of Staley to send a hint. When they auditioned a male stripper, Staley decided to join the band. Eventually the funk project broke up, and in 1987 Staley joined Cantrell's band on a full-time basis. Two weeks after the band's formation, they were playing a gig at Washington State University, trying to fill in a 40-minute set with a couple of original songs along with Hanoi Rocks and David Bowie covers.\nThe band played a couple of gigs in clubs around the Pacific Northwest, calling themselves different monikers, including Diamond Lie, the name of Cantrell's previous band, and \"Fuck\", before eventually adopting the name that Staley's previous band had initially flirted with, \"Alice in Chains\". Staley contacted his former bandmates and asked for permission to use the name. Nick Pollock was not particularly thrilled about it at the time, and thought he should come up with a different name; both he and James Bergstrom ultimately gave Staley their blessing to use the name. \nLocal promoter Randy Hauser became aware of the band at a concert and offered to pay for demo recordings. However, one day before the band was due to record at the Music Bank studio in Washington, police shut down the studio during the biggest cannabis raid in the history of the state. The final demo, completed in 1988, was named \"The Treehouse Tapes\" and found its way to music managers Kelly Curtis and Susan Silver, who also managed the Seattle-based band Soundgarden. Curtis and Silver passed the demo on to Columbia Records' A&amp;R representative Nick Terzo, who set up an appointment with label president Don Ienner. Based on \"The Treehouse Tapes\", Terzo signed Alice in Chains to Columbia in 1989.\n1990\u20131992: \"Facelift\" and \"Sap\".\nAlice in Chains soon became a top priority of the label, which released the band's first official recording in July 1990, a promotional EP called \"We Die Young\". The EP's lead single, \"We Die Young\", became a hit on metal radio. After its success, the label rushed Alice in Chains' debut album into production with producer Dave Jerden. Cantrell stated the album was intended to have a \"moody aura\" that was a \"direct result of the brooding atmosphere and feel of Seattle.\"\nThe resulting album, \"Facelift\", was released on August 21, 1990, peaking at number 42 in the summer of 1991 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart. \"Facelift\" was not an instant success, selling under 40,000 copies in the first six months of release, until MTV added \"Man in the Box\" to regular daytime rotation. The single hit number 18 on the Mainstream rock charts, with the album's follow up single, \"Sea of Sorrow\", reaching number 27, and in six weeks \"Facelift\" sold 400,000 copies in the US. The album was a critical success, with Steve Huey of AllMusic citing \"Facelift\" as \"one of the most important records in establishing an audience for grunge and alternative rock among hard rock and heavy metal listeners.\" Sammy Hagar claimed he invited the band to tour with Van Halen after he saw the music video for \"Man In The Box\" on MTV.\n\"Facelift\" was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for selling a half-million copies on September 11, 1991, becoming the first album from Seattle's Grunge movement to be certified gold. The band continued to hone its audience, opening for such artists as Iggy Pop, Van Halen, Poison, and Extreme. \"Facelift\" has since been certified triple-platinum by the RIAA, for shipments of three million copies in the United States.\nThe concert at the Moore Theatre in Seattle on December 22, 1990, was recorded and released on VHS on July 30, 1991, as \"Live Facelift\". It features five live songs and three music videos. The home video has been certified gold by the RIAA for sales exceeding 50,000 copies.\nIn early 1991, Alice in Chains landed the opening slot for the Clash of the Titans tour with Anthrax, Megadeth, and Slayer, exposing the band to a wide metal audience but receiving mainly poor reception. Alice in Chains was nominated for a Best Hard Rock Performance Grammy Award in 1992 for \"Man in the Box\".\nFollowing the tour, Alice in Chains entered the studio to record demos for its next album, but ended up recording five acoustic songs instead. While in the studio, drummer Sean Kinney had a dream about \"making an EP called \"Sap\"\". The band decided \"not to mess with fate\", and on February 4, 1992, Alice in Chains released their second EP, \"Sap\". The EP was released while Nirvana's \"Nevermind\" was at the top of the \"Billboard\" 200 charts, resulting in a rising popularity of Seattle-based bands, and of the term \"grunge music\". \"Sap\" was certified gold within two weeks. The EP features Cantrell on lead vocals on the opening track, \"Brother\", and guest vocals by Ann Wilson from the band Heart, who joined Staley and Cantrell for the choruses of \"Brother\" and \"Am I Inside\". The EP also features Mark Arm of Mudhoney and Chris Cornell of Soundgarden, who shared vocals with Staley and Cantrell on the song \"Right Turn\", credited to \"Alice Mudgarden\" in the liner notes.\nIn 1992, Alice in Chains appeared in the Cameron Crowe film \"Singles\", performing as a \"bar band\". The band also contributed the song \"Would?\" to the film's , whose video received an award for Best Video from a Film at the 1993 MTV Video Music Awards.\n1992\u20131993: \"Dirt\".\nIn March 1992, the band returned to the studio. With new songs written primarily on the road, the material has an overall darker feel than \"Facelift\", with six of the album's thirteen songs dealing with the subject of addiction. \"We did a lot of soul searching on this album. There's a lot of intense feelings.\" Cantrell said, \"We deal with our daily demons through music. All of the poison that builds up during the day we cleanse when we play.\" On September 29, 1992, Alice in Chains released its second album, \"Dirt\". The album peaked at number six on the \"Billboard\" 200 and since its release has been certified 5\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA, making \"Dirt\" the band's highest selling album to date. The album was a critical success, with Huey praising the album as a \"major artistic statement, and the closest they ever came to recording a flat-out masterpiece.\" Chris Gill of \"Guitar World\" called \"Dirt\" \"huge and foreboding, yet eerie and intimate\", and \"sublimely dark and brutally honest.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThat darkness was always part of the band, but it wasn't \"all\" about that. There was always an optimism, even in the darkest shit we wrote. With \"Dirt\", it's not like we were saying 'Oh yeah, this is a good thing.' It was more of a warning than anything else, rather than 'Hey, come and check this out, it's great!' We were talking about what was going on at the time, but within that there was always a survivor element \u2013 a kind of triumph over the darker elements of being a human being. I still think we have all of that intact, but maybe the percentage has shifted.\n \u2014Jerry Cantrell in 2013\n\"Dirt\" spawned five singles that reached the top 30 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock chart: \"Would?\", \"Rooster\", \"Them Bones\", \"Angry Chair\", and \"Down in a Hole\", and remained on the charts for nearly two years. Alice in Chains was added as openers to Ozzy Osbourne's \"No More Tours\" tour. Days before the tour began, Layne Staley broke his foot in an ATV accident, forcing him to use crutches on stage.\nStarr left the band after the release of \"Dirt\". Staley told \"Rolling Stone\" in 1994 about Starr leaving the band, \"It was just a difference in priorities. We wanted to continue intense touring and press. Mike was ready to go home.\" Years later, Starr claimed that he was fired due to his drug addiction.\nStarr was replaced by former Ozzy Osbourne bassist Mike Inez. Inez had met Alice in Chains during Ozzy Osbourne's \"No More Tours\" tour and became friends with them. When the band was in Brazil, they called Inez to join them and he accepted. Inez wanted to do the shows in Brazil and even got his immunization shots, but the band called him back saying that Starr wanted to do the last two shows in Brazil, so they would meet Inez in London instead. Inez ended up getting sick with his vaccination shots for a couple of days. Inez played his first concert with Alice in Chains on January 27, 1993, at the Camden Underworld in London.\nIn April 1993, the band recorded two songs with Inez, \"What the Hell Have I\" and \"A Little Bitter\", for the \"Last Action Hero\" soundtrack. During the summer of 1993, Alice in Chains toured with the alternative music festival Lollapalooza, their last major tour with Staley.\n1993\u20131994: \"Jar of Flies\".\nFollowing Alice in Chains' extensive 1993 world tour, Staley said the band \"just wanted to go into the studio for a few days with our acoustic guitars and see what happened.\" \"We never really planned on the music we made at that time to be released. But the record label heard it and they really liked it. For us, it was just the experience of four guys getting together in the studio and making some music.\"\nColumbia Records released Alice in Chains' second acoustic-based EP, \"Jar of Flies\", on January 25, 1994. Written and recorded in one week, \"Jar of Flies\" debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, becoming the first EP\u2014and first Alice in Chains release\u2014to top the charts.\nPaul Evans of \"Rolling Stone\" called the EP \"darkly gorgeous\", and Steve Huey said, \"'Jar of Flies' is a low-key stunner, achingly gorgeous and harrowingly sorrowful all at once.\" \"Jar of Flies\" features Alice in Chains' first number-one single on the Mainstream Rock charts, \"No Excuses\". The second single, \"I Stay Away\", reached number ten on the Mainstream rock charts, while the final single \"Don't Follow\", reached number 25. \"Jar of Flies\" has been certified triple platinum by the RIAA, with over 2 million copies sold in the United States during its first year. \"Jar of Flies\" received two Grammy nominations, Best Hard Rock Performance for \"I Stay Away\", and Best Recording Package.\nAfter the release of \"Jar of Flies\", Staley entered rehab for heroin addiction. The band was scheduled to tour during the summer of 1994 with Metallica, Suicidal Tendencies, Danzig, and Fight, as well as a slot during Woodstock '94, but while in rehearsal for the tour, Staley began using heroin again. Staley's condition prompted the other band members to cancel all scheduled dates one day before the start of the tour, putting the band on hiatus. Alice in Chains was replaced by Candlebox on the tour. Susan Silver's management office sent out a statement saying that the decision to withdraw from the Metallica tour and Woodstock was \"due to health problems within the band.\" Shortly after withdrawing, the band broke up for six months, with Kinney telling \"Rolling Stone\" in 1996, \"Nobody was being honest with each other back then. If we had kept going, there was a good chance we would have self-destructed on the road, and we definitely didn't want that to happen in public.\"\n1995\u20131996: \"Alice in Chains\".\nWhile Alice in Chains was inactive during 1995, Staley joined the \"grunge supergroup\" Mad Season, which also featured Pearl Jam guitarist Mike McCready, bassist John Baker Saunders from The Walkabouts, and Screaming Trees drummer Barrett Martin. Mad Season released one album, \"Above\", for which Staley provided lead vocals and the album artwork. The album spawned a number two Mainstream Rock chart single, \"River of Deceit\", and a home video release of \"Live at the Moore\".\nIn April 1995, Alice in Chains entered Bad Animals Studio in Seattle with producer Toby Wright, who had previously worked with Corrosion of Conformity and Slayer. While in the studio, an inferior version of the song \"Grind\" was leaked to radio, and received major airplay. On October 6, the band released the studio version of the song to radio via satellite uplink to stem the excessive spread of taped copies of the song. On November 7, 1995, Columbia Records released their self-titled album, \"Alice in Chains\", which debuted at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 and has since been certified triple platinum. Of the album's four singles, \"Grind\", \"Again\", \"Over Now\", and \"Heaven Beside You\", three feature Cantrell on lead vocals. Jon Wiederhorn of \"Rolling Stone\" called the album \"liberating and enlightening, the songs achieve a startling, staggering and palpable impact.\" The band released the home video \"The Nona Tapes\" On December 12, a mockumentary featuring interviews with the band members conducted by journalist Nona Weisbaum (played by Jerry Cantrell), and the music video for \"Grind\". The band opted not to tour in support of \"Alice in Chains\", adding to the rumors of drug abuse.\nThe song \"Got Me Wrong\" unexpectedly charted three years after its release on the \"Sap\" EP. The song was re-released as a single on the soundtrack for the film \"Clerks\" in 1994, reaching number seven on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart.\nAlice in Chains resurfaced on April 10, 1996, to perform for \"MTV Unplugged\", a program featuring all-acoustic set lists. The performance featured some of the band's highest-charting singles, including \"Rooster\", \"Down in a Hole\", \"Heaven Beside You\", \"No Excuses\" and \"Would?\", and introduced a new song, \"Killer Is Me\", with Cantrell on lead vocals. The show marked Alice in Chains' only appearance as a five-piece band, adding second guitarist Scott Olson. A live album of the performance was released in July 1996, which debuted at number three on the \"Billboard\" 200, and was accompanied by a home video release, both of which received platinum certification by the RIAA. The band also appeared on \"The Late Show with David Letterman\" on May 10, 1996, performing the songs \"Again\" and \"We Die Young\". Alice in Chains performed four shows supporting the reunited original Kiss lineup on their 1996\u201397 Alive/Worldwide Tour, including the final live appearance of Layne Staley on July 3, 1996, in Kansas City, Missouri. Shortly after the show, Staley was found unresponsive after he overdosed on heroin and was taken to the hospital. Although he recovered, the band was forced to go on hiatus.\n1996\u20132004: Hiatus, side projects and death of Layne Staley.\nAlthough Alice in Chains never officially disbanded, Staley became a recluse, rarely leaving his Seattle condominium following the death of his ex-fianc\u00e9e Demri Parrott on October 29, 1996. \"Drugs worked for me for years,\" Staley told \"Rolling Stone\" in February 1996, \"and now they're turning against me ... now I'm walking through hell and this sucks. I didn't want my fans to think that heroin was cool. But then I've had fans come up to me and give me the thumbs up, telling me they're high. That's exactly what I didn't want to happen.\"\nUnable to continue with new Alice in Chains material, Cantrell released his first solo album, \"Boggy Depot\", in 1998, also featuring Sean Kinney and Mike Inez. Cantrell and Kinney were also featured on Metallica's 1998 album \"Garage Inc.\", both were guest musicians in the track \"Tuesday's Gone\", a Lynyrd Skynyrd cover. In October 1998, Staley reunited with Alice in Chains to record two new songs, \"Get Born Again\" and \"Died\". Originally intended for Cantrell's second solo album, the songs were reworked by Alice in Chains and were released in the fall of 1999 on a box set, \"Music Bank\". The set contains 48 songs, including rarities, demos, and previously released album tracks and singles. The band also released a 15-track compilation titled \"\", serving as a sampler for \"Music Bank\", as well as the band's first compilation album; a live album, simply titled \"Live\", released on December 5, 2000; and a second compilation, titled \"Greatest Hits\" in 2001.\nIn November 1998, Layne Staley recorded a cover of Pink Floyd's \"Another Brick in the Wall\" with the supergroup Class of '99. The song was featured on the soundtrack to the 1998 horror/sci-fi film, \"The Faculty\".\nAfter they toured as part of Cantrell's solo band in 1998, Sean Kinney and Queensr\u00ffche guitarist Chris DeGarmo formed a new band called Spys4Darwin. Mike Inez and Sponge lead vocalist Vin Dombroski joined the supergroup soon after. The band released their first and only album in 2001, a 6-track EP entitled \"Microfish\". In June 2001, Mike Inez joined Zakk Wylde's Black Label Society for the remaining dates of Ozzfest, following the departure of bassist Steve Gibb for medical reasons. Inez joined the band again for their West Coast and Japanese tour in 2003.\nBy 2002, Cantrell had finished work on his second solo album, \"Degradation Trip\". Written in 1998, the album's lyrical content focused heavily on what Cantrell regarded as the demise of Alice in Chains, which still remained evident as the album approached its June 2002 release. However, in March that year, Cantrell commented, \"We're all still around, so it's possible [Alice in Chains] could all do something someday, and I fully hope someday we will.\"\nReflecting on the band's hiatus in a 2011 interview, Kinney said that Staley wasn't the only one battling addiction. He was the focal point, like singers are. So they'd single him out. But the truth was, it was pretty much everybody. I definitely had my hand firmly on the wheel going off the cliff. And the reason we pulled back \u2013 you know when you stop when you have two No. 1 records, it's not really the greatest career move \u2013 but we did that because we love each other and we didn't want to die in public. And I know for a fact in my heart that if we were to continue that I wouldn't be on the phone right now talking to you. I wouldn't have made it. I just wouldn't have.\nAfter a decade of battling drug addiction, Layne Staley was found dead in his condominium on April 19, 2002. The autopsy and toxicology report revealed that he died from a mixture of heroin and cocaine, known as \"speedball\". The autopsy concluded that Staley died on April 5, two weeks before his body was found. Cantrell dedicated his 2002 solo album, \"Degradation Trip\", released two months after Staley's death, to his memory. Mike Starr later claimed on \"Celebrity Rehab\" that he was the last person to see Staley alive, and admitted to feeling guilty about not calling 911 after Staley had warned him against it. \"I wish I hadn't been high on benzodiazepine [that night], I wouldn't have just walked out the door,\" Starr said.\nFollowing Staley's death, Mike Inez joined Heart and toured and recorded with the band from 2002 through 2006. Jerry Cantrell collaborated with several artists such as Heart, Ozzy Osbourne, and Damageplan. In 2004, Cantrell formed the band Cardboard Vampyres along with The Cult guitarist Billy Duffy, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce vocalist and Ratt guitarist John Corabi, The Cult bassist Chris Wyse and drummer Josh Howser. On October 22, 2004, Sony BMG terminated their contract with Alice in Chains, 15 years after the band signed with the label, in 1989.\n2005\u20132008: Reunion shows and reformation.\nIn 2005, Sean Kinney came up with the idea of doing a benefit concert for the victims of the tsunami disaster that struck South Asia in 2004. Kinney made calls to his former bandmates, as well as friends in the music community, such as former Alice in Chains manager Susan Silver. Kinney was surprised by the enthusiastic response to his idea. On February 18, 2005, Jerry Cantrell, Mike Inez, and Sean Kinney reunited to perform for the first time in nine years at \"K-Rock Tsunami Continued Care Relief Concert\" in Seattle. The band featured Damageplan vocalist Pat Lachman, as well as other special guests including Maynard James Keenan of Tool, Wes Scantlin of Puddle of Mudd and Ann Wilson of Heart. A few months after that experience, the band called Susan Silver and Cantrell's manager Bill Siddons and said they wanted to tour as Alice in Chains again. Alice in Chains was approached by the producers of the CBS reality show \"Rock Star\" about being featured on its second season, but the band turned the offer down. In the show, aspiring singers competed to become the lead vocalist of a featured group.\nOn March 10, 2006, the surviving members performed at VH1's \"Decades Rock Live!\" concert, honoring fellow Seattle musicians Ann and Nancy Wilson of Heart. They played \"Would?\" with vocalist Phil Anselmo of Pantera and Down and bass player Duff McKagan of Guns N' Roses and Velvet Revolver, and at the end of the performance Cantrell dedicated the show to Layne Staley and the late Pantera and Damageplan guitarist Dimebag Darrell. They also played \"Rooster\" with Comes with the Fall vocalist William DuVall and Ann Wilson. The band followed the concert with a short United States club tour named \"Finish What We Started\", several festival dates in Europe, and a brief tour in Japan. Duff McKagan again joined the band for the reunion tour, playing rhythm guitar on selected songs. During the tour, the band played a 5-minute video tribute to Staley during the changeover from the electric to acoustic set.\nTo coincide with the band's reunion, Sony Music released the long-delayed third Alice in Chains compilation, \"The Essential Alice in Chains\", a double album that includes 28 songs.\nJerry Cantrell met William DuVall in Los Angeles in 2000 through a mutual acquaintance who introduced Cantrell to Comes with the Fall's first album. Cantrell started hanging out with the band and occasionally joined them onstage. Between 2001 and 2002, Comes with the Fall was both the opening act on Cantrell's tour for his second solo album, \"Degradation Trip\", and also his backing band, with DuVall singing Staley's parts at the concerts. DuVall joined Alice in Chains as lead singer during the band's reunion concerts in 2006, and made his first public performance with the band at VH1's \"Decades Rock Live!\" concert. According to Cantrell, it only took one audition for DuVall to get the gig. For his first rehearsal with the band, DuVall sang \"Love, Hate, Love\". After they finished, Sean Kinney looked at his bandmates and said, \"I think the search is pretty much over.\" According to Mike Inez, DuVall didn't try to emulate Staley, and that's what drew them to him.\nCantrell revealed that before he suggested DuVall for the band, Sean Kinney and Mike Inez invited Sponge and Spys4Darwin lead vocalist Vin Dombroski to jam with the band in their rehearsal space. Dombroski jammed with them to a couple of songs but they did not feel he was right for the band. According to Cantrell, Stone Temple Pilots and Velvet Revolver lead singer Scott Weiland was also interested in joining the band.\nCantrell explained the reunion saying, We want to celebrate what we did and the memory of our friend. We have played with some [singers] who can actually bring it and add their own thing to it without being a Layne clone. We're not interested in stepping on [Staley's] rich legacy. It's a tough thing to go through. Do you take the Led Zeppelin approach and never play again, because the guy was that important? That's the approach we've taken for a lot of years. Or, do you give it a shot, try something? We're willing to take a chance on it. It's completely a reunion because the three of us who're left are back together. But it's not about separating and forgetting\u2014it's about remembering and moving on. Before the tour, Kinney mentioned in an interview that he would be interested in writing new material, but not as Alice in Chains.\nDuring the VH1 Rock Honors concert honoring Heart on May 12, 2007, Alice in Chains performed Heart's \"Barracuda\" fronted by country singer Gretchen Wilson. Heart's guitarist Nancy Wilson also joined them onstage.\nAlice in Chains joined Velvet Revolver for a run of U.S. and Canadian gigs from August through October 2007. During that tour, the band also performed four special acoustic-only shows, named as \"The Acoustic Hour\". The acoustic performance at The Rave/Eagles Club in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on August 31, 2007, was recorded for an upcoming live album.\nOn November 2, 2007, Alice in Chains performed a four-song set at Benaroya Hall in Seattle for Matt Messina and the Symphony Guild's 10th anniversary benefit concert for the Seattle Children's Hospital &amp; Regional Medical Center. In addition to the band's original material, they also played a cover of Led Zeppelin's \"Kashmir\" while backed by over 200 musicians, including the Northwest Symphony Orchestra and the Northwest Girlchoir.\nSean Kinney said about the band's reunion: I never called Jerry; he never called me, and said, 'Hey, let's get the band back together,' you know? We had been taking every step extremely cautious and slow, and just doing whatever feels right: If it's genuine and we're doing it for genuine reasons and we're all okay with it then we take a little step. None of us is broke. Nobody needs to be a rock dork, and you know, stroke their ego. I mean, we don't really operate like that. So as long as it felt good and from the right place and it's about making music and carrying on...\nAbout the pressure being put on DuVall for replacing Staley as lead vocalist, Cantrell said, To put all that weight on Will's shoulders is unfair. We're just figuring out how we work as a team. Although the band has changed, we've lost Layne, we've added Will, and there was no master plan. Playing again in 2005 felt right, so we did the next thing and toured. We did it step by step. It's more than just making music, and it always has been. We've been friends a long time. We've been more of a family than most, and it had to be okay from here [pointing to his heart].\nFormer The Doors manager Bill Siddons and his management company, Core Entertainment, co-managed Alice in Chains with original manager Susan Silver from 2005 to 2007.\nThe band started writing and demoing songs for a new album with DuVall in April 2007. But the band did not show further signs of progress until October 2008, when they announced that they had begun recording with producer Nick Raskulinecz in the studio.\n2008\u20132011: \"Black Gives Way to Blue\" and death of Mike Starr.\nBlabbermouth.net reported on September 5, 2008, that Alice in Chains would enter the studio that October to begin recording a new album for a summer 2009 release. On September 14, 2008, Alice in Chains performed at halftime during the Seattle Seahawks vs San Francisco 49ers game at the Qwest Field (now named Lumen Field ) in Seattle. The 12-minute performance for a crowd of 67,000 people featured a cover of Led Zeppelin's \"Kashmir\" accompanied by the Northwest Symphony Orchestra.\nIn October 2008, Alice in Chains began recording its fourth studio album at the Foo Fighters' Studio 606 in Los Angeles with producer Nick Raskulinecz. The band did not have a record label at the time and the album was funded by Jerry Cantrell and Sean Kinney. At the Revolver Golden God Awards, Cantrell said that the group had finished recording on March 18, 2009, and were mixing the album for a September release. The recording process was completed on Cantrell's 43rd birthday and also the same day that William DuVall's son was born. In April 2009, it was reported that the new Alice in Chains album would be released by Virgin/EMI, making it the band's first label change in its 20-plus year career. Susan Silver, who started managing Alice in Chains in 1988, now co-manages the band with David Benveniste and his Velvet Hammer firm.\nOn June 11, 2009, Blabbermouth.net reported that the new album would be titled \"Black Gives Way to Blue\" and was officially set to be released on September 29, 2009. The title first appeared on Amazon.com without any prior announcement from the band. In addition, it was announced that Elton John plays piano on the title track, a tribute to Layne Staley written and sung by Cantrell. The album features new vocalist and rhythm guitarist William DuVall sharing vocal duties with lead guitarist/vocalist Jerry Cantrell, who sings lead vocals on most of the songs. DuVall sings lead vocals on the song \"Last of My Kind\".\nOn June 30, 2009, the song \"A Looking in View\" was made available for purchase via iTunes and Amazon, and for a limited time it was available as a free download through the official Alice in Chains website in early July. Although it was not the album's first radio single, Rock stations across the U.S. started playing the song. The music video for \"A Looking in View\" debuted via the band's official website on July 7, 2009. The song was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance.\n\"Check My Brain\" was released to radio stations as the first official single from the album on August 14, 2009, and was made available for purchase on August 17, 2009. The music video for \"Check My Brain\" premiered on September 14, 2009. The song was also nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance.\nTo promote the album, the band released an EPK featuring all four of the members being interviewed while the Kiss makeup is being applied on them. An app for iPhone was released on October 27, 2009, featuring songs, music videos, news, photos and networking.\nSean Kinney said about the new album and the fans' mixed reactions about the band moving on after Staley's death: Look, it's a big move to fucking stand up and move on. Some people, the music connected with them so strongly, their opinions, how they feel about it ... It's amazing that they have such a connection but they seem to act like it happened to them. This happened to us and Layne's family, not them. This is actually our lives. If we're okay with it, why can't you be? This happened to us, this didn't happen to you. But this album isn't about that, it's a bigger universal point. We're all going to fucking die, we're all going to lose somebody, and it fucking hurts. How do you move on? This record is us moving on, and hurting. That, to me, is a victory. I already feel like I've won. Sometimes people ask us, 'Wouldn't Layne have been pissed off that we did this?' And I tell them it would have been the opposite: he would have been pissed off that it took us so long to do this. We're not doing this for money; there is no money in the music business anymore. Jerry and I funded the whole album, and we spent lots of our own money, because we believe in this. And one of the reasons I'm doing this is so more light is turned on to something where the light was turned off. And Cantrell added: \"We've toured around the world, we've lost some friends, we buried a dear friend, and somebody that you just can't fucking replace, and then we've chosen by circumstance to get together again. That turned into 'maybe we can fucking do this.' And that turned into this.\"\nIn September 2008, it was announced that Alice in Chains would headline Australia's Soundwave Festival in 2009, alongside Nine Inch Nails and Lamb of God. In February 2009, it was also announced that Alice in Chains would play at the third annual Rock on the Range festival. On August 1, 2009, Alice in Chains performed, along with Mastodon, Avenged Sevenfold, and Glyder, at Marlay Park, Dublin as direct support to Metallica. The band made an appearance on \"Later... with Jools Holland\" on November 10, 2009, performing \"Lesson Learned\", \"Black Gives Way to Blue\", and \"Check My Brain\" as the final performance of the episode.\nTo coincide with the band's European tour, Alice in Chains released its next single, \"Your Decision\", on November 16, 2009, in the UK and on December 1 in the US. The last single from the album was \"Lesson Learned\", and it was released to rock radio on June 22, 2010.\n\"Black Gives Way to Blue\" debuted at No. 5 on the \"Billboard\" 200. On May 18, 2010, the album was certified gold by the RIAA for selling over 500,000 copies in the U.S. The singles \"\"Check My Brain\" and \"Your Decision\" reached No. 1 on Billboard's Mainstream Rock Tracks, while \"Lesson Learned\"\" reached No. 4. \"Check My Brain\" was also the band's first No. 1 song on the Alternative Songs chart, and on the Hot Rock Songs chart, it also reached No. 92 on Billboard's Hot 100, becoming the band's first single to appear on the chart.\nAlong with Mastodon and Deftones, Alice in Chains toured the United States and Canada in late 2010 on the Blackdiamondskye tour, an amalgam of the three bands' latest album titles (\"Black Gives Way to Blue\", \"Diamond Eyes\", and \"Crack the Skye\").\nOn March 8, 2011, former Alice in Chains bassist Mike Starr was found dead at his home in Salt Lake City. Police told Reuters they were called to Starr's home at 1:42\u00a0pm and found his body; Starr was 44. Reports later surfaced that Starr's roommate had seen him mixing methadone and anxiety medication hours before he was found dead. Later reports indicated Starr's death may have been linked to two different types of antidepressants prescribed to him by his doctor. A public memorial was held for Starr at the Seattle Center's International Fountain on March 20, 2011. A private memorial was also held, which Jerry Cantrell and Sean Kinney attended according to Mike Inez.\n2011\u20132016: \"The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here\".\nOn March 21, 2011, Alice in Chains announced that they were working on a fifth studio album, and both Cantrell and Inez later made statements that they had begun the recording process. The album was expected to be finished by summer of 2012 and released by the end of 2012 or beginning of 2013. While Alice in Chains were writing for the album in 2011, Cantrell underwent surgery on his right shoulder, which delayed recording the new material. In an interview published in May 2012, Cantrell explained, \"The thing that set me back is I had some bone spurs [and] cartilage issues in my shoulders. I had the same issue in the other shoulder about six years ago so I've had them both done now. It's a repetitive motion injury from playing.\" Cantrell could not play guitar for eight months while he was recovering from surgery. While recuperating at home in a sling, Cantrell heard a riff in his head and sang it into his phone. The riff later became the song \"Stone\".\nAlice in Chains played their first concert in nearly 10 months and their first concert after Cantrell's shoulder surgery at the Winstar Casino in Thackerville, Oklahoma on August 13, 2011. The band's only concert in 2012 was a five-song acoustic set on May 31 at the eighth annual MusiCares MAP Fund Benefit Concert honoring Jerry Cantrell.\nOn December 4, 2012, Cantrell confirmed that the new album had been completed. The first single, \"Hollow\", debuted online on December 18, available for digital download in January 2013, along with an official music video. On February 13, 2013, Alice in Chains posted on Facebook that their new album title would be an anagram of the letters H V L E N T P S U S D A H I E E O E D T I U R R. The next day they announced that the album would be called \"The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here\", which was released on May 28, 2013, and debuted at No. 2 on the \"Billboard\" 200.\nTo promote the album, Alice in Chains teamed up with Funny or Die for an 11-minute mockumentary titled \"\", in which Film Studies professor Alan Poole McLard (played by W. Earl Brown) attempts to make a documentary on Alice in Chains without any help from the actual band, interviewing other musicians instead. Among them are country singer Donnie 'Skeeter' Dollarhide Jr. (played by Jerry Cantrell), Reggae singer Nesta Cleveland (played by William DuVall), Black Metal musician Unta Gleeben Glabben Globben Globin (played by Mike Inez) and the hipster Stanley Eisen (played by Sean Kinney). The video was released on April 3, 2013, and also features cameos by Ann and Nancy Wilson from Heart, Mike McCready from Pearl Jam, Kim Thayil from Soundgarden, Duff McKagan from Guns N' Roses, Brent Hinds and Bill Kelliher from Mastodon, and Lars Ulrich and Robert Trujillo from Metallica.\nIn June 2013, the band released a pinball game app for iOS as part of \"Pinball Rocks\" HD compilation, featuring the single \"Hollow\", the band's logo and the album artwork, as well as references to the band's previous albums such as \"Jar of Flies\" and the self-titled record.\nThe band released videos for the songs \"Hollow\", \"Stone\", \"Voices\", the title track and \"Phantom Limb\". \"Hollow\" and \"Stone\" reached No. 1 on Billboard's Mainstream Rock Tracks, while \"Voices\" reached No. 3, and each one of the three songs stayed on the chart for 20 weeks. \"The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here\" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album, Non-Classical in 2014.\nAlice in Chains toured extensively in the U.S., Canada, and Europe in 2013 and 2014. In May 2013, the band co-headlined the annual MMRBQ festival with Soundgarden in Camden, New Jersey. Asked in September 2013 if Alice in Chains would make another album, Cantrell replied, \"It'll be a while. It's [been] four years since we put the last one out, but at least it's not the gap that was between the last one, so that's about right - about three to four years.\"\nOn January 18, 2015, Alice in Chains performed in the halftime show of the NFC Championship Game between the Seattle Seahawks and the Green Bay Packers at CenturyLink Field in Seattle. Cantrell is a lifelong Seahawks fan and often attends their games. In August 2015, Bassist Mike Inez said that the band had been \"throwing around riffs for a new record\" and \"taking it nice and slow\". The band toured in the summer of 2015 and the summer of 2016, including select shows opening for Guns N' Roses as part of the Not in This Lifetime... Tour. The band finished their 2016 tour with a concert at the Grand Sierra Resort and Casino in Reno, Nevada on October 8, 2016.\nIn November 2016, Alice in Chains released a cover of the Rush song \"Tears\", which was included in the 40th anniversary release of the album \"2112\". The home video \"Live Facelift\" was released on vinyl for the first time on November 25, 2016, as part of Record Store Day's Black Friday event. The album features six songs and only 5000 copies were issued.\nTo celebrate the tenth anniversary of Record Store Day, on April 22, 2017, Legacy Recordings released \"Get Born Again\"/\"What the Hell Have I\", a special 45 RPM double 7\" single featuring four tracks remastered and available on vinyl for the first time, \"What the Hell Have I\", \"A Little Bitter\", \"Get Born Again\" and \"Died\".\n2017\u20132021: \"Rainier Fog\".\nIn January 2017, Mike Inez stated in an interview that the band had begun work on a new album. In June 2017, it was reported that the band would return to Studio X (formerly Bad Animals Studios) in Seattle to record a new album later that month, for a tentative early 2018 release. The sessions were helmed by Nick Raskulinecz, who produced the band's last two albums. Studio X was the studio where Alice in Chains recorded its 1995 self-titled album. According to Inez, the band was not signed to a label, having completed its previous two-record contract with the Universal Music Group. \"This [upcoming album], we're not sure where it's gonna land ... I mean, we financed ['Black Gives Way To Blue'] on our own too, so we're not too worried about that stuff. We've just gotta get it out to ... a significant label [with worldwide distribution].\"\nThe band started recording their sixth studio album on June 12, 2017. On January 11, 2018, producer Nick Raskulinecz announced via Instagram that the album was nearly finished and that there was only one more day left of recording. During an interview with \"Guitar World\" published on April 11, 2018, Jerry Cantrell said that the album was recorded at four studios. After recording at Studio X in Seattle, the band went to Nashville to record vocals and lead guitars at Nick Raskulinecz's home studio. But Cantrell had to take an unexpected break from work for a couple of weeks after getting sick on a trip to Cabo for Sammy Hagar's birthday. Cantrell had the band's engineer, Paul Figueroa, come in to his house and record a lot of his vocals and solos there. The band finished recording the album at the Henson Recording Studios in Los Angeles. Cantrell also said he expected the album to be released \"probably sometime this summer.\"\nAt the press room of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony on April 14, 2018, Cantrell revealed that Alice in Chains had just signed with BMG, and that they had finished mixing their new album.\nAlice in Chains did not perform live in 2017. The band performed their first concert since October 2016 at the House of Blues in Boston on April 28, 2018. In May 2018, Alice in Chains headlined the festivals Carolina Rebellion, Lunatic Luau, Pointfest, Northern Invasion, the WMMR BBQ festival in Philadelphia, and the Rock on the Range festival in Columbus, Ohio on May 18, 2018, in which they paid tribute to Chris Cornell on the first anniversary of his death covering two Soundgarden songs to close their set, \"Hunted Down\" and \"Boot Camp\", respectively. At the end of the show, the lights on stage spelled out \"CC\" for Chris Cornell and \"SG\" for Soundgarden as feedback rang out. The band started their European tour in June 2018, and headlined the Tons Of Rock Festival in Norway alongside Ozzy Osbourne and Helloween. Alice in Chains are also scheduled to headline KISW's Pain in the Grass festival in August 2018.\nThe band released a new single, \"The One You Know\", via Spotify, Amazon and iTunes on May 3, 2018. A music video directed by Adam Mason was released on YouTube the same day. \"The One You Know\" peaked at No. 9 on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart.\nDuring an interview with Eddie Trunk on \"Trunk Nation\" on May 7, 2018, Jerry Cantrell said that the new album would be released at the end of August 2018. The band also revealed that they talked to director Adam Mason, who is making a dark sci-film, about doing two separate pieces of art and maybe molding them together, and that the music video for \"The One You Know\" is the first chapter of molding Mason's film and the band's music videos together.\nThe second single, \"So Far Under\", was released on Alice in Chains' YouTube channel and on streaming platforms on June 27, 2018. It was also announced that the album would be titled \"Rainier Fog\", with the release date scheduled for August 24, 2018. The album's artwork and the track listing were also revealed on the same day. Jerry Cantrell told \"Rolling Stone\" that the title \"Rainier Fog\" was inspired by the Mount Rainier in Seattle, and the title track is a tribute to the Seattle music scene. \"This song is a little homage to all of that: where we come from, who we are, all of the triumphs, all of the tragedies, lives lived.\"\nThe album's third single, \"Never Fade\", was released on August 10, 2018, through digital and streaming services. The song is a tribute dedicated to frontman William DuVall's grandmother, Chris Cornell, and Alice in Chains' original singer Layne Staley. \"Never Fade\" peaked at No. 10 on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart. A music video directed by Adam Mason was released on November 1, 2018, and continued the storyline from the music video of \"The One You Know\".\nIn June 2018, William DuVall said in an interview with Swedish website \"Rocksverige\" that the music video for \"The One You Know\" is the first chapter of what the band is hoping will be visuals for all ten songs from the album \"Rainier Fog\", and in addition to that, will be a companion piece to the film that director Adam Mason was shooting.\nOn August 20, 2018, the baseball team Seattle Mariners hosted a special \"Alice in Chains Night\" at the Safeco Field in Seattle to promote \"Rainier Fog\", with the team offering the fans a package that included a Safeco Field terrace club ticket, access to a pre-game listening party of the album, an Alice in Chains T-shirt and a Rainier Fog CD. Jerry Cantrell also threw out the ceremonial first pitch and delivered a strike before the Seattle Mariners vs. Houston Astros game.\nTo mark the launch of the album, on August 21, 2018, Alice in Chains performed an acoustic set at the top of Seattle's Space Needle and debuted the song \"Fly\". Alice in Chains were the first band to perform on the Space Needle's new \"Loupe\" glass floor, the world's first and only revolving glass floor 500 feet high. The concert was exclusive for an audience of SiriusXM subscribers. SiriusXM broadcast the concert on their channel Lithium on August 31, 2018.\nOn August 22, 2018, Alice in Chains sent fans on a scavenger hunt to access a secret gig that the band would be performing in Seattle on August 24. Ten signed CD copies of \"Rainier Fog\" were hidden around the city as a ticket into the show, and the band asked the fans to keep an eye on their Instagram story for details on the 10 hidden locations. Once all 10 albums were found, the band revealed that the secret gig would be at the rock club The Crocodile, with limited tickets available with the purchase of their album at a pop-up event at the same venue the next day. Preview clips of each of the album tracks were posted on the band's Instagram. The band also commemorated the release of the album with a pop-up museum installation at The Crocodile in Seattle on August 23 and 24. The museum featured rare Alice in Chains photos, limited-edition merchandise and memorabilia that showcased the band's 30+ year career.\n\"Rainier Fog\" debuted at No. 12 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, selling 31,000 copies (29,000 in traditional album sales), in its first week of release. The album also debuted at No. 1 on Billboard's Top Rock Albums, Alternative Albums and Hard Rock Albums charts, and at No. 3 on the Vinyl Albums chart. \"Rainier Fog\" became Alice in Chains' first top 10 in the UK, peaking at No. 9, and topping UK's Rock &amp; Metal Albums chart. The album has been nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rock Album.\nOn December 13, 2018, the teaser of the film \"Black Antenna\" featuring the song \"Rainier Fog\" was released on Alice in Chains' official YouTube channel, with drummer Sean Kinney stating; \"We've always toyed with the idea of creating videos for every song on one of our albums. Not only did we do that for \"Rainier Fog\", it got totally out of hand and we made a whole goddamn movie. Everything that will be seen in the videos will be footage from \"Black Antenna\" to preface the complete film's release.\" \"Rainier Fog\" was released as a single on February 26, 2019. The official trailer for \"Black Antenna\" was released on Alice in Chains' YouTube Channel on February 28, 2019. Besides a 90-minute film, a 10-part web-series focused on each track from the album was planned. Episodes 1 and 2, \"The One You Know\" and \"Rainier Fog\", respectively, were released on March 7, 2019. The tenth and last episode, \"All I Am\", was released on July 17, 2019. The official music video for \"Rainier Fog\" was released on YouTube on May 15, 2019, and was co-directed by Alice in Chains and Peter Darley Miller, who also directed the band's 2013 mockumentary, \"AIC 23\".\nOn December 1, 2020, Alice in Chains was honored with the Founders Award from Seattle's Museum of Pop Culture. The benefit concert featured tribute performances from artists such as Ann Wilson, Korn, Metallica, Fishbone, Dallas Green, Billy Corgan, Tad Doyle, members of Soundgarden and Pearl Jam, among others. The event was made available for streaming for free and raised more than $600,000 for the museum in its first night. A compilation featuring highlights from the tribute was made available for streaming on Amazon Music.\n2022\u2013present: Potential seventh studio album, Kinney health issues and cancelled tour.\nIn an April 2022 interview, vocalist William DuVall revealed that he was \"sure\" Alice in Chains would begin working on their seventh studio album later in the year: We had a lot of time imposed on us and I think we're going through this period of catching up on things that we had planned for 2020 [and] 2021, and we're all finally getting to do that now. So, it's kind of like a stopgap and we're just dealing with all of these stockpiled projects that we had planned a few years back. So once we get back up to speed with things and we get these dates underway in late summer, I'm sure it will spark a whole bunch of ideas for the next Alice in Chains studio album.\nHowever, in March 2023, DuVall stated there were \"no plans\" for new Alice in Chains music.\nIn February 2025, the band announced appearances at Welcome to Rockville in Daytona Beach, Florida, Sonic Temple in Columbus, Ohio, and MMR*B*Q, a festival hosted by WMMR in Camden, New Jersey, alongside three other headlining performances with Chained Saint, a thrash metal band from Florida. The tour was set to kick off at Mohegan Sun Arena in Montville, Connecticut on May 8, when Kinney suffered a medical emergency during soundcheck that evening. The band described the event as \"non-life threatening\" but were forced to cancel the show; two days later, the entire tour was scrapped. The band was advised Kinney's health issue needed \"immediate attention\" and he was unfit to perform the scheduled dates, though they stated \"his long-term prognosis is positive.\"\nIn a September 2025 interview with \"Cleveland.com\", Cantrell stated that Alice in Chains \"had a tour planned for, like, right now that kind of fell through\", adding, \"So we had some bad luck; we planned on doing much more this year, but it just didn't work out.\" He also commented on the possibility of the band touring or recording a new album in 2026: \"We'll take a look at it again probably early next year and figure out what we're gonna do, whether go in and make another record or do some shows \u2014 or both.\"\nArtistry.\nMusical style.\nAlthough Alice in Chains has been labeled grunge by the mainstream media, Jerry Cantrell identifies the band as primarily heavy metal. He told \"Guitar World\" in 1996, \"We're a lot of different things\u00a0 ... I don't quite know what the mixture is, but there's definitely metal, blues, rock and roll, maybe a touch of punk. The metal part will never leave, and I never want it to.\" The \"Edmonton Journal\" has stated, \"Living and playing in Seattle might have got them the grunge tag, but they've always pretty much been a classic metal band to the core.\" A 1995 review of \"Alice in Chains\" from \"People\" dubbed the band \"Seattle's most malevolent-sounding grunge outfit.\"\nOver the course of their career, the band's sound has also been described as alternative metal, sludge metal, alternative rock, doom metal, and hard rock. Furthermore, the band have also incorporated styles including blues rock, folk rock, progressive rock, funk metal and jangle pop into their music. Regarding the band's constant categorization by the media, Cantrell stated: When we first came out we were metal. Then we started being called alternative metal. Then grunge came out and then we were hard rock. And now, since we've started doing this again I've seen us listed as: hard rock, alternative, alternative metal and just straight metal. I walked into an HMV the other day to check out the placement and see what's on and they've got us relegated back into the metal section. Right back where we started! Drummer Sean Kinney rejects the grunge label, stating in a 2013 interview \"I mean, before we first came out there was no grunge, they hadn't invented that word. Before they invented the word grunge we were alternative rock and alternative metal and metal and rock, and we didn't give a shit whatever, we were a rock and roll band!\" According to Mike Inez, they were always the metal stepchildren of the Seattle scene.\nInfluences.\nThe band is influenced to a great extent by English metal music; in 2018, Jerry Cantrell proclaimed Black Sabbath guitarist Tony Iommi as \"one of his biggest\" inspirations, while Layne Staley named his \"first influences\" as Black Sabbath and Deep Purple. The group's work with recording engineer Dave Jerden came about because upon meeting the band, recalling: \"'Metallica took Tony Iommi and sped him up. What you've done is you've slowed him down again.' And [Cantrell] looked at me and said, 'You got it.' That's how I got the gig. I totally understood what they were doing.\" Cantrell adjudged English rock singer Elton John as \"the artist that made me want to be a musician.\" In addition, members of Alice in Chains have cited artists including AC/DC, Accept, Aerosmith, The Beatles, Black Flag, David Bowie, John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Dio, Funkadelic, Hanoi Rocks, Heart, Jimi Hendrix, Iron Maiden, Jethro Tull, King's X, Kiss, Led Zeppelin, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Metallica, Steve Miller, Eddie Money, Mot\u00f6rhead, Mudhoney, Ted Nugent, Pink Floyd, the Pixies, Queen, Queensr\u00ffche, the Rolling Stones, Rush, Scorpions, Soundgarden, The Stooges, Television, Thin Lizzy, Robin Trower, U2, UFO, Van Halen, the Velvet Underground, Hank Williams, and ZZ Top as influential or inspirational.\nInstrumentation and lyrics.\nJerry Cantrell's guitar style combines \"pummeling riffs and expansive guitar textures\" to create \"slow, brooding minor-key grinds\". He is also recognized for his natural ability to blend acoustic and electric guitars. While down-tuned, distorted guitars mixed with Staley's distinctive \"snarl-to-a-scream\" vocals appealed to heavy metal fans, the band also had \"a sense of melody that was undeniable,\" which introduced Alice in Chains to a much wider audience outside of the heavy metal underground.\nAccording to Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic, Alice in Chains' sound has a \"Black Sabbath-style riffing and an unconventional vocal style.\" The band has been described by Erlewine as \"hard enough for metal fans, yet their dark subject matter and punky attack placed them among the front ranks of the Seattle-based grunge bands.\" Three of the band's releases feature acoustic music, and while the band initially kept these releases separate, Alice in Chains' self-titled album combined the styles to form \"a bleak, nihilistic sound that balanced grinding hard rock with subtly textured acoustic numbers.\"\nAlice in Chains is also noted for the unique vocal harmonies of Staley (or DuVall) and Cantrell, which included overlapping passages, dual lead vocals, and trademark harmonies typically separated by a major third. Cantrell said it was Staley who gave him the self-assurance to sing his own songs. Alyssa Burrows said the band's distinctive sound \"came from Staley's vocal style and his lyrics dealing with personal struggles and addiction.\" Staley's songs were often considered \"dark\", with themes such as drug abuse, depression, and suicide, while Cantrell's lyrics often dealt with personal relationships.\nLegacy.\nRankings.\nAlice in Chains has sold over 30 million certified records in the United States, released two number-one albums, had 23 top 40 singles, and has received eleven Grammy Award nominations. The band was ranked number 34 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\". Alice in Chains was named 15th greatest live band by \"Hit Parader\", with Staley placing as 27th-greatest heavy metal vocalist of all time. The band's second album, \"Dirt\", was named 5th-best album in the last two decades by \"Close-Up\" magazine in 2008.\nIn October 2008, \"Guitar World\" ranked Cantrell's solo in \"Man in the Box\" at No. 77 on their list of \"100 Greatest Guitar Solos\". In August 2009, Alice in Chains won the \"Kerrang!\" Icon Award.\nIn November 2011, \"Jar of Flies\" was ranked number four on \"Guitar World\" magazine's top ten list of guitar albums of 1994. It was also featured in \"Guitar World\" magazine's \"Superunknown: 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994\" list, and in May 2014, the EP was placed at number five on Loudwire's \"10 Best Hard Rock Albums of 1994\" list.\nIn June 2017, \"Metal Injection\" ranked Alice in Chains at number 1 on their list of \"10 Heaviest Grunge Bands\". Ozzy Osbourne ranked \"Facelift\" among his list of \"10 Favorite Metal Albums\".\nInfluence.\nAlice in Chains are one of the most popular rock bands from the 1990s. Pantera and Damageplan guitarist Dimebag Darrell had expressed his admiration for Cantrell's guitar work in an interview for \"Guitar International\" in 1995, saying that \"the layering and the honest feel that Jerry Cantrell gets on [Alice in Chains' \"Dirt\"] record is worth a lot more than someone who plays five million notes.\"\nStreet musician Wesley Willis wrote a song about the band entitled \"Alice in Chains\", featured on his 1996 album \"Feel The Power\". Billy Corgan revealed that the song \"Bleeding The Orchid\" from the Smashing Pumpkins' 2007 album \"Zeitgeist\" has a bit of a homage to Alice in Chains in the harmonies and was indirectly inspired by the death of Staley.\nElton John stated that he is a fan of Alice in Chains and a big admirer of Cantrell. According to Jon Wiederhorn of MTV, Godsmack has \"sonically followed Alice in Chains' lead while adding their own distinctive edge.\" Godsmack singer and founder Sully Erna has also cited Staley as his primary influence. Godsmack was named after the Alice in Chains song \"God Smack\" from the album \"Dirt\". Staind has covered Alice in Chains' song \"Nutshell\" live, which appears on the compilation \"\", and also wrote a song entitled \"Layne\", dedicated to Staley, on the album \"14 Shades of Grey\". Three Days Grace also performs a cover of \"Rooster\", which can be seen on the DVD \"Live at the Palace\". Other bands that have been influenced by Alice in Chains include 10 Years, Avenged Sevenfold, Breaking Benjamin, Bush, Creed, Dallas Green, Days of the New, Disturbed, Hoobastank, Incubus, Korn, Manic Street Preachers, Mudvayne, Nickelback, A Pale Horse Named Death, Puddle of Mudd, Queens of the Stone Age, Rains, Seether, Skunk Anansie, Smile Empty Soul, Stone Sour, Tantric, Taproot, and Theory of a Deadman. Metallica said they have always wanted to tour with the band, citing Alice in Chains as a major inspiration for their 2008 release, \"Death Magnetic\".\nAlice in Chains has also had a significant influence on modern heavy metal. Their songs were covered by various metal bands such as In Flames, Opeth, Dream Theater, Secrets of the Moon, Suicide Silence, 36 Crazyfists, Cane Hill, Ektomorf, Dritt Skitt, Grave and Thou, who described their 2018 EP \"Rhea Sylvia\" as \"a melodic grunge, Alice in Chains homage.\" In 2009, Anders Frid\u00e9n of Swedish melodic death metal band In Flames cited Layne Staley as an inspiration for his vocals on the band's later albums. In addition to fellow musicians, the band has also received praise from critics, with Steve Huey calling them \"one of the best metal bands of the '90s\" upon reviewing the 1999 compilation \"Nothing Safe\".\nIn 2009, the Vitamin String Quartet released the album \"The String Quartet Tribute to Alice in Chains\", featuring instrumental versions on viola, violin and cello of 12 of the band's biggest hits.\nMedia.\nIn August 2015, journalist David de Sola published the biography \"Alice in Chains: The Untold Story\". An updated version covering the period from 2014 to 2017 was published in November 2018. Neither the band nor their management had any involvement with the book. Sources tied directly to the band were interviewed instead.\nThe claymation dolls of the band members used in the music video for \"I Stay Away\" are on display at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame museum in Cleveland, Ohio.\nBand members.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50216", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50216", "title": "Dirk Gentlys Holistic Detective Agency", "text": ""}
{"id": "50217", "revid": "39818230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50217", "title": "Mehmed VI", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1918 to 1922\nMehmed VI Vahideddin (, or ; or , also spelled as ; 14 January 1861 \u2013 16 May 1926), also known as \"\u015eahbaba\" (lit.\u2009'Emperor-father') among the Osmano\u011flu family, was the last sultan of the Ottoman Empire and the penultimate Ottoman caliph, reigning from 4 July 1918 until 1 November 1922, when the Ottoman Sultanate was abolished and replaced by the Republic of Turkey on 29 October 1923.\nThe half-brother of Mehmed V Re\u015f\u00e2d, he became heir to the throne in 1916 following the death of \u015eehzade Yusuf \u0130zzeddin, as the eldest male member of the House of Osman. He acceded to the throne after the death of Mehmed V on 4 July 1918 as the 36th \"padishah\" and 115th Islamic Caliph.\nMehmed VI's chaotic reign began with Turkey suffering defeat by the Allied Powers with the conclusion of World War I nearing. The subsequent Armistice of Mudros legitimized further Allied incursions into Turkish territory, resulting in an informal occupation of Istanbul and other parts of the empire. An ardent anglophile, Sultan Vahdeddin hoped a policy of close cooperation with Britain could result in a less harsh peace treaty. An initial process of reconciliation between the government and Christian minorities over their massacres and deportations ultimately proved fruitless, when the Greeks and Armenians, via their patriarchates, renounced their status as Ottoman subjects, spelling a definitive end of Ottomanism. During the Paris Peace Conference, Mehmed VI turned to Damat Ferid Pasha to outflank Greek territorial demands on Turkey diplomatically through Allied appeasement, but to no avail. Unionist elements within the military, discontent with the government's appeasement in the face of partition, and the establishment of war crimes tribunals, began taking actions into their own hands by establishing a nationalist resistance to resume war. Mehmed's most significant act as Sultan was dispatching Mustafa Kemal Pasha (Atat\u00fcrk) to reassert government control in Anatolia, which actually resulted in the further consolidation of anti-appeasement actors against the court, and consequently, the end of the monarchy.\nWith the Greek Occupation of Smyrna on 15 May 1919 galvanizing the Turkish nationalist movement and beginning the Turkish War of Independence, by October the Sultan's government had to give in to nationalist demands with the Amasya Protocol. The Allies occupied Istanbul militarily on 16 March 1920, and pressured Sultan Mehmed VI to dissolve the Nationalist dominated Chamber of Deputies and suspend the Constitution. When the Turkish nationalists stood against Allied designs for a partition of Anatolia, Kemal Pasha responded by establishing a provisional government known as the Grand National Assembly based in Ankara, which dominated the rest of Turkey, while the Sultan's unpopular government in Istanbul was propped up by the Allied powers and effectively impotent. Mehmed VI condemned the nationalist leaders as infidels and called for their execution, though the provisional government in Ankara claimed it was rescuing the Sultan-Caliph from manipulative foreigners and ministers. The Sultan's Istanbul government went on to sign the Treaty of S\u00e8vres, a peace treaty which would have partitioned the empire, and left the remainder of the country without sovereignty.\nWith Ankara's victory in the independence war, the S\u00e8vres Treaty was abandoned for the Treaty of Lausanne. On 1 November 1922, the Grand National Assembly voted to abolish the Sultanate and to depose Mehmed VI as Caliph and he subsequently fled the country. His cousin Abdul Mejid II was elected Caliph in his stead, though he too, and the entire Osmano\u011flu family were soon exiled after the abolition of the Caliphate. On 29 October 1923, the Republic of Turkey was declared, with Mustafa Kemal Pasha as its first president, ending more than 600 years of Ottoman suzerainty. Mehmed VI died in exile in 1926 in San Remo, Italy, having never acknowledged his deposition.\nEarly life.\nMehmed Vahdeddin was born in Dolmabah\u00e7e Palace on 14 January 1861. His father was Sultan Abdul Mejid I, who died five months after he was born. Abdul Mejid had forty-two children and Vahdeddin was his last child, putting him tenth in line to the succession. All of his siblings were half-siblings from different consorts and concubines, save for Mediha Sultana. His mother G\u00fclist\u00fb Kad\u0131n was of Georgian-Abkhazian origin, the daughter of Prince Tahir Bey Chachba. Vahdeddin became an orphan when she died from one of the many cholera outbreaks of the time when he was four years old.\nAfter his mother's death, Vahdeddin Efendi was adopted by \u015e\u00e2yeste Han\u0131m, another of his father's consorts. The \u015eehzade had a rough time with his overbearing adoptive mother, and at the age of sixteen he left his adoptive mother's mansion with the three servants who had been serving him since childhood. He grew up with nannies, servant girls, and tutors. Physically he had a weak constitution, something he may have inherited from his father. As he grew older he developed atrophy in one of his lungs and heart palpitations.\nVahdeddin educated himself by taking lessons from private tutors, becoming a man of intellect and deep religious knowledge. He read a great deal, and was interested in various subjects, including the arts, which was a tradition of the Ottoman family. He took courses in calligraphy and music and learned how to write in the naskh script and to play the qanun. He became interested in Sufism and, unknown to the Palace, he attended courses at the madrasa of Fatih on Islamic jurisprudence, Islamic theology, interpretation of the Quran, and the Hadiths, as well as the Arabic and Persian languages. He attended the dervish lodge of Ahmed Ziya\u00fcddin G\u00fcm\u00fc\u015fhanevi, located not far from the Sublime Porte, where \u00d6mer Ziya\u00fcddin of Dagestan was the spiritual leader, and he became a disciple of the Naqshbandi order. From time to time, the Sheikh-ul-Islam would have to contend with Vahdeddin demanding an amendment on a fatwa which did not follow \"fiqh\". Before moving to the Feriye Palace, the \u015eehzade had lived briefly in the mansion in \u00c7engelk\u00f6y owned by \u015eehzade Ahmed Kemaleddin.\nIn his youth he collected pistols and carried one on him throughout his life. He enjoyed skeet shooting and was a good shot. His closest friend was \u015eehzade Abdul Mejid (later proclaimed as Caliph Abdul Mejid II), the son of his uncle, Sultan Abdul Aziz. They went on hunting trips together in the forests beyond the Bosphorus. Their bond was later tied by marriage when Vahdeddin's daughter Sabiha married Abdul Mejid's son \u00d6mer Faruk -the two fell in love before lobbying their parents for an unprecedented cousin marriage within the Ottoman family. Their friendship went against the prevailing Mejidian\u2013Azizian feud. Abdul Aziz's children believed their father was murdered following the 1876 coup d'\u00e9tat, and were suspicious Abdul Mejid I's children orchestrated it. In the years to come however, the two cousins had an intense falling out over the politics of the Turkish War of Independence, reactivating the feud between their respective branches.\nDuring the 33-year reign of Abdul Hamid II, Vahdeddin was considered to be the Sultan's closest half-brother. He gave him an allowance to supplement the money he received from the state, and gifted him his own mansion in \u00c7engelk\u00f6y which bore his name: the Vahdettin Pavilion. Vahdeddin built another house next to it on the estate for his adoptive mother \u015e\u00e2yeste. Sabiha explained her father's uncommonly close relationship with Abdul Hamid due to his distaste towards family intrigues, something in common with Abdul Hamid's personal paranoia. When he ascended to the throne, this closeness greatly influenced his political attitudes, such as his intense dislike of the Young Turks and the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP), his sympathy for the British, and a wait-and-see policy to political problems.\nMuch of Vahdeddin's princedom, especially under Abdul Hamid II, was spent in luxurious peace, without care for politics or conflict. After all, during Abdul Hamid's reign, he was behind Re\u015f\u00e2d Efendi, Kemaleddin Efendi, S\u00fcleyman Efendi, and Yusuf \u0130zzeddin Efendi in the succession, so it did not seem likely he would ever come to the throne. At Feriye he liked to host guests, and frequently organized music parties with his fas\u0131l orchestra, which consisted of musician apprentices whom he personally took care of in training. Many of the most popular contemporary Ottoman musicians of the time frequented his \u00c7engelk\u00f6y Pavilion. While Vahdeddin was not one for pomp and flamboyancy, he did care for fashion. He was one of the best dressed princes of the royal family, and his first consort Nazikeda Han\u0131m made sure their daughters dressed in the most contemporary styles, which invited compliments from Abdul Hamid and other members of the royal family.\nIn 1909, at the age of forty-six, he took his first steps outside of Istanbul when he accompanied his half-brother, the new Sultan Mehmed V Re\u015f\u00e2d on a tour of Bursa. He accompanied him for another royal tour of Edirne a year later.\nOne of his first conflicts with the CUP was when he harbored an anti-Unionist, \u015eab\u00e2n Efendi, in his palace in the aftermath of the 1913 coup d'\u00e9tat. Mahmud \u015eevket Pasha obtained an arrest warrant for the man, and had Vahdeddin's palace surrounded. Vahdeddin did not consent to the soldiers entering his palace, saying he would shoot dead anyone who attempted to enter in order to arrest an innocent man taking refuge in his palace. He was able to facilitate \u015eaban's escape to Egypt. Vahdeddin's attitude greatly infuriated \u015eevket Pasha, and their dispute could only be mulled over by Abdul Mejid's mediation. Nevertheless, under the Unionist dictatorship, Vahdeddin's happy-go-lucky life in \u00c7engelk\u00f6y moved on, save for the spies and surveillance officers which were reporting his activities to the CUP's Central Committee.\nThere was a quiet rivalry with his half-brother Crown Prince \u0130zzeddin and he repeatedly requested that Mehmed V retract \u0130zzeddin as heir apparent. In the end \u0130zzeddin unexpectedly committed suicide on 1 February 1916, putting Vahdeddin on track to succeed his brother upon his death.\nHarem.\nOne day in 1884, Vahdeddin visited his half-sister Cemile Sultana, where he discovered one of her ladies-in-waiting, Emine Nazikeda Han\u0131m, an Abkhaz noblewomen from the Marshan family. It was love at first sight. But when he asked Cemile for Emine's hand in marriage, she flat out refused, for she treated Nazikeda like a daughter, and thought her company was irreplaceable during her daughter's tragic bout with tuberculosis. After more than a year pleading with Cemile she finally gave her blessing on the condition she would be Vahdeddin's only wife. Vahdeddin and Nazikeda's marriage was held on 8 June 1885. The couple was popular among the high society. They lived in one of the palaces of Feriye, but when it was destroyed in a fire they moved to the \u00c7engelk\u00f6y Pavilion. They enjoyed horseback riding together in the wilderness of their estate. Their first daughter was born three years after their marriage: Fenire Sultana, who died a few weeks later. They had two daughters that survived to adulthood: Fatma Ulviye Sultana, (1892\u20131967), and Rukiye Sabiha Sultana (1894\u20131971), who were gifted mansions known as the Twin Palaces in Ni\u015fanta\u015f\u0131. After Sabiha's birth Nazikeda was informed by doctors that she could not have any more children.\nEven though Vahdeddin was far in the line of succession, he wanted a son on the off chance he could become Sultan and change the succession law to agnatic primogeniture. He took new wives with the consent of Nazikeda, breaking his oath to Cemile after 20 years of monogamy. In 1905 he married \u0130n\u015firah Han\u0131m but this marriage was not happy and he permitted her a divorce in 1909. In 1912 \u015eehzade Mehmed Ertu\u011frul was born from his second consort: M\u00fcveddet Kad\u0131n (m. 1911). In 1918 he married Nevvare Han\u0131m -M\u00fcveddet's niece. Vahdeddin did not have a harem in \u00c7engelk\u00f6y, so when he moved to Dolmabah\u00e7e Palace and Y\u0131ld\u0131z, he chose to keep some of Mehmed V's \"kalfa\"s and servants instead of establishing a new harem. One of these \"kalfa\"s was Nevzad Han\u0131m who he married soon after being officially deposed, though he never gave her a title.\nWhen he did ascend to the throne in 1918, Vahdeddin's biological and adoptive mothers (G\u00fclist\u00fb and \u015e\u00e2yeste) -who could have become Valide Sultanas- were already dead, leaving Nazikeda the most prominent lady of the court. Vahdeddin bestowed upon her the title Ba\u015fKad\u0131n and she was known as \"The Last Empress\".\nCrown prince.\nAs veliahd he represented Mehmed V at the funeral of the Austro-Hungarian emperor Franz Joseph I in 1916. CUP leader Tal\u00e2t was concerned by Crown Prince Vahdeddin's surprisingly popular conduct at the funeral.\nWhen he was invited by Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany to make a state visit in 1917, he was accompanied by his aide-de-camp, Mustafa Kemal Pasha (Atat\u00fcrk). They first met on 13 December 1917. Kemal Pasha was on leave after resigning from the Y\u0131ldar\u0131m Army Group command due to his conflict with Erich von Falkenhayn and received the invitation to accompany the crown prince from Enver Pasha. Colonel Naci invited Mustafa Kemal to meet the heir apparent at his palace. Vahdeddin left a bad impression on Kemal, who he thought had the mannerisms of a \"mad man.\" When they departed from the train station the next day, Kemal had to remind him to wave to the guard of honor. On the train, he was invited to another audience with Vahdeddin; this time he apologized for his behavior to Kemal the day before and expressed gratitude for his role in the Gallipoli campaign and the two had a long and fruitful conversation, making him cautiously optimistic of the veliahd. On the way back from Berlin, Kemal advised Vahdeddin to request a field command and offered to serve as his chief of staff if he wanted to boost his popularity. The crown prince demurred at this request, giving the excuse that the CUP government would refuse. Biographer Murat Bardak\u00e7\u0131 provides probable skepticism of these stories told in Falih R\u0131fk\u0131 Atay's accounts, who was Kemal's secretary, as Kemal would have breached several layers of protocol addressing an imperial crown prince this way. Nevertheless, this story generally corroborates other accounts of Vahdeddin's mannerisms. On the other hand, writing of this first encounter Vahdeddin described Mustafa Kemal as loyal and having a bright mind, who was fiercely anti-German and critical of Enver Pasha. Six years later, Mustafa Kemal declared a republic after deposing his sovereign in 1922.\nEnthronement.\nOn 3 June 1918, Tal\u00e2t Pasha, now the Grand Vizier, called Vahdeddin to tell him of Sultan Mehmed V's death. Even though he was the crown prince and eligible to become the new Sultan as the eldest male of the Ottoman family, he was greatly shaken by the news and did not immediately accept his entitlement over the call. Later that day Tal\u00e2t, Enver, and Hayri, the Sheikh-ul-Islam, visited Vahdeddin in his palace, and he again wavered over becoming Sultan, suggesting they should focus on his half-brother's funeral, raising anxieties. Following a long night of contemplation, prayer, and even some sleep, Vahdeddin let Tal\u00e2t know he was ready to become Sultan during the funeral. They held an enthronement ceremony at Topkap\u0131 Palace. He delivered an oath to the National Assembly and Constitution, and he took the regal name Mehmed VI, though like his predecessor he was known by the people, and in modern Turkey, by his personal name, Vahdettin. He held his sword girding ceremony on 31 August.\nReign.\nBeginning of his reign.\nMehmed Vahdettin ascended to the throne at the age of fifty-seven with little experience in statecraft at possibly the worst possible moment to become an Ottoman sultan. He described his situation the following: \"I did not sit on a feathered throne but upon the ashes of fire.\" He was not at all prepared for the crises he had to tackle in his reign; the Great War was going poorly for Turkey and her allies and he would soon oversee the empire's surrender and sure dissolution. In addition, the last few Sultans had a bad track record ruling the empire: his uncle Abdul Aziz was deposed and died in suspicious circumstances, Murad V and Abdul Hamid II were also deposed, and Mehmed V never could wield power. He later wrote that he decided to become Sultan because he believed it was his national duty and he did not trust Abdul Mejid, but that this decision was a mistake. Sabiha recounted how she, her nurse, and her mother could not hold back their tears as they moved to the Dolmabah\u00e7e Palace, and had to be admonished by the foremen and eunuchs to compose themselves otherwise entering the palace may bring bad luck. Though he detested the Unionists and was ideologically an absolutist, for four months he had to maintain the Sultanate's subservience to the CUP, and the \"de-jure\" constitutional monarchy. Vahdeddin reappointed Tal\u00e2t Pasha as Grand Vizier for another term. This awkward fact aside, he was happy to allow the Unionists to take responsibility for their crimes, troubles, and mishaps, and for now there were not too many problems between him and the CUP.\nMustafa Kemal's first audience with Vahdeddin as Sultan was on 5 August 1918, where he implored his sovereign to dismiss Enver Pasha as Deputy Commander-in-Chief and hinted that he should be his chief of staff, to which Vahdeddin gave vague and non-committal replies. Several more audiences of this nature later, and Kemal understood he was going nowhere. At some point he asked Vahdeddin for Princess Sabiha's hand in marriage, but he warned him off, telling him that she loved someone else (likely Prince \u00d6mer Faruk). He was soon assigned to take command again of Seventh Army on the crumbling Syrian front by the Sultan himself, but Kemal suspected this assignment was orchestrated by Enver. All of his meetings with Sultan Vahdeddin came to crooked fruition when the Sultan took the title of Commander in Chief himself and installed his son-in-law \u0130smail Hakk\u0131 Pasha chief of a private staff organization attached to Y\u0131ld\u0131z Palace, but at least he was a graduate of the Prussian War Academy. Mustafa Kemal soon understood after arriving at his command that his troops, demoralized, deserting, and badly under-equipped, stood no chance of repelling a British attack. Three weeks later on 19 September, the British attacked in the Battle of Megiddo and smashed through the Turkish lines. Perhaps as a way to motivate him, Vahdeddin made Mustafa Kemal Pasha his honorary aid-de-camp the next day. Over the course of October, one major Levantine city after another fell to the British, while Constantinople attempted to negotiate ceasefire terms. With the tides of war turning against Turkey, Tal\u00e2t Pasha would resign, allowing Vahdeddin to appoint a new Grand Vizier. More significantly, the fall of Tal\u00e2t and defeat in the war lead to the disintegration of the CUP, whose leaders fled the country and dissolved itself as an organization by 1 November 1918.\nVahdeddin's first choice as premier was his in-law Ahmed Tevfik Pasha, a senile Hamidian that everyone objected to and could not present a government, so he dropped the matter. Mustafa Kemal Pasha sent a telegram to the Sultan, asking him to appoint Ahmed \u0130zzet Pasha (Vahdeddin's own aide-de-camp) and make himself War Minister. \u0130zzet Pasha wooed the Sultan by promising to 'secure the dynasty's 'legitimate rights' in the armistice and restore justice in the nation'. He assigned the task of forming the government to \u0130zzet, who assembled a cabinet of anti-war Unionists. Mustafa Kemal was excluded from the new cabinet. So were any minorities. The Sultan strongly demanded his Grand Vizier send Damat Ferid Pasha to negotiate an armistice with the British, but \u0130zzet and other statesmen thought of him as a quack, and categorically refused Vahdeddin's request. Instead \u0130zzet dispatched H\u00fcseyin Rauf (Orbay), a famous naval officer with Anglophile leanings, and Major General Charles Townshend, a British officer who had been captured by the Turks, to parley with the British on the battleship HMS \"Agamemnon\". Vahdeddin insisted the delegation prioritize the protection of the Caliphate, Sultanate, and Ottoman dynasty over British demands on Ottoman provinces. \u0130zzet had to remind him that they were simply signing an armistice, not a peace settlement.\nRauf reluctantly signed the Armistice of Mudros. He and Mehmed VI recognized the potentially harsh cease fire terms, but thought it a prudent step in order to regain the lost trust with Britain. Rauf himself believed the many loopholes of the terms would not be exploited due to his trust in English diplomatic credit and Admiral Calthorpe. Instead, the allies exploited Article VII to continue occupying Ottoman territory, to much dismay from Ottoman Anglophiles. Writing of the armistice terms during his exile, Vahdeddin believed Rauf Bey, who later became a Prime Minister of the Ankara government, to be responsible for all of the occupations of territory following Mudros, and Mustafa Kemal for aggravating the ensuing crisis.\nRuling in force.\nThe First World War was a disaster for the Ottoman Empire. Turkey's entry into the war was initiated by the CUP dictatorship. British and Allied forces captured Baghdad, Damascus, and Jerusalem during the war, resulting in a defeated Turkey set to be partitioned amongst the Allies. Now dealing with an existential crisis over the Turkish state, Sultan Mehmed VI was prepared to offer Britain and France the traditional policy of close cooperation in order to rehabilitate Turkey into the international community and sign a lighter peace treaty - or as he call it: friendship with Britain, closeness with France. However this strategy did not turn out to be successful, as despite the leadership change, the Allies considered the participation of Turkey during the Great War -and its trend in the last decade towards political instability- akin to a rogue state that deserved punishment. Therefore, Entente statesmen sought to elevate Greece as a responsible Eastern Mediterranean Great Power in Turkey's place.\nDomestically, the wars end and the CUP's collapse and discreditation represented a power vacuum, and an opportunity for Vahdeddin to reassert the Sultanate and purge the Unionists. However Vahdeddin's program -peace by all means necessary- was ill-conceived and unpopular, while his governments lacked cohesion and he himself had bad political acumen. The Sultan and his government would be trapped between the demands of the Allies and the demands of neo-Unionist Turkish Nationalists. Though he may have had little room to maneuver in foreign affairs, he squandered the mandate given to him in domestic affairs, which lead to his deposition.\nMehmed VI witnessed many of the monarchies of Europe experiencing their demise or extreme shakeup with the end of the Great War. The German Hohenzollerns, Austrian Habsburgs, and Russian Romanovs all met their end due to the Great War, and Greece and Bulgaria's monarchies also experienced great instability due to the war. The highest priority for the Vahdeddin was to safeguard his dynasty's interests, which soon came into conflict with his country's national interest. He hoped to rely on Grand Viziers that were connected to the royal family by marriage ties. Damat Ferid Pasha was Vahdeddin's brother-in-law, or imperial \"damat\", being married to his full-sister Mediha Sultana. Vahdeddin did not have a good relationship with his \"damat\", but appointed him as Grand Vizier five times due to his supposedly good relations with the British. Ahmed Tevfik Pasha was his in-law through his son \u0130smail Hakk\u0131's marriage to Vahdeddin's daughter Ulviye Sultana. He was a capable, though elderly, Hamidian statesman, who often had to \"clean up\" Ferid's mess.\nArmistice era.\nSultan Vahdeddin soon requested the resignation of \u0130zzet, which was unconstitutional, and assigned Tevfik Pasha to form a government, who he wanted in the first place. Two days later, the allies occupied Istanbul, though Tevfik Pasha was able to receive a vote of confidence from a disgruntled parliament afterwards. Over time, Vahdeddin disliked the sight of the massive Allied fleet anchored in the Bosphorus from Dolmabah\u00e7e Palace and retired to Y\u0131ld\u0131z Palace, passing Dolmabah\u00e7e to Crown Prince Abdul Mejid. In his speech for the opening of the new legislative year of the parliament, Vahdeddin wished for peace along the lines of Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points, with the appropriate honour and dignity of the state. He made a press statement absolving the Ottoman people of collective guilt stating that the CUP was solely responsible for the war and its excesses, such as the Armenian genocide. He requested his government to establish tribunals to try war criminals. The Chamber of Deputies, dominated by Unionists elected back in 1914, objected that only the chamber has the authority to establish special tribunals. When it looked like the Chamber was drawing up a motion to censure Tevfik, Vahdeddin and the Grand Vizier decided to dissolve the Chamber on 21 December 1918. The Sultan postponed elections until a peace treaty could be signed on the grounds that the country was under occupation, even though they were constitutionally mandated to occur four months after a parliament's dissolution.\nThe question which immediately dominated Turkey was the fate of the war criminals and the Unionists. Sultan Vahdeddin asked Tevfik Pasha to resign and assigned him to form a new government in order to purge Unionist sympathizers from the government. The escape and suicide of the former governor of Diyarbekir, Re\u015fid Bey, from prison (25 January 1919) renewed British interest in prosecuting war criminals. Britain ended up cooperating with the Turkish government in these arrest campaigns, though controversially demanded extradition of some criminals. British and French demands on war criminals increasingly mounted on the Tevfik Pasha government, and after the Sultan complained about the lack of progress on the matter in the last three and a half months, he resigned, and Damad Ferid Pasha was appointed Grand Vizier on 4 March 1919.\nA new government, consisting of members of the Freedom and Accord Party, arrested the leaders of the CUP, including a former grand vizier, Said Halim Pasha. The trial of Bo\u011fazl\u0131yan District Governor Mehmed Kemal Bey was quickly concluded. He was sentenced to death and publicly hanged in Beyaz\u0131t Square after the fatwa was signed by the Sultan, which did not go over well with Turks, and he was declared a national martyr. Efforts to repair the government's relationship with Greeks and Armenians were ultimately doomed as in March 1919 their respective patriarchates announced the dissolution of their flocks' status as Ottoman citizens. Ferid Pasha was unable to send a Turkish delegation to the Paris Peace Conference, and the Allies increased interference in government. To calm the situation at home and shore up his popularity, Vahdeddin dispatched Commissions of Admonition [\"Hey\u00e2t-i Nas\u00eeha\"] to Anatolia and Rumelia, delegations representing the imperial family headed by royal princes.\nOn 15 May 1919, after receiving the necessary support from the Allies, Greece landed an occupation force in Izmir, which inflamed sectarian tensions in Turkey. This began the Greco-Turkish War. In order to calm nationalist tempers, the Sultan had Ferid, who had resigned following the Greek Occupation of Izmir, form his second government on 19 May, which included ten nationalist ministers without portfolio unaffiliated with political parties or the palace. Twenty-three jailed nationalists, whose trials had already been postponed were released. The Sultan sent a message to the British High Commissioner Admiral Calthorpe where he complained that Greek atrocities had \"turned Ayd\u0131n into a slaughterhouse\". He warned Calthorpe of the wrath of the Anatolian people should Greek excesses continue. Damat Ferid convened a Sultanic Council [\"\u015e\u00fbr\u00e2-yi Saltanat\"], a faux parliament akin to an \"estates general\", to formulate a response to the Greek occupation of Izmir. The delegates concluded the council demanding complete independence and the establishment of an emergency national council. Though the government did not implement the council's recommendations, in response the Allies extradited sixty-seven prisoners from the Bekir A\u011fa Division to Malta, making them the first of the Malta exiles.\nMustafa Kemal's assignment.\nBy the end of the war, conditions in Thrace and Anatolia -by all metrics- were disastrous, to the point where public order collapsed. The Allied Powers allowed officers to be assigned to the army to ensure public order and demobilize the army. On 30 April 1919 Mustafa Kemal Pasha was assigned to the Ninth Army Troops Inspectorate, a wide-ranging responsibility which effectively gave him civil and administrative authority over all of Anatolia. No subject of an Ottoman Sultan received such a delegation of powers since K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc Mehmed Pasha in the 1650s. Mustafa Kemal was a popular, competent, and ambitious general who fought with distinction in the Gallipoli campaign and since the armistice had attempted to capitalize on his fame. Though he was a Unionist, he had poor relations with CUP leaders and was annoyingly isolated from power. He was also outraged by the bad faith of the allied powers, but believed drastic actions had to be taken to secure Turkish independence in the face of Western imperialism. In the lead up to this assignment, Kemal and the Sultan reconnected and held several audiences, with Vahdeddin trying to assess through Kemal the attitude of the army towards him, Kemal wrote later that Vahdeddin's singular concern over his army's loyalty gave him a feeling of hopelessness. Kemal also held several meetings with the Grand Vizier, Damat Ferid Pasha, and it is perhaps because of these meetings he was not caught up in the first waves of arrests of Unionists and war criminals.\nIn the years following, Mustafa Kemal would tell many the story of his last audience with the Sultan at Y\u0131ld\u0131z Palace on 15 May. At the end of the audience, as he was gifted a golden watch with the Sultan's monogram, Vahdeddin was said to have excitedly let Kemal know that he \"can save the state\" in his mission. This left Kemal shocked that the Sultan implicitly hoped for him to indeed establish a nationalist resistance. However Vahdeddin never wrote of a meeting like this occurring, and his later actions, declarations, and justifications show that Kemal did not manifest any implicit intention of his. No funds were provided for his mission besides a small secret sum from Interior Minister Mehmet Ali.\nThe lead up to Kemal's departure to Samsun filled the capital with tension. British officers stationed in the city distributing visas for Mustafa Kemal's party noticed his mission included many more officers and personnel necessary than an inspectorate would need. Instead of three or four people, he intended his party to include thirty-five officers. Liaison officer John Godolphin Bennett, reading the names of the officers, believed Kemal intended to wage war. These concerns were relayed to High Commissioner Rumbolt, who assured him that he trusted the Sultan, who in turn trusted Kemal. On 16 May 1919, Kemal and nineteen officers out of the thirty-five he hoped to join him left early with the news of Izmir's occupation (See Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk's voyage to Samsun). Once he arrived in Samsun on 19 May 1919, out of the reaches of Istanbul and without the Sultan's permission, Kemal indeed used his extraordinary powers to coordinate a nationalist resistance with like minded officers, which led to British demands for his recall.\nInitial clashes with Mustafa Kemal.\nThe Sultan was indifferent to his activities until late June. Though the government announced Mustafa Kemal's cashiering from the army on 23 June, Vahdeddin preferred to remain silent. In a conversation on the night of 8\u20139 July 1919 over telegram with Kemal, who was in Erzurum, Vahdeddin stated that the British wanted him to come to Istanbul immediately and that they had given him a guarantee that they would not treat the general dishonorably. In a second telegram he sent without waiting for the reply to the previous telegram, he announced that Mustafa Kemal Pasha had been dismissed from his duty as the Third Army Inspector (position since renamed) and that he should return to Istanbul. Mustafa Kemal Pasha simultaneously announced his resignation from the army and that he was ready to continue the struggle as a civilian.\nBy the summer of 1919, the Allies finally decided to invite a Turkish delegation to the Paris Peace Conference, which coincided with the commencement of the trial and arrest of the Unionists once again. The Sultan demanded Tevfik accompany Damad Ferid Pasha, who headed the delegation, as he did not trust the Grand Vizier. His presentation of the Turkish position to the conference, effectively demanding \"status quo ante bellum\", produced shock and ridicule from the Allied representatives, discrediting Istanbul's diplomatic position and shuttering Turkey from the peace negotiations. The Sultan nevertheless reappointed him Grand Vizier after his resignation upon returning from Paris, hoping that stacking his cabinet with even more nationalist ministers could unite the country and minimize the influence of Mustafa Kemal's burgeoning movement. Ferid issued a circular opposing the proceedings of the Erzurum Congress. When the Erzurum Congress (23 July) convened under the presidency of Mustafa Kemal Pasha anyway, it began its work by sending a telegram of loyalty to the Sultan, and a telegram criticizing the Grand Vizier's circular.\nAfter a long struggle instigated by British pressure, Ferid was able to obtain an arrest warrant for Mustafa Kemal Pasha and Rauf Bey on 29 July. Abdul Mejid, who had nationalist sympathies, stormed the palace and criticized the Sultan for blindly supporting Damad Ferid Pasha and his pro-British policy, to the point of insult. Ferid had few friends and many enemies, one of whom was the crown prince. The Sultan's continued reliance on Ferid prompted Abdul Mejid to correspond independently with Allied leaders and send letters of advice to his cousin, one of which was to push back in the negotiations for peace terms. Abdul Mejid wrote a memorandum to the Sultan which he subsequently leaked to the press calling for cooperation between the government with the nationalists. In a telegram to XV Corps, Mustafa Kemal would later downplay the Veliahd's memorandum as claims not to be taken seriously.\nWith a decree Ferid had the Sultan personally sign, all of Mustafa Kemal Pasha's decorations were withdrawn and his honorary rank of aide-de-camp to the Sultan was also abolished. \u0130zzet and Tevfik Pasha later resigned from government over this event. The government was again unsuccessful in dispersing the Sivas Congress (4\u201311 September 1919). Upon its conclusion, Mustafa Kemal began the Telegram War by telling provincial officials to cut communications with Istanbul until they give in to Sivas' demands, the National Pact being one of them. Within a month, all of Anatolia and Thrace, save Istanbul, pledged allegiance to Kemal's movement. The British urged the Sultan to create a national unity government, and with the resignation of Damat Ferid Pasha, on 2 October Ali R\u0131za Pasha, a general with nationalist credentials, was brought to the premiership and signed the Amasya Protocol with the nationalists. Vahdeddin was unhappy to have been forced to compromise with what he thought were unreconstructed Unionists rebelling against a rightful monarch.\nDetente with the nationalists.\nIn the 1919 general election, held as part of the Amasya Protocol, Mustafa Kemal's Association for the Defence of Rights of Anatolia and Rumelia won an uncontested victory. The Sultan did not attend the opening of the legislative session, citing his illness as an excuse.\nDespite the appearances of national unity, the Sultan would always believe that the Turkish nationalists surrounding Mustafa Kemal were Unionists (most members of the movement, including Mustafa Kemal, were previously members of the CUP) whose acts of futile resistance were resuming a destructive conflict counterproductive to peace. This disrespect was mutual, Kemal thought of Vahdeddin as na\u00efve and incompetent whose attempt at a diplomatic solution invited bad faith from the allies. Never-the-less, he maintained the political fiction that the Sultan's actions were done under duress of foreigners and manipulative courtiers, and he needed to be rescued. Vahdeddin considered the nationalists\u2019 seizure of the country's administration as a rebellion, based on the fact that the Sultan's prerogatives were no longer absolute. He believed that it was out of the question for a sovereign to compromise and negotiate with rebels. The nationalists imploring him to escape from Istanbul to Bursa or Ankara was also offensive to the Sultan, as it was believed it would make a compelling excuse for Greece or the Allies to press a claim on the imperial capital. Meeting the British High Commissioner Horace Rumbold, he said that Mustafa Kemal Pasha was \"a revolutionary... Bekir Sami is a Circassian. They are all the same... My government, unfortunately, is powerless against them.\"\nConflict with the nationalist movement.\nAfter the military occupation of Istanbul (16 March 1920), an unpopular action the Sultan had to accept under duress, Vahdeddin reported that he received the Allies' pronouncement with sorrow. He said that he had always desired cooperation with the Allied Powers, that he was relieved by the arrest of certain nationalist leaders in Istanbul, and that if the allies had not made such a decision, he would have had to do it himself. He expressed his appreciation for the guarantees regarding his own royal prerogatives.\nThe Salih Hulusi government was forced to resign because it did not accept the Allied powers\u2019 demands to \"condemn\" and \"reject\" the nationalists (2 April). It was understood that Damat Ferid Pasha was due to return to being prime minister. The deputy president of the Chamber of Deputies, H\u00fcseyin K\u00e2z\u0131m Bey, stated that appointing Ferid as Grand Vizier without receiving a solid guarantee from the British would be a disaster for the country and the sultanate. This angered the Sultan who said, \"If I wanted, I could give the office of grand vizier to the Greek or the Armenian Patriarch, or to the Chief Rabbi!\" and assigned Ferid to form a government for the fourth time (5 April). Under pressure from the British, fatwas were issued declaring that the nationalists were \"infidels\" that they were \"obligatory\" to be killed, and defection from Istanbul was punishable by death. A counter-fatwa was later issued by Rifat B\u00f6rek\u00e7i and 147 religious scholars in Ankara, declaring the nationalists' struggle against imperialism legitimate and divinely sanctioned. Istanbul's response to this was to sentence Mustafa Kemal Pasha and five of his comrades to death in a martial law court, a decision signed by the Sultan. These announcements sparked civil war in Anatolia when anti-Kemalists rose up in the Sultan's name against Ankara. An army formation, the Army of the Caliphate, was also raised to crush the nationalist forces, which failed miserably and only delivered a financial crisis to the government's coffers.\nThe Sultan dissolved the Chamber of Deputies and suspended the constitution, adopting personal rule and formally ending the Second Constitutional Era, though it was practically not in effect since 1912. On 23 April 1920, the Grand National Assembly was established in Ankara and declared itself the sole legitimate government of Turkey. A great religious ceremony was held upon its establishment in which Vahdeddin's name was called from the minarets of the provincial town. A few days later Mustafa Fevzi Pasha (\u00c7akmak) defected to Ankara and delivered a speech, noting that his defection was encouraged by Sultan Vahdeddin in order to keep communication open between Istanbul and Ankara. Afterwards, a telegram of allegiance was sent to the Sultan, and the new parliament announced that the national resistance was being carried out to rescue the captive Sultan. This created a diarchy in Turkey: the Sultan's government in Istanbul and the Nationalist government in Ankara, a situation Greece, Armenia, France, and Britain hoped to exploit.\nIn a speech to the Grand National Assembly, Mustafa Kemal said the following of Sultan Mehmed VI's legitimacy as a Caliph:\u201c..Istanbul is officially and effectively occupied by the enemy. Today, there is no difference between saying Istanbul and saying London. Unfortunately, in Istanbul, which is like London, our Caliph, to whom the entire Islamic world is devoted, and our Sultan, the most precious legacy of our great ancestors, has remained.\"\nTreaty of S\u00e8vres.\nThroughout 1918\u20131920 the Sultan attempted several times to contact the British government through Ferid and his nephew Sami Bey to basically request a protectorate status for the Ottoman Empire under Britain, with the justification of Britain's responsible custodianship of millions of Muslims in its empire. Calthorpe would often be the one to reject these proposals, as the British considered them \"diplomatic bribery\" and did not think her allies would accept. In the lead up to the presentation of peace proceedings, Vahdeddin sent a telegram to King George V, asking the king to intervene in his government to ease the peace terms. King George replied \"The future of Turkey is in the hands of the allied governments.\"\nThe Sultan convened the last Sultanate Council of the Ottoman Empire in Y\u0131ld\u0131z Palace to deliberate over the peace terms, which he described as a \"conglomerate of calamities\" [\"mecelle-i mes\u00e2ib\"]. The grand vizier reported that it was understood that Istanbul would be fully occupied by Greek troops if the treaty was rejected. The council was unanimous in signing the treaty except for one delegate. With the approval he received from the Sultanate Council, Ferid Pasha shuffled his cabinet to suppress the Turkish nationalist movement in Anatolia and formed his fifth cabinet. Sultan Vahdeddin's representatives signed the Treaty of S\u00e8vres on 10 August 1920. This treaty detached the Arab provinces of Turkey and turned them into countries under British and French mandates, while recognizing British, French, and Italian spheres of influence in Anatolia. Eastern Thrace was to be annexed by Greece which would also control Izmir and Armenia was to be given independence. Though Turkey could nominally keep its capital, a large Allied presence would be stationed in the Turkish straits. Hundreds of articles of the treaty delved into minutia only appropriate for colonies, such as provisions for foreign excavation and archeology, protection of birds useful for agriculture, and bans on pornography. The Ottoman Empire was to remain a rump state in Anatolia under foreign influence, relegating the country as an \"uncivilized\" state necessary of civilizing initiatives by great powers.\nThe first murmurs of deposing Vahdeddin in the Grand National Assembly came about in the fall out of S\u00e8vres. In a secret session of the Grand National Assembly, Mustafa Kemal claimed that the Sultan could not be considered a legitimate caliph, and accused him of treason. The signatories of the Treaty of S\u00e8vres, including Damad Ferid Pasha, were sentenced to death by an Independence Tribunal in Ankara. Ankara denounced the rule of Mehmed VI and the command of S\u00fcleyman \u015eefik Pasha, who was in charge of the Army of the Caliphate; as a result, a temporary constitution was drafted for Kemal's counter-government in Ankara.\nAround this time Abdul Mejid received an invitation from Mustafa Kemal to come to Ankara to join the nationalists in order to give his movement more legitimacy. But despite his misgivings with Vahdeddin's reliance on Ferid Pasha, Abdul Mejid decided the move would be too risky and could cause a full-scale civil war, putting further distrust of the royal family among the nationalists. Upon this correspondence being found out the government initiated the thirty-eight-day blockade of Dolmabah\u00e7e, which was only resolved with British shuttle diplomacy, and ended his relationship with Vahdeddin. Abdul Mejid would be the only member of the Ottoman family to call Vahdeddin a traitor following his exile. Other members of the royal family such as \u015eehzade \u00d6mer Faruk and \u0130smail Hakk\u0131 were inspired to betray their patriarch and join the nationalists after this incident.\nLead up to deposition.\nWhile Vahdeddin supported peace, he chose not to ratify the S\u00e8vres Treaty despite British pressure, with the justification that it would completely divide the nation. By stalling, S\u00e8vres stayed a draft treaty and it did not enter into force. With the Treaty of S\u00e8vres unpopular with the Turks and the Istanbul government seen as illegitimate and unable to crush the nationalists, the Greeks began an offensive to crush the nationalists. The Allies now hoped to draw up a new peace settlement more acceptable for the Turks, and invited Istanbul and Ankara to the Conference of London. This coincided with the Allies shifting away from Greece with the fall of Eleftherios Venizelos and return of King Constantine, the fall of Clemenceau in France, and support for Ankara throughout the Islamic world.\nIn October 1920, the Allied Powers sent their high commissioners in Istanbul to the Sultan and requested that the government of Ferid be changed for a new government that could reach an agreement with Ankara to implement the treaty. The Sultan reappointed Tevfik Pasha to the premiership, who composed a cabinet made up of ministers sympathetic to the Nationalists. Istanbul once again began a rapprochement with Ankara, though they would be in dispute over which delegation represented the nation. Istanbul's delegation eventually conceded to only represent the interests of the Ottoman dynasty, though this was not enough for Ankara, which wished for sole representation in the negotiations.\nA memorandum of understanding was published in January 1921, where Istanbul recognized the Grand National Assembly. Vahdeddin put responsibility of the treaty on Ferid, who had been discredited even among anti-Unionists and royalists. He participated in Red Crescent aid campaigns for nationalists facing off against the Greeks. Tevfik suspended the Special War Tribunal for war criminals of the Great War, lifted Mustafa Kemal's death penalty sentence, and pardoned nationalist prisoners. In the fallout of the Treaty of S\u00e8vres and the escalation of the Greco-Turkish War, the Sultan admired Mustafa Kemal, and sought ways to escape the capital to join him in Ankara through his chief of staff Avni Pasha. But this was as far as he was able to go. Ministers like \u0130zzet, Ali R\u0131za, and Tevfik advised him against doing so, as there was no guarantee Kemal's movement would succeed and they too had antagonist relationships with him. Avni was pressured to resign. Around this time, Vahdeddin despaired at realizing he had been manipulated by his ministers. These overtures came to nothing, Ankara did not accept the invitation to the London Conference as Istanbul (the Sultan and Tevfik Pasha) refused to recognize Ankara as the sole legitimate government of Turkey.\nAround early summer 1921, Vahdeddin's nephew Sami Bey organized an escape attempt with the royal yacht \"S\u00f6\u011f\u00fct\", only to be confronted on the docks by High Commissioner Rumbold right before he was to fetch the Sultan, reminding him that if he leaves the Allies would evacuate Constantinople too, allowing the Greeks to take sole custody of the city if he fled.\nIn another secret session of parliament in February 1922, Mustafa Kemal and the delegates discussed the feasibility of dethroning Vahdeddin with the justification that the Sultan had vacated the Caliphate by accepting S\u00e8vres.\nAbolition of the Sultanate.\nAs the nationalist movement strengthened its military positions with the Great Offensive of late August 1922, Mehmed VI, his five wives, and attendant eunuchs could no longer leave the safety of the palace. On 19 October 1922, after the Armistice of Mudanya ending the Greco-Turkish War, Refet Pasha arrived in Constantinople as an emissary from Ankara to an exuberant city (at least the Muslims were). To one of Tevfik's sons welcoming him on behalf of Vahdeddin, Refet declared his greeting to the Caliph, not the Sultan, and met with Istanbul's ministers on a personal basis, not in an official capacity. This communicated Ankara's intention to not recognize the Istanbul government, and to end the Sultanate. Refet gave speeches announcing that sovereignty belonged to people now, no longer Khans, Sultans, and Constitutional Monarchs. In a meeting with \u0130zzet Pasha, now Foreign Minister in Tevfik's cabinet, Refet informed him that should Istanbul send a delegate to the peace talks to be held in Lausanne, Ankara would quit the talks.\nWhen he met with the Sultan and then the Grand Vizier, he requested him to dissolve the Istanbul government and recognize Ankara as Turkey's sole legitimate government. However, they insisted on the existence of the Istanbul government to represent the dynasty at the conference, and rejected Refet's request by claiming that he was a constitutional monarch and he could not dissolve the government. When news reached Ankara of the Sublime Porte's intransigence the Grand National Assembly voted to abolish the Sultanate on 1 November 1922. He told Refet Pasha, who notified him of the decision of the assembly, that even if the existence of such a Caliphate without executive authority was enacted, no one could accept it, as a Caliphate could not exist without a Sultanate. Nineteen days later Abdul Mejid accepted the Grand National Assembly's election of him as Caliph. Reactions to his deposition were muted.\nAs newspapers began a press offensive, publishing news of the Sultan's treason, the Grand National Assembly voted to put Mehmed VI on trial, but the method of trial would not be determined. With Istanbul ministers resigning from cabinet, in a surprise move Tevfik Pasha resigned the Grand Vizierate, making him the last Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire. He did not return the imperial seal and never met with Vahdeddin again. On 5 November Refet announced the dissolution of the Istanbul government. In his memoirs, Vahdeddin accused Tevfik Pasha of being Mustafa Kemal Pasha's man.\nWhen news came of Ali Kemal's lynching the royal family and its supporters panicked. Those who could get visas ran away, those who could not took refuge in British barracks. Vahdeddin was overwhelmed by those who came to the palace to provide the money to escape, and kept to his harem. On 10 November he attended the Friday prayers for the first time after the abolition of the Sultanate, and was not mentioned in the sermon. With this experience and reading articles attacking him in the press, he decided to flee the country.\nExile.\nOn 16 November 1922, Vahideddin wrote to General Charles Harington (the British General commanding the Army of Occupation) Sir,\nConsidering my life in danger in Constantinople, I take refuge with the British Government, and request my transfer as soon as possible from Constantinople to another place.\nMehmed Vahideddin, Caliph of the Muslims. He stated that he expected the protection of his person from England, which had the most Muslim subjects, because of commitment to preserving the legitimate and sacred rights of the Ottoman Sultanate and the Islamic Caliphate. He had requested British occupation authorities (and Lord Curzon) security of his person in the event he had to flee the country since July 1919 and made it his highest priority after the formal occupation of Istanbul. The day before his departure, he had lunch with his daughter, Ulviye Sultana.\nWaking up to a rainy day on 17 November 1922, he took care not to take valuable items or jewelry owned by the Ottoman family, other than his personal belongings and burned many documents. He refused to bring with him the Relics of the Sacred Trust. He and his entourage of ten, including his son \u015eehzade Mehmed Ertu\u011frul left Y\u0131ld\u0131z Palace under British ambulance escort to Dolmabah\u00e7e, and with Harington himself, boarded the British warship HMS \"Malaya\" at the Tophane docks. Admiral Sir Osmond Brock asked the Sultan where he wished to go, but a despondent Vahdeddin had no preference. Osmond suggested Malta, which he accepted.\nIn his memoirs, Vahideddin wrote that he did not flee, but performed a dignified \"hijra\" by following the example of the Prophet Muhammed, and that he would return to his homeland one day. He left without abdicating.\nThe British governor of Malta, Lord Plumer, welcomed Vahdeddin on behalf of George V. He thanked the king and reiterated that he had not given up his throne and the Caliphate. An eight-room apartment was prepared for the Sultan and his entourage in the Pini Barracks. On 19 November, his cousin and crown prince, Abdul Mejid, was elected caliph by the Grand National Assembly, becoming the new head of the Imperial House of Osman as Abdul Mejid II. Upon hearing this news Vahideddin said \"Only my prophet [Muhammed] can do that\" [\"Beni ancak m\u00fcvekkil-i z\u00ee\u015f\u00e2n\u0131m hal edebilir\"]. He was doubtful his cousin could handle the Caliphate under the Kemalists:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mecid Efendi finally achieved his wish. They sent an imam\u2019s coat to the poor man. He is still pretending not to know and trying to sit on the throne by dragging his robe.\n\"Umrah\" to Hejaz.\nHussein bin Ali, King of Hejaz, who had rebelled against Turkey with British support in the Arab Revolt, invited the deposed Sultan to his new kingdom to perform \"umrah\". He took up the invitation because he thought it undignified for him to live in a Christian country with his titles. His British hosts were happy to see him leave Malta as he was an expensive guest. He was welcomed by King Hussein's son at Port Said after a voyage on the Battleship HMS \"Ajax\". He reached Jeddah via Suez on 15 January 1923. King Hussein welcomed his guest with a 101-gun salute with field guns previously operated by the Ottoman army. Also waiting for him was R\u0131za Tevfik (B\u00f6l\u00fckba\u015f\u0131) and Mustafa Sabri. He treated him as a distinguished guest, but not as a caliph, as Hussein was working to get himself recognized as caliph in the Islamic world. From there, they proceeded to Mecca. The deposed Sultan stayed in Mecca until the end of February 1923 when he informed Hussein that the dry heat was too much for him, and he wanted to go to Cyprus or Haifa. Hussein wrote to the British representative in Jeddah and said that there might be ulterior motives behind this. London instructed Vahdeddin to stay in Taif. There he composed many poems about the longing he had for his homeland; in one of them he drew parallels to himself and Cem Sultan, an Ottoman prince that was similarly exiled from his empire.\nThe Islamic world criticized his visit to Hejaz, as it was viewed as an insincere British public relations stunt for the Muslim world. The Indian Muslim writer Mawlana Abul Kelam accused Vahdeddin of being used by the British to sow discord among Muslims by sentencing Kemalist heroes to death while they were saving their nation. In the face of this criticism, Vahdeddin published a declaration addressed to the Islamic world with the hope of salvaging his legacy. A summary of the declaration, which could not be distributed due to Sharif Hussein's censorship, was published in \"Al-Ahram\". In this document, Mehmed Vahdeddin defended his actions as Sultan-Caliph as adhering to \"sunnah\" and responded to the accusations against him.\nIn Italy.\nWhen he realized that he could not stay in the Hejaz any longer, he wished to go to Palestine or Cyprus. The British vetoed this wish; British hospitality for Vahdeddin hit its breaking point and his presence could have caused unrest in British controlled Muslim lands. They offered to house him in Switzerland, though he had to pay out of his own pocket for the journey. From Jeddah, he landed in Suez by sea and from there he reached Alexandria by train provided by the Egyptian government. But due to the ongoing Lausanne Conference, soon to produce the Treaty of Lausanne, the British understood his presence could raise unnecessary tensions and directed him to Italy.\nBenito Mussolini and the Italian government, through King Victor Emmanuel III's aid-de-camp General Laderci, welcomed Vahdeddin with an unofficial ceremony at the Port of Genoa on 2 May 1923. Damad Ferid Pasha was a part of this crowd, and met with his former sovereign for the last time. Vahdeddin had good relations with the king since he was crown prince. His visit in 1900 coincided with the death of Victor Emmanuel's father Umberto I, and he was touched by Vahdeddin's offers of condolence. Vahdeddin moved to the Villa Nobel in San Remo, all expenses paid by the Italian government. He passed time playing his qanun and writing doomed petitions to England and France for permission to go to a Muslim land, and to object the attacks on the Ottoman Caliphate by the Turkish government. For sixteen months he lived there with Ertu\u011frul and a couple of servants.\nOn 3 March 1924 the Turkish government abolished the Caliphate and expelled the Ottoman Family (soon to be rendered surname Osmano\u011flu) and he was able to reunite with the rest of his wives, Ulviye, Mediha, and his elder half-sister Princess Seniha. The family moved to the larger Villa Mamolya, though this strained their finances. As fugitives of the Ottoman court gathered in San Remo a Little Istanbul emerged. Abdul Mejid and his kin chose to settle in Nice, and he and Vahdeddin fought over the use of the title of Caliph and obtaining power of attorney, an issue which symbolized family leadership, to recover their family's properties in former Ottoman lands (see Efforts to recover Ottoman estates by the Ottoman family). The dispute was settled by granting neither power of attorney, but instead two lawyers: Re\u015fad Halis Bey and \u015eerif Pasha. Vahdeddin would die six days after signing the paper work, and Abdul Mejid took over the legal cases and claimed sole power of attorney.\nIn 1924, Vahdeddin also had to deal with the suicide of his personal doctor Re\u015fad Pasha, the fallout of which, in the Trial of the Distoliers, led to Ankara accusing the exiled Sultan-Caliph of planning a restoration. An investigation revealed an anti-Kemalist/pro-royalist secret society founded in 1920 known as the Tarikat-\u0131 Sal\u00e2hiye, which recruited members under the pretext of selling the drug distol, was involved in the Sheikh Said rebellion. In 1925 Re\u015fad's son-in-law went to Turkey, and in front of an Independence Tribunal claimed his father-in-law was actually killed, and accused Vahdeddin of ordering his death so that plans for his restoration to the throne would not be interfered with. The judge agreed the evidence he provided of two likely fabricated letters indicated intent, and ten people were executed for their membership in the organization.\nIn Villa Mamolya he was visited by Generals Harrington and Osmond Brock. Royalty came to see him too, including the Aga Khan, Faisal of Iraq, and Mohammad Ali Shah Qajar. He struck up a friendship with the latter, though he previously turned down his son Ahmed Shah's petition to marry Sabiha due to their Shiism. The Italian government kept his household under surveillance, and after the Turkish government opened a consulate in Genoa, they joined in too.\nWith Turkey having abolished the Ottoman Caliphate, a congress was organized in Egypt to spiritually unite the Muslim world under a new Caliphate, a challenging question since no Muslim country other than Mustafa Kemal's Turkey was independent, and the British Empire ruled over the most Muslims anyway. In the end the Caliphate Congress would be inconclusive, and no widely recognized caliph has been proclaimed since. Vahdeddin protested that the congress was unnecessary because he was still Caliph. The congress met on 13 May 1926, but he died from a blocked artery before hearing of the news of the congress meeting on 16 May 1926 in Sanremo, Italy.\nDeath and funeral.\nVahdeddin left Istanbul with \u00a320,000 and died deep in debt. Most of the money was gambled away by his former brother-in-law and chief aid Zeki Bey in casinos and other acts of debauchery (Zeki was later discovered to be on Ankara's payroll to report on Vahdeddin's activities). A lot was given to swindlers and con-men that the exiled Sultan-Caliph felt obliged to gift. Since he was in dire financial straits, he had sold everything he had that could provide money, including some of his medals. He owed some 60,000 Italian lire to all the artisans and creditors of San Remo. Officers placed a lien on the Sultan's coffin along with all the belongings they found in Villa Mamolya and sealed the door. The funeral would be delayed for a month as money was scrounged to pay the creditors. Reactions of his death were cold indifference because Turkey and the wider Islamic world believed he was a traitor. President Mustafa Kemal, then having dinner with friends in Adana, quipped upon hearing the news: \"A very honorable man has died, if he had wanted, he could have taken all the jewels from Topkap\u0131, formed such an army, and returned.\nIn the meantime, a Muslim land was sought where the body could be buried -it was out of the question to bury him in Turkey. It was decided that it would be buried in the courtyard of the Suleymaniyye Mosque Complex in Damascus, commissioned by Mehmed VI's ancestor Suleiman the Magnificent. The necessary permission was soon obtained from France -the mandate power of Syria- and Sabiha found money for a burial. The French and Italian governments chose not to hold a state funeral for him, and the French foreign ministry deemed it unnecessary to deploy an honor guard. Once the debt was paid off the coffin was taken to a station by a horse-drawn carriage belonging to the Green Cross of Sanremo. They tried to erase the cross from the carriage but stains were still visible, and the simple coffin was otherwise unremarkable with no flowers. An Italian witness in the train station remarked that the funeral party was unworthy of a king. From there the coffin was transported to Trieste by train, the stationmaster placed a black wreath in the coffin's carriage, which was removed for being incompatible with Islamic customs. Here, the coffin was loaded onto a ship and transported to Beirut under the supervision of \u00d6mer Faruk. Upon arriving in Beirut, \u015eehzades Selim, Mehmet Orhan, Abd\u00fclkerim, and \u00d6mer Nami received the funeral party and noted that the coffin smelled meaning the body was likely not to have been embalmed. Selim noted a vast crowd assembled to welcome the party, and many Beirutis shook and kissed his hand and addressed him as \"Sultan.\"\nVahdeddin was buried in the Suleymaniyye Tekiyye on 3 July 1926, in a background of fierce fighting and street clashes from the Syrian rebellion. His funeral was attended by members of the Mevlevi, Qadiri, and Rufai Sufi orders, Turkish civil servants and officers still in Damascus, and Syrian dignitaries, including president Ahmed Nami, an Ottoman \"damat\". The body was at first buried under a pile of earth. Faruk and Sabiha lobbied the Syrian government to commission a mausoleum for him, but bureaucracy and Syria's chronic political instability prevented this from happening, so a compromise was made for a simple marble sarcophagus. Thirty other members of the Ottoman family were later buried in the complex's courtyard.\nPersonality.\nA British intelligence report written in 1920 described Vahdeddin:He is known for being against the CUP, but he has not openly taken part in any struggle in his political life. He is a considerable intellectual and a pleasant nature. He has sincere convictions to serve his country and protect his dynasty. After he ascended to the throne, his personal influence and authority as Sultan-Caliph became a factor in domestic affairs. He had ideas that he knew how to use, but his weakness, timidity and caution prevented him from turning the throne into a strong element. He believed that the grace of England could save Turkey. Despite being extremely nervous, he expressed his ideas comfortably. His private life is free of scandals, but it is said that he finds solace in his sorrows in friendship with ladies.Vahdeddin had an optimistic and patient personality according to the testimony of his relatives and employees. He was evidently a kind family man in his palace; outside, and especially at official ceremonies, he would stand cold, frowning and serious, and would not compliment anyone; he attached great importance to religious traditions; he would not tolerate rumors, nor would he allow them to circulate in his palace. Even in his informal conversations, he always attracted attention with seriousness.\nMehmed VI was talented in literature, music, and calligraphy, a tradition of his family. His compositions were performed in the palace when he was on the throne. Instead of commissioning his own anthem he signed an edict making his grandfather Mahmud II's anthem as the official national anthem of Turkey. The lyrics of the poems he composed while in Taif envision the longing of the country and the pain of not getting the news that they have left behind. He loved to play the saz and qanun. Sixty-three works belonging to him can be identified, but only forty works have signatures.\nAssessment.\nMehmed VI's legacy in modern Turkey has stayed moribund. His government's signing of the Treaty of S\u00e8vres, and other actions taken during his reign, has him condemned in Turkish history as a traitor, coward, and a British collaborator. Recent scholarship into his life had painted a more nuanced picture. Murat Bardak\u00e7\u0131 asserted the Sultan was more of a tragic, if incompetent, monarch faced with an incredible crisis. Some historians, principally championed by Bardak\u00e7\u0131, assert that Vahdeddin not only provided Mustafa Kemal the resources to coordinate a nationalist resistance against the Allies but intended him to do so, but Kemal chose to betray his sovereign. This theory is supported by ideological Islamists, such as the poet Necip Faz\u0131l K\u0131sak\u00fcrek. Theories of why the government gave Mustafa Kemal such extensive powers in his assignment as Ninth Army Troops Inspector have remained inconclusive.\nIn an interview between Suat Hayri \u00dcrg\u00fcpl\u00fc and Sabiha Sultana, Sabiha would say that the man her father most admired was Mustafa Kemal and that he was not a traitor.\nThose close to Vahdeddin described him as intelligent and quick-grasped, but he was under the influence of his entourage and especially those he believed in, that he had a very evident, unstable and stubborn temperament. A quality he shared with Abdul Hamid II was his knack for stalling and using time to have problems solve themselves, though in practice these strategies were disastrous when decisive action was necessary.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nMehmed VI had five consorts: \nSon.\nMehmed VI had only one son: \nDaughters.\nMehmed VI had three daughters: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "50221", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50221", "title": "Sixth Ecumenical Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "50223", "revid": "50959561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50223", "title": "Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency", "text": "1987 novel by Douglas Adams\nDirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency is a humorous detective novel by English writer Douglas Adams, published in 1987. It is described by the author on its cover as a \"thumping good detective-ghost-horror-who dunnit-time travel-romantic-musical-comedy-epic\".\nThe book was followed by a sequel, \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\". The recurring major characters are the eponymous Dirk Gently, his secretary Janice Pearce and Sergeant Gilks. Adams began work on another novel, \"The Salmon of Doubt\", with the intention of publishing it as the third book in the series, but died before completing it.\nA BBC Radio 4 adaptation of six episodes was broadcast from October 2007. A second series based on the sequel was broadcast from October 2008. A 2010 television adaptation for BBC Four borrowed some of the characters and some minor plot elements of the novel to create a new story, and a 2016 television adaptation for BBC America served as a continuation of the books.\nWriting.\nThe genesis of the novel was in two \"Doctor Who\" serials written by Adams, \"City of Death\" (in which an alien tries to change history at the cost of erasing humanity from existence) and in particular the cancelled serial \"Shada\", which first introduces a Cambridge professor called Chronotis who is hundreds of years old. He has been living and working at a Cambridge college for centuries, apparently attracting no attention (noting with appreciation that the porters are very discreet). In \"Shada\", Chronotis's longevity is due to him being a Time Lord, and his time machine is an early model TARDIS. These trademark elements from \"Doctor Who\" were removed by Adams for \"Dirk Gently\". \"Shada\" was cancelled before completion due to a production strike and later released on VHS with Tom Baker narrating the unfilmed segments. The story was also animated in 2017 and released on DVD.\nA number of elements in the novel were inspired by Adams' time at university. For example, one plot thread involves moving a sofa which is irreversibly stuck on the staircase to Richard MacDuff's apartment; according to his simulations, not only is it impossible to remove it, but there is no way for it to have got into that position in the first place. In a similar incident that occurred while Douglas Adams attended St John's College, Cambridge, furniture was placed in the rooms overlooking the river in Third Court while the staircases were being refurbished. When the staircases were completed, it was discovered that the sofas could no longer be removed from the rooms, and the sofas remained in those rooms for several decades.\nThe \"South Bank Show\" revealed that Adams based Chronotis' rooms on the rooms he occupied in his third year at university. Likewise, Richard's room \u2013 filled with Macintosh computers and synthesisers \u2013 was based on Adams' own flat (visited and photographed by Hi-Fi Choice Magazine). The piece of music by Bach that is heard aboard the satellite is \"Ach bleib bei uns, Herr Jesu Christ\" from the cantata \"Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden\", BWV 6 (also an organ chorale BWV 649). Adams stated that this was his personal \"absolutely perfect\" piece of music, and that he listened to it \"over and over; drove my wife completely insane\" while writing \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\".\nPlot summary.\nThe novel opens on a hellish landscape, void of almost all life. Its sole feature is a tower-like object, which suddenly explodes.\nThe narrative then moves forward in time four billion years and switches to the perspective of an Electric Monk \u2013 a device resembling a human being and created for the purpose of believing things. This particular Monk, however, is faulty, and his alien creators have therefore abandoned him in a desert. A door appears on a rock face, and the Monk goes through it.\nThe computer programmer Richard MacDuff and his former tutor, Urban \u201cReg\u201d Chronotis, attend a formal dinner at Cambridge University, where they listen to a reading of Coleridge's \"Kubla Khan\"; the narration makes reference to the poem's \"second, and altogether stranger part\" (this part of the poem does not exist in the real world). After dinner, Richard remembers that he meant to bring his girlfriend Susan Way, who is also the sister of his boss Gordon, but completely forgot.\nMeanwhile, Gordon is driving to his country house and, as is his habit, leaving a long message on Susan\u2019s answering machine. When he stops to close the boot of his car, he is killed by a shadowy figure wielding one of Gordon's own hunting guns. Gordon, now a ghost, attempts to manipulate objects around him but accomplishes nothing other than accidentally terminating the call to Susan.\nIt is revealed that after going through the door, the Monk found himself in Reg's flat. Whilst wandering the college grounds, the Monk encountered a porter who told him to \"shoot off\". The Monk hid in the boot of Gordon's car when Gordon stopped for fuel. Not understanding Gordon's \"reaction\" to being shot \u2013 i.e., dying \u2013 the Monk leaves the scene of the crime and is eventually picked up by the police.\nRichard also leaves a message on Susan's answering machine, rashly promising to take her on holiday that weekend, but immediately regrets it. He then decides to break into her flat and remove the tape. He is spotted in this act by Dirk Gently, an eccentric man he knew at Cambridge. Dirk calls Susan\u2019s landline and instructs Richard to meet him nearby, then hangs up.\nRichard is instantly seized by remorse and returns the tape to the machine. Immediately afterward, Susan arrives home in the company of her acquaintance Michael Wenton-Weakes. Richard apologizes to Susan, who forgives him. She also hands him the tape from the answering machine without listening to it, asking him to give it to Gordon\u2019s secretary for transcription.\nThe next day, having failed to meet Dirk, Richard looks him up in the phone book and finds an ad for Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency. He goes to the agency's office, where Dirk explains that his detective methods are based on the \"fundamental interconnectedness of all things\". He believes that there must be a connection between a number of odd events revolving around Richard, including an apparently impossible magic trick Reg performed at dinner.\nThe pair go to Cambridge to speak with Reg. When asked about the trick, the professor confesses his secret: he is not human, but a being so old that he has forgotten his own origins. His flat is in fact a craft of extraordinary power which can travel through space and time \u2013 though, for some reason, it cannot function when Reg's telephone is working, and vice versa. To perform the trick, Reg had to travel back in time and also visit the planet where the Monk originated; the Monk went through the time machine's door while Reg was not looking. The professor acknowledges this is out of character for himself, since he normally refuses to change the past.\nMichael also arrives in Cambridge to ask Reg's assistance. He is possessed by the ghost of an alien engineer, whose crew had left their own war-torn planet in search of another world on which to build a utopia based around the creation of music. When the aliens, known as Salaxalans, arrived on Earth four billion years in the past to refuel and repair their ship, the engineer failed to notice a problem in the engines of their landing craft. When they were started, the craft exploded, killing the entire crew and leaving their deserted mothership still in orbit. The ghost has spent millennia trying to set this right. To this end, he has possessed a number of individuals, including Samuel Taylor Coleridge, whose work he influenced. The curious actions of Richard, Reg, and even the Electric Monk were also caused by the ghost possessing them. Each subject ultimately proved unsuitable, but the engineer finally succeeded with Michael.\nGordon realizes that he will only be able to end his ghosthood if he finishes leaving a message on Susan's answering machine. He stumbles across the scene of a murder, which gives him the emotional energy needed to use a phone. He records a message telling his sister of the crime and hangs up, which enables him to \"[fall] back to his own rest and vanish\".\nAfter Michael has walked into the poisonous atmosphere of pre-organic Earth, Richard receives a phone call from Susan. She has listened to Gordon's message, which informed her that the murder victim was a professional rival of Michael's, who received a job Michael thought should have been his. Richard realizes that the ghost lied: the aliens were intending to colonize Earth, but the accident robbed them of the opportunity. Michael is an acceptable host because of his willingness to go to extremes to \"fix\" a mistake.\nTo stop the engineer, Richard, Reg, and Dirk travel to Somerset in 1797 and interrupt Coleridge at work. This prevents \"Kubla Khan\" (containing the necessary information on how to repair the ship) from being finished and severs the critical link between Michael and the ghost. Reg nevertheless still sympathizes with the engineer, and so travels back to the accident once more. He transports the crew off the landing craft just before the explosion and brings them to the mothership, enabling them to continue on their quest elsewhere.\nIn the present day, Richard discovers Susan performing a cello piece that is hauntingly reminiscent of the Salaxalans' music ; he is baffled when she tells him it was composed by someone called \"Bach\". Reg admits that he recorded a portion of the Salaxalans' harmonies and gave it to the composer. Richard begs him to go back to the mothership and retrieve more, but Reg says this will not be possible \u2013 a man from British Telecom has come and fixed the phone.\nLiterary significance and reception.\nReviewing the book for \"The Times\", John Nicholson wrote it was \"endearingly dotty\", but doubted its commercial potential. Austin MacCurtain of the \"Sunday Times\" reviewed the paperback edition in 1988, saying that it was \"more of the same\" as \"Hitchhiker's\", and that the \"cosmic romp is stretched thin at times but will not disappoint fans\". The book was the 9th highest-selling hardback in the UK in 1987.\nJ. Michael Caparula reviewed \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" in \"Space Gamer/Fantasy Gamer\" No. 84. Caparula commented that \"The writing is wry and quite British, and the novel's quirky spirit is reminiscent of Rudy Rucker's mathematical farces. A nice change for Adams, proof that his talent goes far beyond the meandering \"Hitchhiker\" saga.\"\nIn 1990, the Magill Book Reviews said \"The author's whimsical sense of humor and his sense that the universe has many unexplored possibilities will arouse the interest of a wide readership.\"\nThis novel caused Adams to become acquainted with the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins. As Dawkins explains, \"As soon as I finished it, I turned back to page one and read it straight through again \u2013 the only time I have ever done that, and I wrote to tell him so. He replied that he was a fan of my books, and he invited me to his house in London.\" Adams would later introduce Dawkins to the woman who was to become his third wife, the actress Lalla Ward, best known for playing the character Romana in \"Doctor Who\". One of her early serials on the programme was \"City of Death\", which Adams wrote, and which shares certain plot elements with the novel.\nAdaptations.\nOn 5 January 1992, Dirk Gently, Richard MacDuff, Dirk's secretary, and the Electric Monk all appeared in the Douglas Adams episode of the British arts documentary series \"The South Bank Show\". Michael Bywater played Dirk, while Paul Shearer played both Richard and the Monk. Several characters from \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" were also featured, played by the original television series actors.\nThe book has been adapted for stage performance as \"Dirk\" and in 2005, some fans of Douglas Adams produced an amateur radio series based on the first book. Their efforts began and were coordinated on the Douglas Adams Continuum website. Three episodes were completed. Apart from the radio broadcasts, Douglas Adams recorded both unabridged and abridged readings of the first novel for the audiobook market.\nRadio.\nAnnounced on 26 January 2007, BBC Radio 4 commissioned Above the Title Productions to make eighteen 30-minute adaptations of Douglas Adams' \"Dirk Gently\" books (including \"The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul\" and the unfinished \"The Salmon of Doubt\"), running in three series of six episodes.\nThe first series began on 3 October 2007 and features Harry Enfield as Dirk, Billy Boyd as Richard, Olivia Colman as Janice, Jim Carter as Gilks, Andrew Sachs as Reg, Felicity Montagu as Susan, Robert Duncan as Gordon, Toby Longworth as the Monk, Michael Fenton Stevens as Michael, Andrew Secombe, Jon Glover, Jeffrey Holland, Wayne Forester and Tamsin Heatley.\nThe script for \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" was written by Dirk Maggs, who also directs, and John Langdon. The show was produced by Maggs and Jo Wheeler. As with the previous \"Hitchhiker\"'s series, the CD version features greatly expanded episodes. There are a number of structural and detail differences between the radio adaptation and the book, mostly to aid the comprehension of the story when split into six half-hour episodes.\nDirk Maggs parted ways with Above the Title Productions when he started his own production company, Perfectly Normal Productions, and so the project was never completed and the proposed radio series of \"The Salmon of Doubt\" remains unmade.\nComic book.\nCartoonist Ray Friesen made an unlicensed comic adaptation of the first novel for a book report. A few years later, in 2004, he posted 18 pages of it online as a webcomic.\nIDW Entertainment and Ideate Media have adapted \"Dirk Gently\" into a limited comic book series and, later, an American television series for BBC America. The comic series premiered in May 2015.\nTelevision.\nThere have been two television series based on Dirk Gently books and characters.\nThe first series, \"Dirk Gently\", featuring the character was announced during Hitchcon, a 2009 \"Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" event to launch the sixth \"Hitchhiker's\" book. Ed Victor, a literary agent who represents Adams' estate, announced that a television adaptation of \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" was in production. Stephen Mangan played Gently, with Darren Boyd as Macduff and Helen Baxendale as Susan. It was broadcast on BBC Four on 16 December 2010. The hour-long pilot was well-received, leading to three further episodes being commissioned. These aired on BBC4 during March 2012.\nA second series, \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" was released on Netflix in January 2016. BBC America produced 18 episodes starring Samuel Barnett as Dirk Gently, Elijah Wood as Todd Brotzman, Hannah Marks as Amanda Brotzman, and Jade Eshete as Farah Black. As of July 2025 it is available on the Netflix streaming service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50224", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50224", "title": "Wilberforce", "text": "Wilberforce may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50225", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50225", "title": "Prime meridian", "text": "Line of longitude, at which longitude is defined to be 0\u00b0\nA prime meridian is an arbitrarily chosen meridian (a line of longitude) in a geographic coordinate system at which longitude is defined to be 0\u00b0. On a spheroid, a prime meridian and its anti-meridian (the 180th meridian in a 360\u00b0-system) form a great ellipse. This divides the body (e.g. Earth) into two hemispheres: the Eastern Hemisphere and the Western Hemisphere (for an east-west notational system). For Earth's prime meridian, various conventions have been used or advocated in different regions throughout history. Earth's current international standard prime meridian is the IERS Reference Meridian. It is derived, but differs slightly, from the Greenwich Meridian, the previous standard.\nLongitudes for the Earth and Moon are measured from their prime meridian (at 0\u00b0) to 180\u00b0 east and west. For all other Solar System bodies, longitude is measured from 0\u00b0 (their prime meridian) to 360\u00b0. West longitudes are used if the rotation of the body is prograde (or 'direct', like Earth), meaning that its direction of rotation is the same as that of its orbit. East longitudes are used if the rotation is retrograde.\nHistory.\nThe notion of longitude for Greeks was developed by the Greek Eratosthenes (c.276\u00a0\u2013 195BCE) in Alexandria, and Hipparchus (c.190\u00a0\u2013 120BCE) in Rhodes, and applied to a large number of cities by the geographer Strabo (64/63BCE\u00a0\u2013 c.24CE). Ptolemy (c.90\u00a0\u2013 168CE) was the first geographer to use a consistent meridian for a world map, in his \"Geographia\".\nPtolemy used as his basis the \"Fortunate Isles\", a group of islands in the Atlantic, which are usually associated with the Canary Islands (13\u00b0W to 18\u00b0W), although his maps correspond more closely to the Cape Verde islands (22\u00b0W to 25\u00b0W). The main point is to be comfortably west of the western tip of Africa (17\u00b030\u2032W) as negative numbers were not yet in use. His prime meridian corresponds to 18\u00b040\u2032 west of Winchester (about 20\u00b0W) today. At that time the chief method of determining longitude was by using the reported times of lunar eclipses in different countries.\nOne of the earliest known descriptions of \"standard time\" in India appeared in the 4th century CE astronomical treatise Surya Siddhanta. Postulating a spherical Earth, the book described the thousands years old customs of the prime meridian, or zero longitude, as passing through \"Avanti\", the ancient name for the historic city of Ujjain, and \"Rohitaka\", the ancient name for Rohtak (), a city near the Kurukshetra.\nPtolemy's \"Geographia\" was first printed with maps at Bologna in 1477, and many early globes in the 16th century followed his lead, but there was still a hope that a \"natural\" basis for a prime meridian existed. In 1493, Christopher Columbus reported that the compass pointed due north somewhere in mid-Atlantic, and this fact was used in the important Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494, which settled the territorial dispute between Spain and Portugal over newly discovered lands. The Tordesillas line was eventually settled at 370 leagues (about ) west of Cape Verde. This is shown in the copies of Spain's Padron Real made by Diogo Ribeiro in 1527 and 1529. S\u00e3o Miguel Island (25\u00b030\u2032W) in the Azores was still used for the same reason as late as 1594 by Christopher Saxton, although by then it had been shown that the zero magnetic declination line did not follow a line of longitude.\nIn 1541, Mercator produced his 41\u00a0cm terrestrial globe and drew his prime meridian precisely through Fuerteventura (14\u00b01\u2032W) in the Canaries. His later maps used the Azores, following the magnetic hypothesis, but by the time that Ortelius produced the first modern atlas in 1570, other islands such as Cape Verde were coming into use. In his atlas longitudes were counted from 0\u00b0 to 360\u00b0, not 180\u00b0W to 180\u00b0E as is usual today. This practice was followed by navigators well into the 18th century. In 1634, Cardinal Richelieu used the westernmost island of the Canaries, El Hierro, 19\u00b055\u2032 west of Paris, as the choice of meridian. The geographer Delisle decided to round this off to 20\u00b0, so that it simply became the meridian of Paris disguised.\nIn the early 18th century, the battle was on to improve the determination of longitude at sea, leading to the development of the marine chronometer by John Harrison. The development of accurate star charts, principally by the first British Astronomer Royal, John Flamsteed between 1680 and 1719 and disseminated by his successor Edmund Halley, enabled navigators to use the lunar method of determining longitude more accurately using the octant developed by Thomas Godfrey and John Hadley.\nIn the 18th century most countries in Europe adapted their own \"prime\" meridian, usually through their capital, hence in France the Paris meridian was prime, in Prussia it was the Berlin meridian, in Denmark the Copenhagen meridian, and in United Kingdom the Greenwich meridian.\nBetween 1765 and 1811, Nevil Maskelyne published 49 issues of the \"Nautical Almanac\" based on the meridian of the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. \"Maskelyne's tables not only made the lunar method practicable, they also made the Greenwich meridian the universal reference point. Even the French translations of the \"Nautical Almanac\" retained Maskelyne's calculations from Greenwich \u2013 in spite of the fact that every other table in the \"Connaissance des Temps\" considered the Paris meridian as the prime.\"\nIn 1884, at the International Meridian Conference in Washington, D.C., 22 countries voted to adopt the Greenwich meridian as the prime meridian of the world. The French argued for a neutral line, mentioning the Azores and the Bering Strait, but eventually abstained and continued to use the Paris meridian until 1911.\nThe current international standard Prime Meridian is the IERS Reference Meridian. The International Hydrographic Organization adopted an early version of the IRM in 1983 for all nautical charts. It was adopted for air navigation by the International Civil Aviation Organization on 3 March 1989.\nInternational prime meridian.\nSince 1984, the international standard for the Earth's prime meridian is the IERS Reference Meridian. Between 1884 and 1984, the meridian of Greenwich was the world standard. These meridians are very close to each other.\nPrime meridian at Greenwich.\nIn October 1884 the Greenwich Meridian was selected by delegates (forty-one delegates representing twenty-five nations) to the International Meridian Conference held in Washington, D.C., United States to be the common zero of longitude and standard of time reckoning throughout the world.\nThe position of the historic prime meridian, based at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, was established by Sir George Airy in 1851. It was defined by the location of the Airy Transit Circle ever since the first observation he took with it. Prior to that, it was defined by a succession of earlier transit instruments, the first of which was acquired by the second Astronomer Royal, Edmond Halley in 1721. It was set up in the extreme north-west corner of the Observatory between Flamsteed House and the Western Summer House. This spot, now subsumed into Flamsteed House, is roughly 43 metres (47 yards) to the west of the Airy Transit Circle, a distance equivalent to roughly 2 seconds of longitude. It was Airy's transit circle that was adopted in principle (with French delegates, who pressed for adoption of the Paris meridian abstaining) as the Prime Meridian of the world at the 1884 International Meridian Conference.\nAll of these Greenwich meridians were located via an astronomic observation from the surface of the Earth, oriented via a plumb line along the direction of gravity at the surface. This astronomic Greenwich meridian was disseminated around the world, first via the lunar distance method, then by chronometers carried on ships, then via telegraph lines carried by submarine communications cables, then via radio time signals. One remote longitude ultimately based on the Greenwich meridian using these methods was that of the North American Datum 1927 or NAD27, an ellipsoid whose surface best matches mean sea level under the United States.\nIERS Reference Meridian.\nBeginning in 1973 the International Time Bureau and later the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service changed from reliance on optical instruments like the Airy Transit Circle to techniques such as lunar laser ranging, satellite laser ranging, and very-long-baseline interferometry. The new techniques resulted in the IERS Reference Meridian, the plane of which passes through the centre of mass of the Earth. This differs from the plane established by the Airy transit, which is affected by vertical deflection (the local vertical is affected by influences such as nearby mountains). The change from relying on the local vertical to using a meridian based on the centre of the Earth caused the modern prime meridian to be 5.3\u2033 east of the astronomic Greenwich prime meridian through the Airy Transit Circle. At the latitude of Greenwich, this amounts to 102 metres (112 yards). This was officially accepted by the Bureau International de l'Heure (BIH) in 1984 via its BTS84 (BIH Terrestrial System) that later became WGS84 (World Geodetic System 1984) and the various International Terrestrial Reference Frames (ITRFs).\nDue to the movement of Earth's tectonic plates, the line of 0\u00b0 longitude along the surface of the Earth has slowly moved toward the west from this shifted position by a few centimetres (inches); that is, towards the Airy Transit Circle (or the Airy Transit Circle has moved toward the east, depending on your point of view) since 1984 (or the 1960s). With the introduction of satellite technology, it became possible to create a more accurate and detailed global map. With these advances there also arose the necessity to define a reference meridian that, whilst being derived from the Airy Transit Circle, would also take into account the effects of plate movement and variations in the way that the Earth was spinning.\nAs a result, the IERS Reference Meridian was established and is commonly used to denote the Earth's prime meridian (0\u00b0 longitude) by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service, which defines and maintains the link between longitude and time. Based on observations to satellites and celestial compact radio sources (quasars) from various coordinated stations around the globe, Airy's transit circle drifts northeast about 2.5 centimetres (1 inch) per year relative to this Earth-centred 0\u00b0 longitude.\nIt is also the reference meridian of the Global Positioning System operated by the United States Department of Defense, and of WGS84 and its two formal versions, the ideal International Terrestrial Reference System (ITRS) and its realization, the International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF). A current convention on the Earth uses the line of longitude 180\u00b0 opposite the IRM as the basis for the International Date Line.\nList of places.\nOn Earth, starting at the North Pole and heading south to the South Pole, the IERS Reference Meridian (as of 2016) passes through 8 countries, 4 seas, 3 oceans and 1 channel:\nPrime meridian on other celestial bodies.\nAs on the Earth, prime meridians must be arbitrarily defined. Often a landmark such as a crater is used; other times a prime meridian is defined by reference to another celestial object, or by magnetic fields. \nThe prime meridians of the following planetographic systems have been defined:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50226", "revid": "50890289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50226", "title": "William Wilberforce", "text": "English politician and abolitionist (1759\u20131833)\nWilliam Wilberforce (24 August 1759 \u2013 29 July 1833) was a British politician, philanthropist, and a leader of the movement to abolish the Atlantic slave trade. A native of Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire, he began his political career in 1780, and became an independent Member of Parliament (MP) for Yorkshire (1784\u20131812). In 1785, he underwent a conversion experience and became an evangelical Anglican, which resulted in major changes to his lifestyle and a lifelong concern for reform.\nIn 1787, Wilberforce came into contact with Thomas Clarkson and a group of activists against the transatlantic slave trade, including Granville Sharp, Hannah More and Charles Middleton. They persuaded Wilberforce to take on the cause of abolition, and he became a leading English abolitionist. He headed the parliamentary campaign against the British slave trade for 20 years until the passage of the Slave Trade Act 1807.\nWilberforce was convinced of the importance of religion, morality and education. He championed causes and campaigns such as the Society for the Suppression of Vice, British missionary work in India, the creation of a free colony in Sierra Leone, the foundation of the Church Mission Society and the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. His underlying conservatism led him to support politically and socially repressive legislation, and resulted in criticism that he was ignoring injustices at home while campaigning for the enslaved abroad.\nIn later years, Wilberforce supported the campaign for the complete abolition of slavery and continued his involvement after 1826, when he resigned from Parliament because of his failing health. That campaign led to the Slavery Abolition Act 1833, which abolished slavery in most of the British Empire. Wilberforce died just three days after hearing that the passage of the act through Parliament was assured. He was buried in Westminster Abbey, close to his friend William Pitt the Younger.\nEarly life and education.\nWilberforce was born in Hull, in Yorkshire, England, on 24 August 1759. He was the only son of Robert Wilberforce, a wealthy merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Bird. His grandfather, William, had made the family fortune in the maritime trade with Baltic countries. He was twice elected mayor of Hull.\nWilberforce was a small, sickly child with poor eyesight. In 1767, he began attending Hull Grammar School, which at the time was headed by Joseph Milner, who would become a lifelong friend. Wilberforce profited from the supportive atmosphere at the school, until his father died in 1768. With his mother struggling to cope, the nine-year-old Wilberforce was sent to a prosperous uncle and aunt with houses in both St James's Place, London, and Wimbledon. He attended an \"indifferent\" boarding school in Putney for two years and spent his holidays in Wimbledon, where he grew extremely fond of his relatives. He became interested in evangelical Christianity due to his relatives' influence, especially that of his aunt Hannah, sister of the wealthy merchant John Thornton, a philanthropist and a supporter of the leading Methodist preacher, George Whitefield.\nWilberforce's staunchly Church of England mother and grandfather, alarmed at these nonconformist influences and at his leanings towards evangelicalism, brought the 12-year-old boy back to Hull in 1771. Wilberforce was heartbroken at being separated from his aunt and uncle. His family opposed a return to Hull Grammar School because the headmaster had become a Methodist, and Wilberforce continued his education at Pocklington School from 1771 to 1776. Influenced by Methodist scruples, he initially resisted Hull's lively social life, but, as his religious fervour diminished, he embraced theatre-going, attended balls, and played cards.\nIn October 1776, at the age of seventeen, Wilberforce went up to St John's College, Cambridge. The deaths of his grandfather and uncle, in 1774 and 1777 respectively, had left him independently wealthy and as a result he had little inclination or need to apply himself to serious study. Instead he immersed himself in the social round of student life and pursued a hedonistic lifestyle, enjoying cards, gambling and late-night drinking sessions \u2013 although he found the excesses of some of his fellow students distasteful. Witty, generous and an excellent conversationalist, Wilberforce was a popular figure. He made many friends, including the more studious future Prime Minister William Pitt. Despite his lifestyle and lack of interest in studying, he managed to pass his examinations and was awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1781 and a Master of Arts degree in 1788.\nEarly parliamentary career.\nWilberforce began to consider a political career while still at university and during the winter of 1779\u20131780, he and Pitt frequently watched House of Commons debates from the gallery. Pitt, already set on a political career, encouraged Wilberforce to join him in obtaining a parliamentary seat. In September 1780, at the age of 21 and while still a student, Wilberforce was elected Member of Parliament for Kingston upon Hull, spending over \u00a38,000, as was the custom of the time, to ensure he received the necessary votes. Free from financial pressures, Wilberforce sat as an independent, resolving to be \"no party man\". Criticised at times for inconsistency, he supported both Tory and Whig governments according to his conscience, working closely with the party in power, and voting on specific measures according to their merits.\nWilberforce attended Parliament regularly, but he also maintained a lively social life, becoming an habitu\u00e9 of gentlemen's gambling clubs such as Goostree's and Boodle's in Pall Mall, London. The writer and socialite Madame de Sta\u00ebl described him as the \"wittiest man in England\" and, according to Georgiana, Duchess of Devonshire, the Prince of Wales said that he would go anywhere to hear Wilberforce sing. Wilberforce used his speaking voice to great effect in political speeches; the diarist and author James Boswell witnessed Wilberforce's eloquence in the House of Commons and noted, \"I saw what seemed a mere shrimp mount upon the table; but as I listened, he grew, and grew, until the shrimp became a whale.\"\nDuring the frequent government changes between 1781 and 1784, Wilberforce supported his friend Pitt in parliamentary debates. In autumn 1783, Pitt, Wilberforce and Edward Eliot travelled to France for a six-week holiday together. After a difficult start in Rheims, where their presence aroused police suspicion that they were English spies, they visited Paris, meeting Benjamin Franklin, General Lafayette, Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI, and joined the French court at Fontainebleau.\nPitt became Prime Minister in December 1783, with Wilberforce a key supporter of his minority government. Despite their close friendship, there is no record that Pitt offered Wilberforce a ministerial position in this or future governments. This may have been due to Wilberforce's wish to remain an independent MP. Alternatively, Wilberforce's frequent tardiness and disorganisation, as well as his chronic eye problems that at times made reading impossible, may have convinced Pitt that he was not ministerial material. When Parliament was dissolved in the spring of 1784, Wilberforce decided to stand as a candidate for the county of Yorkshire in the 1784 general election. On 6 April, he was returned as MP for Yorkshire at the age of twenty-four.\nConversion.\nIn October 1784, Wilberforce embarked upon a tour of Europe with his mother, sister and Isaac Milner, the younger brother of his former headmaster. They visited the French Riviera and had dinners, played cards, and gambled. In February 1785, Wilberforce returned to London temporarily, to support Pitt's proposals for parliamentary reforms. He rejoined the party in Genoa, Italy, and they continued their tour to Switzerland. Milner accompanied Wilberforce to England, and on the journey they read \"The Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul\" by Philip Doddridge, a leading early 18th-century English nonconformist.\nWilberforce's spiritual journey is thought to have changed course at this time. He started to rise early to read the Bible and pray and kept a private journal. He underwent an evangelical conversion, regretting his past life and resolving to commit his future life and work to the service of God. His conversion changed some of his habits, but not his nature: he remained outwardly cheerful, interested and respectful, tactfully urging others towards his new faith. Inwardly, he became self-critical, harshly judging his spirituality, use of time, vanity, self-control and relationships with others.\nAt the time, religious enthusiasm was generally regarded as a social transgression and was stigmatised in polite society. Evangelicals in the upper classes were exposed to contempt and ridicule, and Wilberforce's conversion led him to question whether he should remain in public life. He sought guidance from John Newton, a leading evangelical Anglican clergyman of the day and Rector of St Mary Woolnoth. Both counselled him to remain in politics, and he resolved to do so \"with increased diligence and conscientiousness\". His political views were informed by his faith and by his desire to promote Christianity and Christian ethics in private and public life. His views were often deeply conservative, opposed to radical changes in a God-given political and social order, and focused on issues such as the observance of the Sabbath and the eradication of immorality through education and reform. He was often distrusted by progressive voices because of his conservatism, and regarded with suspicion by many Tories who saw evangelicals as radicals who wanted the overthrow of church and state.\nIn 1786, Wilberforce leased a house in Old Palace Yard, Westminster, in order to be near the houses of Parliament. He began using his parliamentary position to advocate reform by introducing a Registration Bill, proposing limited changes to parliamentary election procedures. In response to the need for bodies for dissection by surgeons, he brought forward a bill to extend the measure permitting the dissection after execution of criminals such as rapists, arsonists, burglars and violent robbers. The bill also advocated the reduction of sentences for women convicted of treason, a crime that at the time included a husband's murder. The House of Commons passed both bills, but they were defeated in the House of Lords.\nAbolition of the transatlantic slave trade.\nInitial decision.\nThe British initially became involved in the slave trade during the 16th century. By 1783, the triangular route that took British-made goods to Africa to buy slaves, transported the enslaved to the West Indies, and then brought slave-grown products such as sugar, tobacco, and cotton to Britain, represented about 80\u00a0percent of Great Britain's foreign income. British ships dominated the slave trade, supplying French, Spanish, Dutch, Portuguese and British colonies, and in peak years carried forty thousand enslaved men, women and children across the Atlantic in the horrific conditions of the middle passage. Of the estimated 11\u00a0million Africans transported into slavery, about 1.4\u00a0million died during the voyage.\nThe British campaign to abolish the slave trade is generally considered to have begun in the 1780s with the establishment of the Quakers' anti-slavery committees, and their presentation to Parliament of the first slave trade petition in 1783. The same year, Wilberforce, while dining with his Cambridge friend Gerard Edwards, met Rev. James Ramsay, a ship's surgeon who had become a clergyman and medical supervisor on the island of St Christopher (later St Kitts). Ramsay was horrified by the conditions endured by the enslaved peoples, both at sea and on the plantations and returned to England and joined abolitionist movements. Wilberforce did not follow up on his meeting with Ramsay, but three years later, inspired by his new faith, Wilberforce became interested in humanitarian reform. In November 1786, he received a letter from Sir Charles Middleton that re-opened his interest in the slave trade. Middleton suggested that Wilberforce bring forward the abolition of the slave trade in Parliament. Wilberforce responded that he \"felt the great importance of the subject, and thought himself unequal to the task allotted to him, but yet would not positively decline it\". He began to read widely on the subject and met with a group of abolitionists called the Testonites at Middleton's home in the early winter of 1786\u20131787.\nIn early 1787, Thomas Clarkson met with Wilberforce for the first time at Old Palace Yard and brought a copy of his essay on the subject. Clarkson visited Wilberforce weekly, bringing first-hand evidence he had obtained about the slave trade. The Quakers, already working for abolition, recognised the need for influence within Parliament, and urged Clarkson to secure a commitment from Wilberforce to bring forward the case for abolition in the House of Commons. It was arranged that Bennet Langton, a Lincolnshire landowner and mutual acquaintance of Wilberforce and Clarkson, would organise a dinner party on 13 March 1787 to ask Wilberforce formally to lead the parliamentary campaign. By the end of the evening, Wilberforce had agreed in general terms that he would bring forward the abolition of the slave trade in Parliament, \"provided that no person more proper could be found\".\nThe same spring, on 12 May 1787, the still hesitant Wilberforce held a conversation with William Pitt and the future Prime Minister William Grenville as they sat under a large oak tree on Pitt's estate in Kent. Under what came to be known as the \"Wilberforce Oak\" at Holwood House, Pitt challenged his friend to give notice of a motion concerning the slave trade before another parliamentarian did. Wilberforce's response is not recorded, but he later declared this was when he decided to bring forward the motion.\nEarly parliamentary action.\nWilberforce had planned to introduce a motion giving notice that he would bring forward a bill for the Abolition of the Slave Trade during the 1789 parliamentary session. However, in January 1788, he was taken ill with a probable stress-related condition, now thought to be ulcerative colitis. It was several months before he was able to resume work, and he spent time convalescing at Bath and Cambridge. His regular bouts of gastrointestinal illnesses precipitated the use of moderate quantities of opium, which proved effective in alleviating his condition, and which he continued to use for the rest of his life. In Wilberforce's absence, Pitt, who had long been supportive of abolition, introduced the preparatory motion himself, and ordered a Privy Council investigation into the slave trade, followed by a House of Commons review.\nWith the publication of the Privy Council report in April 1789 and following months of planning, Wilberforce commenced his parliamentary campaign. On 12 May 1789, he made his first major speech on the subject of abolition in the House of Commons, in which he reasoned that the trade was morally reprehensible and an issue of natural justice. Drawing on Thomas Clarkson's mass of evidence, he described in detail the appalling conditions in which enslaved people travelled from Africa in the middle passage and argued that abolishing the trade would also bring an improvement to the conditions of existing slaves in the West Indies. He moved twelve resolutions condemning the slave trade, but did not refer to the abolition of slavery itself, instead dwelling on the potential for reproduction in the existing slave population should the trade be abolished. With several parliamentarians signalling support for the bill, the opponents of abolition delayed the vote by proposing that the House of Commons hear its own evidence; Wilberforce, in a decision that has been criticised for prolonging the slave trade, reluctantly agreed. The hearings were not completed by the end of the parliamentary session and were deferred until the following year. In the meantime, Wilberforce and Clarkson tried unsuccessfully to take advantage of the egalitarian atmosphere of the French Revolution to press for France's abolition of the trade. In January 1790, Wilberforce succeeded in speeding up the hearings by gaining approval for a smaller parliamentary select committee to consider the vast quantity of evidence which had been accumulated. Wilberforce's house in Old Palace Yard became a centre for the abolitionists' campaign and the location for many strategy meetings. Petitioners for other causes also besieged him there.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLet us not despair; it is a blessed cause, and success, ere long, will crown our exertions. Already we have gained one victory; we have obtained, for these poor creatures, the recognition of their human nature, which, for a while was most shamefully denied. This is the first fruits of our efforts; let us persevere and our triumph will be complete. Never, never will we desist till we have wiped away this scandal from the Christian name, released ourselves from the load of guilt, under which we at present labour, and extinguished every trace of this bloody traffic, of which our posterity, looking back to the history of these enlightened times, will scarce believe that it has been suffered to exist so long a disgrace and dishonour to this country.\nWilliam Wilberforce \u2014 speech before the House of Commons, 18 April 1791\nInterrupted by a general election in June 1790, the committee finished hearing witnesses and in April 1791, with a closely reasoned four-hour speech, Wilberforce introduced the first parliamentary bill to abolish the slave trade. After two evenings of debate, the bill was easily defeated by 163 votes to 88, as the political climate having swung in a conservative direction after the French Revolution and in reaction to an increase in radicalism and to slave revolts in the French West Indies.\nA protracted parliamentary campaign to abolish slavery continued, and Wilberforce remained committed to this cause despite frustration and hostility. He was supported by fellow members of the Clapham Sect, among whom was his best friend and cousin Henry Thornton. Wilberforce accepted an invitation to share a house with Henry Thornton in 1792, moving into his own home after Thornton's marriage in 1796. \nWilberforce, the Clapham Sect and others were anxious to demonstrate that Africans, and particularly freed slaves, had human and economic abilities beyond the slave trade and capable of sustaining a well-ordered society, trade and cultivation. Inspired in part by the utopian vision of Granville Sharp, they became involved in the establishment in 1792 of a free colony in Sierra Leone with black settlers from Britain, Nova Scotia and Jamaica, as well as native Africans and some whites. They formed the Sierra Leone Company, with Wilberforce subscribing liberally to the project in money and time.\nOn 2 April 1792, Wilberforce brought another bill calling for abolition of the slave trade. Henry Dundas, as Home Secretary, proposed a compromise solution of gradual abolition of the trade over several years. This was passed by 230 to 85 votes, but Wilberforce believed that it was little more than a clever ploy to ensure that total abolition would be delayed indefinitely.\nWar with France.\nOn 26 February 1793, another vote to abolish the slave trade was narrowly defeated by eight votes. The outbreak of war with France the same month prevented further consideration of the issue, as politicians concentrated on the national crisis and the threat of invasion. The same year, and again in 1794, Wilberforce unsuccessfully brought before Parliament a bill to outlaw British ships from supplying enslaved people to foreign colonies. He voiced his concern about the war and urged Pitt and his government to make greater efforts to end hostilities. Growing more alarmed, on 31 December 1794, Wilberforce moved that the government seek a peaceful resolution with France, a stance that created a temporary breach in his long friendship with Pitt.\nAbolition continued to be associated in the public consciousness with the French Revolution and with British radical groups, resulting in a decline in public support. Despite this, Wilberforce continued to introduce abolition bills throughout the 1790s.\nThe early years of the 19th century saw an increased public interest in abolition. In June 1804, Wilberforce's bill to abolish the slave trade successfully passed all its stages through the House of Commons. However, it was too late in the parliamentary session for it to complete its passage through the House of Lords. On its reintroduction during the 1805 session, it was defeated, with even the usually sympathetic Pitt failing to support it. On this occasion and throughout the campaign, abolition was held back by Wilberforce's trusting, even credulous nature, and his deferential attitude towards those in power. He found it difficult to believe that men of rank would not do what he perceived to be the right thing, and was reluctant to confront them when they did not.\nFinal phase of the campaign.\nFollowing Pitt's death in January 1806, Wilberforce increased his collaboration with the Whigs, especially the abolitionists. He gave general support to the Grenville\u2013Fox administration, which brought more abolitionists into the cabinet; Wilberforce and Charles Fox led the campaign in the House of Commons.\nA radical change of tactics, which involved the introduction of a bill to ban British subjects from aiding or participating in the slave trade to the French colonies, was suggested by the maritime lawyer James Stephen. A bill was introduced and approved by the cabinet, and Wilberforce and other abolitionists maintained a self-imposed silence, so as not to draw any attention to the effect of the bill. The approach was successful and the Foreign Slave Trade Bill received royal assent on 23 May 1806. Wilberforce and Clarkson collected a large volume of evidence against the slave trade over the previous two decades, and Wilberforce spent the latter part of 1806 writing \"A Letter on the Abolition of the Slave Trade\", which was a comprehensive restatement of the abolitionists' case.\nWilberforce was re-elected as an MP for Yorkshire in the 1806 United Kingdom general election, after which he returned to finishing and publishing his \"Letter\", a 400-page book which formed the basis for the final phase of the campaign. Lord Grenville, the Prime Minister, successfully introduced an Abolition Bill in the House of Lords first, then Charles Grey moved for a second reading in the Commons on 23 February 1807. As tributes were made to Wilberforce, whose face streamed with tears, the bill was carried by 283 votes to 16. Excited supporters suggested taking advantage of the large majority to seek the abolition of slavery itself, but Wilberforce made it clear that total emancipation was not the immediate goal.\nPersonal life.\nIn his youth, William Wilberforce showed little interest in women, but when he was in his late thirties his friend Thomas Babington recommended 25-year-old Barbara Ann Spooner as a potential bride. Wilberforce met her two days later on 15 April 1797, and was immediately smitten; following an eight-day whirlwind romance, he proposed. Despite the urgings of friends to slow down, the couple married at the Church of St Swithin in Bath, Somerset, on 30 May 1797. \nThey were devoted to each other, and Barbara was very attentive and supportive to Wilberforce in his increasing ill health, though she showed little interest in his political activities. They had six children in fewer than ten years: William (born 1798), Barbara (born 1799), Elizabeth (born 1801), Robert (born 1802), Samuel (born 1805) and Henry (born 1807). Wilberforce was an indulgent and adoring father who revelled in his time at home and at play with his children.\nOther concerns.\nPolitical and social reform.\nWilberforce was highly conservative on many political and social issues. He advocated change in society through Christianity and improvement in morals, education and religion, fearing and opposing radical causes and revolution. The radical writer William Cobbett was among those who attacked what they saw as Wilberforce's hypocrisy in campaigning for better working conditions for enslaved people while British workers lived in terrible conditions at home. Critics noted Wilberforce's support of the suspension of \"habeas corpus\" in 1795 and his votes for Pitt's \"Gagging Bills\", which banned meetings of more than 50\u00a0people, allowing speakers to be arrested and imposing harsh penalties on those who attacked the constitution. \nWilberforce was opposed to giving workers' rights to organise into unions, in 1799 speaking in favour of the Combination Act, which suppressed trade union activity throughout Britain, and calling unions \"a general disease in our society\". He also opposed an enquiry into the 1819 Peterloo Massacre in which eleven protesters were killed at a political rally demanding reform. Concerned about \"bad men who wished to produce anarchy and confusion\", he approved of the government's Six Acts, which further limited public meetings and seditious writings. Wilberforce's actions led the essayist William Hazlitt to condemn him as one \"who preaches vital Christianity to untutored savages, and tolerates its worst abuses in civilised states.\"\nWilberforce's views of women and religion were also conservative. He disapproved of women anti-slavery activists such as Elizabeth Heyrick, who organised women's abolitionist groups in the 1820s, protesting: \"[F]or ladies to meet, to publish, to go from house to house stirring up petitions\u2014these appear to me proceedings unsuited to the female character as delineated in Scripture.\" Wilberforce initially strongly opposed bills for Catholic emancipation, which would have allowed Catholics to become MPs, hold public office and serve in the army, although by 1813, he had changed his views and spoke in favour of a similar bill.\nWilberforce advocated legislation to improve the working conditions for chimney-sweeps and textile workers, engaged in prison reform, and supported campaigns to restrict capital punishment and the severe punishments meted out under the Game laws. He recognised the importance of education in alleviating poverty, and when Hannah More and her sister established Sunday schools for the poor in Somerset and the Mendips, he provided financial and moral support as they faced opposition from landowners and Anglican clergy. \nFrom the late 1780s onward, Wilberforce campaigned for limited parliamentary reform, such as the abolition of rotten boroughs and the redistribution of Commons seats to growing towns and cities, though by 1832, he feared that such measures went too far. With others, Wilberforce founded the world's first animal welfare organisation, the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (later the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals). He was also opposed to duelling, which he described as the \"disgrace of a Christian society\" and was appalled when his friend Pitt engaged in a duel with George Tierney in 1798, particularly as it occurred on a Sunday, the Christian day of rest.\nWilberforce was generous with his time and money, believing that those with wealth had a duty to give a significant portion of their income to the needy. Yearly, he gave away thousands of pounds, much of it to clergymen to distribute in their parishes. He paid off the debts of others, supported education and missions, and in a year of food shortages, gave to charity more than his own yearly income. He was exceptionally hospitable, and could not bear to sack any of his servants. As a result, his home was full of old and incompetent servants kept on in charity. Although he was often months behind in his correspondence, Wilberforce responded to numerous requests for advice or for help in obtaining professorships, military promotions and livings for clergymen, or for the reprieve of death sentences.\nEvangelical Christianity.\nA supporter of the evangelical wing of the Church of England, Wilberforce believed that the revitalisation of the church and individual Christian observance would lead to a harmonious, moral society. He sought to elevate the status of religion in public and private life, making piety fashionable in both the upper- and middle-classes of society. To this end, in April 1797, Wilberforce published \"A Practical View of the Prevailing Religious System of Professed Christians in the Higher and Middle Classes of This Country Contrasted With Real Christianity\", on which he had been working since 1793. This was an exposition of New Testament doctrine and teachings and a call for a revival of Christianity, as a response to the moral decline of the nation, illustrating his own testimony and the views which inspired him. The book was influential and a best-seller; 7,500\u00a0copies were sold within six months, and it was translated into several languages.\nWilberforce fostered and supported missionary activity in Britain and abroad, and was involved with other members of the Clapham Sect in various evangelical and charitable organisations. He was a founding member of the Church Missionary Society (since renamed the Church Mission Society) and an early vice-president of the London Society for promoting Christianity among the Jews (later the Church's Ministry Among Jewish People). Horrified by the lack of Christian evangelism in India, Wilberforce used the 1793 renewal of the British East India Company's charter to propose the addition of clauses requiring the company to provide teachers and chaplains and to commit to the \"religious improvement\" of Indians. The plan was unsuccessful due to lobbying by the directors of the company, who feared that their commercial interests would be damaged. \nIn 1813, Wilberforce tried again when the charter next came up for renewal. Using petitions, meetings, lobbying and letter writing, he successfully campaigned for changes to the charter. Speaking in favour of the Charter Act 1813, he criticised the East India Company and their rule in India for its hypocrisy and racial prejudice, while also condemning aspects of Hinduism including the caste system, infanticide, polygamy and sati.\nMoral reform.\nGreatly concerned by what he perceived to be the degeneracy of British society, Wilberforce was active in matters of moral reform, lobbying against \"the torrent of profaneness that every day makes more rapid advances\", and considered this issue and the abolition of the slave trade as equally important goals. At the suggestion of Wilberforce and Bishop Porteus, King George III was requested by the Archbishop of Canterbury to issue in 1787 \"A Proclamation for the Encouragement of Piety and Virtue\", as a remedy for the rising tide of immorality. The proclamation commanded the prosecution of those guilty of \"excessive drinking, blasphemy, profane swearing and cursing, lewdness, profanation of the Lord's Day, and other dissolute, immoral, or disorderly practices\". Greeted largely with public indifference, Wilberforce sought to increase its impact by mobilising public figures to the cause, and by founding the Society for the Suppression of Vice. This and other societies in which Wilberforce was a prime mover, mustered support for the prosecution of those who had been charged with violating relevant laws, including brothel keepers, distributors of pornographic material, and those who did not respect the Sabbath.\nThe writer and clergyman Sydney Smith criticised Wilberforce for being more interested in the sins of the poor than those of the rich, and suggested that a better name would be the \"Society for suppressing the vices of persons whose income does not exceed \u00a3500 per annum\". Wilberforce's attempts to legislate against adultery and Sunday newspapers were also in vain; his involvement and leadership in other, less punitive, approaches were more successful in the long-term, however. By the end of his life, British morals, manners, and sense of social responsibility had increased, paving the way for future changes in societal conventions and attitudes during the Victorian era.\nEmancipation of enslaved Africans.\nWilberforce worked with the members of the African Institution to ensure the enforcement of the abolition of the slave trade and to promote abolitionist negotiations with other countries. In particular, the United States had abolished the slave trade after 1808 and Wilberforce lobbied the American government to enforce its own mandated prohibition more strongly. The same year, Wilberforce moved his family from Clapham to a sizeable mansion with a large garden in Kensington Gore, closer to the Houses of Parliament. In worsening health by 1812, Wilberforce resigned his Yorkshire seat, and became MP for the rotten borough of Bramber in Sussex, a seat with little or no constituency obligations, thus allowing him more time for his family and the causes that interested him. \nFrom 1816, Wilberforce introduced a series of bills which would require the compulsory registration of enslaved people, together with details of their country of origin, permitting the illegal importation of foreign slaves to be detected. Later in 1816 he began to publicly denounce slavery itself, though he did not demand immediate emancipation, believing incremental change to be more effective in achieving abolition.\nIn 1820, after a period of poor health and with his eyesight failing, Wilberforce further limited public activities, although he became embroiled in unsuccessful mediation attempts between King George IV, and his estranged wife Caroline of Brunswick, who had sought her rights as queen of the realm. Wilberforce still hoped \"to lay a foundation for some future measures for the emancipation of the poor slaves\". Aware that the cause would need younger men to continue the work, in 1821 he asked MP Thomas Fowell Buxton to take over leadership of the campaign in the Commons. As the 1820s continued, Wilberforce increasingly became more of a figurehead for the abolitionist movement, although he continued to appear at anti-slavery meetings, welcoming visitors, and maintaining a busy correspondence on the subject.\nIn 1823, Wilberforce's 56-page \"Appeal to the Religion, Justice and Humanity of the Inhabitants of the British Empire in Behalf of the Negro Slaves in the West Indies\" was published. The treatise stated that total emancipation was morally and ethically required and that slavery was a national crime which must be ended by parliamentary legislation to gradually abolish slavery. Members of Parliament did not agree, and government opposition in March 1823 stymied Wilberforce's call for abolition. On 15 May 1823, Buxton moved another resolution in Parliament for gradual emancipation. Debates followed on 16 March and 11 June 1824 in which Wilberforce made his last speeches in the House of Commons, and which again saw the emancipationists outmanoeuvred by the government.\nLast years.\nWilberforce's health was continuing to fail, and he suffered further illnesses in 1824 and 1825. With his family concerned that his life was endangered, he declined a peerage and resigned his seat in Parliament, leaving the campaign to others.\nIn 1826, Wilberforce moved from his large house in Kensington Gore to Hendon Park, a more modest property in the countryside of Mill Hill, north of London, where he was joined by his son William and family. William had attempted a series of educational and career paths, and a venture into farming in 1830 led to huge losses, which his father repaid in full, despite offers from others to assist. This left Wilberforce with little income, and he was obliged to let his home and spend the rest of his life visiting family members and friends. \nHe continued his support for the anti-slavery cause, including attending and chairing meetings of the Anti-Slavery Society. Wilberforce approved of the 1830 election victory of the more progressive Whigs, though he was concerned about the implications of their Reform Bill which proposed the redistribution of parliamentary seats towards newer towns and cities and an extension of the franchise.\nIn 1833, Wilberforce's health declined further and he suffered a severe attack of influenza from which he never fully recovered. He made a final anti-slavery speech in April 1833 at a public meeting in Maidstone, Kent. The following month, the Whig government introduced the Bill for the Abolition of Slavery, formally saluting Wilberforce in the process. On 26 July 1833, Wilberforce heard of government concessions that guaranteed the passing of the Bill for the Abolition of Slavery. The following day he grew much weaker, and he died early on the morning of 29 July at his cousin's house in Cadogan Place, London.\nFuneral.\nWilberforce had left instructions that he be buried with his sister and daughter at St Mary's Church, Stoke Newington, just north of London. However, the leading members of both Houses of Parliament urged that he be honoured with a burial in Westminster Abbey. The family agreed and, on 3 August 1833, Wilberforce was buried in the north transept, close to his friend William Pitt. The funeral was attended by many Members of Parliament, as well as by members of the public. The pallbearers included the Duke of Gloucester, the Lord Chancellor Henry Brougham, and the Speaker of the House of Commons Charles Manners-Sutton. While tributes were paid and Wilberforce was laid to rest, both Houses of Parliament suspended their business as a mark of respect.\nLegacy.\nFive years after his death, sons Robert and Samuel Wilberforce published a five-volume biography about their father, and subsequently a collection of his letters in 1840. The biography was controversial in that the authors emphasised Wilberforce's role in the abolition movement and played down the important work of Thomas Clarkson. Clarkson wrote a book refuting their version of events, and the sons eventually made a half-hearted private apology to him and removed the offending passages in a revision of their biography. For more than a century, Wilberforce's role in the campaign dominated the historical record. Later historians have noted the warm and highly productive relationship between Clarkson and Wilberforce, and have termed it one of history's great partnerships: without both the parliamentary leadership supplied by Wilberforce and the research and public mobilisation organised by Clarkson, abolition could not have been achieved.\nAs his sons had desired and planned, Wilberforce has long been viewed as a Christian hero, a statesman-saint held up as a role model for putting his faith into action. Contemporary evangelical and conservative movements in North America appropriate his name and example in their activism. The strategies of Wilberforce and other abolitionists are invoked by anti-abortion activists, who controversially equate the abolition of slavery with ending abortion.\nWilberforce has also been described as a humanitarian reformer who contributed to reshaping the political and social attitudes of the time by promoting concepts of social responsibility and action. In the 1940s, the role of Wilberforce and the Clapham Sect in abolition was downplayed by historian Eric Williams, who argued that abolition was motivated not by humanitarianism but by economics, as the West Indian sugar industry was in decline. Williams's approach strongly influenced historians for much of the latter part of the 20th century. More recent historians have noted that the sugar industry was still making large profits at the time of the abolition of the slave trade, and this has led to a renewed interest in Wilberforce and the evangelicals, as well as a recognition of the anti-slavery movement as a prototype for subsequent humanitarian campaigns.\nMemorials.\nWilberforce's life and work have been commemorated in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. In Westminster Abbey, a seated statue of Wilberforce by Samuel Joseph was erected in 1840, bearing an epitaph praising his Christian character and his long labour to abolish the slave trade and slavery.\nIn Wilberforce's hometown of Hull, a public subscription in 1834 funded the Wilberforce Monument, a Greek Doric column topped by a statue of Wilberforce, which stands in the grounds of Hull College near Queen's Gardens. Wilberforce Memorial School for the Blind in York was established in 1833 in his honour. Wilberforce's birthplace was acquired by the city corporation in 1903 and, following renovation, Wilberforce House in Hull was opened as Britain's first slavery museum. In 2006, the University of Hull established the Wilberforce Institute for the study of Slavery and Emancipation in a building beside Wilberforce House.\nVarious churches within the Anglican Communion commemorate Wilberforce in their liturgical calendars, and Wilberforce University in Ohio, United States, founded in 1856, is named after him. The university was the first owned by African-American people, and is an historically black college. In Ontario, Canada, the Wilberforce Colony was founded by black reformers, and inhabited by freed slaves from the United States.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50227", "revid": "43961533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50227", "title": "Etruscan script", "text": ""}
{"id": "50229", "revid": "30585864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50229", "title": "Erich Raeder", "text": "German admiral (1876\u20131960)\nErich Johann Albert Raeder (; 24 April 1876 \u2013 6 November 1960) was a German admiral who played a major role in the naval history of World War II and was convicted of war crimes after the war. He attained the highest possible naval rank, that of grand admiral, in 1939. Raeder led the Kriegsmarine for the first half of the war; he resigned in January 1943 and was replaced by Karl D\u00f6nitz. At the Nuremberg trials he was sentenced to life imprisonment but was released early owing to failing health in 1955.\nEarly years.\nRaeder was born into a middle-class Protestant family in Wandsbek in the Prussian province of Schleswig-Holstein in the German Empire. His father was a headmaster. \nRaeder idolised his father Hans Raeder, who as a teacher and a father was noted for his marked authoritarian views, and who impressed upon his son the values of hard work, thrift, religion and discipline \u2013 all of which Raeder was to preach throughout his life. Hans Raeder also taught his children to support the existing government of alleged \"non-political\" experts led by Bismarck who were said to stand \"above politics\" and were alleged to only do what was best for Germany. In the same way, Hans Raeder warned his children that if Germany were to become a democracy, that would be a disaster as it would mean government by men \"playing politics\"-doing what was only best for their petty sectarian interests instead of the nation. \nLike many other middle-class Germans of his time, Hans Raeder strongly disliked the Social Democrats, whom he accused of playing \"party politics\" in the \"Reichstag\" by promoting working class interests instead of thinking about the national good, a stance that his son also adopted. Throughout his entire life, Raeder claimed that he was \"apolitisch\" (someone who was \"above politics\", i.e. only thought about the good of the nation instead of his party), and as an \"apolitical\" officer, Raeder thus maintained that his support for sea power was based upon objective consideration of the national good.\nNaval career until World War II.\nImperial German Navy.\nRaeder joined the \"Kaiserliche Marine\" (Imperial Navy) in 1894 and rapidly rose in rank, becoming chief of staff for Franz von Hipper in 1912. Raeder's rise up the ranks was due mostly to his intelligence and hard work though from 1901 to 1903 Raeder served on the staff of Prince Heinrich of Prussia, and gained a powerful patron in the process. Owing to his cold and distant personality, Raeder was a man whom even his friends often admitted to knowing very little about. The dominating figure of the Navy was Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz, the autocratic State Secretary of the Navy. Tirpitz's preferred means of obtaining \"world power status\" was through his \"Risikotheorie\" (risk theory) where Germany would build a \"Risikoflotte\" (Risk Fleet) that would make it too dangerous for Britain to risk a war with Germany, and thereby alter the international balance of power decisively in the \"Reich\"'s favor. Tirpitz transformed the Navy from the small coastal defense force of 1897 into the mighty High Seas Fleet of 1914.\nIn 1904, Raeder, who spoke fluent Russian, was sent to the Far East as an observer of the Russo-Japanese War. Starting in 1905, Raeder worked in the public relations section of the Navy, where he first met Tirpitz and began his introduction to politics by briefing journalists to run articles promoting the \"Seemachtideologie\" and meeting politicians who held seats in the \"Reichstag\" in order to convert them to the \"Seemachtideologie\". Working closely with Tirpitz, Raeder was heavily involved in the lobbying the \"Reichstag\" to pass the Third Navy Law of 1906 which committed Germany to building \"all big gun battleships\" to compete with the new British in the Anglo-German naval race that had only begun at the start of the 20th century.\nRaeder was the captain of Kaiser Wilhelm II's private yacht in the years leading up to World War I. In itself, this was not a rewarding post, but often people in this post were quickly promoted afterwards.\nWorld War I.\nRaeder served as Hipper's chief of staff during World War I, as well as in combat posts. He took part in the Battle of Dogger Bank in 1915 and in the Battle of Jutland in 1916. Raeder later described Hipper as an admiral who \"hated paperwork\"; accordingly, Hipper delegated considerable power to Raeder, who thus enjoyed more influence than his position as chief of staff would suggest.\nDuring and after World War I the German navy was divided into two schools of thought. One, led by Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz (1849\u20131930), consisted of avid followers of the teachings of the American historian Alfred Thayer Mahan (1840\u20131914) and believed in building a \"balanced fleet\" centered around the battleship that would seek out and win a decisive battle of annihilation (\"Entscheidungsschlacht\") against the Royal Navy in the event of war. The other school, led by Commander Wolfgang Wegener (1875\u20131956), argued that because of superior British shipbuilding capacity Germany could never hope to build a \"balanced fleet\" capable of winning an \"Entscheidungsschlacht\", and so the best use of German naval strength was to build a fleet of cruisers and submarines that would wage a \"guerre de course\" (commerce raiding against an enemy's merchant shipping). After reading all three of Wegener's papers setting out his ideas, Admiral Hipper decided to submit them to the Admiralty in Berlin, but changed his mind after reading a paper by Raeder attacking the Wegener thesis as flawed. This marked the beginning of a long feud between Raeder and Wegener, with Wegener claiming that his former friend Raeder was jealous of what Wegener insisted were his superior ideas.\nIn May 1916 Raeder played a major role planning a raid by Hipper's battlecruisers that aimed to lure out the British battlecruiser force which would then be destroyed by the main High Seas Fleet. This raid turned into the Battle of Jutland. Raeder played a prominent role, and was forced midway through the battle to transfer from to as a result of damage to Hipper's flagship.\nAs chief of staff to Admiral Hipper he was closely involved in a plan of Hipper's for a German battlecruiser squadron to sail across the Atlantic and sweep through the waters off Canada down to the West Indies and on to South America to sink the British cruisers operating in those waters, and thereby force the British to redeploy a substantial part of the Home Fleet to the New World. Though Hipper's plans were rejected as far too risky, they significantly influenced Raeder's later thinking.\nOn 14 October 1918, Raeder received a major promotion with appointment as deputy to Admiral Paul Behncke, the Naval State Secretary. Raeder had doubts about submarines, but he spent the last weeks of the war working to achieve the Scheer Programme of building 450 U-boats.\nOn 28 October 1918 the Imperial German fleet at Kiel mutinied when some of the ships' crews refused to sail out for the a final battle against the British Grand Fleet that the Admiralty had ordered without the knowledge or approval of the German government. Raeder played a major role in attempting to crush the mutiny.\nWeimar Republic.\nRaeder's two younger brothers were both killed in action in the First World War, and in 1919 his first marriage, which had been under heavy strain due to war-related stress, ended in divorce. For the puritanical Raeder, the divorce was a huge personal disgrace, and for the rest of his life he always denied his first marriage. The years 1918\u20131919 were some of the most troubled in his life.\nHigh Seas Fleet mutiny.\nIn the winter of 1918\u201319, Raeder was closely involved in the efforts of the naval officer corps, strongly backed by the Defense Minister Gustav Noske to disband the workers' and soldiers' councils established after the Kiel mutiny. Noske was a Majority Social Democrat with firm \"law and order\" views. During this period, Raeder served as the liaison between the naval officer corps and Noske, and it was Raeder who suggested to Noske on 11 January 1919 that Adolf von Trotha be appointed commander-in-chief of the Navy. Tirpitz's attacks on the Emperor's leadership during the war had caused a split in the officer corps between the followers of \"the Master\" and the Kaiser, and Raeder saw Trotha as the only officer acceptable to both factions. Noske in turn asked the Navy for volunteers for the \"Freikorps\" to crush uprisings from the Communists. The Navy contributed two brigades to the \"Freikorps\". Under the Weimar Republic, the military considered itself \"\u00fcberparteilich\" (above party), which did not mean political neutrality as implied. The military argued that there were two types of \"politics\": \"parteipolitisch\" (party politics) which was the responsibility of the politicians, and \"staatspolitisch\" (state politics) which was the responsibility of the military. \"Staatspolitisch\" concerned Germany's \"eternal\" interests and the \"historic mission\" of winning world power, which was to be pursued regardless of what the politicians or the people wanted.\nKapp \"putsch\".\nAfter the war, in 1920, Raeder was involved in the failed Kapp Putsch when, together with almost the entire naval officer corps, he declared himself openly for the \"government\" of Wolfgang Kapp against the leaders of the Weimar Republic. In the summer of 1920 Raeder married his second wife, with whom he later had one son.\nAfter the failure of the Kapp \"Putsch\" he was marginalized in the Navy, being transferred to the Naval Archives, where for two years he played a leading role in writing the official history of the Navy in World War I. After this, Raeder resumed his steady rise in the navy hierarchy, becoming \"Vizeadmiral\" (vice admiral) in 1925.\nCommander-in-chief.\nOn 1 October 1928, Raeder was promoted to admiral and made chief of the Naval Command (\"Chef der Marineleitung\") of the \"Reichsmarine\", the Weimar Republic Navy. On 1 June 1935, the \"Reichsmarine\" was renamed the \"Kriegsmarine\" and Raeder became its commander-in-chief with the title of \"Oberbefehlshaber der Kriegsmarine\". On 20 April 1936, Raeder was promoted to the new rank of \"Generaladmiral\" and granted the rank and authority of a \"Reichsminister\" but without the formal title. On 30 January 1937, Hitler conferred the Golden Party Badge on Raeder, thereby enrolling him in the Party (membership number 3,805,228).\nWorld War II.\nRaeder believed the navy was unprepared for the start of World War II by at least five years. The surface fleet was inadequate to fight the Royal Navy and instead adopted a strategy of convoy raiding. Raeder wanted the Kriegsmarine to play an active part because he feared the budget would be cut after the war. The smaller ships were dispersed around the world in order to force the Royal Navy to disperse their ships to combat them, while the battleships would carry out raids in the North Sea, with a view towards gradually reducing the Royal Navy's strength at home.\nRaeder was unhappy with the outcome of the Battle of the River Plate and believed that Hans Langsdorff should not have scuttled the ship, but instead sailed out to engage the Royal Navy. Fleet commander Hermann Boehm was held responsible and was sacked by Raeder, who also issued orders that ships were to fight until the last shell and either win or sink with their flags flying.\nThe Allies were using Norwegian airfields to transfer aircraft to the Finns fighting against the Soviets in the Winter War, as well as mining Norwegian waters, and the Germans were alarmed by these developments. If the Allies were to use Norwegian naval bases or successfully mine Norwegian waters, they could cut off Germany's vital iron ore imports from Sweden and tighten the blockade of Germany. The Allies had made plans to invade Norway and Sweden in order to cut off those iron ore shipments. Admiral Rolf Carls, commander of the Kriegsmarine in the Baltic Sea region, proposed the invasion of Norway to Raeder in September 1939. Raeder briefed Hitler on the idea in October, but planning did not begin until December 1939. The operation was in low-priority planning until the \"Altmark\" incident in February 1940, during which a German tanker carrying 300 Allied prisoners in then-neutral Norwegian waters was boarded by sailors from a Royal Navy destroyer and the prisoners were freed. After this, plans for the Norwegian invasion took on a new sense of urgency. The invasion proved costly for the Kriegsmarine, which lost a heavy cruiser, two of its six light cruisers, 10 of its 20 destroyers and six U-boats. In addition, almost all of the other capital ships were damaged and required dockyard repairs, and for a time the German surface fleet had only three light cruisers and four destroyers operational in the aftermath of the Norwegian campaign.\nThe swift victory over France allowed the Kriegsmarine to base itself in ports on France's west coast. This was strategically important as German warships would no longer have to navigate through the dangerous English Channel in order to return to friendly ports, as well as allow them to range farther out into the Atlantic to attack convoys. With the surrender of France, Raeder saw the opportunity to greatly enhance the navy's power by confiscating the ships of the French Navy and manning them with his crews. Hitler however, vetoed this idea, afraid that doing so would push the French navy to join the Royal Navy. British fears of Raeder's plan resulted in the Attack on Mers-el-K\u00e9bir, in which the Royal Navy attacked the French navy despite being at peace with France.\nOn 11 July 1940, Hitler and Raeder agreed to continue building the battleships called for by Plan Z. Raeder also had bases built at Trondheim on the Norwegian Sea and at Saint-Nazaire and Lorient on the Bay of Biscay. At this time, Raeder and other senior officers began submitting memos to invade (among others) Shetland, Iceland, the Azores, Iran, Madagascar, Kuwait, Egypt and the Dutch East Indies.\nIn January 1941, the battlecruisers and were sent on a successful commerce-raiding mission in the Atlantic. On 18 March, following the beginning of Lend-Lease, Raeder wanted to start firing on US warships even if unprovoked. He declined to invade the Azores because of the surface ship losses the previous year. Raeder urged Hitler to declare war on the United States throughout 1941 so the Kriegsmarine could begin sinking American warships escorting British convoys.\nIn April 1941, Raeder planned to follow up the success of \"Scharnhorst\" and \"Gneisenau\"'s commerce-raiding mission with an even larger mission involving a battleship, two battlecruisers and a heavy cruiser under the command of L\u00fctjens, codenamed Operation Rhein\u00fcbung. The original plan was to have the battlecruisers \"Scharnhorst\" and \"Gneisenau\" involved in the operation, but \"Scharnhorst\" was undergoing heavy repairs to her engines, and \"Gneisenau\" had just suffered a damaging torpedo hit days before which put her out of action for six months. In the end only the and were sent out on the mission, which ended with \"Bismarck\"'s sinking. The debacle almost saw the end of using capital ships against merchant shipping. Hitler was not pleased and saw the resources used in the construction and operation of the large \"Bismarck\" as a poor investment.\nIn late 1941, Raeder planned the \"channel dash\" which sent the remaining two battleships in the French ports to Germany, for further operations in Norwegian waters. The plan was to threaten the Lend-Lease convoys to the Soviet Union, to deter an invasion of Norway, and to tie down elements of the Home Fleet that might otherwise have been used in the Atlantic against the U-boat wolfpacks.\nAfter the attack on Pearl Harbor Raeder, along with Field Marshal Keitel and Reichsmarschall G\u00f6ring, urged Hitler to immediately declare war on the United States in view of the US war plan Rainbow Five, and to begin the U-boat attacks off the US east coast, which was later called the \"Second Happy Time\" by German submariners.\nResignation.\nOn 30 January 1943, following Hitler's outrage over the Battle of the Barents Sea, Karl D\u00f6nitz, the supreme commander of the Kriegsmarine's U-boat arm, was promoted to grand admiral, and Raeder was named admiral inspector, a ceremonial office. Raeder had failed to inform Hitler of the battle, which Hitler learned about from the foreign press. Hitler thought the \"L\u00fctzow\" and lacked fighting spirit, according to Albert Speer. The reorganisation fitted Speer's goal of working more closely with D\u00f6nitz.\nPost-war.\nNuremberg trial.\nRaeder was captured by Soviet troops on 23 June 1945 and imprisoned in Moscow. At the end of July, he was taken to Nuremberg to stand trial on the counts of: (1) conspiracy to commit crimes against peace, war crimes, and crimes against humanity; (2) planning, initiating, and waging wars of aggression; and (3) crimes against the laws of war. The most serious charges were that he ordered the carrying out of unrestricted submarine warfare, the sinking of unarmed and neutral ships, and that, defying the Second London Naval Treaty, he approved of the murder or non-rescue of survivors in the water.\nRaeder was found guilty on all counts and sentenced to life imprisonment. He was surprised as he had expected to be sentenced to death. His wife, supported by German veterans, led several campaigns to free him until, on account of his ill health, he was released on 26 September 1955.\nDeath.\nRaeder wrote his autobiography, \"Mein Leben\", using a ghostwriter.\nHe died of natural causes in Kiel on 6 November 1960. His wife had died the previous year. He is buried in the \"Nordfriedhof\" (North Cemetery) in Kiel. Former Grand Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz attended his funeral on 12 November 1960.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50230", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50230", "title": "Bruce Nauman", "text": "American sculptor and performance artist\nBruce Nauman (born December 6, 1941) is an American artist. His practice spans a broad range of media including sculpture, photography, neon, video, drawing, printmaking, and performance. Nauman lives near Galisteo, New Mexico.\nLife and work.\nNauman was born in Fort Wayne, Indiana, but his father's work as an engineer for General Electric meant that the family moved often. He studied mathematics and physics at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison (1960\u201364), and art with William T. Wiley and Robert Arneson at the University of California, Davis (1965\u20136). In 1964, he gave up painting to dedicate himself to sculpture, performance and cinema collaborations with William Allan and Robert Nelson. He worked as an assistant to Wayne Thiebaud. Upon graduation (MFA, 1966), he taught at the San Francisco Art Institute from 1966 to 1968, and at the University of California at Irvine in 1970. In 1968, he met the singer and performance artist Meredith Monk and signed with the dealer Leo Castelli. Nauman moved from Northern California to Pasadena in 1969. In 1979, Nauman further moved to Pecos, New Mexico. In 1989, he established a home and studio in Galisteo, New Mexico, where he continued to work and live with his second wife, the painter Susan Rothenberg, until her death in 2020. Nauman has two children, Erik and Zo\u00eb, with his first wife, Judy Govan, and he also has two grandchildren.\nConfronted with \"What to do?\" in his studio soon after graduating, Nauman had the simple but profound realization that \u201cIf I was an artist and I was in the studio, then whatever I was doing in the studio must be art. At this point art became more of an activity and less of a product.\u201d Nauman set up a studio in a former grocery shop in the Mission district of San Francisco and then in a sublet from his university tutor in Mill Valley. These two locations provided the setting for a series of performed actions which he captured in real time, on a fixed camera, over the 10-minute duration of a 16mm film reel. Between 1966 and 1970, he made several videos, in which he used his body to explore the potentials of art and the role of the artist, and to investigate psychological states and behavioural codes.\nMuch of his work is characterized by an interest in language, often manifesting itself as visual puns. He has an interest in setting the metaphoric and descriptive functions of language against each other, which he also derives from the philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein and his concept of the language-game. For example, the neon \"Run From Fear \u2013 Fun From Rear,\" or the photograph \"Bound To Fail,\" which literalizes the title phrase and shows the artist's arms tied behind his back. He seems to be fascinated by the nature of communication and language's inherent problems, as well as the role of the artist as supposed communicator and manipulator of visual symbols.\nIn the 1960s, Nauman began to exhibit his work at Nicholas Wilder's gallery in Los Angeles and in New York at Leo Castelli in 1968 along with early solo shows at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Whitney Museum in 1972.\nNauman's use of neon as a medium recurs in his works over the decades. He uses neon to make allusions to the numinous connotations of light, similar to Mario Merz, who used neon to bring new life to assemblages of mundane objects. Neon also connotes the public atmosphere by the means of advertising, and in his later works he uses it ironically with private, erotic imagery as seen in his \"Hanged Man\" (1985).\nHis \"Self Portrait as a Fountain\" (1966) shows the artist spouting a stream of water from his mouth. At the end of the 1960s, Nauman began constructing claustrophobic and enclosed corridors and rooms that could be entered by visitors and which evoked the experience of being locked in and of being abandoned. A series of works inspired by one of the artist's dreams was brought together under the title of \"Dream Passage\" and created in 1983, 1984, and 1988. In his installation \"Changing Light Corridor with Rooms\" (1971), a long corridor is shrouded in darkness, whilst two rooms on either side are illuminated by bulbs that are timed to flash at different rates.\nSince the mid-1980s, primarily working with sculpture and video, Nauman developed disturbing psychological and physical themes incorporating images of animal and human body parts, depicting sadistic allusions to games and torture together with themes of surveillance. In 1988, after a hiatus of nearly two decades focused on time-based media, he resumed his work with cast objects.\nSelected works.\nSome of Nauman's best-known works include:\nCommissions.\nIn 1990, the Greater Des Moines Public Art Foundation commissioned a cast bronze version of Nauman's \"Animal Pyramid\" (1989), a stack of seventeen taxidermy molds rising to twelve feet. It is installed in the grounds of the Des Moines Art Center, Iowa.\nCollections.\nNauman's work is in the collections of the Art Institute of Chicago; Kunstmuseum Basel; the Hallen f\u00fcr Neue Kunst Schaffhausen; Kunsthaus, Z\u00fcrich; Hamburger Bahnhof/Friedrich Christian Flick Collection, Berlin; Museum Brandhorst, Munich; Centre Pompidou, Paris; the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum and the Museum of Modern Art in New York; the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, DC; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago;Tate Modern in London, New Mexico Museum of Art, di Rosa, and the Walker Art Center, among many others.\nRecognition.\nBruce Nauman holds honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degrees from the San Francisco Art Institute and the California Institute of the Arts. His awards include:\n\"Time\" named Nauman one of their 100 most influential people in 2004. In 2006, Artfacts.net ranked Nauman as number one among living artists, followed by Gerhard Richter and Robert Rauschenberg. In 2013, \"Complex\" ranked \"Wall-Floor Positions\" the 19th best work of performance art in history.\nInfluences.\nNauman has cited as major influences the following writers, philosophers, and artists: \nNauman was a part of the Process Art Movement.\nArt market.\nNauman's earliest supporters, in the 1970s, were mainly European patrons and institutions, such as the Kunstmuseum Basel. Chicago-based collector Gerald Elliott was the first American to amass a sizable number of Naumans, including the 1966 plaster sculpture \"Mold for a Modernized Slant Step\", all of which went to the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, when he died in 1994. Emerging later as a prominent buyer was Friedrich Christian Flick, who collected more than 40 pieces from throughout Nauman's career.\nTwo of Nauman's early auction records were for monumental neons, both walls of blinking punning phrases: Sotheby's New York hammered down \"One Hundred Live and Die\" (1984) to the Benesse Art Site, in Naoshima, Japan, for $1.9 million in 1992, and five years later sold \"Good Boy/Bad Boy\" (1986\u201387) to the Daros Collection in Z\u00fcrich for $2.2 million. Nauman's neon work \"Violins Violence Silence\" (1981/82) realized $4 million at Sotheby's New York in 2009.\nBy 2001, the sculpture \"Henry Moore Bound to Fail\" (1967), a wax and plaster cast of Nauman's own arms tied behind his back, had set a new auction record for postwar art when Christie's sold it for $9.9 million to Fran\u00e7ois Pinault. In 2002, Sperone Westwater Gallery sold \"Mapping the Studio (Fat Chance John Cage)\" (2001), four videos showing Nauman's cat chasing mice during the night, for $1.2 million apiece to such museums as Tate Modern, London; Dia Art Foundation, New York; Kunstmuseum Basel; and Centre Pompidou, Paris.\nNauman is represented by Sperone Westwater Gallery, New York, and Galerie Konrad Fischer, D\u00fcsseldorf and Berlin (since 1968).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral and biographical\nWorks by Bruce Nauman\nExhibitions\nReview and criticism"}
{"id": "50233", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50233", "title": "Piezo electricity", "text": ""}
{"id": "50234", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50234", "title": "Battle of Wakefield", "text": "1460 battle in the English Wars of the Roses\nThe Battle of Wakefield took place in Sandal Magna near Wakefield in northern England, on 30 December 1460. It was a major battle of the Wars of the Roses. The opposing forces were an army led by nobles loyal to the captive King Henry VI of the House of Lancaster and his Queen Margaret of Anjou on one side, and the army of Richard, Duke of York, the rival claimant to the throne, on the other.\nFor several years before the battle, the Duke of York had become increasingly opposed to the weak King Henry's court. After open warfare broke out between the factions and Henry became his prisoner, he laid claim to the throne, but lacked sufficient support. Instead, in an agreement known as the Act of Accord, he was made Henry's heir to the throne, displacing from the succession Henry's and Margaret's 7-year-old son Edward, Prince of Wales. Margaret of Anjou and several prominent nobles were irreconcilably opposed to this accord, and massed their armies in the north. Richard of York marched north to deal with them, but found he was outnumbered.\nAlthough he occupied Sandal Castle, York sortied from the castle on 30 December. His reasons for doing so have been variously ascribed to deception by the Lancastrian armies, or treachery by some nobles and Lancastrian officers who York thought were his allies, or simple rashness or miscalculation by York. He was killed and his army was destroyed. Many of the prominent Yorkist leaders and their family members died in the battle or were captured and executed.\nAn alternative account of the events around the death of Richard, Duke of York based on 15th Century sources, says that he was ambushed and killed by Lancastrian forces on 29 December 1460.\nBackground.\nKing Henry VI ascended the throne in 1422, when he was only nine months old. He grew up to be an ineffective king, and prone to spells of mental illness. There were increasingly bitter divisions among the officials and councillors who governed in Henry's name, mainly over the conduct of the Hundred Years' War with France. By the early 1450s, the most important rivalry was that between Richard, Duke of York, and Edmund Beaufort, Duke of Somerset. York argued for a more vigorous prosecution of the war, to recover territories recently lost to the French, while Somerset belonged to the party which tried to secure peace by making concessions. York had been Lieutenant in France for several years and resented being supplanted in that office by Somerset, who had then failed to defend Normandy against French armies.\nYork was not only the wealthiest magnate in the land, but was also descended through both his parents from King Edward III, leading to calls that he be recognised as successor to the childless King Henry. His rival, Somerset, belonged to the Beaufort family, who were distant cousins of King Henry. Originally illegitimate, the Beauforts had been made legitimate by an act of Parliament but were supposedly barred from the line of succession to the throne. However, there was always the possibility that this could be circumvented and the Beaufort line eventually produced King Henry VII and the Tudor dynasty (via Somerset's niece, Margaret Beaufort).\nYork was appointed Lieutenant of Ireland, effectively exiling him from court, while Somerset increased his influence over the king. In 1452, York marched on London in an attempt to force Henry to dismiss Somerset from the government, but at this stage he lacked support and was forced to swear not to take arms against the king at Old St Paul's Cathedral. Then in 1453, Henry VI suffered a complete mental breakdown. The Great Council of peers appointed York Lord Protector and he governed the country responsibly, but Henry recovered his sanity after eighteen months and restored Somerset to favour. During Henry's madness his queen, Margaret of Anjou, had given birth to a son, which dashed York's hopes of becoming king if Henry died.\nFearing arrest for treason, York and his most prominent allies, the Nevilles (York's brother in law, the Earl of Salisbury and Salisbury's son, the Earl of Warwick, later known as the \"Kingmaker\"), finally resorted to armed force in 1455. At the First Battle of St Albans, many of York's and Salisbury's rivals and enemies were killed, including Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland (whose family, the Percys, had been involved in a long-running feud with the Nevilles) and Lord Clifford.\nAfter the battle, York reaffirmed his loyalty to King Henry, who had been found abandoned in a shop in the town. He was reappointed Lord Protector and Lieutenant of Ireland. Margaret of Anjou nevertheless suspected York of wishing to supplant her infant son, Edward, as Henry's successor, and the heirs of the Lancastrian nobles who were killed at St Albans remained at deadly feud with York.\nEvents of the year preceding Wakefield.\nAfter an uneasy peace during which attempts at reconciliation failed, hostilities broke out again in 1459. Richard of York once again feared indictment for rebellion by a Great Council dominated by his opponents. He and the Nevilles concentrated their forces near York's stronghold at Ludlow Castle in the Welsh Marches but at the confrontation with the much larger royal army which became known as the Battle of Ludford, some of Warwick's contingent from the garrison of Calais, led by experienced captain Andrew Trollope, defected overnight. York and the Nevilles promptly abandoned their troops and fled. The next day, the outnumbered and leaderless Yorkist army surrendered.\nYork went to Ireland, where he had unchallenged support, while Salisbury, Warwick and York's eldest son Edward, Earl of March, made their way to Calais, where Warwick was Constable. They narrowly forestalled the new Duke of Somerset who, with Trollope, had been sent to regain it. Lancastrian attempts to reassert their authority over Ireland and Calais failed, but York and his supporters were declared traitors and attainted. The victorious Lancastrians became reviled for the manner in which their army had looted the town of Ludlow after the Yorkist surrender at Ludford Bridge, and the repressive acts of a compliant Parliament of Devils which caused many uncommitted peers to fear for their own property and titles. The country remained in disorder.\nIn 1460, the Nevilles invaded England through a foothold they had already established at Sandwich and rapidly secured London and the South of England where Warwick had popular support. Warwick and March then advanced north to engage Henry's army in the Midlands. At the Battle of Northampton, part of the Lancastrian army defected and the rest were decisively defeated. Henry was captured on the battlefield for the second time. He was taken to London, and confined in the Bishop of London's palace. George Neville, Bishop of Exeter, was appointed Chancellor of England and Viscount Bourchier (another of York's brothers in law) was appointed Treasurer.\nThe Duke of York landed in Chester some weeks later and made his way to London with much pomp. Entering Parliament, he attempted to claim the throne, but was met with stunned silence. Even his close allies were not prepared to support such a drastic step. Instead, after the House of Lords had considered his claim, they passed the Act of Accord, by which Henry would remain king, but York would govern the country as Lord Protector. Henry's son was disinherited, and York or his heirs would become king on Henry's death. The powerless and frightened Henry was forced to assent.\nLancastrian moves.\nWhen the Battle of Northampton was fought, Queen Margaret and her seven-year-old son Edward had been at Eccleshall Castle near Stafford. After many adventures with brigands and outlaws, they fled via Cheshire to Harlech Castle in North Wales, where they joined Lancastrian nobles (including Henry's half-brother Jasper Tudor and the Duke of Exeter) who were recruiting armies in Wales and the West Country. They later proceeded by ship to Scotland, where Margaret gained troops and other aid for the Lancastrian cause from the queen and regent, Mary of Guelders, in return for the surrender of the town and castle of Berwick upon Tweed.\nAt the same time, other Lancastrians were rallying in Northern England. Many of them, including the Earl of Northumberland and Lords Clifford and Ros, had estates and influence in the north. They were later joined by the Duke of Somerset and the Earl of Devon, who brought their forces from the West Country. Northumberland, Clifford and Somerset were the sons of York's and Salisbury's rivals who had been killed at St. Albans. The Lancastrian forces mustered near Kingston upon Hull, and were said (in \"Gregory's Chronicle\", a near-contemporary account) to number 15,000. A substantial part of these forces encamped at Pontefract began pillaging York's and Salisbury's estates nearby.\nYork's response.\nFaced with these challenges to his authority as Protector, York despatched his eldest son Edward to the Welsh Marches to contain the Lancastrians in Wales and left the Earl of Warwick in charge in London. He himself marched to the north of England on 9 December, accompanied by his second son Edmund, Earl of Rutland, and the Earl of Salisbury. He tried to bring a train of artillery under \"one called Lovelace, a gentleman of Kent\" but bad weather forced the artillery to return to London.\nYork's and Salisbury's army was said by some to number 8,000 to 9,000 men, but by others to be only a few hundred strong, as York intended to recruit local forces with a Commission of Array. He had probably underestimated both the numbers of the Lancastrian army in the north and the degree of opposition he had provoked by his attempt to seize the throne. On an earlier expedition to the north during his first protectorship in 1454, he and the Nevilles had easily subdued a rebellion by the Percys and the Duke of Exeter. In 1460, not only had almost every other northern peer joined the Lancastrian army, but York's nominal supporters were also divided. The Nevilles were one of the wealthiest and most influential families in the North and in addition to controlling large estates, the Earl of Salisbury had held the office of Warden of the Eastern March for several years. However, in the Neville\u2013Neville feud, the cadet branch of the family headed by Salisbury had largely disinherited and eclipsed the senior branch (sometimes referred to as the \"northern Nevilles\") under his great-nephew, the Earl of Westmoreland. Westmoreland had spent several years trying to recover his lands. He had since become too ill, perhaps with some mental disorder, to play any active part. His younger brother, John Neville of Raby, had much to gain by York's and Salisbury's destruction.\nThe Lancastrians were still being reinforced. On 16 December, at the Battle of Worksop in Nottinghamshire, York's vanguard clashed with Somerset's contingent from the West Country moving north to join the Lancastrian army, and was defeated.\nBattle.\nOn 21 December, York reached his own fortress of Sandal Castle near Wakefield. He sent probes towards the Lancastrian camp at Pontefract to the east, but these were repulsed. York sent for help to his son Edward, but before any reinforcements could arrive, he sortied from the castle on 30 December.\nIt is not known for certain why York did so. One theory was later recounted in \"Edward Hall's chronicle\", written a few decades after the event, but partly from first-hand sources, and the contemporary Burgundian Jean de Waurin's chronicle. In a stratagem possibly devised by the veteran Andrew Trollope (who by Waurin's account had also sent messages to York via feigned deserters that he was prepared to change sides once again) half the Lancastrian army under Somerset and Clifford advanced openly towards Sandal Castle, over the open space known as \"Wakefield Green\" between the castle and the River Calder, while the remainder under Ros and the Earl of Wiltshire were concealed in the woods surrounding the area. York was probably short of provisions in the castle and, seeing that the enemy were apparently no stronger than his own army, seized the opportunity to engage them in the open rather than withstand a siege while waiting for reinforcements.\nOther accounts suggested that, possibly in addition to Trollope's deception, York was fooled by some of John Neville of Raby's forces displaying false colours into thinking that reinforcements sent by Warwick had arrived. By another contemporary account, William Worcester's \"Annales Rerum Anglicorum\", John Neville himself obtained a Commission of Array from Richard of York to raise 8,000 men to fight on York's side under the Earl of Westmoreland. Having gathered this force and enticed York to leave the castle to rendezvous with him, John Neville then defected to the Lancastrians.\nAnother suggestion was that York and Somerset had agreed a truce during Christmas until 6 January, the Feast of Epiphany, but the Lancastrians had no intention of honouring the truce. On three successive days, they sent heralds to provoke York into premature action with insulting messages and when York moved into the open the Lancastrians treacherously attacked earlier than had been agreed, catching York at a disadvantage while many of his men were absent foraging for supplies.\nThe simplest suggestion was that York acted rashly. For example, historian John Sadler states that there was no Lancastrian deception or ambush; York led his men from the castle on a foraging expedition (or by popular belief, to rescue some of his foragers who were under attack) and as successive Lancastrian contingents joined the battle (the last being Clifford's division, encamped south and east of Sandal Magna), York's army was outnumbered, surrounded and overwhelmed.\nThe Yorkists marched out of Sandal Castle down the present-day Manygates Lane towards the Lancastrians located to the north of the castle. It is generally accepted that, as York engaged the Lancastrians to his front, others attacked him from the flank and rear, cutting him off from the castle. In Edward Hall's words:\n...\u00a0but when he was in the plain ground between his castle and the town of Wakefield, he was environed on every side, like a fish in a net, or a deer in a buckstall; so that he manfully fighting was within half an hour slain and dead, and his whole army discomfited.\nAlternative recent research based on near contemporary accounts suggest that York was actually ambushed and killed on 29 December without there having been a pitched battle, while his army was scattered in search of provisions.\nCasualties.\nOne near-contemporary source (\"Gregory's Chronicle\") claimed that 2,500 Yorkists and 200 Lancastrians were killed, but other sources give wildly differing figures, from 2,200 to only 700 Yorkists dead.\nThe Duke of York was either killed in the battle or captured and immediately executed. Some later works support the folklore that he suffered a crippling wound to the knee and was unhorsed, and he and his closest followers then fought to the death at that spot; others relate the account that he was taken prisoner (by one Sir James Luttrell of Devonshire), mocked by his captors and beheaded.\nHis son Edmund, Earl of Rutland, attempted to escape over Wakefield Bridge, but was overtaken and killed, possibly by Clifford in revenge for his father's death at St Albans. Salisbury's second son Sir Thomas Neville also died in the battle. Salisbury's son in law William, Lord Harington, and Harington's father, William Bonville, were captured and executed immediately after the battle. (The Bonvilles had been engaged in a feud with the Earl of Devon and the Courtenay family in Devon and Cornwall.) Salisbury himself escaped the battlefield but was captured during the night, and was taken to the Lancastrian camp. Although the Lancastrian nobles might have been prepared to allow Salisbury to ransom himself, he was dragged out of Pontefract Castle and beheaded by local commoners, to whom he had been a harsh overlord. The mob may have been led by the \"Bastard of Exeter\", an illegitimate son of the Duke of Exeter.\nAmong the \"commoners\" in York's army who were killed was John Harrowe, a prominent mercer of London, described as a \"captain of the foot\".\nAftermath.\nAfter the battle the heads of York, Rutland and Salisbury were displayed over Micklegate Bar, the south-western gate through the York city walls, the Duke wearing a paper crown and a sign saying \"Let York overlook the town of York\".\nThe death of Richard of York did not end the wars, or the House of York's claim to the throne. The northern Lancastrian army which had been victorious at Wakefield was reinforced by Scots and borderers eager for plunder, and marched south. They defeated Warwick's army at the Second Battle of St Albans and recaptured the feeble-minded King Henry, who had been abandoned on the battlefield for the third time, but were refused entry to London and failed to occupy the city. Warwick and Edward of March reoccupied London, and within a few weeks, Edward of March was proclaimed King Edward IV.\nAt the first Battle of St Albans, York had been content with the death of his rivals for power. At Wakefield and in every battle in the Wars of the Roses thereafter, the victors would eliminate not only any opposing leaders but also their family members and supporters, making the struggle more bitter and revenge driven.\nA monument erected on the spot where the Duke of York is supposed to have perished is positioned slightly south of the more likely spot where an older monument once stood, but which was destroyed during the English Civil War. A cross in memory of York's son, Rutland, was erected at the Park Street end of Kirkgate in Wakefield. Archaeologist Rachel Askew suggests that the memorial cross to the Duke of York may be fictional as the late-16th- and early-17th-century antiquarian John Camden did not mention it in his description of the location.\nIn literature and folklore.\nMany people are familiar with William Shakespeare's melodramatic version of events in \"Henry VI, Part 3\", notably the murder of Edmund of Rutland, although Edmund is depicted as a small child, and following his unnecessary slaughter by Clifford, Margaret torments his father, York, before murdering him also. In fact, Rutland, at seventeen, was more than old enough to be an active participant in the fighting. Margaret was almost certainly still in Scotland at the time.\nThe battle is said by some to be the source for the mnemonic for remembering the traditional colours of the rainbow, Richard Of York Gave Battle in Vain, and also the mocking nursery rhyme, \"The Grand Old Duke of York\", although this much more likely refers to the eighteenth-century Duke of York, son of George III.\n\"Dicky's Meadow\", a well-known Northern expression, is commonly believed to refer to Sandals Meadow, where the battle of Wakefield took place and where Richard met his end. The common view held that Richard was ill-advised to fight here. The expression is usually used to warn against risky action, as in \"If you do that you'll end up in Dicky's Meadow.\" However, the first known usage of that phrase did not appear until the 1860s, around 400 years after the battle took place.\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50236", "revid": "1319194753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50236", "title": "Battle of Towton", "text": "1461 battle in the Wars of the Roses\nThe Battle of Towton took place on 29 March 1461 during the Wars of the Roses, near Towton in North Yorkshire. Yorkist forces decisively defeated Lancastrian supporters of Henry VI, securing the English throne for Edward IV. Fought for ten hours between an estimated 50,000\u00a0soldiers from both sides in a snowstorm on Palm Sunday, it was \"probably the largest and bloodiest battle on English soil\".\nHenry VI succeeded his father, Henry V, when he was nine months old in 1422, but was a weak, ineffectual and mentally unsound ruler, which encouraged the nobles to scheme for control over him. The situation deteriorated in the 1450s into a civil war between his Beaufort relatives and his wife, Queen Margaret, on one side, with those of his cousin Richard, Duke of York, on the other. \nIn October 1460, Parliament named York as Henry's successor, but the Lancastrians refused to accept the disinheritance of Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales. In December, their army defeated and killed York at Wakefield. His eldest son Edward now declared himself king, and marched north with his own forces. On reaching the battlefield, the Yorkists found themselves heavily outnumbered, since levies under the Duke of Norfolk had yet to arrive. However, Yorkist archers under Lord Fauconberg took advantage of the strong wind to outrange their enemies, provoking the Lancastrians into abandoning their defensive positions. The ensuing combat lasted hours, exhausting the combatants. The arrival of Norfolk's men reinvigorated the Yorkists who routed their foes. \nMany Lancastrians were killed while fleeing, with several high-ranking prisoners executed, while Henry fled the country, leaving Edward to rule England. In 1929, the Towton Cross was erected on the battlefield to commemorate the event. Various archaeological remains and mass graves related to the battle have been found in the area.\nSetting.\nIn 1461 England was in the sixth year of the Wars of the Roses, a series of civil wars between the houses of York and Lancaster over the English throne. The Lancastrians backed the reigning king of England, Henry VI, a weak and indecisive man who suffered from intermittent bouts of madness. The leader of the Yorkists was initially Richard, Duke of York, who resented the dominance of a small number of aristocrats favoured by the king, principally the king's close relatives, the Beaufort family. Fuelled by rivalries between influential supporters of both factions, York's attempts to displace Henry's favourites from power led to war. After capturing Henry at the Battle of Northampton in 1460, the duke, who was of royal blood, issued his claim to the throne. Even York's closest supporters among the nobility were reluctant to usurp the dynasty; the nobles passed by a majority vote the Act of Accord, which ruled that the duke and his heirs would succeed to the throne upon Henry's death.\nHenry VI's wife, Queen Margaret, refused to accept an arrangement that deprived their son, Edward of Westminster, of his birthright. She had fled to Scotland after the Yorkist victory at Northampton; there she began raising an army, promising her followers the freedom to plunder on the march south through England. Her Lancastrian supporters also mustered in the north of England, preparing for her arrival. York marched with his army to meet this threat but he was lured into a trap at the battle of Wakefield and killed. The duke and his second son, Edmund, Earl of Rutland, were decapitated by the Lancastrians and their heads were impaled on spikes atop the Micklegate Bar, a gatehouse of the city of York. The leadership of the House of York passed to the duke's heir, Edward.\nThe victors of Wakefield were joined by Margaret's army and marched south, plundering settlements along the way. They liberated Henry after defeating the Yorkist army of Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, in the second battle of St Albans and continued pillaging on their way to London. The city of London refused to open its gates to Henry and Margaret for fear of being looted. The Lancastrian army was short of supplies and had no adequate means to replenish them. When Margaret learned that Richard of York's eldest son, Edward, Earl of March, and his army had won the battle of Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire and were marching towards London, she withdrew the Lancastrians to York. Warwick and the remnants of his army marched from St Albans to join Edward's men and the Yorkists were welcomed into London. Having lost custody of Henry, the Yorkists needed a justification to continue the rebellion against the king and his Lancastrian followers. On 4 March Warwick proclaimed the young Yorkist leader as King Edward IV. The proclamation gained greater acceptance than Richard of York's earlier claim, as several nobles opposed to letting Edward's father ascend the throne viewed the Lancastrian actions as a betrayal of the legally established Accord.\nThe country now had two kings; a situation that could not be allowed to persist, especially if Edward were to be formally crowned. Edward offered an amnesty to any Lancastrian supporter who renounced Henry. The move was intended to win over the commoners; his offer did not extend to wealthy Lancastrians (mostly the nobles). The young king summoned and ordered his followers to march towards York to take back his family's city and to depose Henry formally through force of arms. The Yorkist army moved along three routes. Warwick's uncle, Lord Fauconberg, led a group to clear the way to York for the main body, which was led by Edward. The Duke of Norfolk was sent east to raise forces and rejoin Edward before the battle. Warwick's group moved to the west of the main body, through the Midlands, gathering men as they went. On 28 March, the leading elements of the Yorkist army came upon the remains of the crossing in Ferrybridge crossing the River Aire. They were rebuilding the bridge when they were attacked and routed by a band of about 500 Lancastrians, led by Lord Clifford.\nLearning of the encounter, Edward led the main Yorkist army to the bridge and was forced into a gruelling battle: although the Yorkists were superior in numbers, the narrow bridge was a bottleneck, forcing them to confront Clifford's men on equal terms. Edward sent Fauconberg and his horsemen to ford the river at Castleford, which should have been guarded by Henry, Earl of Northumberland, but he arrived late, by which time the Yorkists had crossed the ford and were heading to attack the Lancastrians at Ferrybridge from the flank. The Lancastrians retreated but were chased to Dinting Dale, where they were all killed, Clifford being slain by an arrow to his throat. Having cleared the vicinity of enemy forces, the Yorkists repaired the bridge and pressed onwards to camp overnight at Sherburn-in-Elmet. The Lancastrian army marched to Tadcaster, about north of Towton, and made camp. As dawn broke the two rival armies struck camp under dark skies and strong winds. Although it was Palm Sunday, a day of holy significance to Christians, the forces prepared for battle and a few documents named the engagement the battle of \"Palme Sonday Felde\" but the name did not gain wide acceptance. Popular opinion favoured naming the battle after the village of Towton because of its proximity and it being the most prominent feature in the area.\nForce compositions.\nThe armies gathered at Towton were among the largest at the time. Contemporary sources (like \"Gregory's Chronicle\") claimed that the soldiers on each side numbered in the hundreds of thousands. These figures are thought to be exaggerated, and modern historians believe that a combined figure of 50,000 \u2013 65,000 is more likely, between one and two per cent of the English population at the time. An analysis of 50 skeletons found in mass graves between 1996 and 2003 showed most were 24 to 30 years old and many were veterans of previous engagements.\nHenry's physical and mental frailty was a major weakness for the Lancastrian cause, and he remained in York with Margaret. In contrast the 18-year-old Edward was a tall and imposing sight in armour and led from the front: his preference for bold offensive tactics determined the Yorkist plan of action for this engagement. His presence and example were crucial to ensuring the Yorkists held together through the long and exhausting struggle. \nApproximately three-quarters of English peers fought in the battle; eight were with the Yorkist army, whereas the Lancastrians had at least nineteen.\nOf the other Yorkist leaders, Warwick was absent from the battle, having suffered a leg wound at Ferrybridge. Norfolk's contingent was commanded by Walter Blount and Robert Horne; this may have been an advantage, since he was regarded as an unpredictable ally. Edward relied heavily on Warwick's uncle, Lord Fauconberg, a veteran of the Anglo-French wars, highly regarded by contemporaries for his military skills. He demonstrated this in a wide range of roles, having captained the Calais garrison, led naval piracy expeditions in the Channel, and commanded the Yorkist vanguard at Northampton.\nThe senior Lancastrian general was Henry Beaufort, Duke of Somerset, an experienced leader credited with victories at Wakefield and St Albans, although others suggest they were due to Sir Andrew Trollope. Trollope was an extremely experienced and astute commander, who had served under Warwick in Calais, before defecting to the Lancastrians at Ludford Bridge in 1459. Other notable Lancastrian leaders included Henry Holland, Duke of Exeter, and northern magnates the Earl of Northumberland, Lord de Ros and Lord Dacre. Another leading Lancastrian, Lord Clifford, had been killed by an arrow in the throat at Ferrybridge.\nDeployment.\nVery few historical sources give detailed accounts of the battle and they do not describe the exact deployments of the armies. The paucity of such primary sources led early historians to adopt Hall's chronicle as their main resource for the engagement, despite its authorship 70\u00a0years after the event and questions over the origin of his information. The Burgundian chronicler Jean de Waurin (c. 1398 \u2013 c. 1474) was a more contemporary source, but his chronicle was made available to the public only from 1891, and several mistakes in it discouraged historians at that time from using it. Later reconstructions of the battle were based on Hall's version, supplemented by minor details from other sources.\nThe battle took place on a plateau between the villages of Saxton (to the south) and Towton (to the north). The region was agricultural land, with plenty of wide open areas and small roads on which to manoeuvre the armies. Two roads ran through the area: the Old London Road, which connected Towton to the English capital, and a direct road between Saxton and Towton. The steeply banked Cock Beck flowed in an S-shaped course around the plateau from the north to west. The plateau was bisected by the Towton Dale, which ran from the west and extended into the North Acres in the east. Woodlands were scattered along the beck; Renshaw Woods lined the river on the north-western side of the plateau, and south of Towton Dale, Castle Hill Wood grew on the west side of the plateau at a bend in the beck. The area to the north-east of this forest would be known as Bloody Meadow after the battle.\nAccording to Gravett and fellow military enthusiast Trevor James Halsall, Somerset's decision to engage the Yorkist army on this plateau was sound. Defending the ground just before Towton would block any enemy advance towards the city of York, whether they moved along the London \u2013 Towton road or an old Roman road to the west. The Lancastrians deployed on the north side of the dale, using the valley as a \"protective ditch\"; the disadvantage of this position was that they could not see beyond the southern ridge of the dale. The Lancastrian flanks were protected by marshes; their right was further secured by the steep banks of the Cock Beck. The width of their deployment area did not allow for a longer front line, depriving the Lancastrians of the opportunity to use their numerical superiority. Waurin's account gave rise to the suggestion that Somerset ordered a force of mounted spearmen to conceal itself in Castle Hill Wood, ready to charge into the Yorkist left flank at an opportune time in battle.\nThe Yorkists appeared as the Lancastrians finished deployment. Line after line of soldiers crested the southern ridge of the dale and formed up in ranks opposite their enemies as snow began to fall. Edward's army was outnumbered and Norfolk's troops had yet to arrive to join them. The Yorkist vanguard was commanded by Lord Fauconberg. Hall names John Wenlock and John Dinham and others as commanders of the Yorkist rearguard. Sources variously mention the Duke of Somerset, Trollope, the Earl of Northumberland and the Duke of Exeter as the commanders of the Lancastrian host, but show little agreement as to which portion of the host each of them was assigned.\nFighting.\nAs Somerset was content to stand and let his foes come to him, the opening move of the battle was made by the Yorkists. Noticing the direction and strength of the wind, Fauconberg ordered all Yorkist archers to step forward and unleash a volley of their arrows from what would be the standard maximum range of their longbows. With the wind behind them, the Yorkist missiles travelled farther than usual, plunging deep into the masses of soldiers on the hill slope.\nThe response from the Lancastrian archers was ineffective as the heavy wind blew snow in their faces. They found it difficult to judge the range and pick out their targets and their arrows fell short of the Yorkist ranks; Fauconberg had ordered his men to retreat after loosing one volley, thus avoiding any casualties. Unable to observe their results, the Lancastrians loosed their arrows until most had been used, leaving a thick, prickly carpet in the ground in front of the Yorkists.\nAfter the Lancastrians had ceased loosing their arrows, Fauconberg ordered his archers to step forward again to shoot. When they had exhausted their ammunition, the Yorkists plucked arrows off the ground in front of them \u2014 arrows loosed by their foes \u2014 and continued shooting. Coming under attack without any effective response of its own, the Lancastrian army moved from its position to engage the Yorkists in close combat. Seeing the advancing mass of men, the Yorkist archers shot a few more volleys before retreating behind their ranks of men-at-arms, leaving thousands of arrows in the ground to hinder the Lancastrian attack.\nAs the Yorkists reformed their ranks to receive the Lancastrian charge, their left flank came under attack by the horsemen from Castle Hill Wood mentioned by Waurin. The Yorkist left wing fell into disarray and several men started to flee. Edward had to take command of the left wing to save the situation. By engaging in the fight and encouraging his followers, his example inspired many to stand their ground. The armies clashed and archers shot into the mass of men at short range. The Lancastrians continuously threw fresher men into the fray and gradually the numerically inferior Yorkist army was forced to give ground and retreat up the southern ridge. Gravett thought that the Lancastrian left had less momentum than the rest of its formation, skewing the line of battle such that its western end tilted towards Saxton.\nThe fighting continued for three hours, according to research by English Heritage, a government body in charge of conservation of historic sites. It was indecisive until the arrival of Norfolk's men. Marching up the Old London Road, Norfolk's contingent was hidden from view until they crested the ridge and attacked the Lancastrian left flank. The Lancastrians continued to give fight but the advantage had shifted to the Yorkists. By the end of the day, the Lancastrian line had broken up, as small groups of men began fleeing for their lives. Polydore Vergil, chronicler for Henry VII of England, said combat lasted for a total of 10\u00a0hours.\nRout.\nThe tired Lancastrians flung off their helmets and armour to run faster. Without such protection, they were much more vulnerable to the attacks of the Yorkists. Norfolk's troops were much fresher and faster. Fleeing across what would later become known as Bloody Meadow, many Lancastrians were cut down from behind or were slain after they had surrendered. Before the battle, both sides had issued the order to give no quarter and the Yorkists were in no mood to spare anyone after the long, gruelling fight. A number of Lancastrians, such as Trollope, also had substantial bounties on their heads. Gregory's chronicle stated 42\u00a0knights were killed after they were taken prisoner.\nArchaeological findings in the late 20th century shed light on the final moments of the battle. In 1996 workmen at a construction site in the village of Towton uncovered a mass grave, which archaeologists believed to contain the remains of men who were slain during or after the battle in 1461. The bodies showed severe injuries to their upper torsos; arms and skulls were cracked or shattered. One exhumed specimen, known as Towton 25, had the front of his skull bisected: a weapon had slashed across his face, cutting a deep wound that split the bone. The skull was also pierced by another deep wound, a horizontal cut from a blade across the back.\nThe Lancastrians lost more troops in their rout than from the battlefield. Men struggling across the Cock Beck were dragged down by currents and drowned. Those floundering were stepped on and pushed under water by their comrades behind them as they rushed to get away from the Yorkists. As the Lancastrians struggled across the beck Yorkist archers rode to high vantage points and shot arrows at them. The dead began to pile up and the chronicles state that the Lancastrians eventually fled across these \"bridges\" of bodies. The chase continued northwards across the River Wharfe, which was larger than Cock Beck. A bridge over the river collapsed under the flood of men and many drowned trying to cross. Those who hid in Tadcaster and York were hunted down and killed.\nA newsletter dated 4 April 1461 reported a widely circulated figure of 28,000\u00a0casualties in the battle, which Charles Ross and other historians believe was exaggerated. The number was taken from the heralds' estimate of the dead and appeared in letters from Edward and the Bishop of Salisbury, Richard Beauchamp. Letters from an ambassador and a merchant from the duchy of Milan broke this number down into 8,000 dead for the Yorkists and 20,000 for the Lancastrians; in contrast, bishops Nicholas O'Flanagan (Elphin) and Francesco Coppini reported only 800 dead Yorkists. Other contemporary sources gave higher numbers, ranging from 30,000 to 38,000; Hall quoted an exact figure of 36,776. An exception was the \"Annales rerum anglicarum\", which stated the Lancastrians had 9,000\u00a0casualties, an estimate Ross and Wolffe found to be more believable. A more recent analysis of the sources and archaeological evidence, which posits that accounts of Towton were combined with those of the actions of Ferrybridge and Dintingdale, suggests total casualty figures in the range 2,800 \u2013 3,800.\nThe Lancastrian nobility sustained heavy losses. The Earl of Northumberland, lords Welles, Mauley and Dacre, and Sir Andrew Trollope fell in battle, while the earls of Devon and Wiltshire were afterwards taken and executed. Lord Dacre was said to have been killed by an archer who was perched in a \"bur tree\" (a local term for an elder). In contrast, the Yorkists lost only one notable member of the gentry, Horne, at Towton.\nAftermath.\nOn receiving news of his army's defeat, Henry fled into exile in Scotland with his wife and son. They were later joined by Somerset, Ros, Exeter, and the few Lancastrian nobles who escaped from the battlefield. The battle of Towton severely reduced the power of the House of Lancaster in England; the linchpins of their power at court (Northumberland, Clifford, Ros, and Dacre) had either died or fled the country, ending the house's domination over the north of England. Edward further exploited the situation, naming 14\u00a0Lancastrian peers as traitors. Approximately 96\u00a0Lancastrians of the rank of knight and below were also attainted, twenty-four of them Members of Parliament.\nThe new king preferred winning over his enemies to his cause; the nobles he attainted either died in the battle or had refused to submit to him. The estates of a few of these nobles were confiscated by the crown but the rest were untouched, remaining in the care of their families. Edward also pardoned many of those he attainted after they submitted to his rule.\nAlthough Henry was at large in Scotland with his son, the battle put an end (for the time being) to disputes over the country's state of leadership since the Act of Accord. The English people were assured that there was now one true king: Edward. He turned his attention to consolidating his rule over the country, winning over the people and putting down the rebellions raised by the few remaining Lancastrian diehards. He knighted several of his supporters and elevated several of his gentry supporters to the peerage; Fauconberg was made the Earl of Kent. Warwick benefited from Edward's rule after the battle. He received parts of Northumberland's and Clifford's holdings, and was made \"the king's lieutenant in the North and admiral of England.\" Edward bestowed on him many offices of power and wealth, further enhancing the earl's considerable influence and riches.\nBy 1464, the Yorkists had \"wiped out all effective Lancastrian resistance in the north of England.\" Edward's reign was not interrupted until 1470; by then, his relationship with Warwick had deteriorated to such an extent that the earl defected to the Lancastrians and forced Edward to flee England, restoring Henry to the throne. The interruption of Yorkist rule was brief, as Edward regained his throne after defeating Warwick and his Lancastrian cohorts at the battle of Barnet in 1471.\nLiterature.\nIn the sixteenth century William Shakespeare wrote a number of dramatisations of historic figures. The use of history as a backdrop, against which the familiar characters act out Shakespeare's drama, lends a sense of realism to his plays. Shakespeare wrote a three-part play about Henry VI, relying heavily on Hall's chronicle as a source. His vision of the battle of Towton (\"Henry VI\", Part 3, Act\u00a02, Scene\u00a05), touted as the \"bloodiest\" engagement in the Wars of the Roses, became a set piece about the \"terror of civil war, a \"national\" terror that is essentially \"familial\"\". Historian Bertram Wolffe said it was thanks to Shakespeare's dramatisation of the battle that the weak and ineffectual Henry was at least remembered by English society, albeit for his pining to have been born a shepherd rather than a king.\nShakespeare's version of the battle presents a notable scene that comes immediately after Henry's soliloquy. Henry witnesses the laments of two soldiers in the battle. One slays his opponent in hope of plunder, only to find the victim is his son; the other kills his enemy, who turns out to be his father. Both killers have acted out of greed and fell into a state of deep grieving after discovering their misdeeds. Shakespearian scholar Arthur Percival Rossiter names the scene as the most notable of the playwright's written \"rituals\". The delivery of the event follows the pattern of an opera: after a long speech, the actors alternate among one another to deliver single-line asides to the audience. In this scene of grief, in a reversal of the approach adopted in his later historical plays, Shakespeare uses anonymous fictional characters to illustrate the ills of civil war while a historical king reflects on their fates. Michael Hattaway, emeritus professor of English Literature at the University of Sheffield, comments that Shakespeare intended to show Henry's sadness over the war, to elicit the same emotion among the audience and to expose Henry's ineptitude as king.\nThe battle of Towton was re-examined by Geoffrey Hill in his poem \"Funeral Music\" (1968). Hill presents the historical event through the voices of its combatants, looking at the turmoil of the era through their eyes. The common soldiers grouse about their physical discomforts and the sacrifices that they had made for the ideas glorified by their leaders. They share their superiors' determination to seek the destruction of their opponents, even at the cost of their lives. Hill depicts the participants' belief that the event was pre-destined and of utmost importance as a farce; the world went about its business regardless of the battle of Towton.\nAn episode in C. J. Sansom's 2006 historical novel \"Sovereign\", set in 1541, eighty years after the battle, concerns a Towton farmer appealing to King Henry VIII to be compensated for the time and effort he has to spend on turning over to the Church the skeletons discovered nearly every day on his land.\nLegacy.\nObtaining an accurate figure for casualties has been complicated: remains were either moved or used by farmers as fertiliser, and corpses were generally stripped of clothing and non-perishable items before burial. However some survived when later buildings were constructed over their graves; the first were uncovered in 1996 and excavations have so far uncovered more than 50 skeletons from the battle. An analysis of their injuries shows the brutality of the contest, including extensive post-mortem mutilations.\nSome 15th-century documents confirm that there were casualties that had eventually been reburied in graveyards at Saxton and a chapel constructed for the purpose by Richard III in 1484. His death at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 meant the building was never completed and eventually collapsed. In 1929 stones allegedly from the chapel were used to create the Towton Cross, also known as Lord Dacre's Cross, which commemorates those who died in the battle.\nLord Dacre was buried at the church of All Saints in Saxton and his tomb was reported in the late 19th century to be well maintained, although several of its panels had been weathered away. The tree from which Dacre's killer was supposed to have shot his arrow had been cut down by the late 19th century. In 2010 fragments from what are some of the earliest known handguns found in Britain were discovered on the battlefield.\nViews of the Wars of the Roses in general and of the battle as a charnel house were formed by Shakespeare and endured for centuries. However at the start of the 21st century the battle was no longer prominent in the public consciousness. Journalists lamented that people were ignorant of the battle of Towton and of its significance. According to English Heritage the battle was of the \"greatest importance\": it was one of the largest, if not \"the\" largest, fought in England and resulted in the replacement of one royal dynasty by another. Hill expressed a different opinion. Although impressed with the casualty figures touted by the chroniclers, he believed the battle brought no monumental changes to the lives of the English people.\nThe Battle of Towton was associated with a tradition previously upheld in the village of Tysoe, Warwickshire. For several centuries a local farmer had scoured a hill figure, the Red Horse of Tysoe, each year, as part of the terms of his land tenancy. Although the origins of the tradition have never been conclusively identified, it was locally said this was done to commemorate the Earl of Warwick's inspirational deed of slaying his horse to show his resolve to stand and fight with the common soldiers. The tradition died in 1798 when the Tysoe Inclosure Act 1796 (36 Geo. 3. c. \"31\" Pr.) was implemented redesignated the common land on which the equine figure was located as private property. The scouring was revived during the early 20th century but has since stopped.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEssays and journals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNewspaper articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50237", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50237", "title": "Robert Boyle", "text": "Anglo-Irish scientist (1627\u20131691)\nRobert Boyle (; 25 January 1627 \u2013 31 December 1691) was an Anglo-Irish natural philosopher, chemist, physicist, alchemist and inventor. Boyle is largely regarded today as the first modern chemist, and therefore one of the founders of modern chemistry, and one of the pioneers of modern experimental scientific method. \nHe is best known for Boyle's law, which describes the inversely proportional relationship between the absolute pressure and volume of a gas, if the temperature is kept constant within a closed system. \nAmong his works, \"The Sceptical Chymist\" is seen as a cornerstone book in the field of chemistry. He was a devout and pious Anglican and is noted for his works in theology.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nBoyle was born at Lismore Castle in County Waterford, in the far south of Ireland, the seventh son and fourteenth child of the 1st Earl of Cork (\"the Great Earl of Cork\") and Catherine Fenton. Lord Cork, then known simply as Richard Boyle, had arrived in Dublin from England in 1588 during the Tudor plantations of Ireland and obtained an appointment as a deputy escheator. He had amassed enormous wealth and landholdings by the time Robert was born and had been made Earl of Cork in October 1620. Catherine, his wife, was the daughter of Sir Geoffrey Fenton, the former Secretary of State for Ireland, who was born in Dublin in 1539, and Alice Weston, the daughter of Robert Weston, who was born in Lismore in 1541.\nAs a child, Boyle was raised by a wet nurse, as were his elder brothers. Boyle received private tutoring in Latin, Greek, and French and when he was eight years old, following the death of his mother, he, and his brother Francis, were sent to Eton College in England. His father's friend, Sir Henry Wotton, was then the provost of the college.\nDuring this time, his father hired a private tutor, Robert Carew, who had knowledge of Irish, to act as a private tutor to his sons in Eton. However, \"only Mr. Robert sometimes desires it [Irish] and is a little entered in it\", but despite the \"many reasons\" given by Carew to draw their attention to it, \"they practise the French and Latin but they affect not the Irish\". After spending over three years at Eton, Robert travelled abroad with a French tutor. They visited Italy in 1641 and remained in Florence during the winter of that year studying the \"paradoxes of the great star-gazer\", the elderly Galileo Galilei.\nMiddle years.\nRobert returned to England from continental Europe in mid-1644 with a keen interest in scientific research. His father, Lord Cork, had died the previous year and had left him the manor of Stalbridge in Dorset as well as substantial estates in County Limerick in Ireland that he had acquired. Robert then made his residence at Stalbridge House, between 1644 and 1652, and settled in a laboratory where he conducted many experiments. From that time, Robert devoted his life to scientific research and soon took a prominent place in the band of enquirers, known as the \"Invisible College\", who devoted themselves to the cultivation of the \"new philosophy\". They met frequently in London, often at Gresham College, and some of the members also had meetings at Oxford.\nHaving made several visits to his Irish estates beginning in 1647, Robert moved to Ireland in 1652 but became frustrated at his inability to make progress in his chemical work. In one letter, he described Ireland as \"a barbarous country where chemical spirits were so misunderstood and chemical instruments so unprocurable that it was hard to have any Hermetic thoughts in it.\"\nAll Souls, Oxford University, shows the arms of Boyle's family in the colonnade of the Great Quadrangle, opposite the arms of the Hill family of Shropshire, close by a sundial designed by Boyle's friend Christopher Wren.\nIn 1654, Boyle left Ireland for Oxford to pursue his work more successfully. An inscription can be found on the wall of University College, Oxford, the High Street at Oxford (now the location of the Shelley Memorial), marking the spot where Cross Hall stood until the early 19th century. It was here that Boyle rented rooms from the wealthy apothecary who owned the Hall.\nReading in 1657 of Otto von Guericke's vacuum pump, he set himself, with the assistance of Robert Hooke, to devise improvements in its construction. His \"machina Boyleana\" or \"Pneumatical Engine\" was finished in 1659.\nAmong the critics of the views put forward in this book was a Jesuit, Francis Line (1595\u20131675), and it was while answering his objections that Boyle made his first mention of the law that the volume of a gas varies inversely to the pressure of the gas, which among English-speaking people is usually called \"Boyle's law\", after his name. The person who originally formulated the hypothesis was Henry Power in 1661. Boyle in 1662 included a reference to a paper written by Power, but mistakenly attributed it to Richard Towneley. In continental Europe, the hypothesis is sometimes attributed to Edme Mariotte, although he did not publish it until 1676 and was probably aware of Boyle's work at the time.\nIn 1663 the Invisible College became The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge, and the charter of incorporation granted by Charles II of England named Boyle a member of the council. In 1680 he was elected president of the society but declined the honour from a scruple about oaths.\nHe made a \"wish list\" of 24 possible inventions which included \"the prolongation of life\", the \"art of flying\", \"perpetual light\", \"making armour light and extremely hard\", \"a ship to sail with all winds, and a ship not to be sunk\", \"practicable and certain way of finding longitudes\", \"potent drugs to alter or exalt imagination, waking, memory and other functions and appease pain, procure innocent sleep, harmless dreams, etc.\". All but a few of the 24 have come true.\nIn 1668 he left Oxford for London where he resided at the house of his elder sister Katherine Jones, Lady Ranelagh, in Pall Mall. He experimented in the laboratory she had in her home and attended her salon of intellectuals interested in the sciences. The siblings maintained \"a lifelong intellectual partnership, where brother and sister shared medical remedies, promoted each other's scientific ideas, and edited each other's manuscripts.\" His contemporaries widely acknowledged Katherine's influence on his work, but later historiographers dropped discussion of her accomplishments and relationship to her brother from their histories.\nLater years.\nIn 1669 his health, never very strong, began to fail seriously and he gradually withdrew from his public engagements, ceasing his communications to the Royal Society, and advertising his desire to be excused from receiving guests, \"unless upon occasions very extraordinary\", on Tuesday and Friday forenoon, and Wednesday and Saturday afternoon. In the leisure thus gained he wished to \"recruit his spirits, range his papers\", and prepare some important chemical investigations which he proposed to leave \"as a kind of Hermetic legacy to the studious disciples of that art\", but of which he did not make known the nature. His health became still worse in 1691, and he died on 31 December that year, just a week after the death of his sister, Katherine, in whose home he had lived and with whom he had shared scientific pursuits for more than twenty years. Boyle died from paralysis. He was buried in the churchyard of St Martin-in-the-Fields, his funeral sermon being preached by his friend, Bishop Gilbert Burnet. In his will, Boyle endowed a series of lectures that came to be known as the Boyle Lectures.\nScientific contributions.\n Boyle's great merit as a scientific investigator is that he carried out the principles which Francis Bacon espoused in the \"Novum Organum\". Yet he would not avow himself a follower of Bacon, or indeed of any other teacher.\nEmphasis on experiments.\nOn several occasions, he mentions that to keep his judgment as unprepossessed as might be with any of the modern theories of philosophy, until he was \"provided of experiments\" to help him judge of them. He refrained from any study of the atomical and the Cartesian systems, and even of the Novum Organum itself, though he admits to \"transiently consulting\" them about a few particulars. Nothing was more alien to his mental temperament than the spinning of hypotheses. \"I, ... love not to believe any thing upon Conjectures, when by a not over-difficult Experiment I can try whether it be True or no...\"\nHe regarded the acquisition of knowledge as an end in itself, and in consequence, he gained a wider outlook on the aims of scientific inquiry than had been enjoyed by his predecessors for many centuries. This, however, did not mean that he paid no attention to the practical application of science, nor that he despised practical knowledge.\nPhysics and Chemistry.\nVacuum pump.\nTo Boyle, Guericke's vacuum pump had two important limitations. Firstly, its evacuation required \"the continual labour of two strong men for divers hours\", and secondly, \"the Receiver, or Glass to be empty'd, consisting of one entire and uninterrupted Globe ... of Glass ... is so made, that things cannot be convey'd into it\". Hooke constructed a pump that could be operated on a desktop, and conveniently opened to insert candles, mice, birds, bells, pendulums, and other research objects. With Hooke's pump, Boyle began a series of experiments on the properties of air. An account of Boyle's work with the pump was published in 1660 under the title \"New Experiments Physico-Mechanical, Touching the Spring of the Air, and its Effects\".\nChemistry.\nRobert Boyle was an alchemist; and believing the transmutation of metals to be a possibility, he carried out experiments in the hope of achieving it; and he was instrumental in obtaining the repeal, by the Royal Mines Act 1688 (1 Will. &amp; Mar. c. 30), of the statute of Henry IV against multiplying gold and silver, the Gold and Silver Act 1403 (5 Hen. 4. c. 4). With all the important work he accomplished in physics, chemistry was his peculiar and favourite study. His first book on the subject was \"The Sceptical Chymist\", published in 1661, in which he criticised the \"experiments whereby vulgar Spagyrists are wont to endeavour to evince their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury to be the true Principles of Things\". For him, chemistry was the science of the composition of substances, not merely an adjunct to the arts of the alchemist or the physician.\nElements, compounds, and particles of matter.\nBoyle endorsed the view of elements as the undecomposable constituents of material bodies; and made the distinction between mixtures and compounds. He made considerable progress in the technique of detecting their ingredients, a process which he designated by the term \"analysis\". He further supposed that the elements were ultimately composed of particles of various sorts and sizes, into which, however, they were not to be resolved in any known way. He studied the chemistry of combustion and of respiration, and conducted experiments in physiology, where, however, he was hampered by the \"tenderness of his nature\" which kept him from anatomical dissections, especially vivisections, though he knew them to be \"most instructing\".\n\"Factitious airs\".\nAround 1670, upon producing what is now known to be hydrogen, Boyle coined the term \"factitious airs\". \"Factitious\" means \"artificial, not natural\". Later, English chemist and physicist Henry Cavendish used the term \"factitious air\" to refer to \"any kind of air which is contained in other bodies in an unelastic state, and is produced from thence by art\".\nHeat.\nLike English philosopher Francis Bacon, Galileo Galilei, and Robert Hooke had done before him, Boyle declared that heat consists of the motion of the invisible, constituent particles of objects.\nOther contributions.\nAmong his major work in and contributions to physics were Boyle's law, the discovery of the role played by air in the propagation of sound, and investigations of the expansive force of freezing water, specific gravities, refractive powers, crystals, electricity, colour, and hydrostatics.\nTheological interests.\nIn addition to philosophy, Boyle devoted much time to theology, showing a very decided leaning to the practical side and an indifference to controversial polemics. At the Restoration of Charles II of England in 1660, he was favourably received at court and in 1665 would have received the provostship of Eton College had he agreed to take holy orders, but this he refused to do on the ground that his writings on religious subjects would have greater weight coming from a layman than a paid minister of the Church.\nMoreover, Boyle incorporated his scientific interests into his theology, believing that natural philosophy could provide powerful evidence for the existence of God. In works such as \"Disquisition about the Final Causes of Natural Things\" (1688), for instance, he criticised contemporary philosophers \u2013 such as Ren\u00e9 Descartes \u2013 who denied that the study of nature could reveal much about God. Instead, Boyle argued that natural philosophers could use the design apparently on display in some parts of nature to demonstrate God's involvement with the world. He also attempted to tackle complex theological questions using methods derived from his scientific practices. In \"Some Physico-Theological Considerations about the Possibility of the Resurrection\" (1675), he used a chemical experiment known as the reduction to the pristine state as part of an attempt to demonstrate the physical possibility of the resurrection of the body. Throughout his career, Boyle tried to show that science could lend support to Christianity.\nAs a director of the East India Company he spent large sums in promoting the spread of Christianity in the East, contributing liberally to missionary societies and to the expenses of translating the Bible or portions of it into various languages. Boyle supported the policy that the Bible should be available in the vernacular language of the people. An Irish language version of the New Testament was published in 1602 but was rare in Boyle's adult life. In 1680\u201385 Boyle personally financed the printing of the Bible, both Old and New Testaments, in Irish. In this respect, Boyle's attitude to the Irish language differed from the Protestant Ascendancy class in Ireland at the time, which was generally hostile to the language and largely opposed the use of Irish (not only as a language of religious worship).\nBoyle also had a monogenist perspective about race origin. He was a pioneer in studying races, and he believed that all human beings, no matter how diverse their physical differences, came from the same source: Adam and Eve. He studied reported stories of parents giving birth to different coloured albinos, so he concluded that Adam and Eve were originally white and that Caucasians could give birth to different coloured races. Boyle also extended the theories of Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton about colour and light via optical projection (in physics) into discourses of polygenesis, speculating that maybe these differences were due to \"seminal impressions\". Taking this into account, it might be considered that he envisioned a good explanation for complexion at his time, due to the fact that now we know that skin colour is disposed of by genes. Boyle's writings mention that at his time, for \"European Eyes\", beauty was not measured so much in colour of skin, but in \"stature, comely symmetry of the parts of the body, and good features in the face\". Various members of the scientific community rejected his views and described them as \"disturbing\" or \"amusing\".\nIn his will, Boyle provided money for a series of lectures to defend the Christian religion against those he considered \"notorious infidels, namely atheists, deists, pagans, Jews and Muslims\", with the provision that controversies between Christians were not to be mentioned (see Boyle Lectures).\nAwards and honours.\nAs a founder of the Royal Society, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1663. Boyle's law is named in his honour. The Royal Society of Chemistry issues a Robert Boyle Prize for Analytical Science, named in his honour. The Boyle Medal for Scientific Excellence in Ireland, inaugurated in 1899, is awarded jointly by the Royal Dublin Society and The Irish Times. Launched in 2012, The Robert Boyle Summer School organized by the Waterford Institute of Technology with support from Lismore Castle, is held annually to honor the heritage of Robert Boyle.\nImportant works.\nThe following are some of the more important of his works:\nAmong his religious and philosophical writings were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50239", "revid": "50776118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50239", "title": "Led Zeppelin II", "text": "Led Zeppelin II is the second studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin, released on 22 October 1969 in the United States and on 31 October 1969 in the United Kingdom by Atlantic Records. Recording sessions for the album took place at several locations in both the United Kingdom and North America from January to August 1969. The album's production was credited to the band's lead guitarist and songwriter Jimmy Page, and it was also Led Zeppelin's first album on which Eddie Kramer served as engineer.\nThe album exhibited the band's evolving musical style of blues-derived material and their guitar riff-based sound. It has been described as the band's heaviest album. Six of the nine songs were written by the band, while the other three were reinterpretations of Chicago blues songs by Willie Dixon and Howlin' Wolf. One single, \"Whole Lotta Love\", was released outside of the UK (the band would release no UK singles during their career), and peaked as a top-ten single in over a dozen markets around the world.\n\"Led Zeppelin II\" was a commercial success, and was the band's first album to reach number one on charts in the UK and the US. The album's cover designer David Juniper was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Recording Package in 1970. On 15 November 1999, the album was certified 12\u00d7 Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for sales reaching 12 million copies in the US. Since its release, various writers and music critics have cited \"Led Zeppelin II\" as one of the greatest and most influential albums of all time.\nBackground.\n\"Led Zeppelin II\" was conceived during a busy period of Led Zeppelin's career from January through August 1969, when they completed four European and three American concert tours. Each song was separately recorded, mixed and produced at various studios in the UK and North America. The album was written on tour, during periods of a couple of hours in between concerts, a studio was booked and the recording process begun, necessarily resulting in spontaneity and urgency, which is reflected in the sound. Several songs resulted from improvisation while touring and were recorded mostly live in the studio.\nRecording sessions for the album took place at a wide variety of studios in the UK and US, including Olympic and Morgan Studios in London, England; A&amp;M, Quantum, Sunset, Mirror Sound and Mystic Studios in Los Angeles; Ardent Studios in Memphis, Tennessee; A&amp;R, Juggy Sound, Groove and Mayfair Studios in New York City; and R&amp;D Studios. Some of these were ill-equipped, leading to one Vancouver studio, which had an 8-track set-up without even proper headphone facilities, being credited as \"a hut\". A more favourable set-up was Mystic Studios in Hollywood, Los Angeles with Chris Huston engineering. \nLead singer Robert Plant later complained that the writing, recording, and mixing sessions were done in many different locations, and criticised the writing and recording process. \"Thank You\", \"The Lemon Song\" and \"Moby Dick\" were overdubbed during the tour, while the mixing of \"Whole Lotta Love\" and \"Heartbreaker\" was also done on tour. Page later stated, \"In other words, some of the material came out of rehearsing for the next tour and getting new material together.\"\nPage and Kramer spent two days mixing the album at A&amp;R Studios, and the album's production was entirely credited to Jimmy Page, with Eddie Kramer engineering. Kramer was quoted as saying, \"The famous \"Whole Lotta Love\" mix, where everything is going bananas, is a combination of Jimmy and myself just flying around on a small console twiddling every knob known to man.\" Kramer later gave great credit to Page for the sound that was achieved, despite the inconsistent conditions in which it was recorded: \"We cut some of the tracks in some of the most bizarre studios you can imagine ... but in the end it sounded bloody marvellous ... there was one guy in charge and that was Mr. Page.\"\nMusic and lyrics.\nThe finished tracks reflect the evolving sound of the band and their live performances. Plant had his first songwriting credits on \"Led Zeppelin II\"; he had been unable to have his contributions to the writing process credited for the first album because of a prior contract with CBS Records.\nSide one.\n\"Whole Lotta Love\" was built around a five-note Page riff. Parts of the lyrics were taken directly from Willie Dixon's \"You Need Love\", which led to the group being sued for plagiarism, eventually settling out of court. The arrangement also resembles the Small Faces track \"You Need Loving\". With basic tracks recorded on Page's houseboat, the middle section of the song contained a variety of overdubbed instruments and vocals which were mixed live by Page and Kramer, making full use of stereo panning and other controls available on the desk. The song was edited down to a single in the US, where it became a top 5 hit. In the UK, a single release was cancelled; the group never issued any singles there during their active career together. It was finally issued as a single in 1997. A mainly instrumental version of the song was recorded by CCS and was used as the theme tune to the BBC TV show \"Top of the Pops\", ensuring it was well known by virtually everyone in Britain.\nLed Zeppelin performed \"Whole Lotta Love\" at every gig from June 1969 onwards. It was the closing number of their live shows between 1970 and 1973, often extended to incorporate a rock'n'roll medley towards the end of the set. A different arrangement of the song was played for the Knebworth Fayre concerts in 1979. It was the last song the group ever performed live with drummer John Bonham, on 7 July 1980. \"Whole Lotta Love\" has since been critically praised as one of the definitive heavy metal tracks, though the group have never considered themselves to fit that specific style.\n\"What Is and What Should Never Be\" was primarily written by Plant. It features a variety of dynamics during the track, along with flanged vocals and wide-panned stereo guitars.\n\"The Lemon Song\" was a re-arrangement of Howlin' Wolf's \"Killing Floor\", which had become a regular part of the group's live show during 1969. It was mostly recorded live and expanded to include new lyrics, including the sexually charged phrase \"squeeze my lemon\" which was borrowed from Robert Johnson's \"Travelling Riverside Blues\", which the band had played for the BBC radio show \"Top Gear\" broadcast on 29 June 1969.\n\"Thank You\" was written by Plant as a love song to his wife, Maureen. Page played twelve-string guitar and Jones played Hammond organ on the track.\nSide two.\n\"Heartbreaker\" was mostly written by Page as a showcase for his guitar skills, including an unaccompanied solo in the middle of the song. It quickly became a live favourite, being performed regularly from October 1969 onwards, and throughout the group's career.\n\"Living Loving Maid (She's Just a Woman)\" was purported to be written about a groupie the band encountered while touring the US. The group disliked the track, considering it to be little more than filler, and consequently it was never played live by the group. Plant performed the track live on his 1990 solo tour.\n\"Ramble On\" was written by Plant. The lyrics were inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien, and similar themes appeared on subsequent Led Zeppelin albums. The track made good use of dynamics, moving from a quiet acoustic guitar in the opening, to a variety of overdubbed electric guitars towards the end. It was never performed live by Led Zeppelin during their main career, but Plant has performed the song regularly on solo tours, and it was part of Page and Plant's live set in the mid-1990s. It was finally performed live for the first time by Led Zeppelin at the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in 2007.\n\"Moby Dick\" was designed as a showcase for Bonham's drum solo. A previous drum showpiece featured a different arrangement called \"Pat's Delight\" (after his wife). Moby Dick is in drop D tuning and features a variety of drums and percussive instruments played with bare hands as well as drumsticks. It was a regular part of Led Zeppelin's live show, developing to include additional percussion and electronic drums.\n\"Bring It On Home\" was a cover of a Willie Dixon song originally performed by Sonny Boy Williamson II. Led Zeppelin's arrangement includes a faster middle section in addition to the straightforward blues structure of the original. It was played live regularly throughout late 1969 and 1970.\nArtwork.\nThe album sleeve design was from a poster by David Juniper, who was simply told by the band to come up with an interesting idea. Juniper was a fellow student of Page's at Sutton Art College in Surrey.\nJuniper's design was based on a photograph of the Jagdstaffel 11 Division of the German Air Force during World War I, the Flying Circus led by the Red Baron. Juniper replaced four of the flyers' heads with photos of the band members, added facial hair and sunglasses to some of the flyers' faces or replaced some with the faces of other people. The blonde-haired woman is French actress Delphine Seyrig in her role as Marie-Madeleine in the film \"Mr. Freedom\", a leftist anti-war satire by William Klein. The cover also pictured the outline of a Zeppelin on a brown background (similar to the cover of the band's first album), which gave the album its nickname \"Brown Bomber\".\nRelease and reception.\nThe album was released on 22 October 1969 on Atlantic Records, with advance orders of 400,000 copies. The advertising campaign was built around the slogans 'Led Zeppelin \u2013 The Only Way to Fly' and 'Led Zeppelin II Now Flying'. In the United States, some commercially duplicated reel-to-reel copies of \"Led Zeppelin II\" made by Ampex bore the title \"Led Zeppelin II \u2013 The Only Way to Fly\" on their spine. Commercially, \"Led Zeppelin II\" was the band's first album to hit No. 1 in the US, knocking The Beatles' \"Abbey Road\" (1969) twice from the top spot, where it remained for seven weeks. By April 1970 it had registered three million American sales, whilst in Britain it enjoyed a 138-week residence on the LP chart, climbing to the top spot in February 1970. Meanwhile, the album reached the top spot in 5 other national albums charts (including the Canadian, Australian and Spanish albums charts). In November Ritchie Yorke reported in \"Billboard\" that while the album had achieved \"staggering\" sales, as a hard rock record it was considered unsuitable for North American Top 40 radio stations, who were \"dreary and detached from the mainstream of contemporary rock music\".\nThe album also yielded Led Zeppelin's biggest hit, \"Whole Lotta Love\". This song reached No. 4 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in January 1970, after Atlantic went against the group's wishes by releasing a shorter version on 45. The single's B-side, \"Living Loving Maid (She's Just a Woman)\", also hit the \"Billboard\" chart, peaking at No. 65 in April 1970. The album helped establish Led Zeppelin as an international concert attraction, and for the next year, the group continued to tour relentlessly, initially performing in clubs and ballrooms, then in larger auditoriums and eventually stadiums as their popularity grew.\n\"Led Zeppelin II\" was not well-received by contemporary music critics. John Mendelsohn wrote a negative review of the record for \"Rolling Stone\", in which he mocked the group's heavy sound and white blues, while writing that \"until you've listened to the album eight hundred times, as I have, it seems as if it's just one especially heavy song extended over the space of two whole sides\". In \"The Village Voice\", Robert Christgau jokingly referred to the band as \"the best of the wah-wah mannerist groups, so dirty they drool on demand\", while complaining that \"all the songs sound alike\", before assigning the album a \"B\" grade. He nonetheless conceded in 1970 that \"Led Zeppelin simply out-heavied everyone\" the previous year, \"pitting Jimmy Page's repeated low-register fuzz riffs against the untiring freak intensity of Robert Plant's vocal. This trademark has only emerged clearly on the second album, and more and more I am coming to understand it as an artistic triumph.\"\nOn 10 November 1969, the album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America and in 1990 it was certified 5\u00d7 platinum reflecting shipping of five million copies. By 14 November 1999, \"Led Zeppelin II\" had shipped twelve million copies and was certified 12\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA. The 2014 reissue of the album helped itself get back into the \"Billboard\" Top 10 when it got to No.\u202f9.\nLegacy and reappraisal.\n\"Led Zeppelin II\" has since been regarded as the quintessential hard rock and heavy metal album. AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine said it \"provided the blueprint for all the heavy metal bands that followed it\". While crediting the band for essentially inventing metal, Tom Hull said that, after the first album had declared their musical ambition, \"the second honed it down to a singular entity, a sound\", with subsequent albums expanding on it in \"sophisticated, subtler, often quite intelligent\" ways, but still indebted to \"the basic dumbness\" of \"II\" \u2013 \"dumb not in the sense of stupid but of non-speaking. Lyrics are there of course, but as an integral part of the music, a music better appropriated tactilely, through incoherent sensation, than intellectually, literarily.\"\nThe album was described as a \"brilliant if heavy-handed blues-rock offensive\", by popular music scholar Ronald Zalkind. According to Robert Santelli's \"The Big Book of Blues: A Biographical Encyclopedia\" (2001), Led Zeppelin \"had already begun to move beyond its blues-rock influences, venturing into previously unexplored hard-rock territories\". Blues-derived songs like \"Whole Lotta Love\", \"Heartbreaker\", \"The Lemon Song\", \"Moby Dick\", and \"Bring It On Home\" have been seen as representing standards of the metal genre, where the guitar-based riff (rather than vocal chorus or verses) defines the song and provides the key hook. Such arrangements and emphasis were at the time atypical in popular music. Page's guitar solo in \"Heartbreaker\" was an influence on later renowned guitarists Eddie Van Halen, as inspiration for his two-handed tapping technique, and Steve Vai.\nSince its initial critical reception, \"Led Zeppelin II\" has earned several accolades from music publications, being ranked on critics' \"best album\" lists. In 1989, \"Spin\" magazine ranked the album No. 5 on its list of \"The 25 Greatest Albums of All Time\". In 1990, \"CD Review\" ranked it sixth on their list of top 50 CDs for starting a \"pop/rock\" library; an accompanying blurb described the album as \"white boy blues with a hard rock edge\". In 2000, \"Q\" magazine placed \"Led Zeppelin II\" at number 37 in its list of the \"100 Greatest British Albums Ever\". In 2003, the album was ranked number 75 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time, 79 in a 2012 revised list, and 123 in a 2020 revised list. The album was also included in the book \"1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die\".\n(*) designates unordered lists.\n2014 reissue.\nAlong with the group's self-titled debut album and their third album, \"Led Zeppelin III\", the album was remastered and reissued on 2 June 2014. The reissue comes in six formats: a standard CD edition, a deluxe two-CD edition, a standard LP version, a deluxe two-LP version, a super deluxe two-CD plus two-LP version with a hardback book, and as high-resolution, 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material containing alternative takes, backing tracks and the previously unreleased instrumental, \"La La\". The reissue was released with an altered colour version of the original album's artwork as its bonus disc's cover.\nThe reissue was met with widespread critical acclaim. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 95, based on 10 reviews. \"Pitchfork\" journalist Mark Richardson said, \"the reissue sounds as thrilling as ever\", while Julian Marszalek of \"The Quietus\" noted the bonus disc's \"intriguing insight\" into the original record's creation. In \"Rolling Stone\", David Fricke wrote, \"the alternate takes highlight Robert Plant's ripening vocal poise and, in a rough mix of 'Ramble On', the decisive, melodic force of John Paul Jones' bass and John Bonham's drumming.\" \"As a two-disc set\", \"Consequence of Sound\"'s Michael Madden wrote, \"this reissue is both a reminder of the original album's wallop and a closer look at the alchemy of a band increasingly attuned to ideas of progression.\" Raoul Hernandez from \"The Austin Chronicle\" was more critical of the bonus disc, finding it to be \"the thinnest of extras\" offered by the reissue program.\nTrack listing.\nAll tracks written by Jimmy Page and Robert Plant, except where noted.\nOriginal release.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPersonnel.\nLed Zeppelin\nProduction\n George Chkiantz at Olympic Studios, London: \"Whole Lotta Love\", \"What Is and What Should Never Be\"\n Chris Huston at Mystic Studios, Los Angeles: \"The Lemon Song\", \"Moby Dick\"\n Andy Johns at Morgan Studios, London: \"Thank You\", \"Living Loving Maid (She's Just a Woman)\"\n Eddie Kramer at A &amp; R Studios, Juggy Sound Studio, and Atlantic Studios (resp.), New York: \"Heartbreaker\", \"Ramble On\", \"Bring It On Home\"\nDigitally remastered editions\n Additional engineering for prev. unreleased studio outtakes\u00a0\u2013 Drew Griffiths at Metropolis Mastering, London\n Mastering of prev. unreleased tracks\u00a0\u2013 John Davis at Metropolis Mastering, London\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50240", "revid": "1317098106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50240", "title": "Padua", "text": "City in Veneto, Italy\nPadua ( ) is a city and \"comune\" (municipality) in Veneto, northern Italy, and the capital of the province of Padua. The city lies on the banks of the river Bacchiglione, west of Venice and southeast of Vicenza. With a population of 207,694 as of 2025, Padua is the third-largest city in Veneto. It is also the economic and communications hub of the area. Padua is sometimes included, with Venice and Treviso, in the Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area (PATREVE) which has a population of around 2,600,000.\nBesides the Bacchiglione, the Brenta River, which once ran through the city, still touches the northern districts. Its agricultural setting is the Venetian Plain. To the city's south west lies the Euganaean Hills, which feature in poems by Lucan, Martial, Petrarch, Ugo Foscolo, and Percy Bysshe Shelley.\nPadua has two UNESCO World Heritage List entries: its Botanical Garden, which is the world's oldest, and its 14th-century frescoes, situated in buildings in the city centre. An example is the Scrovegni Chapel painted by Giotto at the beginning of 1300.\nPadua is home to one of the oldest universities in the world, the University of Padua, founded in 1222 and where figures such as Galileo Galilei and Nicolaus Copernicus taught or studied. In 1610, Galileo observed the moons of Jupiter through a homemade telescope in Padua, marking the second phase of the Copernican Revolution. Today, the university has around 72,000 students and has a profound impact on the city's recreational, artistic and economic activities.\nEtymology.\nThe original significance of the Roman name \"Patavium\" () is uncertain. It may be connected with \"Padus\", the ancient name of the Po River. In addition, the Indo-European root \"pat-\" may refer to a wide open plain as opposed to nearby hills. (In Latin this root is present in the word \"patera\" 'plate' and the verb \"patere\" 'to open'.) The suffix \"-av\" (also found in names of rivers such as \"Timavus\" and \"Tiliaventum\") is likely of Venetic origin, precisely indicating the presence of a river, which in the case of Padua is the Brenta. The ending \"-ium\" signifies the presence of villages that have united themselves together. According to another theory, \"Patavium\" probably derives from Gaulish \"padi\" 'pine', in reference to the pine forests thereabouts.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nPadua claims to be among the oldest cities in northern Italy. According to a tradition dated at least to the time of Virgil's \"Aeneid\" and to Livy's \"Ab Urbe Condita\", Padua was founded around 1183\u00a0BC by the Trojan prince Antenor.\nAfter the Fall of Troy, Antenor led a group of Trojans and their Paphlagonian allies, the Eneti or Veneti, who lost their king Pylaemenes to settle the Euganean plain in Italy. Thus, when a large ancient stone sarcophagus was exhumed in the year 1274, officials of the medieval commune declared the remains within to be those of Antenor. An inscription by the native humanist scholar Lovato Lovati placed near the tomb reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Inclitus Antenor patriam vox nisa quietem.&lt;br&gt;Transtulit huc Enetum Dardaniumque fugas,&lt;br&gt;Expulit Euganeos, Patavinam condidit urbem,&lt;br&gt;Quem tenet hic humili marmore cesa domus\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This sepulchre excavated from marble contains the body of the noble Antenor who left his country, guided the Eneti and Trojans, banished the Euganeans and founded Padua.\"\nHowever, more recent tests suggest the sepulcher dates back to between the 4th and 3rd centuries BC. Nevertheless, archeological remains confirm an early date for the foundation of the center of the town to between the 11th and 10th centuries B.C. By the 5th century BC, Padua, rose on the banks of the river Brenta, which in the Roman era was called \"Medoacus Maior\" and probably until AD 589 followed the path of the present-day Bacchiglione (\"Retrone\"). Padua was one of the principal centers of the Veneti.\nThe Roman historian Livy records an attempted invasion by the Spartan king Cleonimos around 302\u00a0BC. The Spartans came up the river but were defeated by the Veneti in a naval battle and gave up the idea of conquest. Still, later, the Veneti of Padua successfully repulsed invasions by the Etruscans and Gauls. According to Livy and Silius Italicus, the Veneti, including those of Padua, formed an alliance with the Romans by 226\u00a0BC against their common enemies, first the Gauls and then the Carthaginians. Men from Padua fought and died beside the Romans at Cannae.\nWith Rome's northwards expansion, Padua was gradually assimilated into the Roman Republic. In 175\u00a0BC, Padua requested the aid of Rome in putting down a local civil war. In 91\u00a0BC, Padua, along with other cities of the Veneti, fought with Rome against the rebels in the Social War. Around 49 (or 45 or 43) BC, Padua was made a Roman \"municipium\" under the \"Lex Julia Municipalis\" and its citizens ascribed to the Roman tribe, \"Fabia\". At that time the population of the city was perhaps 40,000. The city was reputed for its excellent breed of horses and the wool of its sheep. In fact, the poet Martial remarks on the thickness of the tunics made there. By the end of the first century BC, Padua seems to have been the wealthiest city in Italy outside of Rome. The city became so powerful that it was reportedly able to raise two hundred thousand fighting men. However, despite its wealth, the city was also renowned for its simple manners and strict morality. This concern with morality is reflected in Livy's \"Roman History\" (XLIII.13.2) wherein he portrays Rome's rise to dominance as being founded upon her moral rectitude and discipline. Still later, Pliny, referring to one of his Paduan prot\u00e9g\u00e9s' Paduan grandmother, Sarrana Procula, lauds her as more upright and disciplined than any of her strict fellow citizens (Epist. i.xiv.6). Padua also provided the Empire with notable intellectuals. Nearby Abano was the birthplace, and after many years spent in Rome, the death place of Livy, whose Latin was said by the critic Asinius Pollio to betray his \"Patavinitas\" (q.v. Quintilian, \"Inst. Or.\" viii.i.3).\nPadua was also the birthplace of Thrasea Paetus, Asconius Pedianus, and perhaps Valerius Flaccus.\nChristianity was introduced in Padua and in most of the Veneto region by Saint Prosdocimus. He is venerated as the first bishop of the city. His deacon, the Jewish convert Daniel, is also a saintly patron of the city.\nLate Antiquity.\nThe history of Padua during Late Antiquity follows the course of events common to most cities of north-eastern Italy. Padua suffered from the invasion of the Huns and was savagely sacked by Attila in 450. A number of years afterward, it fell under the control of the Gothic kings Odoacer and Theodoric the Great. It was reconquered for a short time by the Byzantine Empire in 540 during the Gothic War. However, depopulation from plague and war ensued. The city was again seized by the Goths under Totila, but was restored to the Eastern Empire by Narses only to fall under the control of the Lombards in 568. During these years, many Paduans sought safety in the countryside and especially in the nearby lagoons of what would become Venice. In 601, the city rose in revolt against Agilulf, the Lombard king who put the city under siege. After enduring a 12-year-long bloody siege, the Lombards stormed and burned the city. Many ancient artifacts and buildings were seriously damaged. The remains of an amphitheater (the \"Arena\") and some bridge foundations are all that remain of Roman Padua today. The townspeople fled to the hills and later returned to eke out a living among the ruins; the ruling class abandoned the city for the Venetian Lagoon, according to a chronicle. The city did not easily recover from this blow, and Padua was still weak when the Franks succeeded the Lombards as masters of northern Italy.\nFrankish and Episcopal Supremacy.\nAt the Diet of Aix-la-Chapelle (828), the duchy and march of Friuli, in which Padua lay, was divided into four counties, one of which took its title from the city of Padua.\nThe end of the early Middle Ages in Padua was marked by the sack of the city by the Magyars in 899. It was many years after Padua recovered from this ravage.\nDuring the period of episcopal supremacy over the cities of northern Italy, Padua does not appear to have been either very important or very active. The general tendency of its policy throughout the war of investitures was Imperial (Ghibelline) and not Roman (Guelph); and its bishops were, for the most part, of Germanic extraction.\nEmergence of the Commune.\nUnder the surface, several important movements were taking place that were to prove formative for the later development of Padua.\nAt the beginning of the 11th century, the citizens established a constitution, composed of a general council or legislative assembly and a \"credenza\" or executive body.\nDuring the next century, they were engaged in wars with Venice and Vicenza for the right of water-way on the Bacchiglione and the Brenta. The city grew in power and self-confidence and in 1138, the government was entrusted to two consuls.\nThe great families of Camposampiero, Este and Da Romano began to emerge and to divide the Paduan district among themselves. The citizens, in order to protect their liberties, were obliged to elect a podest\u00e0 in 1178. Their choice first fell on one of the Este family.\nA fire devastated Padua in 1174. This required the virtual rebuilding of the city.\nThe temporary success of the Lombard League helped to strengthen the towns. However, their civic jealousy soon reduced them to weakness again. In 1214\u20131216, Padua was involved in a conflict with Venice, which it lost. In 1236 Frederick II found little difficulty in establishing his vicar Ezzelino III da Romano in Padua and the neighbouring cities, where he practised frightful cruelties on the inhabitants. Ezzelino was unseated in June 1256 without civilian bloodshed, thanks to Pope Alexander IV.\nPadua then enjoyed a period of calm and prosperity: the basilica of the saint was begun; and the Paduans became masters of Vicenza. The University of Padua (the second university in Italy, after Bologna) was founded in 1222, and as it flourished in the 13th century, Padua outpaced Bologna, where no effort had been made to expand the revival of classical precedents beyond the field of jurisprudence, to become a center of early humanist researches, with first-hand knowledge of Roman poets that was unrivalled in Italy or beyond the Alps.\nHowever, the advances of Padua in the 13th century finally brought the commune into conflict with Can Grande della Scala, lord of Verona. In 1311 Padua had to yield to the Scaligeri of Verona.\nEmergence of the Signoria.\nJacopo da Carrara was elected lord (\"signore\") of Padua in 1318, at that point the city was home to 40,000 people. From then till 1405, nine members of the Carraresi family, including Ubertino, Jacopo II, and Francesco il Vecchio, succeeded one another as lords of the city, with the exception of a brief period of Scaligeri overlordship between 1328 and 1337 and two years (1388\u20131390) when Giangaleazzo Visconti held the town. The period of the \"signoria\" is covered down to 1358 in the chronicle of Guglielmo Cortusi.\nThe Carraresi period was a long period of restlessness, for the Carraresi were constantly at war. Under Carraresi rule the early humanist circles in the university were effectively disbanded: Albertino Mussato, the first modern poet laureate, died in exile at Chioggia in 1329, and the eventual heir of the Paduan tradition was the Tuscan Petrarch.\nIn 1387 John Hawkwood won the Battle of Castagnaro for Padua, against Giovanni Ordelaffi, for Verona. The Carraresi period finally came to an end as the power of the Visconti and of Venice grew in importance.\nVenetian rule.\nPadua came under the rule of the Republic of Venice in 1405, and mostly remained that way until the fall of the republic in 1797.\nThere was just a brief period when the city changed hands (in 1509) during the wars of the League of Cambrai. On 10 December 1508, representatives of the Papacy, France, the Holy Roman Empire, and Ferdinand V of Castile concluded the League of Cambrai against the Republic. The agreement provided for the complete dismemberment of Venice's territory in Italy and for its partition among the signatories: Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I of the House of Habsburg was to receive Padua in addition to Verona and other territories. In 1509 Padua was held for just a few weeks by Imperial supporters. Venetian troops quickly recovered it and successfully defended Padua during its siege by Imperial troops.\nThe city was governed by two Venetian nobles, a podest\u00e0 for civil affairs and a captain for military affairs. Both of them were elected for sixteen months. Under these governors, the great and small councils continued to discharge municipal business and to administer the Paduan law, contained in the statutes of 1276 and 1362. The treasury was managed by two chamberlains; and every five years the Paduans sent one of their nobles to reside as nuncio in Venice, and to watch the interests of his native town.\nVenice fortified Padua with new walls, built between 1507 and 1544, with a series of monumental gates.\nAustrian rule.\nIn 1797 the Venetian Republic came to an end with the Treaty of Campo Formio, and Padua, like much of the Veneto region, was ceded to the Habsburgs. In 1806 the city passed to the French puppet Kingdom of Italy until the fall of Napoleon, in 1814, when the city became part of the newly formed Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia, part of the Austrian Empire.\nAustrian rule was unpopular with progressive circles in northern Italy, but the feelings of the population (from the lower to the upper classes) towards the empire were mixed. In Padua, the year of revolutions of 1848 saw a student revolt which on 8 February turned the University and the Caff\u00e8 Pedrocchi into battlegrounds in which students and ordinary Paduans fought side by side. The revolt was however short-lived, and there were no other episodes of unrest under the Austrian Empire (nor previously had there been any), as in Venice or in other parts of Italy; while opponents of Austria were forced into exile.\nUnder Austrian rule, Padua began its industrial development; one of the first Italian rail tracks, Padua-Venice, was built in 1845.\nIn 1866 the Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz gave Italy the opportunity, as an ally of Prussia, to take Veneto, and Padua was also annexed to the recently formed Kingdom of Italy.\nItalian rule.\nAnnexed to Italy during 1866, Padua was at the centre of the poorest area of Northern Italy, as Veneto was until the 1960s. Despite this, the city flourished in the following decades both economically and socially, developing its industry, being an important agricultural market and having a very important cultural and technological centre like the University. The city hosted also a major military command and many regiments.\nThe 20th century.\nWhen Italy entered World War I on 24 May 1915, Padua was chosen as the main command of the Italian Army. The king, Vittorio Emanuele III, and the commander in chief, Cadorna, went to live in Padua for the period of the war. After the defeat of Italy in the battle of Caporetto in autumn 1917, the front line was situated on the river Piave. This was just from Padua, and the city was now in range of the Austrian artillery. However, the Italian military command did not withdraw. The city was bombed several times (about 100 civilian deaths). A memorable feat was Gabriele D'Annunzio's flight to Vienna from the nearby San Pelagio Castle air field.\nA year later, the threat to Padua was removed. In late October 1918, the Italian Army won the decisive Battle of Vittorio Veneto, and the Austrian forces collapsed. The armistice was signed at Villa Giusti, Padua, on 3 November 1918.\nDuring the war, the industry grew rapidly, and this provided Padua with a base for further post-war development. In the years immediately following World War I, Padua developed outside the historical town, enlarging and growing in population, even if labor and social strife were rampant at the time.\nAs in many other areas in Italy, Padua experienced great social turmoil in the years immediately following World War I. The city was shaken by strikes and clashes, factories and fields were subject to occupation, and war veterans struggled to re-enter civilian life. Many supported a new political way, fascism. As in other parts of Italy, the National Fascist Party in Padua soon came to be seen as the defender of property and order against revolution. The city was also the site of one of the largest fascist mass rallies, with some 300,000 people reportedly attending one speech by Benito Mussolini.\nNew buildings, in typical fascist architecture, sprang up in the city. Examples can be found today in the buildings surrounding Piazza Spalato (today Piazza Insurrezione), the railway station, the new part of City Hall, and part of the Bo Palace hosting the University.\nFollowing Italy's defeat in the Second World War on 8 September 1943, Padua became part of the Italian Social Republic, a puppet state of the Nazi occupiers. The city hosted the Ministry of Public Instruction of the new state, as well as military and militia commands and a military airport. The Resistenza, the Italian partisans, was very active against both the new fascist rule and the Nazis. One of the main leaders of the Resistenza in the area was the University vice-chancellor, Concetto Marchesi.\nFrom December 1943 to the end of the war, Padua was bombed 24 times by Allied aircraft; the heaviest raids were the ones on 16 and 30 December 1943 (each of which caused 300 victims), 7 February 1944 (300 victims), 11 March 1944 (over 300 tons of bombs dropped by 111 bombers), 22 and 23 March 1944, 20 April 1944 (180 victims), 22 February and 12 March 1945. The worst-hit areas were the railway station (the target of most raids) and the northern district of Arcella, where 96% of all buildings were destroyed; overall, 950 homes were destroyed and 1,400 damaged. During one of these bombings, the Church of the Eremitani, with frescoes by Andrea Mantegna, was destroyed, considered by some art historians to be Italy's biggest wartime cultural loss. The Cathedral and the University also suffered damage. Some 2,000 inhabitants of Padua were killed by the raids.\nOn 26 April 1945, the partisans started the final insurrection against the Germans and Fascists; in the subsequent fighting, 224 partisans and 497 Germans were killed. 5,000 German troops, including three generals, surrendered to the partisans in Padua, and another 10,000 in the surrounding area; on 28 April New Zealand troops (2nd New Zealand Division) of the British Eighth Army entered the city. A small Commonwealth War Cemetery is located in the west part of the city, commemorating the sacrifice of these troops.\nAfter the war, the city developed rapidly, reflecting Veneto's rise from being the poorest region in northern Italy to one of the richest and most economically active regions of modern Italy.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nPadua experiences a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\") characteristic of northern Italy, modified by the nearby Adriatic Sea.\nDemographics evolution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2025, there are 207,694 people residing in Padua, of which 48.2% are male and 51.8% are female. Minors total 13.4% of the population and pensioners number 26.8%. This compares with the Italian average of minors making up 14.9% and pensioners making up 24.7%. The average age of Padua residents is 45 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the 10 years between 2011 and 2021, the population of Padua grew by 0.2%, while Italy as a whole declined by 0.7%. The current birth rate of Padua is 8.49 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nEthnic groups and foreign minorities.\nStill in the year 2025 the 84.30% of the population was Italian.The largest foreign community comes from Romania with 24.6% of all foreigners present in the country, followed by the People's Republic of China and Moldova.\nMonuments and places of interest.\nVillas.\nIn the community of Padua are numerous noble villas. These include:\nChurches.\nPadua's historic core includes numerous churches of significant architectural and artistic value. These include:\nCulture.\nPadua has long been acclaimed for its university, founded in 1222. Under the rule of Venice the university was governed by a board of three patricians, called the \"Riformatori dello Studio di Padova\". The list of notable professors and alumni is long, containing, among others, the names of Bembo, Sperone Speroni, the anatomist Vesalius, Copernicus, Fallopius, Fabrizio d'Acquapendente, Galileo Galilei, William Harvey, Pietro Pomponazzi, Reginald, later Cardinal Pole, Scaliger, Tasso and Jan Zamoyski. It is also where, in 1678, Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia became the first woman in the world to graduate from university. The university hosts the oldest anatomy theatre, built in 1594.\nThe university also hosts the oldest botanical garden (1545) in the world. The botanical garden Orto Botanico di Padova was founded as the garden of curative herbs attached to the University's faculty of medicine. The Senate of the Venetian republic decided that knowledge of herbal remedies would reduces errors made by pharmacists, so the garden was built. Over time, the Venetian republic funded field trips that gathered plants from all over the world, making it an important place for the introduction of many exotic plants. It still contains an important collection of rare plants.\nThe place of Padua in the history of art is nearly as important as its place in the history of learning. The presence of the university attracted many distinguished artists, such as Giotto, Fra Filippo Lippi and Donatello; and for native art there was the school of Francesco Squarcione, whence issued Mantegna.\nFrancesco Petrarca (commonly anglicized as Petrarch, 20 July 1304 \u2013 19 July 1374), a scholar, poet of the Italian Renaissance, and one of the earliest humanists, was Canonico at the Padua Cathedral (Duomo), invited by Francesco I da Carrara, lord of Padua. Petrarca lived in the via Dietro Duomo 26/28 in 1349 which remained his property until 1374. His house in Padua was a stopover for numerous historical figures, such as the Carrara princes and Giovanni Boccaccio.\nPadua is also the birthplace of the celebrated architect Andrea Palladio, whose 16th-century villas in the area of Padua, Venice, Vicenza and Treviso are among the most notable of Italy and they were often copied during the 18th and 19th centuries; and of Giovanni Battista Belzoni, adventurer, engineer and egyptologist.\nThe sculptor Antonio Canova produced his first work in Padua, one of which is among the statues of Prato della Valle (presently a copy is displayed in the open air, while the original is in the Musei Civici). In Prato della Valle, there is the statue of Antonio Canova (by Giovanni Ferrari), which depicts the sculptor in the act of sculpting the bust of the prosecutor Antonio Cappello.\nThe Antonianum is settled among Prato della Valle, the Basilica of Saint Anthony and the Botanic Garden. It was built in 1897 by the Jesuit fathers and kept alive until 2002. During World War II, under the leadership of P. Messori Roncaglia SJ, it became the center of the resistance movement against the Nazis. Indeed, it briefly survived P. Messori's death and was sold by the Jesuits in 2004.\nPadua also plays host to the majority of \"Taming of the Shrew\" by William Shakespeare and in \"Much Ado About Nothing\" Benedick is named as \"Signior Benedick of Padua\".\nPaolo De Poli, painter and enamellist, author of decorative panels and design objects, 15 times invited to the Venice Biennale was born in Padua. The electronic musician Tying Tiffany was also born in Padua.\nGovernment.\nSince local government political reorganization in 1993, Padua has been governed by the City Council of Padua. Voters elect directly 33 councilors and the mayor of Padua every five years. The current mayor of Padua is Sergio Giordani (independent, supported by the PD), elected on 26 June 2017.\nThis is a list of the mayors of Padua since 1946:\nWhile Veneto has traditionally been Italy's most conservative region, Padua as a university city has had somewhat left-wing leanings. In the 1970s, leftist groups like Potere Operaio and Autonomia Operaia were strong in the city. Since the mayors became directly elected in 1995, only two right-wing mayors have been elected: Giustina Mistrello Destro in 1999 and Massimo Bitonci in 2014.\nEconomy.\nThe industrial area of Padova was created in the eastern part of the city in 1946; it is now one of the biggest industrial zones in Europe, having an area of 11\u00a0million sqm. The main offices of 1,300 industries are based here, employing 50,000 people. In the industrial zone, there are two railway stations, one fluvial port, three truck terminals, two highway exits and a lot of connected services, such as hotels, post offices and directional centres.\nAccording to data released by the Italian Ministry of the Economy and Finances, based on declared income from tax filings, the total average per capita gross income in Padova was \u20ac30,134 for 2022, well above the declared average for Italy at \u20ac20,039.\nThe rate of local income tax for Padova has trended steadily upwards from 0.20% in 2001. In 2024, the city levied a local income tax with rates that ranged from 0.69% to 0.80% depending on the bracket.\nTransport.\nBy car.\nBy car, there are 2 motorways (autostrade in Italian): A4 Brescia-Padova, connecting it to Verona (then to Brenner Pass, Innsbruck and Bavaria) and Milan (then Switzerland, Turin and France); A4 Padova-Venezia, to Venice then Belluno (for Dolomites holiday resorts like Cortina) Trieste and Tarvisio (for Austria, Slovenia, Croatia and Eastern Europe); A13 Bologna-Padova, to Ferrara and Bologna (then Central and South Italy). Roads connect Padua with all the large and small centers of the region. A motorway with more than 20 exits surrounds the city, connecting districts and the small towns of the surrounding region.\nBy rail.\nPadua has two railway stations open to passengers. The main station \"Stazione di Padova\" has 11 platforms and is sometimes incorrectly referred to as \"Padova Centrale\"; it is one of the biggest stations in Italy. More than 450 trains per day leave Padova. The station is used by over 20\u00a0million passengers per year. From Padova, high speed trains connect to Milan, Rome, Bologna, Florence and Venice; one can reach Milan in 1hour and 59\u00a0minutes, Rome in 3hours 13minutes and Venice in 30\u00a0minutes. There are also international day trains to Zurich and Munich, and overnight sleeper services to Munich and Vienna (\u00d6BB).\nThe station was opened in 1842 when the service started on the first part of the Milan\u2013Venice railway (the \"Imperial Regia Ferrovia Ferdinandea\") built from Padua to Marghera through Mestre. Porta Marghera is a major port of the Venetian area.\nRailways enthusiasts can visit the Signal Box A (Cabina A), preserved by the \"Societ\u00e0 Veneta Ferrovie\" (a society named after the former public works and railway company, based in \"Piazza Eremitani\" in Padua) association.\nBy aeroplane.\nPadua is approximately away from Venice Marco Polo Airport which is the nearest airport with regular commercial service. Padua is also served by the Verona Villafranca Airport and Treviso Airport.\nThe Gino Allegri, or \"Aeroporto civile di Padova \"Gino Allegri\"\", is no longer served by regularly scheduled flights. Padua is, however, the home of one of Italy's four area control centres.\nPublic transport.\nUrban public transport includes public buses together with a new Translohr guided tramway (connecting Albignasego, in the south of Padua, with Pontevigodarzere in the north of the city, thanks to the new line built in 2009) and private taxis.\nThe city centre is partly closed to vehicles, except for residents and permitted vehicles. There are some car parks surrounding the district. In this area, as well, there are some streets and squares restricted to pedestrian and bicycle use only.\nPadua has approximately 40 bus lines, which are served by new buses (purchased in 2008\u20139).\nThe Veneto Region is building a regional rail line (S-Bahn-like system) around the city with 15 new stations. Its name will be \"SFMR\" and it will reach the province of Venice.\nStatistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Padova, Vicenza e Verona, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 46 min. 5% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 13 min, while 30% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 4.7\u00a0km, while 4% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nSports.\nPadua is the home of Calcio Padova, an association football team that currently plays in Italy's Serie B, and who played 16 Serie A championships (last 2 in 1995 and 1996, but the previous 14 between 1929 and 1962); the Petrarca Padova rugby union team, winner of 14 national championships (all between 1970 and 2022) and 2 national cups, and now plays in the Top12 league; and the Pallavolo Padova volleyball club, once called Petrarca Padova as well, which plays in the Italian first division (Superlega) and who won a CEV cup in 1994. Basketball, cycling (Padua has been for several years home of the famous Giro del Veneto), rowing (two teams among the best ones in Italy, Canottieri Padova and Padova Canottaggio), horseback-riding, and swimming are popular sports too.\nThe main venues are the following: Stadio Euganeo for football, rugby (it occasionally hosts the national team during the Autumn internationals) and athletics, about 32,000 seats; Stadio Plebiscito for rugby union, about 9,000 seats; Palazzetto dello Sport San Lazzaro for volleyball and basketball, about 5,000 seats; Ippodromo Breda \u2013 Le Padovanelle for horse races. The old Stadio Appiani, which hosted up to 21,000 people, presently reduced to 10,000 for security reasons twenty years ago, and near to Prato della Valle in the city central area, was recently restored and hosts some Calcio Padova training sessions, as well as youth games. There is also a small ice stadium for skating and hockey, with about 1,000 seats.\nItaly international rugby players Mauro and Mirco Bergamasco, Marco Bortolami, Andrea Marcato and Leonardo Ghiraldini were all born in Padua. All of them started their careers in Petrarca Padova.\nWell known footballers from Padua are Francesco Toldo, who was born here, and Alessandro Del Piero, who started his professional career in the Calcio Padova.\nInternational relations.\nPadua hosts consulates for several nations, including those of Canada, Croatia, Ivory Coast, Peru, Poland, Switzerland and Uruguay. A consulate for South Korea was planned in 2014 and a consulate for Moldova was opened on 1 August 2014.\nTwin towns - Sister cities.\nPadua is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50241", "revid": "14769218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50241", "title": "Led Zeppelin III", "text": "Led Zeppelin III is the third studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin, released on 5 October 1970. It was recorded in three locations. Much of the work was done at Headley Grange, a country house, using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio. Additional sessions were held at Island Studios and Olympic Studios in London. As with the prior album, the band eschewed the use of guest musicians, with all music performed by band members Robert Plant (vocals), Jimmy Page (guitars), John Paul Jones (bass, keyboards), and John Bonham (drums). The range of instruments played by the band was greatly enhanced on this album, with Jones especially emerging as a talented multi-instrumentalist, playing a wide range of keyboard and stringed instruments, including various synthesizers, mandolin and double bass, in addition to his usual bass guitar. As with prior albums, Page served as producer on the album, with mixing done by Andy Johns and Terry Manning.\nThe album showed a progression from straightforward rock towards folk and acoustic music. While hard rock influences were still present, such as on \"Immigrant Song\", acoustic-based songs such as \"Gallows Pole\" and \"That's the Way\" showed Led Zeppelin were capable of playing different styles successfully. The band wrote most of the material themselves, but as with prior records, included two songs that were re-interpretations of earlier works: \"Gallows Pole\", based on a traditional English folk song, by way of American singer Fred Gerlach; and \"Hats Off to (Roy) Harper\", a reworking of a blues song by Bukka White. The acoustic material developed from a songwriting session between Plant and Page at Bron-Yr-Aur cottage in Wales, which influenced the musical direction.\nThe album was one of the most anticipated of 1970, and its shipping date was held up by the intricate inner sleeve design based around a volvelle, with numerous images visible through holes in the outer cover. It was an immediate commercial success upon release and topped the UK and US charts. Although many critics were initially confused over the change in musical style and gave the album a mixed response, \"Led Zeppelin III\" has since been acknowledged as representing an important milestone in the band's history and a turning point in their music.\nBackground.\nBy 1970, Led Zeppelin had achieved commercial success in both the UK and the US with their first two albums. They were determined to have a proper break, having recorded most of \"Led Zeppelin II\" in various locations while on tour, financing the sessions with the album sales and tour receipts. Following an exhausting concert tour of North America that spring, lead singer Robert Plant recommended to guitarist and producer Jimmy Page that they should retreat to Bron-Yr-Aur, an 18th-century cottage in Snowdonia, Wales, on a hilltop overlooking the Dyfi Valley, north of the market town Machynlleth. Plant had spent holidays there with his family.\nThis remote setting had no running water or electric power, which encouraged a slight change of musical direction for the band towards an emphasis on acoustic arrangements. Page later explained that the tranquillity of Bron-Yr-Aur stood in sharp contrast to the continual touring of 1969, affecting the overall tone of the songwriting and dominance of acoustic guitars. His playing was influenced by folk guitarists Davey Graham and Bert Jansch, who regularly used alternative guitar tunings. Plant also recalled the band were \"obsessed with change\" and enjoyed listening to John Fahey. The band specifically wanted a change in direction, to show they could play any style of music they wanted.\nRecording.\nThe first recording sessions for \"Led Zeppelin III\" took place at Olympic Studios in November 1969. A press statement from manager Peter Grant said the group were recording a non-album track to be released as a single, but this was ultimately abandoned. Further sessions took place towards the end of the year, in between touring, before the decision was made to stop working and take a break at Bron-Yr-Aur. After preparing material for the album there, Page and Plant were joined by drummer John Bonham and bassist/keyboardist John Paul Jones at Headley Grange, a mansion in East Hampshire, to rehearse the songs. The rural atmosphere gave a relaxed feel to the sessions, and the band found it to be a more enjoyable environment in which to develop songs than a studio in the city.\nThe album was recorded between May and June 1970 at Headley Grange (using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio) and at Olympic, with further recording at Island Records' Island Studios in Notting Hill the following month. Mixing took place at Ardent Studios, Memphis, in August 1970, partway through the group's sixth American concert tour. The album was produced by Page and engineered by Andy Johns and Terry Manning. Page had first met Manning when the latter's band, Lawson and Four More, had supported Page's old band the Yardbirds in 1966. Manning had been to several Led Zeppelin shows, and this led to Page asking him to engineer the new album.\nSongs.\n\"Led Zeppelin III\" marked a change in focus for the band, from late 1960s hard rock to a more acoustic-based sound. These styles had been present to a lesser degree on the band's first two releases, such as \"Babe I'm Gonna Leave You\" and \"Ramble On\", from the first and second albums, respectively. However, on this album, the group used more acoustic arrangements, and they would remain prominent to various degrees in the group's later releases. With \"Led Zeppelin III\", the group's songwriting dynamic also changed, from Page's domination of the first two albums towards a more democratic situation in which all four group members contributed their own compositions and ideas. Plant wrote all of the lyrics, with the exception of \"Tangerine\".\nSide one.\n\"Immigrant Song\" was written about the Viking invasions of England and inspired by a short tour of Iceland in June 1970. It was released as a single in the US and became a top 20 hit. It was the opening song for the band's appearance at the Bath Festival of Blues and Progressive Music and at subsequent gigs for the next two years. It was included in the 2003 movie \"School of Rock\", after Jack Black made a short video with fans asking for permission for its use. Page clarified that the song's opening is a combination of a voice and echo feedback.\n\"Friends\" is an acoustic track that uses a C6 tuning on guitar. Page explained: \"I played a Harmony acoustic tuned to C\u2013A\u2013C\u2013G\u2013C\u2013E on 'Friends'... It's a C [type] tuning, but not a [typical] C tuning. I made it up.\" The song includes a string section arranged by Jones, which Page had wanted to achieve an Indian style of sound. The song was re-recorded as an experimental arrangement with the \"Bombay Orchestra\" (most likely the informal name of a group of freelance musicians brought together by flautist Vijay Raghav Rao) in March 1972, along with \"Four Sticks\" from the following untitled album. That arrangement appeared on the 2015 reissue of the retrospective album \"Coda\". The song segues into \"Celebration Day\" via a Moog synthesiser drone.\n\"Since I've Been Loving You\" was one of the first songs to be written for the album, in late 1969. It is a blues song in the key of C minor, featuring Jones on Hammond organ and bass pedals, simultaneously. The song became a live performance staple for the band throughout the rest of their career, replacing \"I Can't Quit You Baby\" from the first album as the band's slow blues showcase, with Page's guitar solo featured on both the recorded version and in the band's live show.\n\"Out on the Tiles\" was mostly written by Bonham, who came up with the idea for the riffs that run through the track. The introduction was used to open live versions of \"Black Dog\" (from \"Led Zeppelin IV\") and Bonham's drum solo on the 1977 US tour.\nSide two.\n\"Gallows Pole\" is an updated arrangement of a traditional folk song called \"The Maid Freed from the Gallows\", inspired by a version recorded by Fred Gerlach. Page played a variety of acoustic and electric guitars and banjo, while Jones played mandolin as well as bass. It was reworked by Page and Plant for their 1994 album \"\".\n\"Tangerine\" was written by Page in 1968, when the Yardbirds were still together. The track features pedal steel guitar as well as acoustic. It was added to the group's live acoustic set in 1971 and performed regularly into the following year. It was then revived as a four-part harmony arrangement in 1975.\n\"That's the Way\" had the original title of \"The Boy Next Door\". It was written in Bron-Yr-Aur about the problems two people faced in a relationship and the clashes with their families. The song became a staple of the group's acoustic set throughout the 1970s and was played at the Bath Festival, where Led Zeppelin performed acoustically for the first time in the UK. Page thought highly of Plant's lyrics and considered it a breakthrough in their development as a songwriting team. The pair had gone for a walk and, on their return, sat down by a ravine with a tape recorder, where Page started to play the tune, to which Plant improvised a verse.\n\"Bron-Y-Aur Stomp\" was originally called \"Jennings Farm Blues\" and recorded as an electric arrangement, at the end of 1969. It was subsequently reworked as an acoustic number and featured Bonham playing spoons.\nThe closing track, \"Hats Off to (Roy) Harper\", was based on the Bukka White blues song \"Shake 'Em On Down\" and named as a tribute to their friend and folk singer, Roy Harper. The original LP credited the arrangement to \"Charles Obscure\", a band in-joke. It features Plant's voice fed through a vibrato amplifier.\nUnreleased material.\nPage said that the group had 16 tracks to choose from for release on \"Led Zeppelin III\". Six other songs that were recorded during the \"Led Zeppelin III\" sessions were released at a later date: \"Poor Tom\" was released on \"Coda\"; \"Bron-Yr-Aur\" was included on the 1975 double album \"Physical Graffiti\"; \"Hey, Hey, What Can I Do\" was released as the B-side to the 1970 \"Immigrant Song\" single, and on the 1972 sampler album \"The New Age of Atlantic\", later appearing on the first box set in 1990 and then \"Coda\" (Deluxe Edition) in 2015, along with \"St. Tristan's Sword\"; and both \"Jennings Farm Blues\" and \"Key to the Highway/Trouble in Mind\" later appeared on the 2014 deluxe edition of the album.\nPackaging and artwork.\n\"Led Zeppelin III\"'s original vinyl edition was packaged in a gatefold sleeve with an innovative cover, designed by Zacron, a multi-media artist whom Page had met in 1963 whilst Zacron was a student at Kingston College of Art. Zacron subsequently graduated from the Royal Academy of Arts and became a lecturer at the University of Leeds. Page asked him if he would help design a sleeve for the album, which he helped arrange in January 1970.\nThe cover and interior gatefold art consisted of a surreal collection of seemingly random images on a white background, many of them connected thematically with flight or aviation. Behind the front cover was a rotatable laminated card disc, or volvelle, covered with more images, including photos of the band members, which showed through holes in the cover; moving an image into place behind one hole would usually bring one or two others into place behind other holes. The back cover was a composite shot of the best photographs from the photography sessions. Zacron chose the images because he wanted to \"show them as the giant force they were in music\". In France, this album was released with a different album cover, simply showing a photo of the four band members.\nZacron later said that, upon his completion of the artwork, Page telephoned him while he was in New York to express his satisfaction with the results, saying, \"I think it is fantastic\". However, he later thought the artwork was unsatisfactory because of working to a deadline.\nRelease and reception.\n\"Led Zeppelin III\" was one of the most anticipated albums of 1970, and advance orders in the US alone were close to the million mark. The volvelle-designed sleeve held up production and caused a two-month delay. In the run-up to release, the group bought a full-page advertisement in \"Melody Maker\" magazine at the end of September, which simply said, \"Thank you for making us the world's number one band.\" The album was released in the US on 5 October, then in the UK on 23 October. It immediately topped the British charts.\nAlthough the band's expanding musical boundaries were greeted warmly by some, detractors attacked the heavier tracks as being mindless noise. In a review for \"Rolling Stone\", critic Lester Bangs praised \"That's the Way\" as \"beautiful and genuinely moving\", while characterising the band's heavier songs as crude and little differentiated from each other. Others criticised the acoustic material for imitating the music of Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young, which Page disputed, as the group had featured a similar style on both of their previous albums. Page later said that the negative press given to the third album affected him so much that he did not give press interviews for 18 months after its release, adding that the criticism was one of the reasons why the band's untitled follow-up album contained no written information on it at all. Page later came to believe that journalists had little time to listen to the material and were simply looking for \"the new 'Whole Lotta Love'\" instead of appreciating the album on its own merits.\nA positive review came from Robert Christgau, who originally assigned it an A-minus grade and wrote in his \"Consumer Guide\" review for \"The Village Voice\": \"I have always approved theoretically of Led Zep's concept, and now the group has finally whipped it into shape. It's amazing to realize that Robert Plant's vocals can convey that same overbearing power when Page plays acoustic, as he does to great effect on several cuts here. No drum solos, either. Heavy.\"\n\"Led Zeppelin III\" was a trans-Atlantic number one hit. In the UK, it reached No.\u00a01 on 7 November 1970 and remained on the chart for 40 weeks. In the US, it entered the chart at No.\u00a03 on 24 October and reached No.\u00a01 the following week. It remained on the chart for 19 weeks and was certified Gold on 8 October 1970. However, following the lukewarm, if not confused and sometimes dismissive reception from critics, sales lagged after this initial peak.\nDespite mostly indifferent reviews and lower sales than Led Zeppelin's previous two albums, \"Led Zeppelin III\"'s reputation has increased over time. The RIAA certified the album 2 times platinum in 1990, and 6 times platinum in 1999. The 2014 reissue of the album helped itself get back into the \"Billboard\" Top 10.\n2014 reissue.\nAlong with the group's self-titled debut album and their second album, \"Led Zeppelin II\", the album was remastered and reissued on 2 June 2014. The reissue comes in six formats: a standard CD edition; a deluxe two-CD edition; a standard LP version; a deluxe two-LP version; a super deluxe two-CD plus two-LP version with a hardback book; and as high-resolution, 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material containing alternative takes, backing tracks and the previously unreleased songs \"Bathroom Sound\", \"Jennings Farm Blues\" and \"Key to the Highway/Trouble in Mind\". The LP versions replicate the original volvelle sleeve design. The reissue was released with an inverted colour version of the original album's artwork as its bonus disc's cover.\nThe reissue was met with widespread critical acclaim. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 98, based on 10 reviews. The bonus disc was hailed by \"Pitchfork\" journalist Mark Richardson as \"easily the best\" of the three reissues. In \"Rolling Stone\", David Fricke wrote of highlights in the bonus disc: \"'Jennings Farm Blues', an electric run at the folk gallop 'Bron-Y-Aur Stomp', shows Zeppelin exploring options, and the medley 'Keys to the Highway/Trouble in Mind', by Page and Plant, feels like a deep-blues breath before the next rush forward.\"\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50242", "revid": "420756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50242", "title": "Led Zeppelin IV", "text": "The untitled fourth studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin, commonly known as Led Zeppelin IV, was released on 8 November 1971, by Atlantic Records. It was produced by the band's guitarist, Jimmy Page, and recorded between December 1970 and February 1971, mostly in the country house Headley Grange. The album contains one of the band's best-known recordings, the eight-minute-long \"Stairway to Heaven\".\nThe informal recording environment inspired the band, allowing them to try different arrangements of material and create songs in various styles. After the previous album \"Led Zeppelin III\" (1970) received lukewarm reviews from critics, they decided their fourth album would officially be untitled and represented instead by four symbols\u00a0\u2013 one chosen by each band member\u00a0\u2013 without featuring the name or any other details on the cover. Unlike the prior two albums, the band was joined by guest musicians: singer Sandy Denny on \"The Battle of Evermore\", and pianist Ian Stewart on \"Rock and Roll\". As with prior albums, most of the material was written by the band, though there was one cover song, a hard rock re-interpretation of the Memphis Minnie blues song \"When the Levee Breaks\".\n\"Led Zeppelin IV\" was an immediate critical and commercial success and is Led Zeppelin's best-selling album, having sold over 37 million copies worldwide. It is one of the best-selling albums in the United States and of all time, while critics have regularly placed it high on lists of the greatest albums of all time.\nWriting and recording.\nFollowing the release of \"Led Zeppelin III\" in October 1970, the group took a break from live performances to concentrate on recording a follow-up. They turned down all touring offers, including a proposed New Year's Eve gig that would have been broadcast on television. They returned to Bron-Yr-Aur, a country house in Snowdonia, Wales, to write new material.\nRecording sessions for the album began at Island Records' new studios on Basing Street in London on 5 December 1970, with the recording of \"Black Dog\". The group had considered Mick Jagger's home, Stargroves as a recording location, but decided it was too expensive. They subsequently moved the following month to Headley Grange, a country house in Hampshire, England, using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio and engineer Andy Johns, with the Stones' Ian Stewart assisting. Johns had just worked on engineering \"Sticky Fingers\" and recommended the mobile studio. Guitarist and producer Jimmy Page later recalled: \"We needed the sort of facilities where we could have a cup of tea and wander around the garden and go in and do what we had to do.\" This relaxed, atmospheric environment at Headley Grange also provided other advantages for the band, as they were able to capture spontaneous performances immediately, with some tracks arising from the communal jamming. Bassist and keyboardist John Paul Jones remembered there was no bar or leisure facilities, but this helped focus the group on the music without being distracted.\nOnce the basic tracks had been recorded, the band added overdubs at Island Studios in February. The band spent five days at Island, before Page then took the multitrack tapes to Sunset Sound in Los Angeles for mixing on 9 February, on Johns's recommendation, with a plan for an April 1971 release. Mixing would take ten days, before Page travelled back to London with the newly mixed material. The band had a playback at Olympic Studios. The band disliked the results, and so after touring through the spring and early summer, Page remixed the whole album in July. The album was delayed again over the choice of cover and whether it should be a double album, with a possible suggestion it could be issued as a set of EPs.\nSongs.\nSide one.\n\"Black Dog\" was named after a dog that hung around Headley Grange during recording. The riff was written by Page and Jones, while the a cappella section was influenced by Fleetwood Mac's \"Oh Well\". Singer Robert Plant wrote the lyrics, and later sang portions of the song during solo concerts. The guitar solos on the outro were recorded directly into the desk, without using an amplifier.\n\"Rock and Roll\" was a collaboration with Stewart that came out of a jam early in the recording sessions at Headley Grange. Drummer John Bonham created the introduction, which came from jamming around the intro to Little Richard's \"Keep A-Knockin'\". The track became a live favourite in concert and was performed as the opening number or as an encore. It was released as a promotional single in the US, with stereo and mono mixes on either side of the disc.\n\"The Battle of Evermore\" was written by Page on the mandolin, borrowed from Jones. Plant added lyrics inspired by a book he was reading about the Scottish Independence Wars. The track featured a duet between Plant and Fairport Convention's Sandy Denny, who provided the only female voice to be heard on a Led Zeppelin recording. Plant played the role of narrator in the song, describing events, while Denny sang the part of the town crier representing the people.\n\"Stairway to Heaven\" was mostly written by Page and most of the chord sequence was already worked out when recording started at Basing Street Studios. The lyrics were written by Plant at Headley Grange, about a woman who \"took everything without giving anything back\". The final take of the song was recorded at Island Studios after the Headley Grange session. The basic backing track featured Bonham on drums, Jones on electric piano and Page on acoustic guitar. The whole group contributed to the arrangement, such as Jones playing recorders on the introduction and Bonham's distinctive drum entry halfway through the piece. Page played the guitar solo using a Fender Telecaster he had received from Jeff Beck. It had been his main guitar on the group's first album and early live shows. He put down three different takes of the solo and picked the best to put on the album.\nThe song was considered the standout track on the album and was played on FM radio stations frequently, but the group resisted all suggestions to release it as a single. It became the centrepiece of the group's live set from 1971 onwards. In order to replicate the changes between acoustic, electric and twelve-string guitar on the studio recording, Page played a Gibson EDS-1275 double-neck guitar during the song.\nSide two.\n\"Misty Mountain Hop\" was written at Headley Grange and featured Jones playing electric piano. Plant wrote the lyrics about dealing with the clash between students and police over drug possession. The title came from J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Hobbit\". Plant later performed the track on solo tours.\n\"Four Sticks\" took its title from Bonham playing the drum pattern that runs throughout the song with four drum sticks, and Jones played analog synth. The track was more difficult to record than the other material on the album, requiring numerous takes. It was played live occasionally in early 1971. The song was also re-recorded with the Bombay Symphony Orchestra in 1972. This version appeared on the deluxe edition reissue of the group's 1982 album \"Coda\". The song was also reworked for Page and Plant's 1994 album \"\".\n\"Going to California\" was a quiet acoustic number. It was written by Page and Plant about Californian earthquakes, and trying to find the perfect woman. The music was inspired by Joni Mitchell, of whom both Plant and Page were fans. The track was originally titled \"Guide To California\"; the final title came from the trip to Los Angeles to mix the album.\n\"When the Levee Breaks\" came from a blues song recorded by Memphis Minnie and Kansas Joe McCoy in 1929. The track opened with Bonham's heavy unaccompanied drumming, which was recorded in the lobby of Headley Grange using two Beyerdynamic M 160 microphones suspended above a flight of stairs; output from these were passed to a limiter. A Binson Echorec, a delay effects unit, was also used. Page recalled he had tried to record the track at early sessions but it had sounded flat. The unusual locations around the lobby gave the ideal ambience for the drum sound. This introduction was later extensively sampled in hip hop music during the 1980s. Page and Plant played the song on their 1995 tour promoting \"\".\nOther songs.\nThree other songs from the sessions, \"Down by the Seaside\", \"Night Flight\" and \"Boogie with Stu\" (featuring Stewart on piano), were included four years later on the double album \"Physical Graffiti\". An early version of \"No Quarter\" was also recorded at the sessions.\nTitle.\nAfter the lukewarm, if not confused and sometimes dismissive, critical reaction \"Led Zeppelin III\" had received in late 1970, Page decided that the next Led Zeppelin album would not have a title, but would instead feature four hand-drawn symbols on the inner sleeve and record label, each one chosen by the band member it represents. Atlantic Records were strongly against the idea, but the group stood their ground and refused to hand over the master tapes until their decision had been agreed to.\nPage has also stated that the decision to release the album without any written information on the album sleeve was contrary to strong advice given to him by a press agent, who said that after a year's absence from both records and touring, the move would be akin to \"professional suicide\". Page thought, \"We just happened to have a lot of faith in what we were doing.\" He recalled the record company were insisting that a title had to be on the album, but held his ground, as he felt it would be an answer to critics who could not review one Led Zeppelin album without a point of reference to earlier ones.\nReleasing the album without an official title has made it difficult to consistently identify. While most commonly called \"Led Zeppelin IV\", Atlantic Records catalogues have used the names \"Four Symbols\" and \"The Fourth Album\". It has also been referred to as \"ZoSo\" (which Page's symbol appears to spell), \"Untitled\" and \"Runes\". Page frequently refers to the album in interviews as \"the fourth album\" and \"Led Zeppelin IV\", and Plant thinks of it as \"the fourth album, that's it\". The original LP also has no text on the front or back cover, and lacks a catalogue number on the spine.\nPackaging.\nIn place of a title, Page decided each member could choose a personal emblem for the cover. Initially thinking of a single symbol, he then decided there could be four, with each member of the band choosing his own. He designed his own symbol and has never publicly disclosed any reasoning behind it. It has been argued that his symbol appeared as early as 1557 to represent Saturn. The symbol is sometimes referred to as \"ZoSo\", though Page has explained that it was not in fact intended to be a word at all. Jones's symbol, which he chose from Rudolf Koch's \"Book of Signs\", is a single circle intersecting three \"vesicae piscis\" (a triquetra). It is intended to symbolise a person who possesses both confidence and competence. Bonham's symbol, the three interlocking (Borromean) rings, was picked by the drummer from the same book. It represents the triad of mother, father and child, but, also happens to be the logo for the steel and armament producer Krupp and, turned upside down, Ballantine beer. Plant's symbol of a feather within a circle was his own design, being based on the sign of the supposed Mu civilisation. A fifth, smaller symbol chosen by guest vocalist Sandy Denny represents her contribution to \"The Battle of Evermore\"; the figure, composed of three equilateral triangles, appears on the inner sleeve of the LP, serving as an asterisk.\nDuring Led Zeppelin's tour of the United Kingdom in winter 1971 shortly after the album's release, the symbols could be seen on the group's stage equipment; Page's on one of his amplifiers, Bonham's on his bass drum head, Jones's on a covering for his Rhodes piano, and Plant's on the side of a PA cabinet. Only Page's and Bonham's symbols were retained for subsequent tours.\nThe picture on the front of the album of an old man carrying a bundle of sticks on his back was bought in an antique shop in Reading, Berkshire by Plant. The picture was then affixed to the internal, papered wall of a partly demolished suburban house for the cover photograph to be taken. Research in 2023 suggests that the image, which had previously been described as an oil painting, is a black and white photograph dating to 1892 which had been hand-coloured. The original photograph was taken by Ernest Howard Farmer (1856\u00a0\u2013 1944), the first head of the school of photography at Regent Street Polytechnic. The research also suggests that the stooped figure is Lot Long (or Lot Longyear, 1823\u20131893), a thatcher from Mere, Wiltshire.\nThe block of flats seen on the album is Salisbury Tower in the Ladywood district of Birmingham. Page has explained that the cover of the fourth album was intended to bring out a city/country dichotomy that had initially surfaced on \"Led Zeppelin III\", and a reminder that people should look after the Earth. He later said the cover was supposed to be for \"other people to savour\" rather than a direct statement. The album cover was among the 10 chosen by the Royal Mail for a set of \"Classic Album Cover\" postage stamps issued in January 2010.\nThe inside illustration, entitled \"The Hermit\", painted by Barrington Coleby (credited to Barrington Colby MOM on the album sleeve), was influenced by the design of the card of the same name in the Rider\u2013Waite tarot deck. This character was later portrayed by Page himself in Led Zeppelin's concert film, \"The Song Remains the Same\" (1976). The inner painting is also referred to as \"View in Half or Varying Light\". The typeface for the lyrics to \"Stairway to Heaven\", printed on the inside sleeve of the album, was Page's contribution. He found it in an Arts and Crafts magazine called \"The Studio\" which dated from the late 19th century. He thought the lettering was interesting and arranged for someone to create a whole alphabet.\nRelease.\nThe album was released by Atlantic on 8 November 1971. It was promoted via a series of teaser advertisements showing the individual symbols on the album artwork. It entered the UK chart at No.\u00a010, rising to No.1 the following week and has spent a total of 90 weeks on the chart. In the US it was Led Zeppelin's best-selling album, but did not top the \"Billboard\" album chart, peaking at No. 2 behind \"There's a Riot Goin' On\" by Sly and the Family Stone and \"Music\" by Carole King. \"Ultimately\", writes Lewis, \"the fourth Zeppelin album would be the most durable seller in their catalogue and the most impressive critical and commercial success of their career\". At one point, it was ranked as one of the top five best-selling albums of all time. The album is one of the best-selling albums of all time with more than 37 million copies sold as of 2014. As of 2021, it is tied for fifth-highest-certified album in the US by the Recording Industry Association of America at 24\u00d7 Platinum.\nThe album was reissued several times throughout the 1970s, including a lilac vinyl pressing in 1978, and a box set package in 1988. It was first issued on CD in the 1980s. Page remastered the album in 1990 with engineer George Marino in an attempt to update the catalogue, and several tracks were used for that year's compilation \"Led Zeppelin Remasters\" and the \"Led Zeppelin Boxed Set\". All remastered tracks were reissued on \"The Complete Studio Recordings\", while the album was individually reissued on CD in 1994.\nA remastered version of \"Led Zeppelin IV\" was reissued on 27 October 2014, along with \"Houses of the Holy\". The reissue comes in six formats: a standard CD edition, a deluxe two-CD edition, a standard LP version, a deluxe two-LP version, a super deluxe two-CD plus two-LP version with a hardback book, and as high-resolution 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material. The reissue was released with an inverted colour version of the original album's artwork as its bonus disc's cover. The album's remastered version received widespread acclaim from critics, including \"Rolling Stone\", who found Page's remastering \"illuminative\".\nCritical reception.\n\"Led Zeppelin IV\" received overwhelming praise from critics. In a contemporary review for \"Rolling Stone\", Lenny Kaye called it the band's \"most consistently good\" album yet and praised the diversity of the songs: \"out of eight cuts, there isn't one that steps on another's toes, that tries to do too much all at once.\" \"Billboard\" magazine called it a \"powerhouse album\" that has the commercial potential of the band's previous three albums. Robert Christgau originally gave \"Led Zeppelin IV\" a lukewarm review in \"The Village Voice\", but later called it a masterpiece of \"heavy rock\". While still finding the band's medieval ideas limiting, he believed the album showed them at the pinnacle of their songwriting, and regarded it as \"the definitive Led Zeppelin and hence heavy metal album\".\nIn a retrospective review for AllMusic, Stephen Thomas Erlewine credited the album for \"defining not only Led Zeppelin but the sound and style of '70s hard rock\", while \"encompassing heavy metal, folk, pure rock &amp; roll, and blues\". In his album guide to heavy metal, \"Spin\" magazine's Joe Gross cited \"Led Zeppelin IV\" as a \"monolithic cornerstone\" of the genre. BBC Music's Daryl Easlea said that the album made the band a global success and effectively combined their third album's folk ideas with their second album's hard rock style, while Katherine Flynn and Julian Ring of \"Consequence of Sound\" felt it featured their debut's blues rock, along with the other styles from their second and third albums. Led Zeppelin's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame biography described the album as \"a fully realized hybrid of the folk and hard-rock directions\". \"PopMatters\" journalist AJ Ramirez regarded it as one of the greatest heavy metal albums ever, while Chuck Eddy named it the number one metal album of all time in his 1991 book \"Stairway to Hell: The 500 Best Heavy Metal Albums in the Universe\". According to rock scholar Mablen Jones, \"Led Zeppelin IV\" and particularly \"Stairway to Heaven\" reflected heavy metal's presence in countercultural trends of the early 1970s, as the album \"blended post-hippie mysticism, mythological preoccupations, and hard rock\".\nSteven Hyden observed in 2018 that the album's popularity had given rise to a reflexive bias against it from both fans and critics. \"There are two unwritten laws\" about the album, he wrote. The first was that a listener must claim a track from side two, the \"deep cuts with credibility\" side, was his or her favourite, and the second was that one should never say it was their favourite among the band's albums. He blamed this later tendency for why \"rock critics who try too hard always make a case for \"In Through the Out Door\" being Zeppelin's best.\" The band members themselves, he noted, also seemed to prefer performing the songs from side two in their solo shows. In 2022, Jenna Scaramanga of \"Guitar World\" asserted that \"Led Zeppelin IV is not just the greatest guitar album of the 70s, but the benchmark for every guitar band ever since.\"\nAccolades.\nIn 2000, \"Led Zeppelin IV\" was named the 26th-greatest British album in a list by \"Q\" magazine. In 2002, \"Spin\" magazine's Chuck Klosterman named it the second-greatest metal album of all time and said that it was \"the most famous hard-rock album ever recorded\" as well as an album that unintentionally created metal\u2014\"the origin of \"everything\" that sounds, feels, or even tastes vaguely metallic\". In 2000 it was voted number 42 in Colin Larkin's \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\". In 2003, the album was ranked number 66 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of \"The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", then re-ranked number 69 in a 2012 revised list, and re-ranked 58 in a 2020 revised list. It was also named the seventh-best album of the 1970s in a list by \"Pitchfork\". In 2016, Classic Rock magazine ranked \"Led Zeppelin IV\" as the greatest of all Zeppelin albums.\nPersonnel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50243", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50243", "title": "Houses of the Holy", "text": "Houses of the Holy is the fifth studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin, released on 28 March 1973 in the United States and on 30 March 1973 in the United Kingdom by Atlantic Records. The album benefited from two band members installing studios at home, which allowed them to develop more sophisticated songs and arrangements and expand their musical style. Several songs subsequently became fixtures in the group's live set, including \"The Song Remains the Same\", \"The Rain Song\" and \"No Quarter\". Other material recorded at the sessions, including the title track, was shelved and released on the later albums \"Physical Graffiti\" (1975) and \"Coda\" (1982). All instruments and vocals were provided by the band members Robert Plant (vocals), Jimmy Page (guitar), John Paul Jones (bass, keyboards), and John Bonham (drums). The album was produced by Page and mixed by Eddie Kramer. The cover was the first for the band to be designed by Hipgnosis and was based on a photograph taken at Giant's Causeway in Northern Ireland.\nAlthough critical response was mixed, \"Houses of the Holy\" became a commercial success, later receiving a Diamond certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in 1999 for at least 10 million copies sold in the US. In 2020, the album was ranked at number 278 on \"Rolling Stone\"'s 2020 list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\".\nRecording.\nBy 1972, Led Zeppelin had achieved sustained commercial and critical success from both their studio albums and live shows. They were keen to record on location using the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio as it had been an enjoyable experience for their untitled fourth album, released the previous year. After touring Australia, in April 1972 the group decided to take the mobile studio to Mick Jagger's home, Stargroves, a manor house and country estate in Hampshire. Eddie Kramer returned as recording engineer.\nSome songs from the album had initially been tried out in earlier sessions, such as \"No Quarter\", which was first attempted during a session at Headley Grange Estate, in East Hampshire. Both guitarist and producer Jimmy Page and bassist / keyboardist John Paul Jones had installed home studios, which allowed them to arrive at Stargroves with complete compositions and arrangements.\nPage's home studio used some of the equipment from Pye Mobile Studios, which had been used to record the Who's 1970 live album \"Live at Leeds\". Because of his home studio, he was able to present a complete arrangement of \"The Rain Song\", including non-standard guitar tunings and a variety of dynamics, and \"Over the Hills and Far Away\", featuring multiple guitar parts. Meanwhile, Jones had developed a new arrangement of \"No Quarter\". Once the group were settled in Stargroves, they composed the other songs through jam sessions together. Further recording took place at Olympic Studios in May, and during the band's 1972 North American tour additional recording sessions were conducted at Electric Lady Studios in New York. Some songs recorded during these various sessions did not make it onto \"Houses of the Holy\", though several were released on later albums. A series of rock 'n' roll covers, including songs that appeared on Elvis Presley's \"Elvis' Golden Records\", were recorded at Electric Lady Studios, which remain unreleased.\nComposition.\nThe album was a stylistic turning point for the band. The composition and production laid foundations for subsequent releases. According to the band's biographer Dave Lewis, \"while the barnstorming effect of the early era was now levelling off, and though devoid of the electricity of \"Zeppelin I\" and \"II\", the sheer diversity of the third album, and lacking the classic status of the fourth, \"Houses of the Holy\" nevertheless found its rightful niche.\" The album largely abandoned their previous music's weighty, dark blues rock distortion in favor of a clean, expansive rock sound\u2014as evinced by Page's sharper, brighter guitar tone. It was also likely the most eclectic musically of their albums, in the opinion of \"Consequence of Sound\" writer Kristofer Lenz, who observed swing rhythms on \"Dancing Days\", and experiments with reggae and psychedelic music on \"D'yer Mak'er\" and \"No Quarter\", respectively. Pete Prown and HP Newquist have called it \"a diverse collection of rockers, ballads, reggae, funk, and fifties-style rock 'n' roll\".\nSide one.\nThe album's opening track, \"The Song Remains The Same\", was originally a Page-composed instrumental called \"The Overture\". Plant added lyrics that referred to the group's experiences on tour, and it was given a working title of \"The Campaign\". His lead vocal was sped up slightly in the final mix, while Page played an electric twelve string guitar and a six-string electric. For live performances, he used the Gibson EDS-1275 double-neck guitar that was also used for playing \"Stairway to Heaven\" in concert.\n\"The Rain Song\" was composed at Page's home studio, including the entire arrangement and the vocal melody. He was inspired to write the song after George Harrison complained that Led Zeppelin \"never did any ballads\". The opening chords are the same as Harrison's song \u201cSomething\u201d from The Beatles' \"Abbey Road\". The backing track was recorded at Olympic, with a working title of \"Slush\". Plant added some sensitive lyrics which matched the music, Jones added a string section played on the Mellotron, while Page played acoustic and Danelectro electric guitars in various different tunings. The song was regularly performed live, with Page using the Gibson EDS-1275. Page and Plant revived the track for their 1994\u201395 tour.\n\"Over the Hills and Far Away\" was written about the hippie lifestyle, including references to the \"open road\". The song was developed in two halves, with a quiet acoustic section leading into a livelier electric one. The song was one of the first to be introduced into Led Zeppelin's live set, being first played in mid-1972.\n\"The Crunge\" was written by Bonham and developed out of a jam at Stargroves. He decided to create a funk beat that stepped on and off the beat, making it impossible to dance to. Plant improvised a set of lyrics in the manner of James Brown over the music, parodying Brown's \"Take it to the Bridge\" vocal style towards the end of the track. To further show that the song was a tongue-in-cheek joke, the group considered putting \"dance steps\" to the song on the cover at one stage. The track was occasionally performed as an impromptu piece in concert, usually in the middle of another song such as the fast guitar solo section in \"Dazed and Confused\".\nSide two.\n\"Dancing Days\" was inspired by the enjoyable sessions at Stargroves, and the lyrics show a general optimism to life. Kramer recalled the group dancing around in the garden at Stargroves, listening to the playback of the final mix. A promotional copy of the track was sent out by Atlantic for radio play in March 1973, as a preview for the album.\n\"D'yer Mak'er\" originated with Bonham trying to combine reggae with 1950s doo-wop by leaving a short off-beat. Jones later disapproved of the track, saying it was treated as a joke and not thought out well, but Plant thought it could be a hit and suggested it should be released as a single. Led Zeppelin's general policy was to not release singles in the UK, and though test and promotional pressings were produced there, the rest of the group vetoed the idea. In the United States, it became a top 20 hit.\n\"No Quarter\" was composed by Jones. An early arrangement of the song was attempted for their fourth album, but abandoned. Jones reworked the track to add acoustic and electric piano, and various synthesizers. The track quickly became a live favourite, and was featured at every show from 1973 through 1979, providing Jones with an extended solo showcase in the middle, and a jam session with a variety of different styles. Plant revived the song for his 1990 tour, and it was performed by Page and Plant in 1994. Jones performed a solo instrumental performance on tour in 1999, and Plant performed it solo again in 2005. It was part of the set at the Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert in 2007.\n\"The Ocean\" began with Bonham shouting \"We've done four already but now we're steady and then they went, one, two, three, four,\" referring to the number of takes already recorded. The title and lyrics refer to the group's fans and their devotion to the band. The middle of the track features an a cappella vocal break sung by Plant, Bonham and Jones, while the ending was another pastiche of the doo-wop style.\nUnreleased material.\nThe album's title track was recorded at Olympic and mixed at Electric Lady. It was ultimately left off the album, as there were enough tracks to fill two sides of an LP, and was released on the follow-up, \"Physical Graffiti\" in 1975. That album also included two other songs from \"Houses of the Holy's\" Stargroves sessions, \"The Rover\" and \"Black Country Woman\" (the latter recorded in the outdoor garden).\nAnother track from the Stargroves sessions, \"Walter's Walk\", was eventually released on \"Coda\" in 1982.\nPackaging.\n\"Houses of the Holy\" was the first album by the group to have an explicit title that was not eponymous, but like the previous one, neither the band's name nor the album title was printed on the sleeve. However, manager Peter Grant did allow Atlantic Records to add a wrap-around paper title band to US copies of the sleeve that had to be broken or slid off to access the record. The first CD release of the album in the 1980s had the title logos printed on the cover itself.\nThe cover art for \"Houses of the Holy\" was inspired by Arthur C. Clarke's novel \"Childhood's End\". The cover is a collage of several photographs which were taken at the Giant's Causeway, Northern Ireland, by Aubrey Powell of Hipgnosis. This location was chosen ahead of an alternative one in Peru which had also been considered.\nThe photo shoot featured two naked child models, Stefan and Samantha Gates. It was a frustrating affair over the course of 10 days. Shooting was done first thing in the morning and at sunset in order to capture the light at dawn and dusk, but the desired effect was never achieved due to constant rain and clouds. The photos of the two children were taken in black and white and were multi-printed to create the effect of 11 individuals that can be seen on the album cover. The results were unsatisfactory, but some accidental tinting effects in post-production created a suitable cover. The inner gatefold photograph was taken at Dunluce Castle nearby the Causeway. In February 2010, Stefan Gates was featured on a BBC Radio 4 documentary about the cover. He said there was something sinister about the image, though his sister disagreed. He also admitted never having heard the album. The programme ended with Gates returning to Giant's Causeway and listening to the album on a portable player, after which he said that a great weight had been lifted from him. Samantha also appeared on the back cover of the band's 1976 album \"Presence\".\nPage has stated that the album cover was the second version submitted by Hipgnosis. The first, by artist Storm Thorgerson, featured an electric green tennis court with a tennis racket on it. Furious that Thorgerson was implying, by means of a visual pun, that their music sounded like a \"racket\", the band fired him and hired Powell in his place.\nIn 1974, the album was nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of Best Album Package. The cover was rated number 6 on VH1's 50 Greatest Album Covers in 2003.\nRelease and reception.\nThis was Led Zeppelin's final studio release on Atlantic Records before forming their own label, Swan Song Records, in 1974, which would be distributed by Atlantic. It was also the only Led Zeppelin album that contained complete printed lyrics for each song.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The epic scale suited Zeppelin: They had the largest crowds, the loudest rock songs, the most groupies, the fullest manes of hair. Eventually excess would turn into bombast, but on \"Houses\", it still provided inspiration.\"\n\u2014Gavin Edwards, \"Rolling Stone\" (2003)\nAlthough intended for release in January 1973, delays in producing the album cover meant that it was not released until March, when the band was on its 1973 European tour. The album was promoted heavily before the commencement of Led Zeppelin's subsequent North American Tour, ensuring that it had ascended the top of the American chart by the beginning of the tour. Because much of the album had been recorded almost a year previously, many of the songs which are featured on the album had already been played live by Led Zeppelin on their concert tours of North America, Japan, Europe and the UK in 1972\u201373.\n\"Houses of the Holy\" originally received mixed reviews, with much criticism from the music press being directed at the off-beat nature of tracks such as \"The Crunge\" and \"D'yer Mak'er\". Gordon Fletcher from \"Rolling Stone\" called the album \"one of the dullest and most confusing albums I've heard this year\", believing the band had digressed from \"the epitome of everything good about rock\" to a watered-down heavy metal act. However, the album was a commercial success and topped the UK charts and spent 39 weeks on the Billboard 200 albums chart including two weeks at number one (their longest stint since \"Led Zeppelin III\"). The album was number four on Billboard magazine's top albums of 1973 year end chart.\nIn \"\" (1981), Robert Christgau appraised \"Houses of the Holy\" favourably. While mocking the solemnity of \"No Quarter\" and finding some tracks derivative of previous albums, he found side one \"solid led\" with \"sprung rhythm\" and a \"James Brown tribute/parody/ripoff\" in \"The Crunge\" that complements the second side's \"two amazing, well, dance tracks\" in \"Dancing Days\"'s \"transmogrified shuffle\" and the reggae of \"D'yer Mak'er\". \"Throughout the record, the band's playing is excellent,\" wrote AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine, \"making the eclecticism of Page and Robert Plant's songwriting sound coherent and natural.\"\nIn 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked it at number 149 on the magazine's list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time.\" It was re-ranked at number 148 in a 2012 revised list, and re-ranked at number 278 in 2020. In 1991, Chuck Eddy ranked \"Houses of the Holy\" 45th in his book of the 500 best heavy metal albums, writing that as with \"the Byrds in the sixties and college radio in the eighties\", the band \"forfeit hookage for janglage\". He noted that despite fans of the band's \"lead mode\" being critical of the funk and reggae excursions, \"fun\" songs like those and \"Dancing Days\" mark the album's best material, highlighting Bonham's great steel drum-esque sounds on \"D'yer Maker\", as well as praising \"The Rain Song\" for being \"my kinda new age\".\n2014 reissue.\nA remastered version of \"Houses of the Holy\" was reissued on 27 October 2014, along with \"Led Zeppelin IV\". The reissue comes in six formats: a standard CD edition, a deluxe two-CD edition, a standard LP version, a deluxe two-LP version, a super deluxe two-CD plus two-LP version with a hardback book, and as high resolution 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material. The reissue was released with an altered-colour version of the original album's artwork as its bonus disc's cover.\nAt Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the reissue received an average score of 98, based on nine reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\". \"Consequence of Sound\" writer Kristofer Lenz said, \"The remastering of this album is a blessing to the careful compositions and mannered performances throughout the record.\" \"\"Houses of the Holy\" might be Zeppelin's most impressive album on a purely sonic level,\" wrote \"Pitchfork\"'s Mark Richardson, \"and this particular remaster reinforces that notion.\" He was disappointed, however, by the bonus disc of alternate mixes, which merely provide \"a chance to hear familiar performances in familiar songs in a way that sounds slightly unfamiliar\".\nTrack listing.\nAll tracks written by Jimmy Page and Robert Plant, except where noted.\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50245", "revid": "3810835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50245", "title": "Sugar beet", "text": "Plant grown commercially for sugar production\nA sugar beet is a plant whose root contains a high concentration of sucrose and is grown commercially for sugar production. In plant breeding, it is known as the Altissima cultivar group of the common beet (\"Beta vulgaris\"). Together with other beet cultivars, such as beetroot and chard, it belongs to the subspecies \"Beta vulgaris\" subsp. \"vulgaris\" but is classified as \"var. saccharifera\". Its closest wild relative is the sea beet (\"Beta vulgaris\" subsp. \"maritima\").\nSugar beets are grown in climates that are too cold for sugarcane. In 2020, Russia, the United States, Germany, France and Turkey were the world's five largest sugar beet producers. In 2010\u20132011, Europe, and North America except Arctic territories failed to supply the overall domestic demand for sugar and were all net importers of sugar. The US harvested of sugar beets in 2008. In 2009, sugar beets accounted for 20% of the world's sugar production and nearly 30% by 2013. Sugarcane accounts for most of the rest of sugar produced globally. In February 2015, a USDA factsheet reported that sugar beets generally account for about 55 percent of sugar produced in the United States, and sugar cane for about 45 percent.\nDescription.\nThe sugar beet has a conical, white, fleshy root (a taproot) with a flat crown. The plant consists of the root and a rosette of leaves. Sugar is formed by photosynthesis in the leaves and is then stored in the root.\nThe root of the beet contains 75% water, about 20% sugar, and 5% pulp. The exact sugar content can vary between 12% and 21%, depending on the cultivar and growing conditions. Sugar is the primary value of sugar beet as a cash crop. The pulp, insoluble in water and mainly composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, and pectin, is used in animal feed. The byproducts of the sugar beet crop, such as pulp and molasses, add another 10% to the value of the harvest.\nSugar beets grow exclusively in the temperate zone, in contrast to sugarcane, which grows exclusively in the tropical and subtropical zones. The average weight of a sugar beet ranges between . Sugar beet foliage has a rich, brilliant green color and grows to a height of about . The leaves are numerous and broad and grow in a tuft from the crown of the beet, which is usually level with or just above the ground surface.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nThe species beet consists of several cultivar groups. The 16th-century French scientist Olivier de Serres discovered a process for preparing sugar syrup from (red) beetroot. He wrote: \"The beet-root, when being boiled, yields a juice similar to syrup of sugar, which is beautiful to look at on account of its vermilion colour\" (1575). Because crystallized cane sugar was already available and had a better taste, this process did not become popular.\nModern sugar beets date to the mid-18th century Silesia, where Frederick the Great, king of Prussia, subsidized experiments to develop processes for sugar extraction. In 1747, Andreas Sigismund Marggraf, professor of physics in the Academy of Science of Berlin, isolated sugar from beetroots and found them at concentrations of 1.3\u20131.6%. He also demonstrated that the sugar that could be extracted from beets was identical to that produced from cane. He found the best of these vegetable sources for sugar was the white beet. Despite Marggraf's success in isolating sugar from beets, it did not lead to commercial beet sugar production.\nDevelopment of the sugar beet.\nMarggraf's student and successor Franz Karl Achard began plant breeding sugar beet in Kaulsdorf near Berlin in 1786. Achard started his plant breeding by evaluating 23 varieties of beet for sugar content. In the end he selected a local strain from Halberstadt in modern-day Saxony-Anhalt, Germany. Moritz Baron von Koppy and his son further selected white, conical tubers from this strain. The selection was named \"wei\u00dfe schlesische Zuckerr\u00fcbe\", meaning white Silesian sugar beet. In about 1800, this cultivar contained about 5% to 6% sucrose by (dry) weight. It went on to become the progenitor of all modern sugar beets. The plant breeding process has continued since then, leading to a sucrose content of around 18% in modern varieties.\nBeet sugar industry.\nFranz Karl Achard opened the world's first beet sugar factory in 1801, at Kunern, Silesia (now Konary, Poland). The idea to produce sugar from beet was soon introduced to France, whence the European sugar beet industry rapidly expanded. By 1840, about 5% of the world's sugar was derived from sugar beets, and by 1880, this number had risen more than tenfold to over 50%. In North America, the first commercial production started in 1879 at a farm in Alvarado, California. The sugar beet was introduced to Chile by German settlers around 1850.\nCulture.\nThe sugar beet, like sugarcane, needs a particular soil and a proper climate for its successful cultivation. The most important requirements are that the soil must contain a large supply of nutrients, be rich in humus, and be able to contain a great deal of moisture. A certain amount of alkali is not necessarily detrimental, as sugar beets are not especially susceptible to injury by some alkali. The ground should be fairly level and well-drained, especially where irrigation is practiced.\nGenerous crops can be grown in both sandy soil and heavy loams, but the ideal soil is a sandy loam, i.e., a mixture of organic matter, clay and sand. A subsoil of gravel, or the presence of hardpan, is not desirable, as cultivation to a depth of from is necessary to produce the best results.\nClimatic conditions, temperature, sunshine, rainfall and winds have an important bearing upon the success of sugar beet agriculture. A temperature ranging from during the growing months is most favorable. In the absence of adequate irrigation, of rainfall are necessary to raise an average crop. High winds are harmful, as they generally crust the land and prevent the young beets from coming through the ground. The best results are obtained along the coast of southern California, where warm, sunny days succeeded by cool, foggy nights seem to meet sugar beet's favored growth conditions. Sunshine of long duration but not of great intensity is the most important factor in the successful cultivation of sugar beets. Near the equator, the shorter days and the greater heat of the sun sharply reduce the sugar content in the beet.\nIn high elevation regions such as those of Idaho, Colorado and Utah, where the temperature is high during the daytime, but where the nights are cool, the quality of the sugar beet is excellent. In Michigan, the long summer days from the relatively high latitude (the Lower Peninsula, where production is concentrated, lies between the 41st and 46th parallels North) and the influence of the Great Lakes result in satisfactory climatic conditions for sugar beet culture. Sebewaing, Michigan, lies in the Thumb region of Michigan; both the region and state are major sugar beet producers. Sebewaing is home to one of four Michigan Sugar Company factories. The town sponsors an annual Michigan Sugar Festival.\nTo cultivate beets successfully, the land must be properly prepared. Deep ploughing is the first principle of beet culture. It allows the roots to penetrate the subsoil without much obstruction, thereby preventing the beet from growing out of the ground, besides enabling it to extract considerable nourishment and moisture from the lower soil. If the latter is too hard, the roots will not penetrate it readily and, as a result, the plant will be pushed up and out of the earth during the process of growth. A hard subsoil is impervious to water and prevents proper drainage. It should not be too loose, however, as this allows the water to pass through more freely than is desirable. Ideally, the soil should be deep, fairly fine and easily penetrable by the roots. It should also be capable of retaining moisture and at the same time admit of a free circulation of air and good drainage. Sugar beet crops exhaust the soil rapidly. Crop rotation is recommended and necessary. Normally, beets are grown in the same ground every third year, peas, beans or grain being raised the other two years.\nIn most temperate climates, beets are planted in the spring and harvested in the autumn. At the northern end of its range, growing seasons as short as 100 days can produce commercially viable sugar beet crops. In warmer climates, such as in California's Imperial Valley, sugar beets are a winter crop, planted in the autumn and harvested in the spring. In recent years, Syngenta has developed the so-called tropical sugar beet. It allows the plant to grow in tropical and subtropical regions. Beets are planted from a small seed; of beet seed comprises 100,000 seeds and will plant over of ground ( will plant about .\nUntil the latter half of the 20th century, sugar beet production was highly labor-intensive, as weed control was managed by densely planting the crop, which then had to be manually thinned two or three times with a hoe during the growing season. Harvesting also required many workers. Although the roots could be lifted by a plough-like device that could be pulled by a horse team, the rest of the preparation was by hand. One laborer grabbed the beets by their leaves, knocked them together to shake free loose soil, and then laid them in a row, root to one side, greens to the other. A second worker equipped with a beet hook (a short-handled tool between a billhook and a sickle) followed behind, and would lift the beet and swiftly chop the crown and leaves from the root with a single action. Working this way, he would leave a row of beets that could be forked into the back of a cart.\nToday, mechanical sowing, herbicide application for weed control, and mechanical harvesting have displaced this reliance on manual farm work. A root beater uses a series of blades to chop the leaf and crown (which is high in nonsugar impurities) from the root. The beet harvester lifts the root, and removes excess soil from the root in a single pass over the field. A modern harvester is typically able to cover six rows at the same time. The beets are dumped into trucks as the harvester rolls down the field, and then delivered to the factory. The conveyor then removes more soil.\nIf the beets are to be left for later delivery, they are formed into clamps. Straw bales are used to shield the beets from the weather. Provided the clamp is well built with the right amount of ventilation, the beets do not significantly deteriorate. Beets that freeze and then defrost, produce complex carbohydrates that cause severe production problems in the factory. In the UK, loads may be hand examined at the factory gate before being accepted.\nIn the US, the fall harvest begins with the first hard frost, which arrests photosynthesis and the further growth of the root. Depending on the local climate, it may be carried out over the course of a few weeks or be prolonged throughout the winter months. The harvest and processing of the beet is referred to as \"the campaign\", reflecting the organization required to deliver the crop at a steady rate to processing factories that run 24 hours a day for the duration of the harvest and processing (for the UK, the campaign lasts about five months). In the Netherlands, this period is known as , a time to be careful when driving on local roads in the area while the beets are being grown, because the naturally high clay content of the soil tends to cause slippery roads when soil falls from the trailers during transport.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nThe world harvested of sugar beets in 2022. The world's largest producer was Russia, with a harvest. The average yield of sugar beet crops worldwide was 60.8 tonnes per hectare.\nThe most productive sugar beet farms in the world, in 2022, were in Chile, with a nationwide average yield of 106.2 tonnes per hectare.\nImperial Valley (California) farmers have achieved yields of about 160 tonnes per hectare and over 26 tonnes sugar per hectare. Imperial Valley farms benefit from high intensities of incident sunlight and intensive use of irrigation and fertilizers.\nSugar extraction.\nMost sugar beet are used to create white sugar. This is done in a beet sugar factory, often abbreviated to sugar factory. Nowadays these usually also act as a sugar refinery, but historically the beet sugar factory produced raw sugar and the sugar refinery refined raw sugar to create white sugar. \nSugar factory.\nIn the 1960s, beet sugar processing was described as consisting of these steps.\nNowadays, most sugar factories then refine the raw juice themselves, without moving it to a sugar refinery. The beet pulp is processed on site to become cattle fodder.\nSugar refinery.\nThe next steps to produce white sugar are not specific for producing sugar from sugar beet. They also apply to producing white sugar from sugar cane. As such, they belong to the sugar refining process, not to the beet sugar production process per se.\nEthanol and alcohol.\nFrom molasses.\nThere are two obvious methods to produce alcohol (ethanol) from sugar beet. The first method produces alcohol as a byproduct of manufacturing sugar. It is about fermenting the sugar beet molasses that are left after (the second) centrifugation. This strongly resembles the manufacture of rum from sugar cane molasses. In a number of countries, notably the Czech Republic and Slovakia, this analogy led to making a rum-like distilled spirit called \"Tuzemak\". On the \u00c5land Islands, a similar drink is made under the brand name \"Kobba Libre\".\nFrom sugar beet.\nThe second method to produce alcohol from sugar beet is to ferment the sugar beet themselves. I.e. without attempting to produce sugar. The idea to distill sugar from the beet came up soon after the first beet sugar factory was established. Between 1852 and 1854 Champonnois devised a good system to distill alcohol from sugar beet. Within a few years a large sugar distilling industry was created in France. The current process to produce alcohol by fermenting and distilling sugar beet consists of these steps:\nLarge sugar beet distilleries remain limited to Europe. In 2023 Tereos had 8 beet sugar distilleries, located in France, Czechia and Romania. \nIn many European countries rectified spirit from sugar beet is used to make Liquor, e.g. vodka, Gin etc..\nOther uses.\nSugary syrup.\nAn unrefined sugary syrup can be produced directly from sugar beet. This thick, dark syrup is produced by cooking shredded sugar beet for several hours, then pressing the resulting mash and concentrating the juice produced until it has a consistency similar to that of honey. No other ingredients are used. \nIn Germany, particularly the Rhineland area, and in the Netherlands, this sugar beet syrup (called \"Zuckerr\u00fcben-Sirup\" or \"Zapp\" in German, or \"Suikerstroop\" in Dutch) is used as a spread for sandwiches, as well as for sweetening sauces, cakes and desserts. Dutch people generally top their pancakes with stroop.\nSuikerstroop made according to the Dutch tradition is a Traditional Speciality Guaranteed under EU and UK law. Commercially, if the syrup has a dextrose equivalency (DE) above 30, the product has to be hydrolyzed and converted to a high-fructose syrup, much like high-fructose corn syrup, or isoglucose syrup in the EU.\nUridine.\nUridine can be isolated from sugar beet.\nAlternative fuel.\nBP and Associated British Foods plan to use agricultural surpluses of sugar beet to produce biobutanol in East Anglia in the United Kingdom.\nThe feedstock-to-yield ratio for sugarbeet is 56:9. Therefore, it takes 6.22\u00a0kg of sugar beet to produce 1\u00a0kg of ethanol (approximately 1.27 L at room temperature). In 2006 it was found that producing ethanol from sugar beet or cane became profitable when the market price for ethanol were close to $4 per U.S. gallon. According to Atlantic Biomass president Robert Kozak, a study at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, indicates sugar beets appear capable of producing of ethanol per acre (400 m2).\nCattle feed.\nIn New Zealand, sugar beet is widely grown and harvested as feed for dairy cattle. It is regarded as superior to fodder beet, because it has a lower water content (resulting in better storage properties). Both the beet bulb and the leaves (with 25% protein) are fed to cattle. Although long considered toxic to cattle, harvested beet bulbs can be fed to cattle if they are appropriately transitioned to their new diet. Dairy cattle in New Zealand can thrive on just pasture and beets, without silage or other supplementary feed. The crop is also now grown in some parts of Australia as cattle feed.\nMonosodium glutamate.\nMolasses can serve to produce monosodium glutamate (MSG).\nAgriculture.\nSugar beets are an important part of a crop rotation cycle.\nSugar beet plants are susceptible to \"Rhizomania\" (\"root madness\"), which turns the bulbous tap root into many small roots, making the crop economically unprocessable. Strict controls are enforced in European countries to prevent the spread, but it is already present in some areas. It is also susceptible to both the beet leaf curl virus, which causes crinkling and stunting of the leaves and beet yellows virus.\nContinual research looks for varieties with resistance, as well as increased sugar yield. Sugar beet breeding research in the United States is most prominently conducted at various USDA Agricultural Research Stations, including one in Fort Collins, Colorado, headed by Linda Hanson and Leonard Panella; one in Fargo, North Dakota, headed by John Wieland; and one at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan, headed by Rachel Naegele.\nOther economically important members of the subfamily Chenopodioideae:\nGenetic modification.\nIn the United States, genetically modified sugar beets, engineered for resistance to glyphosate, a herbicide marketed as Roundup, were developed by Monsanto as a genetically modified crop. In 2005, the US Department of Agriculture-Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (USDA-APHIS) deregulated glyphosate-resistant sugar beets after it conducted an environmental assessment and determined glyphosate-resistant sugar beets were highly unlikely to become a plant pest. Sugar from glyphosate-resistant sugar beets has been approved for human and animal consumption in multiple countries, but commercial production of biotech beets has been approved only in the United States and Canada. Studies have concluded the sugar from glyphosate-resistant sugar beets has the same nutritional value as sugar from conventional sugar beets. After deregulation in 2005, glyphosate-resistant sugar beets were extensively adopted in the United States. About 95% of sugar beet acres in the US were planted with glyphosate-resistant seed in 2011.\nWeeds may be chemically controlled using glyphosate without harming the crop. After planting sugar beet seed, weeds emerge in fields and growers apply glyphosate to control them. Glyphosate is commonly used in field crops because it controls a broad spectrum of weed species and has a low toxicity. A study from the UK suggests yields of genetically modified beet were greater than conventional, while another from the North Dakota State University extension service found lower yields. The introduction of glyphosate-resistant sugar beets may contribute to the growing number of glyphosate-resistant weeds, so Monsanto has developed a program to encourage growers to use different herbicide modes of action to control their weeds.\nIn 2008, the Center for Food Safety, the Sierra Club, the Organic Seed Alliance and High Mowing Seeds filed a lawsuit against USDA-APHIS regarding their decision to deregulate glyphosate-resistant sugar beets in 2005. The organizations expressed concerns regarding glyphosate-resistant sugar beets' ability to potentially cross-pollinate with conventional sugar beets. U.S. District Judge Jeffrey S. White, US District Court for the Northern District of California, revoked the deregulation of glyphosate-resistant sugar beets and declared it unlawful for growers to plant glyphosate-resistant sugar beets in the spring of 2011. Believing a sugar shortage would occur USDA-APHIS developed three options in the environmental assessment to address the concerns of environmentalists. In 2011, a federal appeals court for the Northern district of California in San Francisco overturned the ruling. In July 2012, after completing an environmental impact assessment and a plant pest risk assessment the USDA deregulated Monsanto's Roundup Ready sugar beets.\nGenome and genetics.\nThe sugar beet genome shares a triplication event somewhere super-Caryophyllales and at or sub-Eudicots. It has been sequenced and two reference genome sequences have already been generated. The genome size of the sugar beet is approximately 731 (714\u2013758) Megabases, and sugar beet DNA is packaged in 18 metacentric chromosomes (2n=2x=18). All sugar beet centromeres are made up of a single satellite DNA family and centromere-specific LTR retrotransposons. More than 60% of sugar beet's DNA is repetitive, mostly distributed in a dispersed way along the chromosomes.\nCrop wild beet populations (\"B. vulgaris\" ssp. \"maritima\") have been sequenced as well, allowing for identification of the resistance gene \"Rz2\" in the wild progenitor. \"Rz2\" confers resistance to rhizomania, commonly known as the sugar beet root madness disease.\nBreeding.\nSugar beets have been bred for increased sugar content, from 8% to 18% in the 200 years up to 2013[ [update]], resistance to viral and fungal diseases, increased taproot size, monogermy, and less bolting. Breeding has been eased by discovery of a cytoplasmic male sterility line \u2013 this has especially been useful in yield breeding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50246", "revid": "40813215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50246", "title": "Physical Graffiti", "text": "Physical Graffiti is the sixth studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin. Released as a double album on 24 February 1975 in the United States and on 28 February 1975 in the United Kingdom, it was the group's first album to be released under their new label, Swan Song Records. The band wrote and recorded eight new songs for the album in early 1974 at Headley Grange, a country house in Hampshire, which gave them ample time to improvise arrangements and experiment with recording. The total playing time covered just under three sides of an LP, so they decided to expand it into a double album by including seven previously unreleased tracks from the sessions for the band's earlier albums \"Led Zeppelin III\" (1970), \"Led Zeppelin IV\" (1971) and \"Houses of the Holy\" (1973). The album covered a range of styles including hard rock, progressive rock, rock 'n' roll and folk. The album was then mixed over summer 1974 and planned for an end-of-year release; however, its release was delayed because the Peter Corriston-designed die-cut album cover proved difficult to manufacture.\n\"Physical Graffiti\" was commercially and critically successful upon its release and debuted at number one on album charts in the UK and number three in the United States. It was promoted by a successful U.S. tour and a five-night residency at Earl's Court, London. The album has been reissued on CD several times, including an expansive 40th anniversary edition in 2015. \"Physical Graffiti\" was later certified 16\u00d7 platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in 2006, signifying shipments of over eight million copies in the US.\nRecording.\nThe first attempt by Led Zeppelin to record songs for \"Physical Graffiti\" took place in November 1973 at Headley Grange in Hampshire, England, where they had previously recorded their untitled fourth album. The recording equipment consisted of Ronnie Lane's Mobile Studio. Guitarist and producer Jimmy Page and drummer John Bonham recorded an instrumental which was later reworked as \"Kashmir\" during this visit. However, these sessions came to a halt quickly and the studio time was turned over to Bad Company, who used it to record songs for their debut album. The press reported that bassist/keyboardist John Paul Jones was ill and unable to record. However, he had become disillusioned with the group and tired of touring, and told manager Peter Grant he was considering quitting. Grant asked him to reconsider and to take the rest of the year off to recuperate.\nThe group reconvened at Headley Grange in January and February 1974, where they recorded eight tracks engineered by Ron Nevison. Lead singer Robert Plant later referred to these eight tracks as \"the belters,\" including \"off-the-wall stuff that turned out really nice.\" As with previous sessions at Headley Grange, the informal atmosphere allowed the group to improvise and develop material while recording. Sometimes the group would rehearse or record a track several times, discuss what went wrong or what could be improved and then realized they'd worked out an alternative arrangement for it which was better. Bonham was a driving force at the sessions, regularly suggesting ideas or the best ways in which a complicated arrangement could be played successfully. This led to him getting a lead songwriting credit on several tracks.\nThe eight songs extended beyond the length of a conventional album, almost spanning three sides of an LP, so the group decided to create a double album, adding material they'd recorded for previous albums but never issued. This included various jam sessions such as \"Boogie With Stu,\" which Page thought would be unsuitable as a track on a single album. Additional overdubs were laid down, and the final mixing of the album was performed in July 1974 by Keith Harwood at Olympic Studios, London. The title \"Physical Graffiti\" was coined by Page to illustrate the whole physical and written energy that had gone into producing the set.\nThe band was also working on a track titled \"Swan Song\", with instrumental portions recorded during the \"Physical Graffiti\" sessions in 1974, with plans to add lyrics. The song was ultimately left off the album, but Page wanted to revisit it, and his 1980s band The Firm recorded a version of it called \"Midnight Moonlight\". The original track was never released, but can be heard in various bootlegs.\nSongs.\nThe album spanned several years of recording and covered a range of musical styles, including hard rock (\"Custard Pie\", \"The Rover\", \"The Wanton Song\", \"Sick Again\", \"Houses of the Holy\"), eastern-influenced orchestral rock (\"Kashmir\"), progressive rock (\"In the Light\"), driving funk (\"Trampled Under Foot\"), acoustic rock and roll (\"Boogie with Stu\", \"Black Country Woman\"), love ballad (\"Ten Years Gone\"), blues rock (\"In My Time of Dying\"), soft rock (\"Down by the Seaside\"), country rock romp (\"Night Flight\"), and acoustic guitar instrumental (\"Bron-Yr-Aur\").\nSeveral tracks from the album became live staples at Led Zeppelin concerts. In particular, \"In My Time of Dying\", \"Trampled Under Foot\", \"Kashmir\", \"Ten Years Gone\", \"Black Country Woman\", and \"Sick Again\" became regular components of the band's live concert set lists following the release of the album.\nSide one.\n\"Custard Pie\" was recorded at Headley Grange in early 1974. The first take was played at a faster tempo than the finished version, with various improvised vocals. After a basic run-through, the group then discussed possibilities for rearranging it. Page played the guitar solo through an ARP synthesiser, while Jones overdubbed a Hohner Clavinet part and Plant played harmonica.\n\"The Rover\" was written in 1970 at Bron-Yr-Aur, a cottage near Machynlleth, Wales. It was first recorded at Headley Grange in May 1970 as an acoustic number for \"Led Zeppelin III\". It was reworked as an electric number in 1972 for \"Houses of the Holy\", which formed the basis for the backing track. Page subsequently added guitar overdubs in 1974 with Keith Harwood engineering.\n\"In My Time of Dying\" is based on a traditional song that Bob Dylan recorded on his debut album in 1962. The track was recorded live, with Page later adding further slide guitar overdubs. The arranging and structuring was led by Bonham, who worked out where the various stop / start sections in the track should be, and how the group would know where to come back in. The very end of the song features his off-mic cough, causing the rest of the group to break down at that point. Bonham subsequently shouted \"That's got to be the one, hasn't it?\", feeling it was the best take. It was left on the album to show fans that Led Zeppelin were a working band that took care in their recordings.\nSide two.\n\"Houses of the Holy\" was recorded as the title track for the album of the same name in May 1972 at Olympic Studios with Eddie Kramer engineering. It was left off that album because of its similarity to other tracks such as \"Dancing Days\", which were felt to be better. Unlike some of the other older material on \"Physical Graffiti\", it required no further overdubbing or remixing.\n\"Trampled Under Foot\" developed from a jam session driven by Jones at the Clavinet. The song went through several arrangement changes before arriving at the version heard on the album, with the group rehearsing various different ideas and arguing about the overall style. Bonham decided the track was too \"souly\" and rearranged it into a funk style, suggesting that Page should play a guitar riff throughout in place of chords. The lyrics are a series of double entendres around driving and cars. The song quickly became a popular live piece that was played at every live show from 1975 onwards, and was later revived by Plant for his solo tours. It was released as a single in the US on 2 April (with \"Black Country Woman\" as the B-side) and was a top 40 hit.\n\"Kashmir\" was an idea from Page and Bonham, and was first attempted as an instrumental demo in late 1973. Plant wrote the lyrics while on holiday in Morocco. Jones played Mellotron on the track, and arranged strings and brass parts that were played by session musicians. The song was one of the most critically acclaimed on the album, and was played at every gig from 1975 onwards. Page and Plant played it on their 1994 tour, and it was reworked in 1998 by Sean \"Puffy\" Combs for his single \"Come With Me\" which featured Page on guitar.\nSide three.\n\"In the Light\" was recorded at Headley Grange in early 1974. It was initially called \"In the Morning\" and went through several rehearsals and takes to work out a basic structure. A drone/chant introduction was later added to the piece.\n\"Bron-Yr-Aur\" was a solo acoustic piece by Page, named after the cottage where he had composed and arranged much of \"Led Zeppelin III\" with Plant. It was recorded at Island Studios in mid-1970. The track was later used as background music in the group's film \"The Song Remains the Same\".\n\"Down by the Seaside\" was originally written as an acoustic track at Bron-Yr-Aur in 1970, and was influenced by Neil Young. It was reworked as an electric track during sessions for the fourth album the following year. Page and Bonham led the arranging, changing tempo from the slow to fast section and then back again.\n\"Ten Years Gone\" was mostly composed by Plant about an old love affair, and was combined with an instrumental piece from Page, featuring overdubbed electric and acoustic guitar parts. When the track was performed live, Jones played a triple-neck guitar featuring mandolin, six- and 12-string guitars, in order to try to reproduce the various guitar overdubs on the studio recording.\nSide four.\n\"Night Flight\" was recorded at Headley Grange in 1971 for the fourth album. Besides the usual bass, Jones plays Hammond organ on the track, and Page plays guitar through a Leslie speaker. Plant wrote the lyrics after reading a news headline entitled \"Nuclear Damage Test Threat\" and wondered why there seemed to be little peace and love in the world.\n\"The Wanton Song\" was built around a Page guitar riff. Unlike some of the other tracks recorded at the 1974 Headley Grange sessions, it was straightforward to arrange, with the group building the song around the riffs.\n\"Boogie with Stu\" was a jam session with Rolling Stones pianist Ian Stewart based around the Ritchie Valens song \"Ooh My Head\". It was recorded in 1971 at Headley Grange during the same session that produced \"Rock and Roll\" for the group's fourth album. It did not credit Valens or Bob Keane, instead crediting Valens' mother. Eventually a lawsuit was filed by Keane, and half of the award went to Valens' mother, although she was not part of the suit.\n\"Black Country Woman\" was recorded in the garden at Stargroves in 1972 for \"Houses of the Holy\", as part of the group's desire to work in \"off the wall\" locations outside a traditional studio environment. The track was nearly abandoned when an aeroplane cruised overhead, but it was left on the final recording for effect.\n\"Sick Again\" was written by Page and Plant about the 1973 tour and their experience with meeting groupies. The track was driven by Bonham's drumming and Page's guitar riffs. The arrangement had been worked out before recording, and was straightforward to put down on tape.\nUnreleased material.\nAs \"Physical Graffiti\" collected various out-takes from earlier albums, little was left over from the recording sessions that was not eventually released. An early arrangement of \"Custard Pie\", different from the final version, was reworked as \"Hots on For Nowhere\" on the following album, \"Presence\". A number of other outtakes from earlier album sessions that had not been put on \"Physical Graffiti\" were later included on the 1982 album \"Coda\".\nArtwork and packaging.\nThe album was originally released with a die-cut sleeve design depicting a New York City tenement block, through whose windows various cultural icons could be interchangeably viewed. The album designer, Peter Corriston, was looking for a building that was symmetrical with interesting details, that was not obstructed by other objects and would fit the square album cover. He subsequently came up with the rest of the cover based on the idea of people moving in and out of the tenement, with various sleeves that could be placed under the main cover and filling the windows with various pieces of information.\nThe two five-storey buildings photographed for the album cover are located at 96 and 98 St. Mark's Place in New York City. The original photograph underwent a number of tweaks to arrive at the final image. The fourth floor of the building had to be cropped out to fit the square album cover format. (The front doorway and stoop at 96 St. Mark's Place is also the location used by the Rolling Stones for the music video promoting their single \"Waiting on a Friend\", from their 1981 album \"Tattoo You\").\nEschewing the usual gatefold design in favour of a special die-cut cover, the original album jacket included four covers made up of two inners (for each disc), a middle insert cover and an outer cover. The middle insert cover is white and details all the album track listings and recording information. The outer cover has die-cut windows on the building, so when the middle cover is wrapped around the inner covers and slid into the outer cover, the title of the album is shown on the front cover, spelling out the name \"Physical Graffiti\". Images in the windows touched upon a set of American icons and a range of Hollywood ephemera. Pictures of W. C. Fields and Buzz Aldrin alternated with the snapshots of Led Zeppelin. Photographs of Lee Harvey Oswald, Marcel Duchamp and Pope Leo XIII are also featured. Per the liner notes, package concept and design was by AGI/Mike Doud (London) and Peter Corriston (New York). Photography was by Elliott Erwitt, B. P. Fallon, and Roy Harper. \"Tinting Extraordinaire\": Maurice Tate, and window illustration by Dave Heffernan. In 1976, the album was nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of best album package.\nRelease and critical reception.\n\"Physical Graffiti\" was Led Zeppelin's first release on their own Swan Song Records label, which had been launched in May 1974. Until this point, all of Led Zeppelin's albums had been released on Atlantic Records, who would distribute Swan Song. The album was first announced to the press on 6 November with a planned release date of 29 November and an accompanying US tour (the band's tenth) starting in January. Delays in the production of the album's sleeve design prevented its release prior to the commencement of the tour. It was finally released on 24 February 1975.\nThe album was a commercial and critical success, having built up a huge advance order following the delayed release date, and when eventually issued it reached No. 1 in the UK charts. In the US, it debuted at No. 3 on the \"Billboard\" Pop Albums chart, rising to No. 1 the following week and staying there for six weeks. \"Physical Graffiti\" has since proven to be one of the most popular releases by the group, shipping 8\u00a0million copies in the United States. It was the first album to go platinum on advance orders alone. Shortly after its release, all previous Led Zeppelin albums simultaneously re-entered the top-200 album chart.\nThe group debuted several songs from \"Physical Graffiti\" live at a warm-up gig in Rotterdam, Netherlands, on 11 January, a week before the US tour, which lasted until 27 March. The tour was also successful, and was followed up by a series of shows at Earl's Court, London. Tickets for the shows sold out within four hours, described by promoter Mel Bush as \"unprecedented demand in the history of rock music\", so a further two dates were added. The shows attracted rave reviews, and critics noted the band enjoyed playing the new material on \"Physical Graffiti\" more than the older songs.\n\"NME\"'s Nick Kent reviewed the album three months before it was released. He speculated it could be the group's best work to date, saying \"the album's tonal density is absolutely the toughest, most downright brutal I've heard all year\". In March 1975, \"Billboard\" magazine's reviewer wrote: \"[\"Physical Graffiti\"] is a tour de force through a number of musical styles, from straight rock to blues to folky acoustic to orchestral sounds.\" Similarly, Jim Miller stated in \"Rolling Stone\" that the double album was \"the band's \"Tommy\", \"Beggar's Banquet\" and \"Sgt. Pepper\" rolled into one: \"Physical Graffiti\" is Led Zeppelin's bid for artistic respectability\". \"Village Voice\" critic Robert Christgau maintained his long-held ambivalence regarding Led Zeppelin, writing that except for side two, the material often wanders into \"wide tracks, misconceived opi, and so forth\", and \"after a while Robert Plant begins to grate\".\nIn 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked it at number 70 on the magazine's list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\". It was re-ranked at number 73 in a 2012 revised list, and re-ranked at number 144 in 2020.\nPlant later felt that \"Physical Graffiti\" represented the band at its creative peak, and has since said that it is his favourite Led Zeppelin album. Page has also said the album was a \"high-water mark\" for the group, and the creative energy from jamming and gradually working out song structures together led to some strong material. Reviewing the album for BBC Music in 2007, Chris Jones described it as \"a towering monument to the glory of Zeppelin in their high-flying heyday\".\nReissues.\n\"Physical Graffiti\" was first issued on CD as a double-disc set in 1987. However, it was done without input from the band, and the first pressing accidentally edited off the studio banter at the end of \"In My Time of Dying\" (later fixed on repressings). Page was unhappy with his lack of input over the CDs and decided he would produce new versions himself. He booked a week in May 1990 with engineer George Marino to remaster the entire back catalogue. Eight tracks from \"Physical Graffiti\" appeared on the four-disc \"Boxed Set\" and three on \"Remasters\", both in 1990; the remainder appeared on \"Boxed Set 2\" in 1993, while the album was properly reissued in 1994.\nAn extended remastered version of \"Physical Graffiti\" was reissued on 23 February 2015, almost exactly forty years after the original album was released. The reissue comes in six formats: a standard two-CD edition, a deluxe three-CD edition, a standard two-LP version, a deluxe three-LP version, a super deluxe three-CD plus three-LP version with a hardback book, and as high resolution 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material containing alternative takes and arrangements of songs. The reissue was released with an altered colour version of the original album's artwork as its bonus disc's cover.\nPersonnel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50247", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50247", "title": "Presence (album)", "text": "Presence is the seventh studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin. It was released by the band's own label Swan Song Records on 31 March 1976 in the United States and on 2 April 1976 in the United Kingdom. While the record was commercially successful, reaching the top of both the British and American album charts, and achieving a triple-platinum certification in the United States by the RIAA, it received mixed reviews from critics and is the lowest-selling album by the band, but has received more positive reviews in the years since its release.\nThe album was written and recorded in the last months of 1975, during a difficult time in the band's history. Singer Robert Plant was recovering from serious injuries he had sustained earlier that year in a car accident; this led to tours being cancelled and the band booking studio time to record \"Presence\" instead. The entire album was completed in a few weeks, with guitarist Jimmy Page putting in several long shifts to complete recording and mixing. The title came from the strong presence the group felt as they worked together. The LP's artwork from Hipgnosis featured several photographs focused on a mysterious black object, called \"The Object\".\n\"Presence\" is dominated by compositions by Page and Plant, with only one track credited to the entire group; unlike other Zeppelin albums, it features no keyboards and little acoustic guitar. Because Plant was still ill, the band could not tour to promote the release, and only two tracks were ever performed live. However, the album has been re-appraised in retrospective reviews for its hard rock dynamics and simplicity compared to the group's other work.\nBackground.\nAfter touring in support of their previous album, \"Physical Graffiti\", released in early 1975, Led Zeppelin took a brief break from touring that summer, intending to start a major US tour on 23 August. Critics had said they were at the height of their popularity at this time. However, singer Robert Plant sustained serious injuries from a car accident on the Greek island of Rhodes on 4 August, which forced the band to cancel the tour and reschedule their activities.\nBecause of their status as tax exiles, Plant was forced to recuperate abroad, initially in Jersey in the Channel Islands, then in Malibu, California, and wrote several sets of lyrics that reflected on his personal situation and wondering about the future. Guitarist Jimmy Page joined him in Malibu in September and the pair began to think about plans to make an album instead. The two prepared enough material to be able to present to the rest of the band. The other two members, drummer John Bonham and bassist John Paul Jones, joined them at Hollywood's SIR Studio where they rehearsed the material throughout October 1975.\nRecording.\nOnce they had worked out arrangements, the group were eager to record. Page favoured going to Musicland Studios in Munich, Germany, which he felt had state-of-the-art recording facilities. Plant was still recovering from the accident during recording and sang his vocals in a wheelchair, which led to Page assuming most of the responsibilities at the sessions. The album was recorded and mixed with longtime group associate and engineer Keith Harwood, and completed in eighteen days, with the final mixes finished on 27 November. This was the fastest recording turnaround time achieved by the band since their debut album.\nThe rushed recording sessions were in part a result of Led Zeppelin having booked the studio immediately prior to the Rolling Stones, who were shortly to record songs for their album \"Black and Blue\" (released, like \"Presence\", in the spring of 1976). Page negotiated with the Stones to borrow two days from their recording session time, during which he completed all the guitar overdubs in one lengthy session. Page and Harwood then worked on the mixes virtually non-stop until they fell asleep; whoever woke up first went back to the desk to carry on. Page later stated he worked around 18\u201320 hours every day during the sessions.\nThe recording sessions for \"Presence\" were also particularly challenging for Plant. The studio was in a basement of an old hotel, and the singer felt claustrophobic. He also experienced physical difficulties as a result of his car accident, and missed his family. He later said he was upset about Page and manager Peter Grant booking the \"Presence\" sessions and began to re-evaluate the priorities in his life.\nBecause the album was completed one day before the American holiday of Thanksgiving, Plant suggested to the record company the album should be called \"Thanksgiving\". This idea was quickly dropped in favour of a title that was thought would represent the powerful force and presence that the band members felt surrounded the group.\nSongs.\nSix of the seven songs on the album are Page and Plant compositions; the remaining song, \"Royal Orleans\", is credited to all four band members. This is because the majority of the songs were formulated at Malibu, where Page (but not Bonham and Jones) had initially joined a recuperating Plant. With Plant at less than full fitness, Page took responsibility for the album's completion, and his playing dominates the album's tracks.\nBoth Page and Plant had planned this album's recording session as a return to hard rock, much like their debut album, except at a new level of complexity. It marked a change in the Led Zeppelin sound towards more straightforward, guitar-based jams. Whereas their previous albums up to and including the previous year's \"Physical Graffiti\" contain electric hard rock anthems balanced with acoustic ballads and intricate arrangements, \"Presence\" was seen to include more simplified riffs, and is Led Zeppelin's only studio album that features no keyboards, and with the exception of a rhythm track on \"Candy Store Rock\", no acoustic guitar. The changed stylistic emphasis on this album was a direct result of the troubled circumstances experienced by the band around the time of its recording. Page later said the music came from this spontaneity. Plant later described it as \"a cry of survival\" and speculated the group would not make another album like it.\nThe ten-minute opening song, \"Achilles Last Stand\", was first recorded on 12 November, when the basic backing track was laid down. Jones played an Alembic 8 string bass on the track, giving it a distinctive tone. Plant wrote the lyrics based on travelling across Africa in mid-1975 with Page. Page added six guitars in the marathon overdubbing session at the end of the recording period.\n\"For Your Life\" was developed mostly in the studio. For the recording, Page used a Fender Stratocaster, provided by former Byrds guitarist Gene Parsons. \"Royal Orleans\" was written about an incident involving Jones at the Royal Orleans Hotel in New Orleans and includes a reference to soul singer Barry White. It was the only track on the album credited to the entire band.\n\"Nobody's Fault but Mine\", was inspired by the Blind Willie Johnson song \"It's Nobody's Fault but Mine\", first recorded in 1928 and later covered by Nina Simone in 1969. The influence of the old blues song is noticeable in both Page's guitar work in the track, and also in the melody and lyrics. \n\"Candy Store Rock\" was inspired by 1950s rock 'n' roll. \n\"Hots on for Nowhere\" was written about Plant's time in Malibu, while Page played the Stratocaster on the track. \nThe closing number, \"Tea For One\", was a slow blues written by Plant about the problems he faced being separated from his family, and was an attempt to update their earlier \"Since I've Been Loving You\" from \"Led Zeppelin III\".\nIn contrast to earlier albums that contained several tracks that the band chose to play live at Led Zeppelin concerts, only two tracks from \"Presence\" were played in full on stage while the band was active. \"Achilles Last Stand\" and \"Nobody's Fault but Mine\" were added to the setlist for the 1977 tour of the United States and stayed on it through the band's final concerts in 1980. \"Tea For One\" was performed live on the Page and Plant tour of Japan in 1996, where the main group was backed by an orchestra. \"For Your Life\" was played in full by Led Zeppelin for the first (and only) time at the Ahmet Erteg\u00fcn Tribute Concert on 10 December 2007.\nPackaging and artwork.\nThe cover and inside sleeve, created by Hipgnosis with George Hardie, features images of people interacting with a black obelisk-shaped object. Inside the sleeve, the item is referred to simply as \"The Object\". It was intended to represent Zeppelin's \"force and presence\". Hipgnosis co-founder Storm Thorgerson wrote that the obelisk represented the power of Led Zeppelin, saying they were \"so powerful, they didn't need to be there\". Both Page and Plant have said that the presence of the object in the photographs made people stop and think about what is real, which reflected the music.\nThe background in the cover photograph is an artificial marina, installed in London's Earl's Court arena for the annual Boat Show, in the winter of 1974\u201375. The band played a series of concerts at this venue in May 1975, a few months after the boat show. The inner sleeve photographs came from various archive stock pictures, and was designed to resemble a feature in \"National Geographic\". The girl on the back cover photo was Samantha Gates, and she had also appeared (with her brother Stefan) on the cover of \"Houses of the Holy\". Hipgnosis and Hardie were nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Album Package in 1977.\nRelease and reception.\nThe album was released on 31 March 1976, having been delayed by the completion of the album sleeve. In Britain it attained one of the highest ever advance orders, shipping gold on the day of release. It entered at No.\u202f2 and peaked the following week at No.\u202f1 on the US \"Billboard\" Pop Albums chart. However, the album was the lowest selling of their career as it was overshadowed by the release of the band's movie and soundtrack \"The Song Remains the Same\". \"Candy Store Rock\" was released as a single in the US, but it failed to chart.\nIn a contemporary review for \"Rolling Stone\", Stephen Davis said \"Presence\" established Led Zeppelin as the premier heavy metal act and featured some exceptional rock music, highlighting the \"clean and purifying\" guitar riffs. In spite of a few dull blues rock songs, the album was \"another monster in what by now is a continuing tradition of battles won by this band of survivors\", in Davis' opinion. Robert Christgau was less enthusiastic in \"The Village Voice\", citing \"Hots on for Nowhere\" as a \"commanding cut\" while finding much of the rest consistent but unnecessary in comparison with earlier recordings.\nNeil McCormick of \"The Daily Telegraph\" claimed it was \"Zeppelin at their most blunted\", awarding it two stars out of five. In a retrospective review, a \"Q\" critic who gave the album three out of five stars wrote, \"\"Presence\" sounds as rushed as it was.\"\nAccording to Dave Lewis, \"The direct, hard-hitting nature of the seven recordings failed to connect with a fan base more accustomed to the diversity and experimental edge of their previous work. Page later acknowledged that, because the album conveys a sense of urgency resulting from the troubled circumstances in which it was recorded, \"it's not an easy album for a lot of people to access\u00a0... [I]t's not an easy album for a lot of people to listen to.\" Lewis nonetheless believed that \"Presence\" was underrated, as its music \"packs a considerable punch\", highlighting Page's playing and the production on the album. Fellow journalist Mick Wall said it \"pulled Led Zeppelin back from the brink of crisis\".\n2015 reissue.\nA remastered version of \"Presence\", along with \"In Through the Out Door\" and \"Coda\", were reissued on 31 July 2015. The reissue comes in six formats, including CD, vinyl and digital download. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material containing alternative takes and one previously unreleased instrumental, \"10 Ribs &amp; All/Carrot Pod Pod\". The reissue was released with an altered colour version of the original album's artwork as the bonus disc's cover.\nThe reissue received generally positive reviews. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 77, based on eight reviews. \"Pitchfork\" wrote, \"It might be their weakest album, but \"Presence\" is among the most special; none of these songs sound like they could have come from another record.\" \"Uncut\" said the original album is grand \"in lyric form and musical scale\", while \"the discs of 'companion audio,' often short on revelation, here reveal a moment of sheer anomaly. '10 Ribs &amp; All/Carrot Pod Pod (Pod)' is whatever that title may mean, everything the LP is not: a tender piano piece.\" \"PopMatters\" was less impressed, saying \"like the rest of the re-releases, the bonus material leaves too much to be desired\", but concluded, \"despite its weak second half, \"Presence\" is too good of an album to be dismissed.\"\nTrack listing.\nOriginal release.\nDetails are taken from the original UK and US Swan Song albums; all tracks are written by Jimmy Page and Robert Plant, except where noted.\nDeluxe edition bonus disc (2015).\nIncludes five tracks identified as \"Reference mixes of works in progress\".\nPersonnel.\nLed Zeppelin\nProduction\nCharts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50250", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50250", "title": "Canaan", "text": "Region in the ancient Near East\nCanaan was an ancient Semitic-speaking civilization and region of the Southern Levant during the late 2nd millennium BC. Canaan had significant geopolitical importance in the Late Bronze Age Amarna Period (14th century\u00a0BC) as the area where the spheres of interest of the Egyptian, Hittite, Mitanni, and Assyrian Empires converged or overlapped. Much of present-day knowledge about Canaan stems from archaeological excavation in this area at sites such as Tel Hazor, Tel Megiddo, En Esur, and Gezer.\nThe name \"Canaan\" appears throughout the Bible as a geography associated with the \"Promised Land\". The demonym \"Canaanites\" serves as an ethnic catch-all term covering various indigenous populations\u2014both settled and nomadic-pastoral groups\u2014throughout the regions of the southern Levant. It is by far the most frequently used ethnic term in the Bible. Biblical scholar Mark Smith, citing archaeological findings, suggests \"that the Israelite culture largely overlapped with and derived from Canaanite culture\u00a0... In short, Israelite culture was largely Canaanite in nature.\"\nThe name \"Canaanites\" is attested, many centuries later, as the endonym of the people later known to the Ancient Greeks from c.\u2009500 BC as Phoenicians, and after the emigration of Phoenicians and Canaanite-speakers to Carthage (founded in the 9th century BC), was also used as a self-designation by the Punics (as ) of North Africa during Late Antiquity.\nEtymology.\nCanaan.\nThe English term \"Canaan\" (pronounced since c.\u20091500, due to the Great Vowel Shift) comes from the Hebrew (), via the Koine Greek and the Latin . It appears as \"Kin\u00e2\u1e2bna\" (, \"KURki-na-a\u1e2b-na\") in the Amarna letters (14th century BC) and several other ancient Egyptian texts. In Greek, it first occurs in the writings of Hecataeus (c. 550\u2013476 BC) as \"\" (). It is attested in Phoenician on coins from Berytus dated to the 2nd century BC.\nThe etymology is uncertain. An early explanation derives the term from the Semitic root , \"to be low, humble, subjugated\". Some scholars have suggested that this implies an original meaning of \"lowlands\", in contrast with Aram, which would then mean \"highlands\", whereas others have suggested it meant \"the subjugated\" as the name of Egypt's province in the Levant, and evolved into the proper name in a similar fashion to Provincia Nostra (the first Roman colony north of the Alps, which became Provence).\nAn alternative suggestion, put forward by Ephraim Avigdor Speiser in 1936, derives the term from Hurrian , purportedly referring to the colour purple, so that \"Canaan\" and \"Phoenicia\" would be synonyms (\"Land of Purple\"). Tablets found in the Hurrian city of Nuzi in the early 20th century appear to use the term as a synonym for red or purple dye, laboriously produced by the Kassite rulers of Babylon from murex molluscs as early as 1600\u00a0BC, and on the Mediterranean coast by the Phoenicians from a byproduct of glassmaking. Purple cloth became a renowned Canaanite export commodity which is mentioned in Exodus. The dyes may have been named after their place of origin. The name 'Phoenicia' is connected with the Greek word for \"purple\", apparently referring to the same product, but it is difficult to state with certainty whether the Greek word came from the name, or vice versa. The purple cloth of Tyre in Phoenicia was well known far and wide and was associated by the Romans with nobility and royalty. However, according to Robert Drews, Speiser's proposal has generally been abandoned.\nDjahy.\nRetjenu (Anglicised 'Retenu') was the usual ancient Egyptian name for Canaan and Syria, covering the region from Gaza in the south, to Tartous in the north. Its borders shifted with time, but it generally consisted of three regions. The region between Ascalon and the Lebanon, stretching inland to the Sea of Galilee, was named Djahy, which was approximately synonymous with Canaan.\nHistory and archaeology.\nOverview.\nThere are several periodization systems for Canaan. One of them is the following.\nAfter the Iron Age the periods are named after the various empires that ruled the region: Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Hellenistic (related to Greece) and Roman.\nCanaanite culture developed \"in situ\" from multiple waves of migration merging with the earlier Circum-Arabian Nomadic Pastoral Complex, which in turn developed from a fusion of their ancestral Natufian and Harifian cultures with Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) farming cultures, practicing animal domestication, during the 6200\u00a0BC climatic crisis which led to the Neolithic Revolution/First Agricultural Revolution in the Levant. The majority of Canaan is covered by the Eastern Mediterranean conifer\u2013sclerophyllous\u2013broadleaf forests ecoregion.\nChalcolithic (4500\u20133500 BC).\nThe first wave of migration, called Ghassulian culture, entered Canaan circa 4500 BC. This is the start of the Chalcolithic in Canaan. From their unknown homeland, they brought an already complete craft tradition of metalwork. They were expert coppersmiths and their work is similar to artifacts from the later Maykop culture, leading some scholars to believe they represent two branches of an original metalworking tradition. Their main copper mine was at Wadi Feynan. The copper was mined from the Cambrian Burj Dolomite Shale Unit in the form of the mineral malachite. All of the copper was smelted at sites in Beersheba culture.\nGenetic analysis has shown that the Ghassulians belonged to the West Asian haplogroup T-M184.\nThe end of the Chalcolithic period saw the rise of the urban settlement of 'En Esur on the southern Mediterranean coast.\nEarly Bronze Age (3500\u20132000 BC).\nBy the Early Bronze Age other sites had developed, such as Ebla (where an East Semitic language, Eblaite, was spoken), which by c.\u20092300 BC was incorporated into the Mesopotamia-based Akkadian Empire of Sargon the Great and Naram-Sin of Akkad (biblical Accad). Sumerian references to the \"Mar.tu\" (\"tent dwellers\", later \"Amurru\", i.e. Amorite) country west of the Euphrates River date from even earlier than Sargon, at least to the reign of the Sumerian king, Enshakushanna of Uruk, and one tablet credits the early Sumerian king Lugal-Anne-Mundu with holding sway in the region, although this tablet is considered less credible because it was produced centuries later.\nAmorites at Hazor, Kadesh (Qadesh-on-the-Orontes), and elsewhere in Amurru (Syria) bordered Canaan in the north and northeast. (Ugarit may be included among these Amoritic entities.) The collapse of the Akkadian Empire in 2154\u00a0BC saw the arrival of peoples using Khirbet Kerak ware (pottery), coming originally from the Zagros Mountains (in modern Iran) east of the Tigris. In addition, DNA analysis revealed that between 2500 and 1000 BC, populations from the Chalcolithic Zagros and Bronze Age Caucasus migrated to the Southern Levant.\nThe first cities in the southern Levant arose during this period. The major sites were 'En Esur and Meggido. These \"proto-Canaanites\" were in regular contact with the other peoples to their south such as Egypt, and to the north Asia Minor (Hurrians, Hattians, Hittites, Luwians) and Mesopotamia (Sumer, Akkad, Assyria), a trend that continued through the Iron Age. The end of the period is marked by the abandonment of the cities and a return to lifestyles based on farming villages and semi-nomadic herding, although specialised craft production continued and trade routes remained open. Archaeologically, the Late Bronze Age state of Ugarit (at Ras Shamra in Syria) is considered quintessentially Canaanite, even though its Ugaritic language does not belong to the Canaanite language group proper.\nA disputed reference to a \"Lord of \"ga-na-na\"\" in the Semitic Ebla tablets (dated 2350\u00a0BC) from the archive of Tell Mardikh has been interpreted by some scholars to mention the deity Dagon by the title \"Lord of Canaan\" If correct, this would suggest that Eblaites were conscious of Canaan as an entity by 2500 BC. Jonathan Tubb states that the term \"ga-na-na\" \"may provide a third-millennium reference to \"Canaanite\"\", while at the same time stating that the first certain reference is in the 18th century BC. See Ebla-Biblical controversy for further details.\nMiddle Bronze Age (2000\u20131550 BC).\nUrbanism returned and the region was divided among small city-states, the most important of which seems to have been Hazor. Many aspects of Canaanite material culture now reflected a Mesopotamian influence, and the entire region became more tightly integrated into a vast international trading network.\nAs early as Naram-Sin of Akkad's reign (c.\u20092240 BC), \"Amurru\" was called one of the \"four quarters\" surrounding Akkad, along with Subartu/Assyria, Sumer, and Elam. Amorite dynasties also came to dominate in much of Mesopotamia, including in Larsa, Isin and founding the state of Babylon in 1894\u00a0BC. Later on, \"Amurru\" became the Assyrian/Akkadian term for the interior of south as well as for northerly Canaan. At this time the Canaanite area seemed divided between two confederacies, one centred upon Megiddo in the Jezreel Valley, the second on the more northerly city of Kadesh on the Orontes River. An Amorite chieftain named Sumu-abum founded Babylon as an independent city-state in 1894 BC. One Amorite king of Babylonia, Hammurabi (1792\u20131750\u00a0BC), founded the First Babylonian Empire, which lasted only as long as his lifetime. Upon his death the Amorites were driven from Assyria but remained masters of Babylonia until 1595\u00a0BC, when they were ejected by the Hittites.\nThe semi-fictional \"Story of Sinuhe\" describes an Egyptian officer, Sinuhe, conducting military activities in the area of \"Upper Retjenu\" and \"Fenekhu\" during the reign of Senusret I (c.\u20091950 BC). The earliest \"bona fide\" Egyptian report of a campaign to \"Mentu\", \"Retjenu\" and \"Sekmem\" (Shechem) is the Sebek-khu Stele, dated to the reign of Senusret III (c.\u20091862 BC).\nA letter from Mut-bisir to Shamshi-Adad I (c.\u20091809\u20131776 BC) of the Old Assyrian Empire (2025\u20131750 BC) has been translated: \"It is in Rahisum that the brigands (habbatum) and the Canaanites (Kinahnum) are situated\". It was found in 1973 in the ruins of Mari, an Assyrian outpost at that time in Syria. Additional unpublished references to Kinahnum in the Mari letters refer to the same episode. Whether the term Kinahnum refers to people from a specific region or rather people of \"foreign origin\" has been disputed, such that Robert Drews states that the \"first certain cuneiform reference\" to Canaan is found on the Alalakh statue of King Idrimi (below).\nA reference to Ammiya being \"in the land of Canaan\" is found on the Statue of Idrimi (16th century BC) from Alalakh in modern Syria. After a popular uprising against his rule, Idrimi was forced into exile with his mother's relatives to seek refuge in \"the land of Canaan\", where he prepared for an eventual attack to recover his city. The other references in the Alalakh texts are:\nAround 1650 BC, Canaanites invaded the eastern Nile delta, where, known as the Hyksos, they became the dominant power. In Egyptian inscriptions, \"Amar\" and \"Amurru\" (Amorites) are applied strictly to the more northerly mountain region east of Phoenicia, extending to the Orontes.\nArchaeological excavations of a number of sites, later identified as Canaanite, show that prosperity of the region reached its apogee during this Middle Bronze Age period, under the leadership of the city of Hazor, at least nominally tributary to Egypt for much of the period. In the north, the cities of Yamkhad and Qatna were hegemons of important confederacies, and it would appear that biblical Hazor was the chief city of another important coalition in the south.\nLate Bronze Age (1550\u20131200 BC).\nIn the early Late Bronze Age, Canaanite confederacies centered on Megiddo and Kadesh, before being fully brought into the Egyptian Empire and Hittite Empire. Later still, the Neo-Assyrian Empire assimilated the region.\nAccording to the Bible, the migrant ancient Semitic-speaking peoples who appear to have settled in the region included (among others) the Amorites, who had earlier controlled Babylonia. The Hebrew Bible mentions the \"Amorites\" in the \"Table of Peoples\" (Book of Genesis 10:16\u201318a). Evidently, the Amorites played a significant role in the early history of Canaan. In Book of Genesis 14:7 \"f\"., Book of Joshua 10:5 \"f\"., Book of Deuteronomy 1:19 \"f\"., 27, 44, we find them located in the southern mountain country, while verses such as Book of Numbers 21:13, Book of Joshua 9:10, 24:8, 12, etc., tell of two great Amorite kings residing at Heshbon and Ashteroth, east of the Jordan. Other passages, including Book of Genesis 15:16, 48:22, Book of Joshua 24:15, Book of Judges 1:34, regard the name \"Amorite\" as synonymous with \"Canaanite\". The name \"Amorite\" is, however, never used for the population on the coast.\nIn the centuries preceding the appearance of the biblical Hebrews, parts of Canaan and southwestern Syria became tributary to the Egyptian pharaohs, although domination by the Egyptians remained sporadic, and not strong enough to prevent frequent local rebellions and inter-city struggles. Other areas such as northern Canaan and northern Syria came to be ruled by the Assyrians during this period.\nUnder Thutmose III (1479\u20131426\u00a0BC) and Amenhotep II (1427\u20131400\u00a0BC), the regular presence of the strong hand of the Egyptian ruler and his armies kept the Amorites and Canaanites sufficiently loyal. Nevertheless, Thutmose III reported a new and troubling element in the population. Habiru or (in Egyptian) 'Apiru, are reported for the first time. These seem to have been mercenaries, brigands, or outlaws, who may have at one time led a settled life, but with bad luck or due to the force of circumstances, contributed a rootless element to the population, prepared to hire themselves to whichever local mayor, king, or princeling would pay for their support.\nAlthough Habiru (a Sumerian ideogram glossed as \"brigand\" in Akkadian), and sometimes (an Akkadian word) had been reported in Mesopotamia from the reign of the Sumerian king, Shulgi of Ur III, their appearance in Canaan appears to have been due to the arrival of a new state based in Asia Minor to the north of Assyria and based upon a Maryannu aristocracy of horse-drawn charioteers, associated with the Indo-Aryan rulers of the Hurrians, known as Mitanni.\nThe Habiru seem to have been more a social class than an ethnic group. One analysis shows that the majority were Hurrian, although there were a number of Semites and even some Kassite and Luwian adventurers amongst their number. The reign of Amenhotep III, as a result, was not quite so tranquil for the Asiatic province, as Habiru/'Apiru contributed to greater political instability. It is believed that turbulent chiefs began to seek their opportunities, although as a rule they could not find them without the help of a neighbouring king. The boldest of the disaffected nobles was Aziru, son of Abdi-Ashirta, who endeavoured to extend his power into the plain of Damascus. Akizzi, governor of Katna (Qatna?) (near Hamath), reported this to Amenhotep III, who seems to have sought to frustrate Aziru's attempts. In the reign of the next pharaoh, Akhenaten (reigned c. 1352 to c. 1335 BC) both father and son caused infinite trouble to loyal servants of Egypt like Rib-Hadda, governor of Gubla (Gebal), by transferring their loyalty from the Egyptian crown to the Hittite Empire under Suppiluliuma I (reigned c. 1344\u20131322 BC).\nEgyptian power in Canaan thus suffered a major setback when the Hittites (or Hatti) advanced into Syria in the reign of Amenhotep III, and when they became even more threatening in that of his successor, displacing the Amorites and prompting a resumption of Semitic migration. Abdi-Ashirta and his son Aziru, at first afraid of the Hittites, afterwards made a treaty with their king, and joining with the Hittites, attacked and conquered the districts remaining loyal to Egypt. In vain did Rib-Hadda send touching appeals for aid to the distant Pharaoh, who was far too engaged in his religious innovations to attend to such messages.\nThe Amarna letters tell of the Habiri in northern Syria. Etakkama wrote thus to the Pharaoh:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Behold, Namyawaza has surrendered all the cities of the king, my lord to the in the land of Kadesh and in Ubi. But I will go, and if thy gods and thy sun go before me, I will bring back the cities to the king, my lord, from the Habiri, to show myself subject to him; and I will expel the .\nSimilarly, Zimrida, king of Sidon (named 'Siduna'), declared, \"All my cities which the king has given into my hand, have come into the hand of the Habiri.\" The king of Jerusalem, Abdi-Heba, reported to the Pharaoh:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If (Egyptian) troops come this year, lands and princes will remain to the king, my lord; but if troops come not, these lands and princes will not remain to the king, my lord.\nAbdi-heba's principal trouble arose from persons called Iilkili and the sons of Labaya, who are said to have entered into a treasonable league with the Habiri. Apparently this restless warrior found his death at the siege of Gina. All these princes, however, maligned each other in their letters to the Pharaoh, and protested their own innocence of traitorous intentions. Namyawaza, for instance, whom Etakkama (see above) accused of disloyalty, wrote thus to the Pharaoh,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAround the beginning of the New Kingdom period, Egypt exerted rule over much of the Levant. Rule remained strong during the Eighteenth Dynasty, but Egypt's rule became precarious during the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. Ramses II was able to maintain control over it in the stalemated battle against the Hittites at Kadesh in 1275 BC, but soon thereafter, the Hittites successfully took over the northern Levant (Syria and Amurru). Ramses II, obsessed with his own building projects while neglecting Asiatic contacts, allowed control over the region to continue dwindling. During the reign of his successor Merneptah, the Merneptah Stele was issued which claimed to have destroyed various sites in the southern Levant, including a people known as \"Israel\". Egypt's withdrawal from the southern Levant was a protracted process lasting some one hundred years beginning in the late 13th century BC and ending close to the end of the 12th century BC. The reason for the Egypt's withdrawal was most likely political turmoil in Egypt proper rather than the invasion by the Sea Peoples, as there is little evidence that the Sea Peoples caused much destruction ca. 1200 BC. Many Egyptian garrisons or sites with an \"Egyptian governor's residence\" in the southern Levant were abandoned without destruction including Deir al-Balah, Ascalon, Tel Mor, Tell el-Far'ah (South), Tel Gerisa, Tell Jemmeh, Tel Masos, and Qubur el-Walaydah. Not all Egyptian sites in the southern Levant were abandoned without destruction. The Egyptian garrison at Aphek was destroyed, likely in an act of warfare at the end of the 13th century. The Egyptian gate complex uncovered at Jaffa was destroyed at the end of the 12th century between 1134\u20131115 based on C14 dates, while Beth-Shean was partially though not completely destroyed, possibly by an earthquake, in the mid-12th century.\nAmarna letters.\nReferences to Canaanites are also found throughout the Amarna letters of Pharaoh Akhenaten c.\u20091350 BC. In these letters, some of which were sent by governors and princes of Canaan to their Egyptian overlord Akhenaten (Amenhotep IV) in the 14th century BC, are found, beside \"Amar\" and \"Amurru\" (Amorites), the two forms \"Kinahhi\" and \"Kinahni\", corresponding to \"Kena\" and \"Kena'an\" respectively, and including Syria in its widest extent, as Eduard Meyer has shown. The letters are written in the official and diplomatic East Semitic Akkadian language of Assyria and Babylonia, though \"Canaanitish\" words and idioms are also in evidence. The known references are:\nOther Late Bronze Age mentions.\nText RS 20.182 from Ugarit is a copy of a letter of the king of Ugarit to Ramesses II concerning money paid by \"the sons of the land of Ugarit\" to the \"foreman of the sons of the land of Canaan (\"*kn'ny\")\" According to Jonathan Tubb, this suggests that the people of Ugarit, contrary to much modern opinion, considered themselves to be non-Canaanite. The other Ugarit reference, KTU 4.96, shows a list of traders assigned to royal estates, one of the estates having three Ugaritians, an Ashdadite, an Egyptian and a Canaanite.\nAshur tablets.\nA Middle Assyrian letter during the reign of Shalmaneser I includes a reference to the \"travel to Canaan\" of an Assyrian official.\nHattusa letters.\nFour references are known from Hattusa:\nBronze Age collapse.\nAnn Killebrew has shown that cities such as Jerusalem were large and important walled settlements in the pre-Israelite\nMiddle Bronze IIB and the Israelite Iron Age IIC period (c.\u20091800\u20131550 and c.\u2009720\u2013586 BC), but that during the intervening Late Bronze (LB) and Iron Age I and IIA/B Ages sites like Jerusalem were small and relatively insignificant and unfortified towns.\nJust after the Amarna period, a new problem arose which was to trouble the Egyptian control of southern Canaan (the rest of the region then being under Assyrian control). Pharaoh Horemhab campaigned against Shasu (Egyptian = \"wanderers\"), nomadic pastoralist tribes who had moved across the Jordan River to threaten Egyptian trade through Galilee and Jezreel. Seti I (c.\u20091290 BC) is said to have conquered these Shasu, Semitic-speaking nomads living just south and east of the Dead Sea, from the fortress of Taru (Shtir?) to \"Ka-n-'-na\". After the near collapse of the Battle of Kadesh, Rameses II had to campaign vigorously in Canaan to maintain Egyptian power. Egyptian forces penetrated into Moab and Ammon, where a permanent fortress garrison (called simply \"Rameses\") was established.\nSome believe the \"Habiru\" signified generally all the nomadic tribes known as \"Hebrews\", and particularly the early Israelites of the period of the \"judges\", who sought to appropriate the fertile region for themselves. However, the term was rarely used to describe the Shasu. Whether the term may also include other related ancient Semitic-speaking peoples such as the Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites is uncertain.\nThere is little evidence that any major city or settlement in the southern Levant was destroyed around 1200 BC. At Lachish, The Fosse Temple III was ritually terminated while a house in Area S appears to have burned in a house fire as the most severe evidence of burning was next to two ovens while no other part of the city had evidence of burning. After this though the city was rebuilt in a grander fashion than before. For Megiddo, most parts of the city did not have any signs of damage and it is only possible that the palace in Area AA might have been destroyed though this is not certain. While the monumental structures at Hazor were indeed destroyed, this destruction was in the mid-13th century BC long before the end of the Late Bronze Age began. However, many sites were not burned to the ground around 1200 BC including: Asqaluna, Ashdod (ancient city), Tell es-Safi, Tel Batash, Tel Burna, Tel Dor, Tel Gerisa, Tell Jemmeh, Khirbet Rabud, Tel Zeror, and Tell Abu Hawam among others.\nDespite many theories which claim that trade relations broke down after 1200 BC in the southern Levant, there is ample evidence that trade with other regions continued after the end of the Late Bronze Age in the Southern Levant. Archaeologist Jesse Millek has shown that while the common assumption is that trade in Cypriot and Mycenaean pottery ended around 1200 BC, trade in Cypriot pottery actually largely came to an end at 1300, while for Mycenaean pottery, this trade ended at 1250 BC, and destruction around 1200 BC could not have affected either pattern of international trade since it ended before the end of the Late Bronze Age. He has also demonstrated that trade with Egypt continued after 1200 BC. Archaeometallurgical studies performed by various teams have also shown that trade in tin, a non-local metal necessary to make bronze, did not stop or decrease after 1200 BC, even though the closest sources of the metal were modern Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, or perhaps even Cornwall, England. Lead from Sardinia was still being imported to the southern Levant after 1200 BC during the early Iron Age.\nIron Age.\nBy the Early Iron Age, the southern Levant came to be dominated by the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, besides the Philistine city-states on the Mediterranean coast, and the kingdoms of Moab, Ammon, and Aram-Damascus east of the Jordan River, and Edom to the south. The northern Levant was divided into various petty kingdoms, the so-called Syro-Hittite states and the Phoenician city-states.\nThe entire region (including all Phoenician/Canaanite and Aramean states, together with Israel, Philistia, and Samaria) was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire during the 10th and 9th centuries BC, and would remain so for three hundred years until the end of the 7th century BC. Emperor-kings such as Ashurnasirpal, Adad-nirari II, Sargon II, Tiglath-Pileser III, Esarhaddon, Sennacherib and Ashurbanipal came to dominate Canaanite affairs. During the Twenty-fifth Dynasty the Egyptians made a failed attempt to regain a foothold in the region but were vanquished by the Neo-Assyrian Empire, leading to an Assyrian conquest of Egypt.\nBetween 616 and 605 BC the Neo-Assyrian Empire collapsed due to a series of bitter civil wars, followed by an attack by an alliance of Babylonians, Medes, and Persians and the Scythians. The Neo-Babylonian Empire inherited the western part of the empire, including all the lands in Canaan and Syria. They successfully defeated the Egyptians and remained in the region in an attempt to regain a foothold in the Near East.\nThe Neo-Babylonian Empire itself collapsed in 539 BC, and the region became a part of the Achaemenid Empire. It remained so until in 332 BC it was conquered by the Greeks under Alexander the Great, later to fall to the Roman Empire in the late 2nd century BC, and then Byzantium, until the Arab conquest in the 7th century AD.\nEgyptian hieroglyphic and hieratic (1500\u20131000 BC).\nDuring the 2nd millennium BC, Ancient Egyptian texts use the term \"Canaan\" to refer to an Egyptian-ruled colony, whose boundaries generally corroborate the definition of Canaan found in the Hebrew Bible, bounded to the west by the Mediterranean Sea, to the north in the vicinity of Hamath in Syria, to the east by the Jordan Valley, and to the south by a line extended from the Dead Sea to around Gaza. Nevertheless, the Egyptian and Hebrew uses of the term are not identical: the Egyptian texts also identify the coastal city of Qadesh in northwest Syria near Turkey as part of the \"Land of Canaan\", so that the Egyptian usage seems to refer to the entire Levantine coast of the Mediterranean Sea, making it a synonym of another Egyptian term for this coastland, Retjenu.\nLebanon, in northern Canaan, bordered by the Litani river to the watershed of the Orontes River, was known by the Egyptians as upper Retjenu. In Egyptian campaign accounts, the term Djahi was used to refer to the watershed of the Jordan river. Many earlier Egyptian sources also mention numerous military campaigns conducted in \"Ka-na-na\", just inside Asia.\nArchaeological attestation of the name \"Canaan\" in Ancient Near Eastern sources relates almost exclusively to the period in which the region operated as a colony of the New Kingdom of Egypt (16th\u201311th centuries BC), with usage of the name almost disappearing following the Late Bronze Age collapse (c.\u20091206\u20131150 BC). The references suggest that during this period the term was familiar to the region's neighbors on all sides, although scholars have disputed to what extent such references provide a coherent description of its location and boundaries, and regarding whether the inhabitants used the term to describe themselves.\n16 references are known in Egyptian sources, from the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt onwards.\nGreco-Roman historiography.\nThe Greek term \"Phoenicia\" is first attested in the first two works of Western literature, Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\". It does not occur in the Hebrew Bible, but occurs three times in the New Testament in the Book of Acts. In the 6th century BC, Hecataeus of Miletus affirms that Phoenicia was formerly called , a name that Philo of Byblos subsequently adopted into his mythology as his eponym for the Phoenicians: \"Khna who was afterwards called Phoinix\". Quoting fragments attributed to Sanchuniathon, he relates that Byblos, Berytus and Tyre were among the first cities ever built, under the rule of the mythical Cronus, and credits the inhabitants with developing fishing, hunting, agriculture, shipbuilding and writing.\nCoins of the city of Beirut / Laodicea bear the legend, \"Of Laodicea, a metropolis in Canaan\"; these coins are dated to the reign of Antiochus IV (175\u2013164 BC) and his successors until 123 BC.\n Saint Augustine also mentions that one of the terms the seafaring Phoenicians called their homeland was \"Canaan\". Augustine also records that the rustic people of Hippo in North Africa retained the Punic self-designation \"Chanani\". Since 'punic' in Latin also meant 'non-Roman', some scholars, however, argue that the language referred to as Punic in Augustine may have been Libyan.\nThe Greeks also popularized the term \"Palestine\", named after the Philistines or the Aegean Pelasgians, for roughly the region of Canaan, excluding Phoenicia, with Herodotus' first recorded use of \"Palaistin\u00ea\", c.\u2009480 BC. From 110 BC, the Hasmoneans extended their authority over much of the region, creating a Judean-Samaritan-Idumaean-Ituraean-Galilean alliance. The Judean (Jewish, see Ioudaioi) control over the wider area resulted in it also becoming known as Judaea, a term that had previously only referred to the smaller region of the Judean Mountains, the allotment of the Tribe of Judah and heartland of the former Kingdom of Judah. Between 73 and 63 BC, the Roman Republic extended its influence into the region in the Third Mithridatic War, conquering Judea in 63 BC, and splitting the former Hasmonean Kingdom into five districts. Around 130\u2013135 AD, as a result of the suppression of the Bar Kochba revolt, the province of Iudaea was joined with Galilee to form a new province of Syria Palaestina. There is circumstantial evidence linking Hadrian with the name change, although the precise date is not certain, and the interpretation of some scholars that the name change may have been intended \"to complete the dissociation with Judaea\" is disputed.\nLater sources.\nPadiiset's Statue is the last known Egyptian reference to Canaan, a small statuette labelled \"Envoy of the Canaan and of Peleset, Pa-di-Eset, the son of Apy\". The inscription is dated to 900\u2013850 BC, more than 300 years after the preceding known inscription.\nDuring the period c.\u2009900\u2013330 BC, the dominant Neo-Assyrian and Achaemenid Empire make no mention of Canaan.\nCanaanites.\nThe Canaanites were the inhabitants of ancient Canaan, a region that roughly corresponds to present-day Israel and Palestine, western Jordan, southern and coastal Syria, Lebanon, and continued up to the southern border of Turkey. They are believed to have been one of the oldest civilizations in human history.\nHistory.\nThe Levant was inhabited by people who referred to the land as \"ka-na-na-um\" as early as the mid-third millennium BC. The Akkadian word \"\"kinahhu\" referred to the purple-coloured wool, dyed from the Murex molluscs of the coast\u2014which was a key export of the region. When the ancient Greeks later traded with the Canaanites, this meaning of the word seems to have predominated, as they referred to the Canaanites as \"Phoenikes\" (\u03a6\u03bf\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03b5\u03c2; Phoenicians), which may derive from the Greek-language word \"phoenix\" (\u03c6\u03bf\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03be; transl.\u2009\"crimson\" or \"purple\"), and also described the cloth for which the Greeks traded. The word \"\"phoenix\" was transcribed by the Romans to \"poenus\"\"; the descendants of the Canaanite settlers in Carthage were likewise referred to as \"Punic\".\nThus, while \"Phoenician\" and \"Canaanite\" refer to the same culture, archaeologists and historians commonly refer to the Bronze Age pre-1200 BC Levantine peoples as Canaanites, while their Iron Age descendants, particularly those living on the coast, are referred to as Phoenicians. More recently, the term \"Canaanite\" has been used for the secondary Iron Age states of the Levantine interior that were not ruled by Aramean peoples, that is, that were ruled by a separate and closely related ethnic group which included the Philistines and the Israelite kingdoms of Israel and Judah.\nCulture.\nAccording to archaeologist Jonathan N. Tubb, \"Ammonites, Moabites, Israelites, and Phoenicians undoubtedly achieved their own cultural identities, and yet ethnically they were all Canaanites\", \"the same people who settled in farming villages in the region in the 8th millennium BC.\"\nThere is uncertainty about whether the name \"Canaan\" refers to a specific Semitic-speaking ethnic group wherever they live, the homeland of this ethnic group, a region under the control of this ethnic group, or perhaps any combination of the three.\nCanaanite civilization was a response to long periods of stable climate interrupted by short periods of climate change. During these periods, Canaanites profited from their intermediary position between the ancient civilizations of the Middle East\u2014Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia (Sumer, Akkad, Assyria, Babylonia), the Hittites, and Minoan Crete\u2014to become city-states of merchant princes along the coast, with small kingdoms specializing in agricultural products in the interior. This polarity, between coastal towns and agrarian hinterland, was illustrated in Canaanite mythology by the struggle between the storm god, variously called Teshub (Hurrian) or Ba'al Hadad (Semitic Amorite/Aramean) and Ya'a, Yaw, or Yam, god of the sea and rivers. Early Canaanite civilization was characterized by small walled market towns, surrounded by peasant farmers growing a range of local horticultural products, along with commercial growing of olives, grapes for wine, and pistachios, surrounded by extensive grain cropping, predominantly wheat and barley. Harvest in early summer was a season when transhumance nomadism was practised\u2014shepherds staying with their flocks during the wet season and returning to graze them on the harvested stubble, closer to water supplies in the summer. Evidence of this cycle of agriculture is found in the Gezer calendar and in the biblical cycle of the year.\nPeriods of rapid climate change generally saw a collapse of this mixed Mediterranean farming system; commercial production was replaced with subsistence agricultural foodstuffs; and transhumance pastoralism became a year-round nomadic pastoral activity, whilst tribal groups wandered in a circular pattern north to the Euphrates, or south to the Egyptian delta with their flocks. Occasionally, tribal chieftains would emerge, raiding enemy settlements and rewarding loyal followers from the spoils or by tariffs levied on merchants. Should the cities band together and retaliate, a neighbouring state intervenes or should the chieftain suffer a reversal of fortune, allies would fall away or intertribal feuding would return. It has been suggested that the Patriarchal tales of the Bible reflect such social forms.\nSince 3100 BC, most Canaanites, particularly those that lived on the land that is now Israel/Palestine, lived in walled settlements in the plains and coastal regions. These settlements were surrounded by mud-brick fortifications and agricultural hamlets, which the inhabitants relied on for food. In the 2nd millennium BC, urban Canaanite elites ruled over rural and pastoral areas. The material culture of the city-states was relatively uniform. New burial customs were implicitly influenced by a belief in the afterlife.\nDuring the periods of the collapse of Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia and the First Intermediate Period of Egypt, the Hyksos invasions and the end of the Middle Bronze Age in Assyria and Babylonia, and the Late Bronze Age collapse, trade through the Canaanite area would dwindle, as Egypt, Babylonia, and to a lesser degree Assyria, withdrew into their isolation. When the climates stabilized, trade would resume firstly along the coast in the area of the Philistine and Phoenician cities. As markets redeveloped, new trade routes that would avoid the heavy tariffs of the coast would develop from Kadesh Barnea, through Hebron, Lachish, Jerusalem, Bethel, Samaria, Shechem, Shiloh through Galilee to Jezreel, Hazor, and Megiddo. Secondary Canaanite cities would develop in this region. Further economic development would see the creation of a third trade route from Eilath, Timna, Edom (Seir), Moab, Ammon, and thence to the Aramean states of Damascus and Palmyra. Earlier states (for example the Philistines and Tyrians in the case of Judah and Samaria, for the second route, and Judah and Israel for the third route) tried generally unsuccessfully to control the interior trade.\nEventually, the prosperity of this trade would attract more powerful regional neighbours, such as Ancient Egypt, Assyria, the Babylonians, Persians, Ancient Greeks, and Romans, who would control the Canaanites politically, levying tribute, taxes, and tariffs. Often in such periods, thorough overgrazing would result in a climatic collapse and a repeat of the cycle (e.g., PPNB, Ghassulian, Uruk, and the Bronze Age cycles already mentioned). The fall of later Canaanite civilization occurred with the incorporation of the area into the Greco-Roman world (as Iudaea province), and after Byzantine times, into the Umayyad Caliphate. Western Aramaic, one of the two lingua francas of Canaanite civilization, is still spoken in a number of small Syrian villages, whilst Phoenician Canaanite disappeared as a spoken language in about 100\u00a0CE. A separate Akkadian-infused Eastern Aramaic is still spoken by the existing Assyrians of Iraq, Iran, northeast Syria, and southeast Turkey.\nTel Kabri contains the remains of a Canaanite city from the Middle Bronze Age (2000\u20131550 BC). The city, the most important of the cities in the Western Galilee during that period, had a palace at its center. Tel Kabri is the only Canaanite city that can be excavated in its entirety because after the city was abandoned, no other city was built over its remains. It is notable because the predominant extra-Canaanite cultural influence is Minoan; Minoan-style frescoes decorate the palace.\nSignificant figures.\nFigures mentioned in historiography or known through archaeology\nGenetic studies.\nA 2017 study of five Canaanite samples found that approximately half of their genome originated from local Neolithic populations. The other half was from eastern migrants genetically related to Chalcolithic Iranians, which researchers estimate arrived in the Levant approximately 5,000 years ago. \nHajjej (2018) revealed that when using HLA genes, Levantine Arabs, such as Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese and Jordanians, were closely related populations with common Canaanite ancestry. They shared a common geographic territory, which was later disrupted by 19th-century British and French colonization. Their Canaanite ancestors came from North Africa or the Arabian peninsula via Egypt in 3300 BC and settled in the Levant lowlands after the Ghassulian collapse in 3800-3350 BC. The Levantine Arabs were also related to East Mediterranean populations, such as Turks, Greeks and Cretans, Egyptians and Iranians, which can be explained by the high migratory flow between Levantine sub-regions. However, Levantine Arabs were genetically distant from Arabian Peninsula populations such as Saudis, Kuwaitis and Yeminis before the 7th century Islamic conquests.\nAgranat-Tamir et al. (2020) stated that Canaanites from the Intermediate Bronze Age (c. 2500\u20132000 BC) to late Iron Age I (c. 1000 BC) were genetically similar to each other. They lived in modern Israel, Jordan and Lebanon and could be modeled as \"a mixture of local earlier Neolithic populations and populations from the northeastern part of the Near East (i.e. Zagros Mountains, Caucasians/Armenians and possibly, Hurrians)\". Exceptions include the 2nd millennium BC inhabitants of Sidon, Abel Beth Maacah and Ashkelon, who were relatively heterogenous due to inflow from the eastern Mediterranean basin. The inhabitants of Ba'qah in Jordan also have probable admixture from \"eastern desert groups\". Following the Bronze Age, there was an addition of European-related and East African-related components, which were represented by Late Neolithic and Bronze Age Europeans and Somalis, from a north-south and south-north gradient respectively. The majority of modern Jewish and Levantine Arabic-speaking groups have 50% or more ancestry from peoples who were related to Bronze Age Levantines and Chalcolithic Zagros groups. This does not mean that any of these present-day groups bear direct ancestry from people who lived in the Middle to Late Bronze Age Levant or in Chalcolithic Zagros; rather, it indicates that they have ancestries from populations whose ancient proxy can be related to the Middle East.\nAlmarri et al. (2021) stated that Levantines and Arabians diverged from each other before the Neolithic period, with Levantines adopting a sedentary agricultural lifestyle. In the Bronze Age, immigrants with ancient Iranian-related ancestry replaced about 50% of the local Levantine ancestry. They were believed to introduce haplogroup J1, which was not found in earlier Levantines. After the Bronze Age, Eastern Hunter Gatherer (EHG) ancestry was introduced, along with southeast European and Anatolian ancestry. Anatolian ancestry is significantly higher in modern Levantines than Arabians.\nLazaridis et al. (2022) clarified that ancient Levantines and their descendants exhibit a decrease of ~8% local Neolithic ancestry, which is mostly Natufian, every millennium, starting from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic to the Medieval period. It was largely replaced by Caucasus-related and Anatolian-related ancestries, from the north and west respectively. However, despite the decline in the Natufian component, this key ancestry source made an important contribution to peoples of later periods, continuing until the present.\nIn Jewish and Christian scriptures.\nHebrew Bible.\nCanaan and the Canaanites are mentioned some 160 times in the Hebrew Bible, mostly in the Torah and the books of Joshua and Judges.\nThey descended from Canaan, who was the son of Ham and the grandson of Noah. Canaan was cursed with perpetual slavery because his father Ham had \"looked upon\" the drunk and naked Noah. The expression \"look upon\" at times has sexual overtones in the Bible, as in Leviticus 20:11, \"The man who lies with his father's wife has uncovered his father's nakedness...\" As a result, interpreters have proposed a variety of possibilities as to what kind of transgression has been committed by Ham, including the possibility of castrating or raping his father or maternal incest. However, some believe that \"Canaan\" was the perpetrator of the crime, based on the surrounding verses.\nAccording to the Table of Nations, Canaan was also the ancestor of other nations, which were collectively considered to be Canaanite:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Canaan is the father of Sidon, his firstborn; and of the Hittites, Jebusites, Amorites, Girgashites, Hivites, Arkites, Sinites, Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hamathites. Later the Canaanite clans scattered, and the borders of Canaan reached [across the Mediterranean coast] from Sidon toward Gerar as far as Gaza, and then [inland around the Jordan Valley ] toward Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha.\nOther passages in the Bible offer different lists of the exact names of the Canaanite tribes. For example, lists the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaim, Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites. In contrast, only lists the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. How those other Biblical lists of Canaanite tribes agree with the genealogical listing of Canaan's sons has been subject to much discussion. It has further been argued that the Biblical term Canaanite is actually synecdoche, referring to both the broader Canaanite nation and to a specific Canaanite tribe within that nation.\nAnn E. Killebrew states that the biblical ethnogenesis of Canaan is problematic, because there is archaeological and linguistic evidence that suggests that the ancient Israelites were largely Canaanites themselves. In particular, they were a subset of Canaanite culture. Alternatively, other scholars have suggested that the Israelites originated from the Shasu and other seminomadic peoples from the desert regions south of the Levant, only later settling in the highlands of Canaan. It has been also suggested that the Hamitic origin myth could be a reference to Canaan's colonization by the Egyptians in the Late Bronze Age, who were Hamites according to the Hebrew Bible.\nVolkmar Fritz argues that there are also dissimilarities in the material culture of the early Israelites and Canaanites, suggesting that the new settlers were unrelated to the former inhabitants of the Canaanite cities. While Fritz agrees that there are some similarities between the two cultures, he argues that this resulted from close contact between them over a long period. In his view, cultural similarities developed when nomadic Israelites entered the land and gradually formed close economic relationships with Canaanites. The Israelites eventually became self-sufficient in the highlands but retained aspects of the shared Canaanite material culture.\nBiblical scholar David Frankel argues that a narrative in the Books of Chronicles tenuously indicates the historical reality of Israel's ethnogenesis. In his view, the text makes reference to an established Israelite presence in Canaan before Joshua's conquest, which primarily consisted of Ephraimites.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Canaan was located to the west of the Jordan River. The Canaanites were described as living \"by the sea, and along by the side of the Jordan\" (Book of Numbers 13:29) and \"around Jordan\" (Book of Joshua 22:9). More specifically, they inhabited the Mediterranean coastlands (), including Lebanon corresponding to Phoenicia () and the Gaza Strip corresponding to Philistia () and the Jordan Valley (, , ). Numbers 34:3\u201312 provide even more specific boundaries, which covered territory that was considered to be \"small\" by ancient standards.\nJohn N. Oswalt observes that \"Canaan consists of the land west of the Jordan and is distinguished from the area east of the Jordan.\" Oswalt then goes on to say that in Scripture, Canaan \"takes on a theological character\" as \"the land which is God's gift\" and \"the place of abundance\".\nWhilst the inhabitants of Canaan are called Canaanites, they are also called Amorites, similar to the citizens of the multi-ethnic Soviet Union being called Russian, and Hethites/Hittites. Abraham, the ancestor of the Israelites, was most likely an Amorite-Aramean, according to some early theories.\nConquest of Canaan.\nYahweh promises the land of Canaan to Abraham in the Book of Genesis and eventually delivers it to descendants of Abraham, the Israelites. The Hebrew Bible describes the Israelite conquest of Canaan in the \"Former Prophets\" (, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e0\u05d1\u05d9\u05d0\u05d9\u05dd \u05e8\u05d0\u05e9\u05d5\u05e0\u05d9\u05dd\u200e), viz. the books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings. These books give the narrative of the Israelites after the death of Moses and their entry into Canaan under the leadership of Joshua. The renaming of the Land of Canaan as the Land of Israel marks the Israelite conquest of the Promised Land.\nThe Canaanites (Hebrew: , \u00a0, \u00a0) are said to have been one of seven \"nations\" driven out by the Israelites following the Exodus. The other nations were the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites (). One of the 613 commandments prescribes that no inhabitants of the cities of six Canaanite nations, the same as mentioned in 7:1, minus the Girgashites, were to be left alive. ().\nKingdom of Israel and Judah.\nAfter the Israelite conquest of Canaan, Canaan existed as a kritarchy and later, a monarchy. Under the Israelite monarchy, the Israelite tribes were united as one kingdom. However, it split into the Kingdom of Israel and the Kingdom of Judah.\nIn 738 BC, the Neo-Assyrian empire conquered the Kingdom of Israel. In 586\u00a0BC, the Kingdom of Judah was annexed into the Neo-Babylonian Empire. The city of Jerusalem fell after a siege which lasted either eighteen or thirty months. By 586 BC, much of Judah was devastated, and the former kingdom suffered a steep decline of both economy and population.\nNew Testament.\n\"Canaan\" () is used only twice in the New Testament: both times in Acts of the Apostles when paraphrasing Old Testament stories. Additionally, the derivative (, \"Canaanite woman\") is used in Matthew's version of the exorcism of the Syrophoenician woman's daughter, while the Gospel of Mark uses the term (). It is implied that the New Testament authors considered all non-Jewish inhabitants in the northern coastlines of Canaan to be Canaanite.\nIn the King James Version of the Bible one of the disciples is known as Simon the Canaanite.\nUses of the name.\nBy the Second Temple period (530 BC \u2013 70 AD), \"Canaanite\" in the Hebrew language had come to be not an ethnic designation, so much as a general synonym for \"merchant\", as it is interpreted in, for example, Book of Job 40:30, or Book of Proverbs 31:24.\nThe name \"Canaanites\" is attested as the endonym of the people later known to the Ancient Greeks from c.\u2009500 BC as Phoenicians, and following the emigration of Canaanite-speakers to Carthage (founded in the 9th century BC), was also used as a self-designation by the Punics (\"chanani\") of North Africa during Late Antiquity.\nThe Septuagint (3rd and 2nd century BC) mostly renders Canaan as \u03a7\u03b1\u03bd\u03b1\u03ac\u03bd (Khanaan), but on two occasions as \"Phoenicia\" (Exod 16:35 and Josh 5:12).\nLegacy.\n\"Canaan\" is used as a synonym of the Promised Land; for instance, it is used in this sense in the hymn \"Canaan's Happy Shore\", with the lines: \"Oh, brothers, will you meet me, (3x)/On Canaan's happy shore,\" a hymn set to the tune later used in \"The Battle Hymn of the Republic\".\nIn the 1930s and 1940s, some Revisionist Zionist intellectuals in Mandatory Palestine founded the ideology of Canaanism, which sought to create a unique Hebrew identity, rooted in ancient Canaanite culture, rather than a Jewish one.\nIsraeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion observed the contradictions between the secular and biblical records of Jewish indigeneity to Canaan, which was nonetheless affirmed in the Declaration of Independence. Whilst he used secular arguments to justify Jewish indigeneity, he argued that the biblical narrative of Abraham migrating to Canaan was a \"reunion with indigenous Hebrews who shared his theological belief\". He also argued that not all Hebrews joined Jacob's family when they migrated to Egypt and later, birthed the generation of the Hebrews that endured the Exodus. Some professors find this view tenable, based on , which preserved heterodox traditions of Jewish indigeneity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50252", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50252", "title": "Eric Williams", "text": "Leader of Trinidad and Tobago from 1956 to 1981\nEric Eustace Williams (25 September 1911 \u2013 29 March 1981) was a Trinidad and Tobago politician. He has been dubbed as the \"Father of the Nation\", having led the then-British Colony of Trinidad and Tobago to majority rule on 28 October 1956, to independence on 31 August 1962, and republic status, on 1 August 1976, leading an unbroken string of general elections victories with his political party, the People's National Movement, until his death in 1981. He represented Port of Spain South in the Parliament of Trinidad and Tobago.\nHe was the first Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago and also a Caribbean historian, most noted for his book entitled \"Capitalism and Slavery.\"\nEarly life.\nWilliams was born on 25 September in 1911. His father Thomas Henry Williams was a minor civil servant and devout Roman Catholic, and his mother Eliza Frances Boissiere (13 April 1888 \u2013 1969) was a descendant of the mixed French Creole Mulatto elite and had African and French ancestry. She was a descendant of the notable de Boissi\u00e8re family in Trinidad. Eliza's paternal grandfather was John Boissiere, a married upper-middle class Frenchman who had an intimate relationship with an African slave named Ma Zu Zule. From the union, Jules Arnold Boissiere, father of Eliza, was born. His sister Lucy married Alexander Chamberlain Alexis, who was a minister in his government.\nHe saw his first school years at Tranquillity Boys' Intermediate Government School and he was later educated at Queen's Royal College in Port of Spain, where he excelled at academics and football. A football injury at QRC led to a hearing problem which he wore a hearing aid to correct.\nHe won an island scholarship in 1932, which allowed him to attend St. Catherine's Society, Oxford (later renamed St. Catherine's College). In 1935, he received a first class honours degree, and ranked first among history graduates that year. He also represented the university at football. In 1938, he went on to obtain his doctorate (see section below). In \"Inward Hunger\", his autobiography, he described his experience of studying at Oxford, including his frustrations with rampant racial discrimination at the institution, and his travels in Germany after the Nazis' seizure of power.\nScholarly career.\nIn \"Inward Hunger\", Williams recounts that in the period following his graduation, He was \"severely handicapped in my research by my lack of money... I was turned down everywhere I tried... and could not ignore the racial factor involved\". However, in 1936, thanks to a recommendation made by Sir Alfred Claud Hollis (Governor of Trinidad and Tobago, 1930\u201336), the Leathersellers' Company awarded him a \u00a350 grant to continue his advanced research in history at Oxford.\nHe completed the D.Phil in 1938 under the supervision of Vincent Harlow. His doctoral thesis was titled \"The Economic Aspects of the Abolition of the Slave Trade and West Indian Slavery\", and was published as \"Capitalism and Slavery\" in 1944, although excerpts of his thesis were published in 1939 by \"The Keys\", the journal of the League of Coloured Peoples. According to Williams, Fredric Warburg \u2013 a publisher of Marxist literature, who Williams asked to publish his thesis \u2013 refused to publish, saying that \"such a book... would be contrary to the British tradition\". His thesis was both a direct attack on the idea that moral and humanitarian motives were the key facts in the success of the British abolitionist movement, and a covert critique of the established British historiography on the West Indies (as exemplified by, in Williams' view, the works of Oxford professor Reginald Coupland) as supportive of continued British colonial rule. Williams's argument owed much to the influence of C. L. R. James, whose \"The Black Jacobins\", also completed in 1938, also offered an economic and geostrategic explanation for the rise of abolitionism in the Western world.\nGad Heuman states:\n In \"Capitalism and Slavery,\" Eric Williams argued that the declining economies of the British West Indies led to the abolition of the slave trade and of slavery. More recent research has rejected this conclusion; it is now clear that the colonies of the British Caribbean profited considerably during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars.\nHowever, \"Capitalism and Slavery\" covers the economic history of sugar and slavery beyond just the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, and discusses the decline of sugar plantations from 1823 until the emancipation of the slaves in the 1830s. It also discusses the British government's use of the equalisation of the sugar duties Acts in the 1840s to sever their responsibilities to buy sugar from the British West Indian colonies, and to buy sugar on the open market from Cuba and Brazil, where it was cheaper. In support of the Williams thesis, David Ryden presented evidence to show that by the early nineteenth century there was an emerging crisis of profitability.\nWilliams's argument about abolitionism went far beyond this decline thesis. What he argued was that the new economic and social interest created in the 18th century by the slave-based Atlantic economy generated new pro-free trade and anti-slavery political interests. These interacted with the rise of evangelical antislavery and with the self-emancipation of slave rebels, from the Haitian Revolution of 1792\u20131804 to the Jamaica Christmas Rebellion of 1831, to bring the end of Slavery in the 1830s.\nIn 1939, Williams joined the Political Science department at Howard University. In 1943, Williams organised a conference about the \"economic future of the Caribbean.\" He argued that small islands of the West Indies would be vulnerable to domination by the former colonial powers in the event that these islands became independent states; Williams advocated for a West Indian Federation as a solution to post-colonial dependence.\nShift to public life.\nIn 1944, Williams was appointed to the Anglo-American Caribbean Commission. In 1948 he returned to Trinidad as the Commission's deputy chairman of the Caribbean Research Council. In Trinidad, he delivered an acclaimed series of educational lectures. In 1955, after disagreements between Williams and the Commission, the Commission elected not to renew his contract. In a speech at Woodford Square in Port of Spain, he declared that he had decided to \"put down his bucket\" in the land of his birth. He rechristened that enclosed park, which stood in front of the Trinidad courts and legislature, \"The University of Woodford Square\", and proceeded to give a series of public lectures on world history, Greek democracy and philosophy, the history of slavery, and the history of the Caribbean to large audiences drawn from every social class.\nEntry into nationalist politics in Trinidad and Tobago.\nFrom that public platform on 15 January 1956, Williams inaugurated his own political party, the People's National Movement (PNM), which would take Trinidad and Tobago into independence in 1962, and dominate its post-colonial politics. Until this time his lectures had been carried out under the auspices of the Political Movement, a branch of the Teachers Education and Cultural Association, a group that had been founded in the 1940s as an alternative to the official teachers' union. The PNM's first document was its constitution. Unlike the other political parties of the time, the PNM was a highly organised, hierarchical body. Its second document was The People's Charter, in which the party strove to separate itself from the transitory political assemblages which had thus far been the norm in Trinidadian politics.\nIn elections held eight months later, on 24 September the Peoples National Movement won 13 of the 24 elected seats in the Legislative Council, defeating 6 of the 16 incumbents running for re-election. Although the PNM did not secure a majority in the 31-member Legislative Council, he was able to convince the Secretary of State for the Colonies to allow him to name the five appointed members of the council (despite the opposition of the Governor, Sir Edward Betham Beetham). This gave him a clear majority in the Legislative Council. Williams was thus elected Chief Minister and was also able to get all seven of his ministers elected.\nFederation and independence.\nAfter the Second World War, the Colonial Office had preferred that British colonies move towards political independence in the kind of federal systems which had appeared to succeed since the Canadian confederation, which created Canada, in the 19th century. In the British West Indies, this goal coincided with the political aims of the nationalist movements which had emerged in all the colonies of the region during the 1930s. The Montego Bay conference of 1948 had declared the common aim to be the achievement by the West Indies of \"Dominion Status\" (which meant constitutional independence from the British government) as a Federation. In 1958, a West Indies Federation emerged from the British Caribbean, which with British Guiana (now Guyana) and British Honduras (now Belize) choosing to opt out of the Federation, leaving Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago as the dominant players. Most political parties in the various territories aligned themselves into one of two Federal political parties \u2013 the West Indies Federal Labour Party (led by Grantley Adams of Barbados and Norman Manley of Jamaica) and the Democratic Labour Party (DLP) led by Manley's cousin, Sir Alexander Bustamante. The PNM affiliated with the former, while several opposition parties (the People's Democratic Party, the Trinidad Labour Party and the Party of Political Progress Groups) aligned themselves with the DLP, and soon merged to form the Democratic Labour Party of Trinidad and Tobago.\nThe DLP victory in the 1958 Federal Elections and subsequent poor showing by the PNM in the 1959 County Council Elections soured Williams on the Federation. Lord Hailes (Governor-General of the Federation) also overruled two PNM nominations to the Federal Senate in order to balance a disproportionately WIFLP-dominated Senate. When Bustamante withdrew Jamaica from the Federation, this left Trinidad and Tobago in the untenable position of having to provide 75% of the Federal budget while having less than half the seats in the Federal government. In a speech, Williams declared that \"one from ten leaves nought\". Following the adoption of a resolution to that effect by the PNM General Council on 15 January 1962, Williams withdrew Trinidad and Tobago from the West Indies Federation. This action led the British government to dissolve the Federation.\nIn 1961 the PNM had introduced the \"Representation of the People Bill\". This Bill was designed to modernise the electoral system by instituting permanent registration of voters, identification cards, voting machines and revised electoral boundaries. These changes were seen by the DLP as an attempt to disenfranchise illiterate rural voters through intimidation, to rig the elections through the use of voting machines, to allow Afro-Caribbean immigrants from other islands to vote, and to gerrymander the boundaries to ensure victory by the PNM. Opponents of the PNM saw \"proof\" of these allegations when A. N. R. Robinson was declared winner of the Tobago seat in 1961 with more votes than there were registered voters, and in the fact that the PNM was able to win every subsequent election until the 1980 Tobago House of Assembly Elections.\nThe 1961 elections gave the PNM 57% of the votes and 20 of the 30 seats. This two-thirds majority allowed them to draft the Independence Constitution without input from the DLP. Although supported by the Colonial Office, independence was blocked by the DLP, until Williams was able to make a deal with DLP leader Rudranath Capildeo that strengthened the rights of the minority party and expanded the number of Opposition Senators. With Capildeo's assent, Trinidad and Tobago became independent on 31 August 1962, 25 days after Jamaica. In addition to primeministership, Williams was also Minister of Finance from 1957 to 1961 and from 1966 to 1971.\nBlack Power.\nBetween 1968 and 1970 the Black Power movement gained strength in Trinidad and Tobago. The leadership of the movement developed within the Guild of Undergraduates at the St. Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies. Led by Geddes Granger, the National Joint Action Committee joined up with trade unionists led by George Weekes of the Oilfields Workers' Trade Union and Basdeo Panday, then a young trade-union lawyer and activist. The Black Power Revolution started during the 1970 Carnival. In response to the challenge, Williams countered with a broadcast entitled \"I am for Black Power\". He introduced a 5% levy to fund unemployment reduction and established the first locally owned commercial bank. However, this intervention had little impact on the protests.\nOn 3 April 1970, a protester was killed by the police. This was followed on 13 April by the resignation of A. N. R. Robinson, Member of Parliament for Tobago East. On 18 April sugar workers went on strike, and there was the talk of a general strike. In response to this, Williams proclaimed a State of Emergency on 21 April and arrested 15 Black Power leaders. In response to this, a portion of the Trinidad and Tobago Defence Force, led by Raffique Shah and Rex Lassalle, mutinied and took hostages at the army barracks at Teteron. Through the action of the Trinidad and Tobago Coast Guard the mutiny was contained and the mutineers surrendered on 25 April.\nWilliams made three additional speeches in which he sought to identify himself with the aims of the Black Power movement. He reshuffled his cabinet and removed three ministers (including two White members) and three senators. He also proposed a Public Order Bill which would have curtailed civil liberties in an effort to control protest marches. After public opposition, led by A. N. R. Robinson and his newly created Action Committee of Democratic Citizens (which later became the Democratic Action Congress), the Bill was withdrawn. Attorney General Karl Hudson-Phillips offered to resign over the failure of the Bill, but Williams refused his resignation.\nDeath.\nPrime Minister Eric Eustace Williams of Trinidad and Tobago, died on 29 March 1981 at his official house in St. Ann's, Port of Spain in Trinidad and Tobago. He was 69 years old at the time of his death.\nPersonal life.\nEric Williams had married Elsie Ribeiro, a music studies student born to a mother from Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and a Portuguese Trinidadian father, on 30 January 1937, while he was a postgraduate student at Oxford University. He had known Ribeiro from Trinidad before he left for the United Kingdom and she was the sister of his roommate in England. The ceremony was private out of fear that the terms of his scholarship could have prohibited marriage and he did not want it to be terminated. After he graduated, they moved to Washington, D.C. in the United States where he obtained a position at Howard University. They had a son, Alistair Williams, in 1943 and a daughter, Elsie Pamela Williams, in 1947. However, Williams questioned the paternity of Elsie Pamela, thus leading to problems in the marriage. In May 1948, Williams left Washington, D.C. to go back to Trinidad, abandoning his wife and children. His reason for not financially supporting them after leaving was because Ribeiro refused to send their children to Oxford University in the future.\nAfter returning to Trinidad in 1948, he met Evelyn Siulan Soy Moyou, a typist 13 years his junior of Chinese descent on her father's side and Chinese, African, and Portuguese descent on her mother's side, and she was a niece of Solomon Hochoy, the future Governor and Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago during Williams's premiership. She worked at the Caribbean Commission where Williams had taken up a position. They began a relationship and he initiated divorce proceedings from Ribeiro in January 1950 on a Caribbean Commission trip to the US Virgin Islands.\nRibeiro responded with an injunction restraining him from proceeding with his petition. After dropping the proceedings, in a letter of April 1950 submitted to the jurisdiction of the District of Columbia court, he agreed to abide by its decision and be bound by an order regarding alimony. However, a few months later while on a research holiday in the United States he reinitiated divorce proceedings in Reno, Nevada, known for its quick divorces, due to the fact that Moyou was pregnant with his child. However, Ribeiro obtained an injunction preventing Williams from making any attempt at divorce, on the grounds that he had earlier subjected himself to the jurisdiction of the District of Columbia court. Williams filed formal proceedings for a divorce on 24 November 1950. On 13 December 1950, Williams was ordered to appear in court, most likely because he had filed for a divorce in Reno, even though he had earlier submitted himself to the jurisdiction of the District of Columbia. Even though a lawyer had been assigned to him, he did not appear and on 22 December 1950 he was ordered to be taken into custody by a US Marshal. His lawyer in Reno pointed out that his divorce had been granted, though a search of the court records showed no entry for a final decree. Williams eventually met the six-week residential requirement to obtain a Nevada divorce and on 2 January 1951, he married Moyou in Reno, in a ceremony performed by The Rev. Munroe Warner of First Christian Church. Their daughter, Erica Williams, was born on 12 February 1951, in Reno. After his second marriage, Ribeiro obtained a divorce from him on 20 January 1951, on grounds of desertion. It was made effective on 21 July 1951 and he was ordered to pay a monthly alimony of US$250 for the maintenance of his first wife and two children. On 26 May 1953, Moyou died from Tuberculosis.\nHe later married Mayleen Mook Sang, his daughter's dentist. She was of Chinese Guyanese origin. They were married on Caledonia Island on 13 November 1957 by Rev. Andrew McKean, of Greyfriars Presbyterian Church on Frederick Street in Port of Spain. However, the couple never lived together and the marriage was kept hidden by Williams. The marriage was exposed 18 months later when Mook Sang sent a copy of their marriage certificate to the \"Chronicle\" newspaper following rumours of Williams having an affair with a local beauty queen. They remained married till his death. After his death she filed to receive Williams' benefits and pension from his premiership, however it was given to his daughter, Erica, who was named his heir in his will.\nLegacy.\nAcademic contributions.\nWilliams specialised in the study of slavery. Many Western academics focused on his chapter on the abolition of the slave trade, but that is just a small part of his work. In his 1944 book, \"Capitalism and Slavery\", Williams argued that the British government's passage of the Slave Trade Act in 1807 was motivated primarily by economic concerns rather than by humanitarian ones. Williams also argued that by extension, so was the emancipation of the slaves and the blockade of Africa, and that as industrial capitalism and wage labour began to expand, eliminating the competition from wage-free slavery became economically advantageous.\nWilliams' impact on that field of study has proved of lasting significance. As Barbara Solow and Stanley Engerman put it in the preface to a compilation of essays on Williams that was based on a commemorative symposium held in Italy in 1984, Williams \"defined the study of Caribbean history, and its writing affected the course of Caribbean history... Scholars may disagree on his ideas, but they remain the starting point of discussion... Any conference on British capitalism and Caribbean slavery is a conference on Eric Williams.\"\nIn an open letter to Solow, Yale Professor of History David Brion Davis refers to Williams' thesis of the declining economic viability of slave labour as \"undermined by a vast mountain of empirical evidence and has been repudiated by the world\u2019s leading authorities on New World slavery, the transatlantic slave trade, and the British abolition movement\". A major work which was written to refute Eric Williams' thesis was Seymour Drescher's \"Econocide\", which argued that when the slave trade was abolished in 1807, Britain's sugar economy was thriving. However, other historians have noted that Drescher ended his study of the economic history of the British West Indies in 1822, and did not address the decline of the British sugar industry (something which was highlighted by Williams) which began in the mid-1820s, and continued until the passage of the Slavery Abolition Act in 1833. The majority of Eric William's thesis, which addressed the decline of the sugar industry in the 1820s, the passage of the Slavery Abolition Act in 1833, and the sugar equalisation acts of the 1840s, has continued to influence the historiography of the 19th-century West Indies and its connection to the wider Atlantic world as a whole.\nIn addition to \"Capitalism and Slavery\", Williams produced a number of other scholarly works focused on the Caribbean. Of particular significance are two published long after he had abandoned his academic career for public life: \"British Historians and the West Indies\" and \"From Columbus to Castro\". The former, based on research done in the 1940s and initially presented at a symposium at Clark Atlanta University, sought to challenge established British historiography on the West Indies. Williams was particularly scathing in his criticism of the work of Scottish historian Thomas Carlyle. The latter work is a general history of the Caribbean from the 15th to the mid-20th centuries. The work appeared at the same time as a similarly titled book (\"De Crist\u00f3bal Col\u00f3n a Fidel Castro\") by another Caribbean scholar-statesman, Juan Bosch of the Dominican Republic.\nWilliams sent one of 73 Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages to NASA for the historic first lunar landing in 1969. The message still rests on the lunar surface today. He wrote, in part: \"It is our earnest hope for mankind that while we gain the moon, we shall not lose the world.\"\nThe Eric Williams Memorial Collection.\nThe Eric Williams Memorial Collection (EWMC) at the University of the West Indies in Trinidad and Tobago was inaugurated in 1998 by former US Secretary of State Colin Powell. In 1999, it was named to UNESCO's prestigious Memory of the World Register. Secretary Powell heralded Williams as a tireless warrior in the battle against colonialism, and for his many other achievements as a scholar, politician and international statesman.\nThe Collection consists of the late Dr. Williams' Library and Archives. Available for consultation by researchers, the Collection amply reflects its owner's eclectic interests, comprising some 7,000 volumes, as well as correspondence, speeches, manuscripts, historical writings, research notes, conference documents and a miscellany of reports. The Museum contains a wealth of emotive memorabilia of the period and copies of the seven translations of Williams' major work, \"Capitalism and Slavery\" (into Russian, Chinese and Japanese [1968, 2004] among them, and a Korean translation was released in 2006). Photographs depicting various aspects of his life and contribution to the development of Trinidad and Tobago complete this extraordinarily rich archive, as does a three-dimensional re-creation of Williams' study.\nDr Colin Palmer, Dodge Professor of History at Princeton University, has said: \"as a model for similar archival collections in the Caribbean...I remain very impressed by its breadth... [It] is a national treasure.\" Palmer's biography of Williams up to 1970, \"Eric Williams and the Making of the Modern Caribbean\" (University of North Carolina Press, 2008), is dedicated to the Collection.\nFilm.\nIn 2011, to mark the centenary of Williams' birth, Mariel Brown directed the documentary film \"Inward Hunger: the Story of Eric Williams\", scripted by Alake Pilgrim.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50255", "revid": "51034474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50255", "title": "Canadian Alliance", "text": "Federal political party (2000\u20132003)\nThe Canadian Alliance (), formally the Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance (), was a centre-right to right-wing federal political party in Canada that existed under that name from 2000 to 2003. The Canadian Alliance was the new name of the Reform Party of Canada and inherited many of its populist policies, as well as its position as the Official Opposition in the House of Commons of Canada. The party supported policies that were both fiscally and socially conservative, seeking reduced government spending on social programs and reductions in taxation.\nThe Alliance resulted from the United Alternative initiative launched by the Reform Party of Canada and several provincial Tory parties as a vehicle to merge with the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada. The federal Progressive Conservative Party led by Joe Clark in the late fall of 1998 rejected the initiative to \"unite the right.\" After the Alliance led by Stockwell Day was defeated and a third consecutive Liberal majority government was won in the 2000 federal election, talks reopened and in December 2003, the Canadian Alliance and the Progressive Conservative parties finally voted to merge into the Conservative Party of Canada.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe Canadian Alliance's origins were in the Reform Party of Canada, which was founded in 1987 as a right-wing populist party supporting Western Canadian interests. Led by its founder Preston Manning, the Reform Party rapidly gained momentum at the expense of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada (PC); in the 1993 federal election, the PCs fell to only two seats while Reform surged to 52 seats, thus becoming Canada's largest right-wing party. However, the party was virtually nonexistent east of Manitoba. In the 1997 election, the PCs rebounded slightly to 20 seats while Reform again struggled outside of the west. The division among the right encouraged Manning to promote a new movement, the \"United Alternative\" (UA), to create a small-c conservative alternative to the Liberals. Manning blamed \"conservative\" vote-splitting for keeping the Liberal Party in power, although some polls showed that the Liberals were the second choice of many PC voters (especially in Ontario). Manning's efforts created a strong debate in the Reform Party, and he would even write a letter to the effect that he didn't want to lead Reform anymore, but would only lead the new party. The opposition died down after Manning won a leadership review with 74.6 per cent support at the January 2000 UA convention.\nFoundation.\nIn 2000, following the second of the two United Alternative conventions, the party voted to form a new party, the \"Canadian Conservative Reform Alliance\". After the convention, the Reform Party applied to change its name, short name, and logo; this application was granted by the Chief Electoral Officer of Canada, retroactive to March 27, 2000. As of that date, what used to be the Reform Party of Canada was used as a vehicle to adopt the new name, and re-registered as the Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance. The newly named party's platform was a mixture of the PC and Reform platforms. However, former Reform members dominated the new party \u2014 with few exceptions, the Reform caucus in the Commons essentially became the Alliance caucus. Brian Mulroney called the party \"Reform in pantyhose\", and some opponents referred to the party as the \"Reform Alliance\" to enforce this perception.\nMedia covering the convention quickly pointed out that if one added the word \"Party\" to the end of the party's name, the resulting initials were \"CCRAP\" (humorously pronounced \"see-crap\" or just \"crap\"); this was despite the fact that the Canadian Alliance never actually had the word \"party\" in its name. One day later, the party changed its official name to the \"Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance\". However, it was almost always called simply \"the Canadian Alliance\" (which was accepted on first reference in most media outlets) or \"the Alliance\". However, the \"CCRAP\" nickname was still used by its opponents. Deborah Grey, the deputy leader of Reform, was chosen as the new party's interim leader, becoming the first female leader of the Opposition in Canadian history. Subsequently, at the new party's first leadership convention, Manning was defeated by Stockwell Day, treasurer (finance minister) of Alberta. One Progressive Conservative senator, Gerry St. Germain, joined the new party in October 2000, becoming the Alliance's first (and, ultimately, only) member of the Senate.\n2000 federal election.\nIn the fall of 2000, the Liberals called a snap election that caught the Alliance off-guard. Nonetheless, the party went into the election with great hopes, campaigning on tax cuts, an end to the federal gun registration program, and their vision of \"family values\". At one point, the Alliance was at 30.5 per cent in the polls; some thought they could win the election, or at least knock the Liberals down to a minority government.\nThough disappointed with the election results in Ontario, the Alliance increased its presence to 66 MPs, including two MPs from Ontario. Nationally, the party increased its popular vote to 25 per cent. The Alliance remained the Official Opposition in the House of Commons. The Liberals increased their large majority mostly at the expense of the NDP, and the Tories under Joe Clark lost many seats and remained in fifth place, but Clark was elected in Calgary Centre in the middle of Alliance country, and the overall political landscape was not significantly changed. Like Reform, the Alliance was perceived mostly as a Western protest party.\nElection aftermath.\nHowever, the Alliance's failure to win more seats east of Manitoba, along with residual resentments from the Alliance leadership contest and questions about Day's competence, led to caucus infighting. In the spring of 2001, eleven MPs who either voluntarily resigned or were expelled from the party formed the \"Independent Alliance Caucus\". The group was led by Chuck Strahl and included Grey. Day offered the dissidents an amnesty at the end of the summer, but seven of them, including Grey and Strahl, turned it down and formed their own parliamentary grouping, the Democratic Representative Caucus. The DRC formed a coalition with Clark's Tories in the House, which was widely seen as an attempt by Clark to reunite the Canadian right on his terms. The split forced Day to call a new leadership convention, and, in April 2002, former Reform MP Stephen Harper defeated Day at the subsequent leadership election.\nOnce Harper assumed the leadership, most of the rebellious MPs rejoined the Alliance. Two MPs did not rejoin, however: Inky Mark chose to remain outside of caucus, and eventually joined the Tories, and the scandal-plagued Jim Pankiw was rejected when he applied for readmission to the Alliance caucus.\nCreation of the Conservative Party of Canada.\nOn October 15, 2003, the Canadian Alliance and the Progressive Conservative Party (under its new leader Peter MacKay) announced that they would merge to form a new party, called the Conservative Party of Canada. The union was ratified on December 5, 2003, with 96 per cent support of the membership of the Canadian Alliance, and on December 6, 90.04 per cent support of elected delegates in the PC Party. On December 8, the party was registered with Elections Canada, and on March 20, 2004, former Alliance leader Stephen Harper was elected as leader of the party with MacKay serving as deputy leader. The new party was dubbed \"the Alliance Conservatives\" by critics who considered the new party a \"hostile takeover\" of the old Progressive Conservatives by the newer Alliance. However, some grassroots Alliance supporters who had adhered to the old populist ideas of the Reform Party feared that the merger would signal a return to what they saw as indifference to Western Canadian interests. The Alliance also subsequently shed some of its populist and socially conservative policies during the merger.\nThe new Conservative Party formed the Canadian government on February 6, 2006, and won two additional elections (2008 and 2011) under the leadership of Stephen Harper; of these, the 2006 and 2008 votes resulted in the party governing only as a minority; only in 2011 was a majority mandate achieved. The party was defeated in 2015, by the Liberals, and became the official opposition party in the House of Commons.\nProvincial wings.\nDuring its short history, the Canadian Alliance never seriously entertained the prospect of forming provincial wings or forging formal links with existing provincial parties. The vast majority of Alliance supporters in most provinces supported, and continued to support, their provincial Progressive Conservative parties, while most supporters in Saskatchewan remained loyal to the Saskatchewan Party and in BC supported the conservative BC Liberals.\nHowever, an attempt to form a provincial party with clear, if unofficial links with the Alliance was made in Alberta, where the Alberta Alliance was formed in 2002. Under the leadership of Reform/Alliance activist Randy Thorsteinson, the new party never sought a formal link with the Alliance, and if it had done so the overture would likely have been rebuffed since many Albertan Alliance members continued to support the Alberta Progressive Conservatives. However, the Alberta Alliance copied the colours of the Alliance and many of its logos bear a striking resemblance to those of the federal party. The Alberta Alliance continued to grow following the federal party's merger, and the provincial party fielded a full slate of candidates for the 2004 provincial election, on November 22, 2004, and won one seat in the Legislature.\nElectoral performance.\nHouse of Commons.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50259", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50259", "title": "Nicholas II (disambiguation)", "text": "Nicholas II was the last emperor of Russia from 1894 to 1917.\nNicholas II may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "50261", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50261", "title": "Steal this Book", "text": ""}
{"id": "50262", "revid": "28699555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50262", "title": "Steal This Book", "text": "1971 book by Abbie Hoffman\nSteal This Book is a book written by Abbie Hoffman. Written in 1970 and published the following year, it exemplifies the counterculture of the 1960s. The book sold more than a quarter of a million copies between April and November 1971. The number of copies that were stolen is unknown.\nThe book is, in the style of the counterculture, mainly focused on ways to fight against the government and against corporations in any way possible. The book is written in the form of a guide to the youth. Hoffman, a political and social activist himself, used many of his own activities as the inspiration for some of his advice in \"Steal This Book\".\nCreation.\nThe main author of the book, Abbie Hoffman, was one of the most influential and recognizable North American activists of the late 1960s and early 1970s, gaining fame with his leadership in anti-Vietnam War protests. In the introduction, Hoffman writes that 50 people were involved in the creation of \"Steal This Book\". Izak Haber and Bert Cohen are credited on the title page as \"co-conspirator\" and \"accessory after the fact\", respectively. \"Steal This Book\" was written in the climate of the counterculture, in which opposition to tradition and government was rampant, and experimentation with new forms of living was encouraged. When the book was published, it took hold among the new left, especially among students on college campuses, such as Brandeis University, where Hoffman had been a student.\nContent.\n\"Steal This Book\" is divided into three sections, \"Survive!\", \"Fight!\" and \"Liberate!\". There is also an introduction and appendix that lists \"approved\" organizations and other books worth stealing.\n\"Survive!\" gives information and methods for obtaining goods and services for free or at discounted rates. It covers a broad range of items, including food, clothing, furniture, transportation, land, livestock, housing, education, medical care, communication, entertainment, money, and drugs. There is further advice on slug coins, panhandling, welfare, shoplifting, growing cannabis, and establishing a commune.\n\"Fight!\" includes chapters on starting an underground press, broadcasting through guerrilla radio or guerrilla television, non-violent demonstrations and how to protect oneself if they become violent, how to make an assortment of home-made bombs, first aid for street fighters, legal advice, how to seek political asylum, guerrilla warfare, gun laws, and identification papers.\nThe final section, \"Liberate!\", contains information particular to four major cities: New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.\nHoffman has an idiosyncratic writing style, and incorporates slang specific to his subculture\u2014e.g., referring to his country as \"Amerika.\" In the book, Hoffman calls America the \"Pig Empire\" and contends that it is not immoral to steal from it\u2014in fact, Hoffman wrote, it is immoral \"not\" to do so. The term was picked up by the Yippies, and was widely used by what became known as the \"Woodstock Nation.\" Some of the information in the book has since become obsolete for technological or regulatory reasons, but the book iconically reflects the hippie zeitgeist.\nPublication and reception.\n\"Steal This Book\" was rejected by at least 30 publishers before it was able to get into print, and Hoffman was eventually forced to make a publishing company of his own, Pirate Editions, to publish the book at his own expense, with Grove Press as the distributor. Some of the publishers rejected the book out of moral opposition to its content, while others were afraid of the government. Some editors feared a negative reaction from booksellers, to the title as well as the content. This fear proved to be well-founded; in the United States, many regional distributors and bookstores were unwilling to carry the book. In Canada, it was banned by the government.\nOnce it got into print, \"Steal This Book\" had many readers and became a bestseller mainly through word of mouth. Dotson Rader in \"The New York Times\" described it as a \"necessary\" work \"of warning and practical knowledge\" that had been written with \"gentleness and affection.\" He wrote that the book had received no reviews and that only one paper had permitted an advertisement, though the book had sold 100,000 copies. Rader felt that the \"remarkable\" suppression of the book constituted a form of \"fearsome censorship.\" Hoffman was quoted saying, \"It's embarrassing when you try to overthrow the government and you wind up on the Best Seller's List.\"\nSubsequent to publication, two contributors to the book, Tom Forcade and Izak Haber, had a dispute with Hoffman. Forcade accused him of failing to pay sufficient royalties, contravening the contract Hoffman had made. Hoffman responded that Forcade had done an \"inadequate job\" of editing the book. Haber threatened to sue Hoffman for breaking his contract; he claimed that he was due 22 percent of the royalties for having compiled and written the book, but received only $1,000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50263", "revid": "46962576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50263", "title": "Domain of a function", "text": "Mathematical concept\nIn mathematics, the domain of a function is the set of inputs accepted by the function. It is sometimes denoted by formula_1 or formula_2, where \"f\" is the function. In layman's terms, the domain of a function can generally be thought of as \"what x can be\".\nMore precisely, given a function formula_3, the domain of \"f\" is \"X\". In modern mathematical language, the domain is part of the definition of a function rather than a property of it.\nIn the special case that \"X\" and \"Y\" are both sets of real numbers, the function \"f\" can be graphed in the Cartesian coordinate system. In this case, the domain is represented on the \"x\"-axis of the graph, as the projection of the graph of the function onto the \"x\"-axis.\nFor a function formula_3, the set \"Y\" is called the \"codomain\": the set to which all outputs must belong. The set of specific outputs the function assigns to elements of \"X\" is called its \"range\" or \"image\". The image of formula_5 is a subset of \"Y\", shown as the yellow oval in the accompanying diagram.\nAny function can be restricted to a subset of its domain. The restriction of formula_6 to formula_7, where formula_8, is written as formula_9.\nNatural domain.\nIf a real function f is given by a formula, it may be not defined for some values of the variable. In this case, it is a \"partial function\", and the set of real numbers on which the formula can be evaluated to a real number is called the \"natural domain\" or \"domain of definition\" of f. In many contexts, a partial function is called simply a \"function\", and its natural domain is called simply its \"domain\".\nOther uses.\nThe term \"domain\" is also commonly used in a different sense in mathematical analysis: a \"domain\" is a non-empty connected open set in a topological space. In particular, in real and complex analysis, a \"domain\" is a non-empty connected open subset of the real coordinate space formula_26 or the complex coordinate space formula_27\nSometimes such a domain is used as the domain of a function, although functions may be defined on more general sets. The two concepts are sometimes conflated as in, for example, the study of partial differential equations: in that case, a \"domain\" is the open connected subset of formula_28 where a problem is posed, making it both an analysis-style domain and also the domain of the unknown function(s) sought.\nSet theoretical notions.\nFor example, it is sometimes convenient in set theory to permit the domain of a function to be a proper class X, in which case there is formally no such thing as a triple (\"X\", \"Y\", \"G\"). With such a definition, functions do not have a domain, although some authors still use it informally after introducing a function in the form \"f\": \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50264", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50264", "title": "Codomain", "text": "Target set of a mathematical function\nIn mathematics, a codomain or set of destination of a function is a set into which all of the outputs of the function is constrained to fall. It is the set Y in the notation \"f\": \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\". The term range is sometimes ambiguously used to refer to either the codomain or the \"image\" of a function.\nA codomain is part of a function f if f is defined as a triple (\"X\", \"Y\", \"G\") where X is called the \"domain\" of f, Y its \"codomain\", and G its \"graph\". The set of all elements of the form \"f\"(\"x\"), where x ranges over the elements of the domain X, is called the \"image\" of f. The image of a function is a subset of its codomain so it might not coincide with it. Namely, a function that is not surjective has elements y in its codomain for which the equation \"f\"(\"x\") = \"y\" does not have a solution.\nA codomain is not part of a function f if f is defined as just a graph. For example, in set theory it is desirable to permit the domain of a function to be a proper class X, in which case there is formally no such thing as a triple (\"X\", \"Y\", \"G\"). With such a definition functions do not have a codomain, although some authors still use it informally after introducing a function in the form \"f\": \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\".\nExamples.\nFor a function\nformula_1\ndefined by\n formula_2 or equivalently formula_3\nthe codomain of f is formula_4, but f does not map to any negative number. \nThus the image of f is the set formula_5; i.e., the interval [0, \u221e).\nAn alternative function g is defined thus: \n formula_6\n formula_7\nWhile f and g map a given x to the same number, they are not, in this view, the same function because they have different codomains. A third function h can be defined to demonstrate why:\n formula_8\nThe domain of h cannot be formula_9 but can be defined to be formula_5:\n formula_11\nThe compositions are denoted\n formula_12\n formula_13\nOn inspection, \"h\" \u2218 \"f\" is not useful. It is true, unless defined otherwise, that the image of f is not known; it is only known that it is a subset of formula_4. For this reason, it is possible that h, when composed with f, might receive an argument for which no output is defined \u2013 negative numbers are not elements of the domain of h, which is the square root function.\nFunction composition therefore is a useful notion only when the \"codomain\" of the function on the right side of a composition (not its \"image\", which is a consequence of the function and could be unknown at the level of the composition) is a subset of the domain of the function on the left side.\nThe codomain affects whether a function is a surjection, in that the function is surjective if and only if its codomain equals its image. In the example, g is a surjection while f is not. The codomain does not affect whether a function is an injection.\nA second example of the difference between codomain and image is demonstrated by the linear transformations between two vector spaces \u2013 in particular, all the linear transformations from formula_15 to itself, which can be represented by the 2\u00d72 matrices with real coefficients. Each matrix represents a map with the domain formula_15 and codomain formula_15. However, the image is uncertain. Some transformations may have image equal to the whole codomain (in this case the matrices with rank 2) but many do not, instead mapping into some smaller subspace (the matrices with rank 1 or 0). Take for example the matrix T given by\nformula_18\nwhich represents a linear transformation that maps the point (\"x\", \"y\") to (\"x\", \"x\"). The point (2, 3) is not in the image of T, but is still in the codomain since linear transformations from formula_15 to formula_15 are of explicit relevance. Just like all 2\u00d72 matrices, T represents a member of that set. Examining the differences between the image and codomain can often be useful for discovering properties of the function in question. For example, it can be concluded that T does not have full rank since its image is smaller than the whole codomain.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50268", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50268", "title": "World's fair", "text": "Large international exhibition\nA world's fair, also known as a universal exhibition, is a large global exhibition designed to showcase the achievements of nations. These exhibitions vary in character and are held in different parts of the world at a specific site for a period of time, typically between three and six months.\nThe term \"world's fair\" is commonly used in the United States, while the French term, (\"universal exhibition\") is used in most of Europe and Asia; other terms include World Expo or Specialised Expo, with the word expo used for various types of exhibitions since at least 1958.\nSince the adoption of the 1928 Convention Relating to International Exhibitions, the Paris-based Bureau International des Expositions (BIE) has served as an international sanctioning body for international exhibitions; four types of international exhibition are organised under its auspices: World Expos, Specialised Expos, Horticultural Expos (regulated by the International Association of Horticultural Producers), and the Milan Triennial.\nOsaka, Japan held the most recent World Expo in 2025, while Astana, Kazakhstan held the most recent Specialised Expo in 2017, and Doha, Qatar held the most recent Horticultural Expo in 2023.\nHistory.\nIn 1791, Prague organized the first World's Fair in Bohemia (modern-day Czech Republic). The first industrial exhibition was on the occasion of the coronation of Leopold II as king of Bohemia. The exhibition was held in the Clementinum, and celebrated the considerable sophistication of manufacturing methods in the region during that time period. \nFrance had a tradition of national exhibitions, which culminated with the French Industrial Exposition of 1844 held in Paris. This fair was followed by other national exhibitions in Europe. In 1851, the \"Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations\" was held in the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park, London, United Kingdom. It was an idea of Prince Albert, Queen Victoria's husband. \nThe character of world fairs, or expositions, has evolved since. Three eras can be distinguished: the era of industrialization, the era of cultural exchange, and the era of nation branding.\nIndustrialization (1851\u20131938).\nThe first era, the era of \"industrialization\", roughly covered the years from 1850 to 1938. In these years, world expositions were largely focused on trade and displayed technological advances and inventions. World expositions were platforms for state-of-the-art science and technology from around the world. The world expositions of 1851 London, 1853 New York, 1862 London, 1876 Philadelphia, Paris 1878, 1888 Barcelona, 1889 Paris, 1891 Prague, 1893 Chicago, 1897 Brussels, 1900 Paris, 1904 St. Louis, 1915 San Francisco, and 1933\u20131934 Chicago were notable in this respect. Inventions such as the telephone were first presented during this era. This era set the basic character of the world fair.\nCultural exchange (1939\u20131987).\nThe 1939\u20131940 New York World's Fair, and those that followed, took a different approach, one less focused on technology and aimed more at cultural themes and social progress. For instance, the theme of the 1939 fair was \"Building the World of Tomorrow\"; at the 1964\u20131965 New York World's Fair, it was \"Peace Through Understanding\"; at the 1967 International and Universal Exposition in Montreal, it was \"Man and His World\". These fairs encouraged effective intercultural communication along with sharing of technological innovation.\nThe 1967 International and Universal Exposition in Montreal was promoted under the name \"Expo 67\". Event organizers retired the term \"world's fair\" in favor of \"Expo,\" a term already popular in French language and used as far back as the Brussels World Fair in 1958. The Montreal Expos, a former Major League Baseball team, was named for the 1967 fair.\nNation branding (1988\u2013present).\nFrom World Expo 88 in Brisbane onwards, countries started to use expositions as a platform to improve their national image through their pavilions. Finland, Japan, Canada, France, and Spain are cases in point. A major study by Tjaco Walvis called \"Expo 2000 Hanover in Numbers\" showed that improving national image was the main goal for 73% of the countries participating in Expo 2000. Pavilions became a kind of advertising campaign, and the Expo served as a vehicle for \"nation branding\". According to branding expert Wally Olins, Spain used Expo '92 and the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona in the same year to underscore its new position as a modern and democratic country and to show itself as a prominent member of the European Union and the global community.\nAt Expo 2000 Hanover, countries created their own architectural pavilions, investing, on average, \u20ac12\u00a0million each. Given these costs, governments are sometimes hesitant to participate, because the benefits may not justify the costs. However, while the effects are difficult to measure, an independent study for the Dutch pavilion at Expo 2000 estimated that the pavilion (which cost around \u20ac35\u00a0million) generated around \u20ac350\u00a0million of potential revenues for the Dutch economy. It also identified several key success factors for world-exposition pavilions in general.\nTypes.\nAt present there are two types of international exhibition: World Expos (formally known as International Registered Exhibitions) and Specialised Expos (formally known as International Recognised Exhibitions). World Expos, previously known as universal expositions, are the biggest category events. At World Expos, participants generally build their own pavilions. They are therefore the most extravagant and most expensive expos. Their duration may be between six weeks and six months. Since 1995, the interval between two World Expos has been at least five years. World Expo 2015 was held in Milan, Italy, from 1 May to 31 October 2015.\nSpecialised Expos are smaller in scope and investments and generally shorter in duration; between three weeks and three months. Previously, these Expos were called Special Exhibitions or International Specialized Exhibitions but these terms are no longer used officially. Their total surface area must not exceed and organizers must build pavilions for the participating states, free of rent, charges, taxes and expenses. The largest country pavilions may not exceed 1,000\u00a0m2 (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 acre). Only one Specialised Expo can be held between two World Expos.\nAn additional two types of international exhibition may be recognized by the BIE: horticultural exhibitions, which are joint BIE and AIPH-sanctioned 'garden' fairs in which participants present gardens and garden pavilions; and the semi-regular Milan Triennial (not always held every third year) art and design exhibition, held in Milan, Italy, with the BIE granting official international exhibition status to 14 editions of the Triennale between 1996 and 2016.\nWorld Expos.\nWorld Expos (formally known as International Registered Exhibitions) encompass universal themes that affect the full gamut of human experience, and international and corporate participants are required to adhere to the theme in their representations. Registered expositions are held every 5 years because they are more expensive as they require total design of pavilion buildings from the ground up. As a result, nations compete for the most outstanding or memorable structure\u2014for example Japan, France, Morocco, and Spain at Expo '92. Sometimes prefabricated structures are used to minimize costs for developing countries, or for countries from a geographical block to share space (i.e. Plaza of the Americas at Seville '92).\nIn the 21st century the BIE has moved to sanction World Expos every five years; following the numerous expos of the 1980s and 1990s, some see this as a means to cut down potential expenditure by participating nations. The move was also seen by some as an attempt to avoid conflicting with the Summer Olympics. World Expos are restricted to every five years, with Specialized Expos in the in-between years.\nSpecialised Expos.\nSpecialized Expos (formally known as International Recognized Exhibitions) are usually united by a precise theme\u2014such as \"Future Energy\" (Expo 2017 Astana), \"The Living Ocean and Coast\" (Expo 2012 Yeosu), or \"Leisure in the Age of Technology\" (Brisbane, Expo '88). Such themes are more specific than the wider scope of world expositions.\nSpecialized Expos are usually smaller in scale and cheaper to run for the host committee and participants because the architectural fees are lower and they only have to customize pavilion space provided free of charge from the Organiser, usually with the prefabricated structure already completed. Countries then have the option of \"adding\" their own colours, design etc. to the outside of the prefabricated structure and filling in the inside with their own content.\nHorticultural Expos.\nHorticultural Expos (formally known as A1 International Horticultural Exhibitions) are co-regulated by International Association of Horticultural Producers. Like Specialised Expos are organized in a precise theme\u2014such as \"Green Desert, Better Environment\" (International Horticultural Expo 2023 Doha Qatar), \"Growing Green Cities\" (Floriade 2022), or \"Building a Beautiful Home Featuring Harmonious Coexistence between Man and Nature\" (Expo 2019).\nThe purpose of these exhibitions is to foster cooperation and the sharing of knowledge and solutions between countries, horticultural producers and agricultural industries by addressing the paramount issues of healthy lifestyles, green economies, sustainable living, education and innovation.\nList of expositions.\nList of official world expositions (Universal and International/Specialised/Horticultural) according to the Bureau International des Expositions.\nLegacies.\nRemaining structures.\nMost of the structures are temporary and are dismantled after the fair closes, except for landmark towers. By far the most famous of these is the Eiffel Tower, built for the Exposition Universelle (1889). Although it is now the most recognized symbol of its host city Paris, there were contemporary critics opposed to its construction, and demands for it to be dismantled after the fair's conclusion.\nOther structures that remain from these fairs:\nReuse of sites.\nSome world's fair sites became (or reverted to) parks incorporating some of the expo elements, such as:\nRelocation of pavilions.\nSome pavilions have been transported overseas intact:\nThe Brussels Expo '58 relocated many pavilions within Belgium: the pavilion of Jacques Chocolats moved to the town of Diest to house the new town swimming pool. Another pavilion was relocated to Willebroek and has been used as dance hall Carr\u00e9 ever since. One smaller pavilion still stands on the boulevard towards the Atomium: the restaurant \"Salon 58\" in the pavilion of Comptoir Tuilier.\nOther legacies.\nMany exhibitions and rides created by Walt Disney and his WED Enterprises company for the 1964 New York World's Fair (which was held over into 1965) were moved to Disneyland after the closing of the Fair. Many of the rides, including \"It's a Small World\", and \"Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln\", as well as the building that housed the Carousel of Progress are still in operation. The concept of a permanent world's fair came to fruition with the Disney Epcot theme park at the Walt Disney World Resort, near Orlando, Florida. Epcot has many characteristics of a typical universal exposition: national pavilions and exhibits concerning technology and/or the future, along with more typical amusement park rides. Meanwhile, several of the 1964 attractions that were relocated to Disneyland have been duplicated at the Walt Disney World Resort.\nOccasionally other mementos of the fairs remain. In the New York City Subway system, signs directing people to Flushing Meadows\u2013Corona Park remain from the 1964\u20131965 event. In the Montreal Metro subway at least one tile artwork of its theme, \"Man and His World\", remains. Also, a seemingly endless supply of souvenir items from fair visits can be found, and in the United States, at least, often turn up at garage or estate sales. Many fairs and expos produced postage stamps and commemorative coins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50269", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50269", "title": "World fair", "text": ""}
{"id": "50271", "revid": "2399661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50271", "title": "World Fair", "text": ""}
{"id": "50272", "revid": "1310113515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50272", "title": "Louisiana Purchase Exposition", "text": "1904 world's fair in St. Louis, Missouri, US\nThe Louisiana Purchase Exposition, informally known as the St. Louis World's Fair, was an international exposition held in St. Louis, Missouri, United States, from April 30 to December 1, 1904. Local, state, and federal funds totaling $15 million (equivalent to $ in 2024) were used to finance the event. More than 60 countries and 43 of the then-45 American states maintained exhibition spaces at the fair, which was attended by nearly 19.7 million people.\nHistorians generally emphasize the prominence of the themes of race and imperialism, and the fair's long-lasting impact on intellectuals in the fields of history, architecture, and anthropology. From the point of view of the memory of the average person who attended the fair, it primarily promoted entertainment, consumer goods, and popular culture. The monumental Greco-Roman architecture of this and other fairs of the era did much to influence permanent new buildings and master plans of major cities.\nBackground.\nIn 1904, St. Louis hosted a world's fair to celebrate the centennial of the 1803 Louisiana Purchase. The idea for such a commemorative event seems to have emerged early in 1898, with Kansas City and St. Louis initially presented as potential hosts for a fair based on their central location within the territory encompassed by the 1803 land annexation.\nThe exhibition was grand in scale and lengthy in preparation, with an initial $5 million committed by the city of St. Louis through the sale of city bonds, authorized by the Missouri state legislature in April 1899. An additional $5 million was generated through private donations by interested citizens and businesses from around Missouri, a fundraising target reached in January 1901. The final installment of $5 million of the exposition's $15 million capitalization came in the form of earmarked funds that were part of a congressional appropriations bill passed at the end of May 1900. The fundraising mission was aided by the active support of President of the United States William McKinley, which was won by organizers in a February 1899 White House visit.\nWhile initially conceived as a centennial celebration to be held in 1903, the actual opening of the St. Louis exposition was delayed until April 30, 1904, to allow for full-scale participation by more states and foreign countries. The exposition operated until December 1, 1904. During the year of the fair, the Louisiana Purchase Exposition supplanted the annual St. Louis Exposition of agricultural, trade, and scientific exhibitions which had been held in the city since the 1880s.\nThe fair's site, designed by George Kessler, was located at the present-day grounds of Forest Park and on the campus of Washington University, and was the largest fair (in area) to date. There were over 1,500 buildings, connected by some of roads and walkways. It was said to be impossible to give even a hurried glance at everything in less than a week. The Palace of Agriculture alone covered some .\nExhibits were staged by approximately 50 foreign nations, the United States government, and 43 of the then-45 US states. These featured industries, cities, private organizations and corporations, theater troupes, and music schools. There were also over 50 concession-type amusements found on \"The Pike\"; they provided educational and scientific displays, exhibits and imaginary 'travel' to distant lands, history and local boosterism (including Louis Wollbrinck's \"Old St. Louis\") and pure entertainment.\nOver 19 million individuals were in attendance at the fair.\nAspects that attracted visitors included the buildings and architecture, new foods, popular music, and exotic people on display. American culture was showcased at the fair especially regarding innovations in communication, medicine, and transportation.\nArchitects.\nGeorge Kessler, who designed many urban parks in Texas and the Midwest, created the master design for the Fair.\nA popular myth says that Frederick Law Olmsted, who had died the year before the Fair, designed the park and fair grounds. There are several reasons for this confusion. First, Kessler in his twenties had worked briefly for Olmsted as a Central Park gardener. Second, Olmsted was involved with Forest Park in Queens, New York. Third, Olmsted had planned the renovations in 1897 to the Missouri Botanical Garden several blocks to the southeast of the park. Finally, Olmsted's sons advised Washington University on integrating the campus with the park across the street.\nIn 1901, the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Corporation selected prominent St. Louis architect Isaac S. Taylor as the Chairman of the Architectural Commission and Director of Works for the fair, supervising the overall design and construction. Taylor quickly appointed Emmanuel Louis Masqueray to be his Chief of Design. In the position for three years, Masqueray designed the following Fair buildings: Palace of Agriculture, the Cascades and Colonnades, Palace of Forestry, Fish, and Game, Palace of Horticulture and Palace of Transportation, all of which were widely emulated in civic projects across the United States as part of the City Beautiful movement. Masqueray resigned shortly after the Fair opened in 1904, having been invited by Archbishop John Ireland of St. Paul, Minnesota to design a new cathedral for the city. The was designed by Messrs, Walker &amp; Kimball, of Omaha, Nebraska. It covered and cost over $400,000 (equivalent to more than $ in 2024). Crowning the great towers were heroic groups of statuary typifying the various attributes of electricity.\nBoard of Commissioners.\nFlorence Hayward, a successful freelance writer in St. Louis in the 1900s, was determined to play a role in the World's Fair. She negotiated a position on the otherwise all-male Board of Commissioners. Hayward learned that one of the potential contractors for the fair was not reputable and warned the Louisiana Purchase Exposition Company (LPEC). In exchange for this information, she requested an appointment as roving commissioner to Europe.\nFormer Mayor of St. Louis and Governor of Missouri David R. Francis, LPEC president, made the appointment and allowed Hayward to travel overseas to promote the fair, especially to women. The fair also had a Board of Lady Managers (BLM) who felt they had jurisdiction over women's activities at the fair and objected to Hayward's appointment without their knowledge. Despite this, Hayward set out for England in 1902. Hayward's most notable contribution to the fair was acquiring gifts Queen Victoria received for her Golden Jubilee and other historical items, including manuscripts from the Vatican. These items were all to be shown in exhibits at the fair.\nPleased with her success in Europe, Francis put her in charge of historical exhibits in the anthropology division, which had originally been assigned to Pierre Chouteau III. Despite being the only woman on the Board of Commissioners, creating successful anthropological exhibits, publicizing the fair, and acquiring significant exhibit items, Hayward's role in the fair was not acknowledged. When Francis published a history of the fair in 1913, he did not mention Hayward's contributions and she never forgave the slight.\nScientific contributions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Expositions are the timekeepers of progress. They record the world's advancement. They stimulate the energy, enterprise, and intellect of the people; and quicken human genius. They go into the home. They broaden and brighten the daily life of the people. They open mighty storehouses of information to the student.\u2014\u200a\nMany of the inventions displayed were precursors to items which have become an integral part of today's culture. Novel applications of electricity and light waves for communication and medical use were displayed in the Palace of Electricity. According to an article he wrote for Harper's Weekly, W. E. Goldsborough, the Chief of the Department of Electricity for the Fair, wished to educate the public and dispel the misconceptions about electricity which many common people believed. New and updated methods of transportation also showcased at the World's Fair in the Palace of Transportation would come to revolutionize transportation for the modern day.\nCommunication contributions.\nWireless telephone \u2013 The \"wireless telephony\" unit or \"radiophone\" was invented by Alexander Graham Bell and installed at the St. Louis World Fair. This radiophone comprised a sound-light transmitter and a light-sound receiver, as an apparatus in the Palace of Electricity transmitted music or speech to a receiver in the courtyard. Visitors heard the transmission when holding the cordless receiver to the ear. It developed into the radio and telephone.\nEarly fax machine \u2013 The telautograph was invented in 1888 by American scientist Elisha Gray, who contested Alexander Graham Bell's invention of the telephone. A person wrote on one end of the telautograph, which electrically communicated with the receiving pen to recreate drawings on paper. In 1900, assistant Foster Ritchie improved the device to display at the 1904 World's Fair and market for the next thirty years. This developed into the fax machine.\nMedical contributions.\nFinsen light \u2013 The Finsen light, invented by Niels Ryberg Finsen, treated tuberculosis luposa. Finsen received the Nobel Prize in Medicine and Physiology in 1903. This pioneered phototherapy.\nX-ray machine \u2013 The X-ray machine was launched at the 1904 World's Fair. German scientist Wilhelm Conrad R\u00f6ntgen discovered X-rays studying electrification of low pressure gas. He X-rayed his wife's hand, capturing her bones and wedding ring to show colleagues. Thomas Edison and assistant Clarence Dally recreated the machine. Dally failed to test another X-ray machine at the 1901 World's Fair after President McKinley was assassinated. A perfected X-ray machine was successfully exhibited at the 1904 World's Fair. X-rays are now commonplace in hospitals and airports.\nInfant incubator \u2013 Although infant incubators were invented in the year 1888 by Drs. Alan M. Thomas and William Champion, adoption was not immediate. To advertise the benefits, incubators containing preterm babies were displayed at the 1897, 1898, 1901, and 1904 World Fairs. These provided immunocompromised newborns a sanitary environment. Each incubator comprised an airtight glass box with a metal frame. Hot forced air thermoregulated the container. Newspapers advertised the incubators with \"lives are being preserved by this wonderful method.\" During the 1904 World Fair, E. M. Bayliss exhibited these devices on The Pike where approximately ten nurses cared for twenty-four neonates. The entrance fee was 25 cents () while the adjoining shop and caf\u00e9 offered souvenirs and refreshments. Proceeds totaling $181,632 (equivalent to $ in 2024) helped fund Bayliss's project. Inconsistent sanitation killed some babies, so glass walls were installed between them and visitors, shielding the infants. These developed into \"isolettes\" in modern neonatal intensive care units.\nTransportation contributions.\nElectric streetcar \u2013 North American street railways from the early 19th century were being introduced to electric street railcars. An electric streetcar on a track demonstrated its speed, acceleration, and braking outside the Palace of Electricity. Many downtown trams today are electric.\nPersonal automobile \u2013 The Palace of Transportation displayed automobiles and motor cars. The private automobile was revealed here. The automobile display contained 140 models including ones powered by gasoline, steam, and electricity. Inventor Lee de Forest demonstrated a prototype car radio. Four years later, the Ford Motor Company began producing the affordable Ford Model T.\nAirplane \u2013 The 1904 World's Fair hosted the first \"Airship Contest\". Stationary air balloons demarcated a time trial with a minimum speed limit of . Nobody won the $100,000 grand prize (equivalent to $ in 2024). The contest witnessed the first public dirigible flight in America. A history of aviation in St. Louis followed, leading to the nickname Flight City.\nLegacy.\nSt. Louis' status as an up-and-coming city garnered interest from many reporters and photographers who attended the World's Fair and found its citizens constantly on the \"go\" and the streets \"crowded with activity\". One observer remarked that, at this time, St. Louis had more energy in its streets than any other northern city did.\nBuildings.\nWith more and more people interested in the city, St. Louis government and architects were primarily concerned with their ports and access to the city. The city originating as a trading post, transportation by water was important. It was becoming even more important that the port be open, but efficient for all visitors. It also needed to show off some of the city's flair and excitement, which is why in many photographs one sees photos of St. Louis' skyscrapers in the background. In addition to a functioning port, the Eads Bridge was constructed, which was considered one of St. Louis' \"sights\". At long, it connected Missouri and Illinois, and was the first large-scale application of steel as a structural material. \nAs with the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893, all but one of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition's grand, neo-Classical exhibition palaces were temporary structures, designed to last but a year or two. They were built with a material called \"staff\", a mixture of plaster of Paris and hemp fibers, on a wood frame. As at the Chicago World's Fair, buildings and statues deteriorated during the months of the Fair and had to be patched.\nThe Administration Building, designed by Cope &amp; Stewardson, is now Brookings Hall, the defining landmark on the campus of Washington University. A similar building was erected at Northwest Missouri State University founded in 1905 in Maryville, Missouri. The grounds' layout was also recreated in Maryville and now is designated as the official Missouri State Arboretum.\nThe Palace of Fine Art, designed by architect Cass Gilbert, featured a grand interior sculpture court based on the Roman Baths of Caracalla. Standing at the top of Art Hill, it now serves as the home of the St. Louis Art Museum.\nThe huge bird cage at the Saint Louis Zoological Park, dates to the fair. A Jain temple carved out of teak stood within the Indian Pavilion near the Ferris Wheel. It was dismantled after the exhibition and was reconstructed in Las Vegas at the Castaways hotel. It has recently been reassembled and is now on display at the Jain Center of Southern California at Los Angeles. Birmingham, Alabama's iconic cast iron Vulcan statue was first exhibited at the Fair in the Palace of Mines and Metallurgy. Additionally, a plaster reproduction of \"Alma Mater\" at Columbia University by Daniel Chester French was displayed at the Grand Sculpture Court of the exhibition.\nThe Missouri State building was the largest of the state buildings, as Missouri was the host state. Though it had sections with marble floors and heating and air conditioning, it was planned to be a temporary structure. However, it burned the night of November 18\u201319, just eleven days before the Fair was to end. Most interior contents were destroyed, but furniture and much of the Model Library were undamaged. The fair being almost over, the building was not rebuilt. In 1909\u201310, the current World's Fair Pavilion in Forest Park was built on the site of the Missouri building with profits from the fair.\nFestival Hall, designed by Cass Gilbert and used for large-scale musical pageants, contained the largest organ in the world at the time, built by the Los Angeles Art Organ Company (which went bankrupt as a result). The great organ was debuted by the fair's official organist, Charles Henry Galloway. Though the opening concert was scheduled for the first day of the fair, complications related to its construction resulted in the opening concert being postponed until June 9. After the fair, the organ was placed into storage, and eventually purchased by John Wanamaker for his new Wanamaker's store in Philadelphia where it was tripled in size and became known as the Wanamaker Organ. The famous Bronze Eagle in the Wanamaker Store also came from the Fair. It features hundreds of hand-forged bronze feathers and was the centerpiece of one of the many German exhibits. Wanamaker's became a Lord &amp; Taylor store and more recently, a Macy's store.\nCompleted in 1913, the Jefferson Memorial building was built near the main entrance to the Exposition, at Lindell and DeBalivere. It was built with proceeds from the fair, to commemorate Thomas Jefferson, who initiated the Louisiana Purchase, as was the first memorial to the third President. It became the headquarters of the Missouri History Museum, and stored the Exposition's records and archives when the Louisiana Purchase Exposition company completed its mission. The building is now home to the Missouri History Museum, and the museum was significantly expanded in 2002\u20133.\nThe State of Maine Building, which was a rustic cabin, was transported to Point Lookout, Missouri where it overlooked the White River by sportsmen who formed the Maine Hunting and Fishing Club. In 1915, when the main building at the College of the Ozarks in Forsyth, Missouri burned, the school relocated to Point Lookout, where the Maine building was renamed the Dobyns Building in honor of a school president. The Dobyns Building burned in 1930 and the college's signature church was built in its place. In 2004, a replica of the Maine building was built on the campus. The Keeter Center is named for another school president.\nThe observation tower erected by the American DeForest Wireless Telegraph Company was brought to the Fair when it became a hazard near Niagara Falls and needed to be removed because in the wintertime, ice from the fall's mist would form on the steel structure, and eventually fall onto the buildings below. It served as a communications platform for Lee DeForest's work in wireless telegraphy and a platform to view the fair. As Niagara Falls was near Buffalo New York, it was also called the Buffalo Tower After the World's Fair, it was moved to Creve Coeur Lake to be part of that park.\nThe Swedish Pavilion is still preserved in Lindsborg, Kansas. Designed by Swedish architect Ferdinand Boberg, it is the only one of his international exposition buildings in existence today. After the fair, the Pavilion was moved to Bethany College in Lindsborg, where it was used for classroom, library, museum and department facilities for the art department. In 1969, it was moved to the Lindsborg Old Mill &amp; Swedish Heritage Museum where it serves as a venue for community events. The Pavilion was added to the National Historic Register in 1973.\nWestinghouse Electric sponsored the Westinghouse Auditorium, where they showed films of Westinghouse factories and products.\nSome mansions from the Exposition's era survive along Lindell Boulevard at the north border of Forest Park.\nIntroduction of new foods.\nA number of foods are claimed to have been invented at the fair. The most popular claim is that of the waffle-style ice cream cone. However, its popularization, not invention, is widely believed to have taken place here. Dubious claims include the hamburger and hot dog (both traditional American and European foods of German origin), peanut butter, iced tea, and cotton candy. Again, popularization is more likely. Dr Pepper and Puffed Wheat cereal were introduced to a national audience. Freeborn Annie Fisher received a gold medal for her beaten biscuits famous in her hometown of Columbia, Missouri. President William Howard Taft enjoyed them on his 1911 visit to Missouri.\nThough not the debut of as many foods as claimed, the fair offered what was essentially America's first food court. Visitors sampled a variety of fast foods, dined in dozens of restaurants, and strolled through the mile-long pike. As one historian said of the fair, \"one could breakfast in France, take a mid-morning snack in the Philippines, lunch in Italy, and dine in Japan.\"\nInfluence on popular music and literature.\nThe fair inspired the song \"Meet Me in St. Louis, Louis\", which was recorded by many artists, including Billy Murray. Both the fair and the song are focal points of the 1944 feature film \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" starring Judy Garland, which also inspired a Broadway musical version. Scott Joplin wrote the rag \"Cascades\" in honor of the elaborate waterfalls in front of Festival Hall.\nA book entitled \"Wild Song\", by Candy Gourlay, was inspired by the Louisiana Purchase.\nPeople on display.\nFollowing the Spanish\u2013American War, the peace treaty granted the United States control over Guam, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico had had a quasi-autonomous government as an \"overseas province\" of Spain, and the Philippines, having declared independence after the 1896\u20131899 Philippine Revolution, fought US annexation in the 1899\u20131902 Philippine\u2013American War. These areas controversially became unincorporated territories of the United States in 1899, and people were brought from these territories to be on \"display\" at the 1904 fair.\nThe fair displayed 1,102 Filipinos, 700 of them Philippine Scouts and Philippine Constabulary, used for controlling conflict among Filipinos and between Filipinos and fair organizers. Displays included the Apache of the American Southwest and the Igorots of the Philippines, both of which peoples were noted as \"primitive\". Within the Philippine reservation, was a school which was actively teaching Igorot students. At least two Moros were photographed while praying at the fair. The Philippine reservation at the exposition cost $1.1 million (equivalent to $ in 2024) to create and operate. The people had been trafficked under harsh conditions, and many did not survive. Burial plots in two St. Louis cemeteries were prepared in advance. However, traditional burial practices were not allowed. Some of the people to be exhibited died en route or at the fair and their bodies were immediately removed. Funeral rites had to be conducted without the bodies in front of an oblivious public audience of fair attendees. Organizers choreographed ethnographic displays, having customs which marked special occasions restaged day after day.\nSimilarly, members of the Southeast Alaskan Tlingit tribe accompanied fourteen totem poles, two Native houses, and a canoe displayed at the Alaska Exhibit. Mary Knight Benson, a noted Pomo basket weaver whose work is curated at the Smithsonian Institution and National Museum of the American Indian, attended to demonstrate her basket making skills which are described as astounding. Athletic events such as a basketball tournament were held to demonstrate the success of the Indian Boarding Schools and other assimilation programs. These efforts were confirmed with the Fort Shaw Indian School girls basketball team who were declared \"World Champions\" after beating every team who faced them in these denominational games.\nIt has been argued that the \"overriding purpose of the fair really centered on an effort to promote America's new role as an overseas imperial power\", and that \"While the juxtaposition of \"modern\" and \"primitive\" buttressed assumptions of racial superiority, representations of Native American and Filipino life created an impression of continuity between westward expansion across the continent and the new overseas empire.\" Racializing concepts and epithets used domestically were extended to the people of the overseas territories.\nOta Benga, a Congolese Pygmy, was featured at the fair. Later he was held captive at the Bronx Zoo in New York, then featured in an exhibit on evolution alongside an orangutan in 1906, but public protest ended that.\nIn contrast, the Japan pavilion advanced the idea of a modern yet exotic culture unfamiliar to the turn-of-the-century Western world, much as it had during the earlier Chicago World's Fair. The Japanese government spent lavishly: $400,000, plus $50,000 from the Japanese colonial government of Formosa, with an additional $250,000 coming from Japanese commercial interests and regional governments; all told, this totaled $700,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024). A garden, set on the hillside south of the Machinery Hall and Engine House, featured a replica of Kyoto's famous Kinkakuji, showing Japan's ancient sophistication, and a Formosa Mansion and Tea House, showing her modern colonial efforts. A second exhibition, \"Fair Japan on the 'Pike'\", organized by Kushibiki and Arai, welcomed the public through a large Ni\u014dmon-style gate into a realm of geisha-staffed exotic Japanese consumerism.\nIn 2025, a historical marker was placed in the Wydown-Skinker neighborhood to commemorate the location of the Philippine Village, following years of advocacy by Filipino American artist Janna A\u00f1onuevo Langholz.\nExhibits.\nAfter the fair was completed, many of the international exhibits were not returned to their country of origin, but were dispersed to museums in the United States. For example, the Philippine exhibits were acquired by the Museum of Natural History at the University of Iowa. The Vulcan statue is today a prominent feature of the Vulcan Park and Museum in Birmingham, Alabama, where it was originally cast.\nThe Smithsonian Institution coordinated the US government exhibits. It featured a blue whale, the first full-cast of a blue whale ever created.\nOne exhibit of note was Beautiful Jim Key, the \"educated\" Arabian-Hambletonian cross horse in his Silver Horseshoe Pavilion. He was owned by Dr. William Key, an African-American/Native American former slave, who became a respected self-taught veterinarian, and promoted by Albert R. Rogers, who had Jim and Dr. Key on tour for years around the US, helping to establish a humane movement that encouraged people to think of animals as having feelings and thoughts, and not just \"brutes\". Jim and Dr. Key became national celebrities along the way. Rogers invented highly successful marketing strategies still in use today. Jim Key could add, subtract, use a cash register, spell with blocks, tell time and give opinions on the politics of the day by shaking his head yes or no. Jim thoroughly enjoyed his \"act\"\u2014he performed more than just tricks and appeared to clearly understand what was going on. Dr. Key's motto was that Jim \"was taught by kindness\" instead of the whip, which he was indeed.\nDaisy E. Nirdlinger's book, \"Althea, or, the children of Rosemont plantation\" (illustrated by Egbert Cadmus (1868\u20131939)) was adopted by the Commissioners of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition as the official souvenir for young people.\nOlympics.\nThe Fair hosted the 1904 Summer Olympic Games, the first Olympics to be held in the United States: the Games had originally been awarded to Chicago, but after St. Louis threatened to hold a rival international competition in the same timeframe, the Games were relocated.\nNonetheless, the sporting events, spread out over several months, were overshadowed by the Fair. Due to high travel costs and European tensions arising from the Russo-Japanese War, many European athletes did not attend the Games, nor did the founder of the modern Olympics, Baron Pierre de Coubertin.\nBullfight riot.\nOn June 5, 1904, a bullfight scheduled for an arena just north of the fairgrounds, in conjunction with the fair, turned violent when Missouri governor Alexander Monroe Dockery ordered police to halt the fight in light of Missouri's anti-bullfighting laws. Disgruntled spectators demanded refunds, and when they were turned away, they began throwing stones through the windows of the arena office. While police protected the office, they did not have sufficient numbers to protect the arena, which was burned to the ground by the mob. The exposition fire department responded to the fire, but disruption to the fair was minimal, as the riot took place on a Sunday, when the fair was closed.\nAnglo-Boer War Concession.\nFrank E. Fillis produced what was supposedly \"the greatest and most realistic military spectacle known in the history of the world\". Different portions of the concession featured a British Army encampment, several South African native villages (including Zulu, San, Swazi, and Ndebele) and a arena in which soldiers paraded, sporting events and horse races were held and major battles from the Second Boer War were re-enacted twice a day. Battle recreations took 2\u20133 hours and included several generals and 600 veteran soldiers from both sides of the war. At the conclusion of the show, the Boer general Christiaan de Wet would escape on horseback by leaping from a height of into a pool of water.\nAdmission ranged from 25 cents () for bleacher seats to one dollar () for box seats, and admission to the villages was another 25 cents. The concession cost $48,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) to construct, grossed over $630,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024), and netted about $113,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) to the fair\u2014the highest-grossing military concession of the fair.\nNotable attendees.\nThe Louisiana World's Fair was opened by President, Theodore Roosevelt, by telegraph, but he did not attend personally until after his reelection in November 1904, as he stated he did not wish to use the fair for political purposes. Attendees included John Philip Sousa, a musician, composer and conductor whose band performed on opening day and several times during the fair. Thomas Edison is claimed to have attended.\nRagtime music was popularly featured at the Fair. Scott Joplin wrote \"The Cascades\" specifically for the fair, inspired by the waterfalls at the Grand Basin, and presumably attended the fair.\nHelen Keller, who was 24 and graduated from Radcliffe College, gave a lecture in the main auditorium.\nJ. T. Stinson, a well-regarded fruit specialist, introduced the phrase \"An apple a day keeps the doctor away\" (at a lecture during the exhibition).\nThe French organist Alexandre Guilmant played a series of 40 recitals from memory on the great organ in Festival Hall, then the largest pipe organ in the world, including \"Toccata in D minor\" (Op. 108, No. 1) by Albert Renaud, which Renaud had dedicated to Guilmant.\nGeronimo, the former war chief of the Apache, was \"on display\" in a teepee in the Ethnology Exhibit.\nGrover Cleveland, the 22nd and 24th president, attended the opening ceremony on April 30 and \"overshadowed President Roosevelt in popular applause, when both stood on the same platform.\"\nHenri Poincar\u00e9 gave a keynote address on mathematical physics, including an outline for what would eventually become known as special relativity.\nJelly Roll Morton did not visit, stating in his later Library of Congress interview and recordings that he expected jazz pianist Tony Jackson would attend and win a jazz piano competition at the Exposition. Morton said he was \"quite disgusted\" to later learn that Jackson had not attended either, and that the competition had been won instead by Alfred Wilson; Morton considered himself a better pianist than Wilson.\nThe poet T. S. Eliot, who was born and raised in St. Louis, Missouri, visited the Igorot Village held in the Philippine Exposition section of the St. Louis World's Fair. Several months after the closing of the World's Fair, he published a short story entitled \"The Man Who Was King\" in the school magazine of Smith Academy, St. Louis, Missouri, where he was a student. Inspired by the ganza dance that the Igorot people presented regularly in the Village and their reaction to \"civilization\", the poet explored the interaction of a white man with the island culture. All this predates the poet's delving into the anthropological studies during his Harvard graduate years.\nMax Weber visited upon first coming to the United States in hopes of using some of his findings for a case study on capitalism.\nJack Daniel, the American distiller and the founder of Jack Daniel's Tennessee whiskey distillery, entered his Tennessee whiskey into the World's Fair whiskey competition. After four hours of deliberation, the eight judges awarded Jack Daniel's Tennessee Whiskey the Gold Medal for the finest whiskey in the world. The award was a boon for the Jack Daniel's distillery.\nNovelist Kate Chopin lived nearby and purchased a season ticket to the fair. After her visit on the hot day of August 20, she suffered a brain hemorrhage and died two days later, on August 22, 1904.\nPhiladelphia mercantilist, John Wanamaker, visited the exposition in November 1904 and purchased an entire collection of German furniture which included the giant \"jugendstil\" brass sculpture of an eagle that he would display in the rotunda of his Wanamaker's department store in Philadelphia. In 1909 Wanamaker also purchased the organ from the fair, which at the time was the biggest pipe organ in the world. It is still featured today, much enlarged, as the Wanamaker Organ in the Grand Court of his Philadelphia retail palace. Wanamaker purchased and donated an ancient Egyptian tomb, a mummy and other relics to the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania.\nBenedictine monk, artist and museum founder, Fr. Gregory Gerrer, OSB, exhibited his recent portrait of Pope Pius X at the fair. Following the fair, Gerrer brought the painting to Shawnee, Oklahoma, where it is now on display at the Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art.\nJohn McCormack, Irish tenor, was brought to the fair by James A. Reardon, who was in charge of the Irish exhibit.\nThe Sundance Kid visited the exposition, accompanied by Etta Place.\nCommemoration.\nIn conjunction with the Exposition the US Post Office issued a series of five commemorative stamps celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Louisiana Purchase. The 1-cent value portrays Robert Livingston, the ambassador who negotiated the purchase with France; the 2-cent value depicts Thomas Jefferson, who executed the purchase; the 3-cent honors James Monroe, who participated in negotiations with the French; the 5-cent memorializes William McKinley, who was involved with early plans for the Exposition; and the 10-cent presents a map of the Louisiana Purchase.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50274", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50274", "title": "Saint Louis World Fair", "text": ""}
{"id": "50275", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50275", "title": "New York World's Fair", "text": "New York World's Fair may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50277", "revid": "10340692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50277", "title": "Century 21 Exposition", "text": "World's fair held in Seattle, Washington\nThe Century 21 Exposition (also known as the Seattle World's Fair) was a world's fair held April 21, 1962, to October 21, 1962, in Seattle, Washington, United States. Nearly 10\u00a0million people attended the fair during its six-month run.\nAs planned, the exposition left behind a fairground and numerous public buildings and public works; some credit it with revitalizing Seattle's economic and cultural life (\"see History of Seattle (1940\u2013present)\"). The fair saw the construction of the Space Needle and Alweg monorail, as well as several sports venues (Washington State Coliseum, now Climate Pledge Arena) and performing arts buildings (the Playhouse, now the Cornish Playhouse), most of which have since been replaced or heavily remodeled. Unlike some other world's fairs of its era, Century 21 made a profit.\nThe site, slightly expanded since the fair, is now called the Seattle Center; the United States Science Pavilion is now Pacific Science Center. Another notable Seattle Center building, the Museum of Pop Culture (earlier called EMP Museum), was built nearly 40\u00a0years later and designed to fit in with the fairground atmosphere.\nPlanning and funding.\nSeattle mayor Allan Pomeroy is credited with bringing the World's Fair to the city. He recruited community and business leaders, as well as running a petition campaign, in the early 1950s to convince the city council to approve an $8.5 million bond issue to build the opera house and sports center needed to attract the fair. Eventually the council approved a $7.5 million bond issue with the state of Washington matching that amount. Planning officials agreed to proposals by prominent scientists to showcase the scientific achievements of the United States of America. About 75 percent of the fair buildings were constructed to be permanent.\nCold War and Space Race context.\nThe fair was originally conceived at a Washington Athletic Club luncheon in 1955 to mark the 50th anniversary of the 1909 Alaska\u2013Yukon\u2013Pacific Exposition, but it soon became clear that that date was too ambitious. With the Space Race underway and Boeing having \"put Seattle on the map\" as \"an aerospace city\", a major theme of the fair was to show that \"the United States was not really 'behind' the Soviet Union in the realms of science and space\". As a result, the themes of space, science, and the future completely trumped the earlier conception of a \"Festival of the [American] West\".\nIn June 1960, the Bureau International des Expositions (BIE) certified Century 21 as a world's fair. Project manager Ewen Dingwall went to Moscow to request Soviet participation, but was turned down. Neither the People's Republic of China, Vietnam nor North Korea were invited.\nAs it happened, the Cold War had an additional effect on the fair. President John F. Kennedy was supposed to attend the closing ceremony of the fair on October 21, 1962. He bowed out, pleading a \"heavy cold\"; it later became public that he was dealing with the Cuban Missile Crisis.\nThe fair's vision of the future displayed a technologically based optimism that did not anticipate any dramatic social change, one rooted in the 1950s rather than in the cultural tides that would emerge in the 1960s. Affluence, automation, consumerism, and American power would grow; social equity would simply take care of itself on a rising tide of abundance; the human race would master nature through technology rather than view it in terms of ecology. In contrast, 12\u00a0years later\u2014even in far more conservative Spokane, Washington\u2014Expo '74 took environmentalism as its central theme. The theme of Spokane's Expo '74 was \"Celebrating Tomorrow's Fresh New Environment.\".\nBuildings and grounds.\nOnce the fair idea was conceived, several sites were considered. Among the sites considered within Seattle were Duwamish Head in West Seattle; Fort Lawton (now Discovery Park) in the Magnolia neighborhood; and First Hill\u2014even closer to Downtown than the site finally selected, but far more densely developed. Two sites south of the city proper were considered\u2014Midway, near Des Moines, and the Army Depot in Auburn\u2014as was a site east of the city on the south shore of Lake Sammamish.\nThe site finally selected for the Century 21 Exposition had originally been contemplated for a civic center. The idea of using it for the world's fair came later and brought in federal money for the United States Science Pavilion (now Pacific Science Center) and state money for the Washington State Coliseum (later Seattle Center Coliseum; renamed KeyArena in 1993 after the city sold naming rights to KeyCorp, the company doing business as KeyBank; renamed Climate Pledge Arena in 2021 after naming rights were sold to Amazon.com, Inc). Some of the land had been donated to the city by James Osborne in 1881 and by David and Louisa Denny in 1889. Two lots at Third Avenue N. and John Street were purchased from St. Demetrios Greek Orthodox Church, who had been planning to build a new church building there; the church used the proceeds to purchase land in the Montlake neighborhood. The Warren Avenue School, a public elementary school with several programs for physically Disabled students, was torn down, its programs dispersed, and provided most of the site of the Coliseum (now Climate Pledge Arena). Near the school, some of the city's oldest houses, apartments, and commercial buildings were torn down; they had been run down to the point of being known as the \"Warren Avenue slum\". The old Fire Station No. 4 was also sacrificed.\nAs early as the 1909 Bogue plan, this part of Lower Queen Anne had been considered for a civic center. The Civic Auditorium (later the Opera House, now McCaw Hall), the ice arena (later Mercer Arena), and the Civic Field (rebuilt in 1946 as the High School Memorial Stadium), all built in 1927 had been placed there based on that plan, as was an armory (the Food Circus during the fair, later Center House).\nThe fair planners also sought two other properties near the southwest corner of the grounds. They failed completely to make any inroads with the Seattle Archdiocese of the Roman Catholic Church, who had recently built Sacred Heart Church there; they did a bit better with the Freemasons' Nile Temple, which they were able to use for the duration of the fair and which then returned to its previous use. It served as the site of the Century 21 Club. This membership organization, formed especially for the fair, charged $250 for membership and offered lounge, dining room, and other club facilities, as well as a gate pass for the duration of the fair. The city ended up leasing the property after the fair and in 1977 bought it from the Masons. The building was eventually incorporated into a theater complex including the Seattle Children's Theatre.\nPaul Thiry was the fair's chief architect; he also designed the Coliseum building. Among the other architects of the fair, Seattle-born Minoru Yamasaki received one of his first major commissions to build the United States Science Pavilion. Yamasaki would later design New York's World Trade Center. Victor Steinbrueck and John Graham, Jr. designed the Space Needle. Hideki Shimizu and Kazuyuki Matsushita designed the original International Fountain. Despite the plan to build a permanent civic center, more than half the structures built for the fair were torn down more or less immediately after it ended. One attempt to conserve installations from Century 21 was the creation of a replica \"welcoming pole,\" a number of which originally stood tall over the southern entrance to the fair. This replica stood outside the Washington State Capital Museum until 1990, when it was taken down.\nThe grounds of the fair were divided into:\nBesides the monorail, which survives as of 2023[ [update]], the fair also featured a Skyride that ran across the grounds from the Gayway to the International Mall. The bucket-like three-person cars were suspended from cables that rose as high as off the ground. The Skyride was moved to the Puyallup Fairgrounds in 1980.\nWorld of Science.\nThe World of Science centered on the United States Science Exhibit. It also included a NASA Exhibit that included models and mockups of various satellites, as well as the Project Mercury capsule that had carried Alan Shepard into space. These exhibits were the federal government's major contribution to the fair.\nThe United States Science Exhibit began with Charles Eames' 10-minute short film \"The House of Science\", followed by an exhibit on the development of science, ranging from mathematics and astronomy to atomic science and genetics. The Spacearium held up to 750\u00a0people at a time for a simulated voyage first through the Solar System and then through the Milky Way Galaxy and beyond. Further exhibits presented the scientific method and the \"horizons of science\". This last looked at \"Science and the individual\", \"Control of man's physical surroundings\", \"Science and the problem of world population\", and \"Man's concept of his place in an increasingly technological world\".\nWorld of Century 21.\nThe Washington State Coliseum, financed by the state of Washington, was one of Thiry's own architectural contributions to the fairgrounds. His original conception had been staging the entire fair under a single giant air-conditioned tent-like structure, \"a city of its own\", but there were neither the budgets nor the tight agreements on concept to realize that vision. In the end, he got exactly enough of a budget to design and build a building suitable to hold a variety of exhibition spaces and equally suitable for later conversion to a sports arena and convention facility.\nDuring the festival, the building hosted several exhibits. Nearly half of its surface area was occupied by the state's own circular exhibit \"Century 21\u2014The Threshold and the Threat\", also known as the \"World of Tomorrow\" exhibit, billed as a \"21-minute tour of the future\". The building also housed exhibits by France, Pan American World Airways (Pan Am), General Motors (GM), the American Library Association (ALA), and RCA, as well as a Washington state tourist center.\nIn \"The Threshold and the Threat\", visitors rode a \"Bubbleator\" into the \"world of tomorrow\". Music \"from another world\" and a shifting pattern of lights accompanied them on a 40-second upward journey to a starry space bathed in golden light. Then they were faced briefly with an image of a desperate family in a fallout shelter, which vanished and was replaced by a series of images reflecting the sweep of history, starting with the Acropolis and ending with an image of Marilyn Monroe.\nNext, visitors were beckoned into a cluster of cubes containing a model of a \"city of the future\" (which a few landmarks clearly indicated as Seattle) and its suburban and rural surroundings, seen first by day and later by night. The next cluster of cubes zoomed in on a vision of a high-tech, future home in a sylvan setting (and a commuter gyrocopter); a series of projections contrasted this \"best of the future\" to \"the worst of the present\" (over-uniform suburbs, a dreary urban housing project).\nThe exhibit continued with a vision of future transportation (centered on a monorail and high-speed \"air cars\" on an electrically controlled highway). There was also an \"office of the future\", a climate-controlled \"farm factory\", an automated offshore kelp and plankton harvesting farm, a vision of the schools of the future with \"electronic storehouses of knowledge\", and a vision of the many recreations that technology would free humans to pursue.\nFinally, the tour ended with a symbolic sculptural tree and the reappearance of the family in the fallout shelter and the sound of a ticking clock, a brief silence, an extract from , followed by a further \"symphony of music and color\".\nUnder the same roof, the ALA exhibited a \"library of the future\" (centered on a Univac computer). GM exhibited its vision for highways and vehicles of the future (the latter including the Firebird III). Pan Am exhibited a giant globe that emphasized the notion that we had come to be able to think of distances between major world cities in hours and minutes rather than in terms of chancy voyages over great distances. RCA (which produced \"The Threshold and the Threat\") exhibited television, radio, and stereo technology, as well as its involvement in space. The French government had an exhibit with its own take on technological progress. Finally, a Washington state tourist center provided information for fair-goers wishing to tour the state.\nWorld of Commerce and Industry.\nThe World of Commerce and Industry was divided into domestic and foreign areas. The former was sited mainly south of American Way (the continuation of Thomas Street through the grounds), an area it shared with the World of Science. It included the Space Needle and what is now the Broad Street Green and Mural Amphitheater. The Hall of Industry and some smaller buildings were immediately north of American Way. The latter included 15\u00a0governmental exhibitors and surrounded the World of Tomorrow and extended to the north edge of the fair.\nAmong the features of Domestic Commerce and Industry, the massive Interiors, Fashion, and Commerce Building spread for \u2014nearly the entire Broad Street side of the grounds\u2014with exhibits ranging from 32\u00a0separate furniture companies to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\". \"Vogue\" produced four fashion shows daily alongside a perfumed pool. The Ford Motor Company, in its pavilion, presented a simulated space flight and its vision for the car of the future, the Ford Seattle-ite XXI. The Electric Power Pavilion included a -high fountain made to look like a hydroelectric dam, with the entrance to the pavilion through a tunnel in said \"dam\". The Forest Products Pavilion was surrounded by a grove of trees of various species, and included an all-wood theater and a Society of American Foresters exhibit. Standard Oil of California celebrated, among other things, the fact that the world's first service station opened in Seattle in 1907. The fair's Bell Telephone (now AT&amp;T Inc.) exhibit was featured in a short film called \"Century 21 Calling...\", which was later shown on \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\". There were also several religious pavilions. Near the center of all this was Seattle artist Paul Horiuchi's massive mosaic mural, the region's largest work of art at the time, which now forms the backdrop of Seattle Center's Mural Amphitheater.\nForeign exhibits included a science and technology exhibit by Great Britain, while Mexico and Peru focused on handicrafts, and Japan and India attempted to show both of these sides of their national cultures. The Taiwan and South Korea pavilions showed their rapid industrialization to the world and the benefits of capitalism over communism during the time of cold war era. Other pavilions included one featuring Brazilian tea and coffee; a European Communities Pavilion from the then six countries of the European Economic Community; and a joint pavilion by those countries of Africa that had by then achieved independence. Sweden's exhibit included the story of the salvaging of a 17th-century man-of-war from Stockholm harbor, and San Marino's exhibit featured its postage stamps and pottery. Near the center of this was the DuPen Fountain featuring three sculptures by Seattle artist Everett DuPen.\nWorld of Art.\nThe Fine Arts Pavilion (later the Exhibition Hall) brought together an art exhibition unprecedented for the West Coast of the United States. Among the 50\u00a0contemporary American painters whose works shown were Josef Albers, Willem de Kooning, Helen Frankenthaler, Philip Guston, Jasper Johns, Joan Mitchell, Robert Motherwell, Georgia O'Keeffe, Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg, Ad Reinhardt, Ben Shahn, and Frank Stella, as well as Northwest painters Kenneth Callahan, Morris Graves, Paul Horiuchi, and Mark Tobey. American sculptors included Leonard Baskin, Alexander Calder, Joseph Cornell, Louise Nevelson, Isamu Noguchi, and 19\u00a0others. The 50\u00a0international contemporary artists represented included the likes of painters Fritz Hundertwasser, Joan Mir\u00f3, Antoni T\u00e0pies, and Francis Bacon, and sculptors Henry Moore and Jean Arp. In addition, there were exhibitions of Mark Tobey's paintings and of Asian art, drawn from the collections of the Seattle Art Museum; and an additional exhibition of 72\u00a0\"masterpieces\" ranging from Titian, El Greco, Caravaggio, Rembrandt, and Rubens through Toulouse-Lautrec, Monet, and Turner to Klee, Braque, and Picasso, with no shortage of other comparably famous artists represented.\nA separate gallery presented Northwest Coast Indian art, and featured a series of large paintings by Bill Holm introducing Northwest Native motifs.\nWorld of Entertainment.\nA US$15 million performing-arts program at the fair ranged from a boxing championship to an international twirling competition but with no shortage of nationally and internationally famous performers, especially at the new Opera House and Playhouse. After the fair, the Playhouse became the Seattle Repertory Theatre; in the mid-1980s it became the Intiman Playhouse. When the Intiman Theatre became financially unstable, Cornish College of the Arts took over the lease from the city of Seattle, and now operates it as the Cornish Playhouse at Seattle Center.\nOpera House performances.\nScheduled groups performing at the Opera House included:\nOther performances.\nEvents and performances at the Playhouse included Sweden's Royal Dramatic Theatre; a chamber music performance by Isaac Stern, Milton Katims, Leonard Rose, Eugene Istomin, the Claiborne Brothers gospel quartet, and the Juilliard String Quartet; two appearances by newsman Edward R. Murrow; Bunraku theater; Richard Dyer-Bennet; Hal Holbrook's solo show as Mark Twain; the Count Basie and Benny Goodman jazz orchestras; Lawrence Welk; Nat King Cole; and Ella Fitzgerald. Also during the fair, Memorial Stadium hosted the Ringling Brothers Circus, Tommy Bartlett's Water Ski Sky and Stage Show, Roy Rogers and Dale Evans' Western Show, and an appearance by evangelist Billy Graham.\nThe fair and the city were the setting of the Elvis Presley movie \"It Happened at the World's Fair\" (1963), with a young Kurt Russell making his first screen appearance. Location shooting began on September 4 and concluded nearly two weeks later. The film would be released the following spring, long after the fair had ended.\nShow Street.\nAt the northeast corner of the grounds (now the KCTS-TV studios), Show Street was the \"adult entertainment\" portion of the fair. Attractions included Gracie Hansen's Paradise International (a Vegas-style floor show (rivalled next door by LeRoy Prinz's \"Backstage USA\")), Sid and Marty Krofft's adults-only puppet show, \"Les Poup\u00e9es de Paris\", and (briefly, until it was shut down) a show featuring naked \"Girls of the Galaxy\". Tamer entertainment came in forms such as the Paris Spectacular wax museum, an elaborate Japanese Village, and the Hawaiian Pavilion.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50278", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50278", "title": "Worlds fair", "text": ""}
{"id": "50279", "revid": "19469213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50279", "title": "List of prominent operas", "text": "Since the origins of opera in late 16th century Italy, a central repertoire has developed, shepherded by major opera composers. The earliest major opera composer is generally considered to be Claudio Monteverdi, who wrote the first prominent opera, \"L'Orfeo\", followed by two others. Throughout the later 17th century, his successor Francesco Cavalli and the Englishman Henry Purcell wrote numerous prominent operas. The early 18th century was dominated by the operas of George Frideric Handel, while other important works include Pepusch's \"The Beggar's Opera\", Pergolesi's \"La serva padrona\", and various works by Jean-Philippe Rameau.\nThis list provides a guide to the most prominent operas, as determined by their presence on a majority of selected compiled lists, which date from between 1984 and 2000. The operas included cover all important genres, and include all operas regularly performed today, from seventeenth-century works to late twentieth-century operas. The brief accompanying notes offer an explanation as to why each opera has been considered important. The organisation of the list is by year of first performance, or, if this was long after the composer's death, approximate date of composition.\nSignificant firsts in opera history.\nOperas not included in the above list, but which were important milestones in operatic history.\nLists consulted.\nThis list was compiled by consulting nine lists of great operas, created by recognized authorities in the field of opera, and selecting all of the operas which appeared on at least five of these (i.e. all operas on a majority of the lists). The lists used were:\nOperas included in all nine lists.\nThe 93 operas included in all nine lists cited are: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50281", "revid": "92631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50281", "title": "1893 World's Fair", "text": ""}
{"id": "50286", "revid": "8356162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50286", "title": "Bugs Bunny", "text": "Looney Tunes character; mascot of Warner Bros.\nBugs Bunny is a cartoon character created in the late 1930s at Warner Bros. Cartoons (originally Leon Schlesinger Productions) and voiced originally by Mel Blanc. Bugs is best known for his featured roles in the \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" series of animated short films, produced by Warner Bros. Early iterations of the character first appeared in Ben Hardaway's \"Porky's Hare Hunt\" (1938) and subsequent shorts before Bugs's definitive character traits debuted in Tex Avery's \"A Wild Hare\" (1940). Bob Givens, Chuck Jones, and Robert McKimson are credited for defining Bugs's visual design.\nBugs is an anthropomorphic gray-and-white rabbit or hare who is characterized by his flippant, insouciant personality, his Brooklyn accent, and his catchphrase \"Eh... What's up, doc?\". He is typically portrayed as a trickster, outwitting foes like Elmer Fudd and Yosemite Sam as well as various authority figures and criminals. He develops a friendly rivalry with Daffy Duck. Through his popularity during the golden age of American animation, Bugs became an American cultural icon and Warner Bros.' official mascot.\nBugs starred in more than 160 short films produced between 1940 and 1964. He has since appeared in feature films, television shows, comics, and other media. He has appeared in more films than any other cartoon character, is the ninth most-portrayed film personality in the world and has his own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nDevelopment.\nAccording to Chase Craig, who wrote and drew the first Bugs Bunny comic Sunday pages and the first Bugs comic book, \"Bugs was not the creation of any one man; however, he rather represented the creative talents of perhaps five or six directors and many cartoon writers including Charlie Thorson. In those days, the stories were often the work of a group who suggested various gags, bounced them around and finalized them in a joint story conference.\" A prototype Bugs rabbit with some of the personality of a finalized Bugs, though looking very different, was originally featured in the film \"Porky's Hare Hunt\", released on April 30, 1938. It was co-directed by Ben \"Bugs\" Hardaway and an uncredited director Cal Dalton (who was responsible for the initial design of the rabbit). This cartoon has an almost identical plot to Avery's \"Porky's Duck Hunt\" (1937), which had introduced Daffy Duck. Porky Pig is again cast as a hunter tracking a silly prey who is more interested in driving his pursuer insane and less interested in escaping. \"Hare Hunt\" replaces the little black duck with a small white rabbit. According to Friz Freleng, Hardaway and Dalton had decided to \"dress the duck in a rabbit suit\". The white rabbit had an oval head and a shapeless body. In characterization, he was \"a rural buffoon\". Mel Blanc gave the character a voice and laugh much like those he later used for Woody Woodpecker. He was loud, zany with a goofy, guttural laugh. The rabbit character was popular enough with audiences that the Termite Terrace staff decided to use it again.\nThe rabbit comes back in \"Prest-O Change-O\" (1939), directed by Chuck Jones, where he is the pet rabbit of unseen character Sham-Fu the Magician. Two dogs, fleeing the local dogcatcher, enter the rabbit's absent master's house. The rabbit harasses them but is ultimately bested by the bigger of the two dogs. This version of the rabbit was cool, graceful, and controlled. He retained the guttural laugh but was otherwise silent.\nThe rabbit's third appearance comes in \"Hare-um Scare-um\" (1939), directed again by Dalton and Hardaway. This cartoon\u2014the first in which he is depicted as a gray bunny instead of a white one\u2014is also notable as the rabbit's first singing role. Charlie Thorson, lead animator on the film, gave the character a name. He had written \"Bugs's Bunny\" on the model sheet that he drew for Hardaway. In promotional material for the cartoon, including a surviving 1939 presskit, the name on the model sheet was altered to become the rabbit's own name: \"Bugs\" Bunny (quotation marks only used, on and off, until 1944).\nIn his autobiography, Blanc claimed that another proposed name for the character was \"Happy Rabbit.\" In the actual cartoons and publicity, however, the name \"Happy\" only seems to have been used in reference to Bugs Hardaway. In \"Hare-um Scare-um\", a newspaper headline reads, \"Happy Hardaway.\" Animation historian David Gerstein disputed that \"Happy Rabbit\" was ever used as an official name, arguing that the only usage of the term came from Mel Blanc himself in humorous and fanciful tales he told about the character's development in the 1970s and 1980s; the name \"Bugs Bunny\" was used as early as August 1939, in the Motion Picture Herald, in a review for \"Hare-um Scare-um\".\nThorson had been approached by Tedd Pierce, head of the story department, and asked to design a better look for the rabbit. The decision was influenced by Thorson's experience in designing hares. He had designed Max Hare in \"Toby Tortoise Returns\" (Disney, 1936). For Hardaway, Thorson created the model sheet previously mentioned, with six different rabbit poses. Thorson's model sheet is \"a comic rendition of the stereotypical fuzzy bunny\". He had a pear-shaped body with a protruding rear end. His face was flat and had large expressive eyes. He had an exaggerated long neck, gloved hands with three fingers, oversized feet, and a \"smart aleck\" grin. The result was influenced by Walt Disney Animation Studios' tendency to draw animals in the style of cute infants. He had an obvious Disney influence, but looked like an awkward merger of the lean and streamlined Max Hare from \"The Tortoise and the Hare\" (1935) and the round, soft bunnies from \"Little Hiawatha\" (1937).\nIn Jones' \"Elmer's Candid Camera\" (1940), the rabbit first meets Elmer Fudd. This time the rabbit looks more like the present-day Bugs, taller and with a similar face\u2014but retaining the more primitive voice. \"Candid Camera\"'s Elmer character design is also different: taller and chubbier in the face than the modern model, though Arthur Q. Bryan's character voice is already established.\nOfficial debut.\nWhile \"Porky's Hare Hunt\" was the first Warner Bros. cartoon to feature what would become Bugs Bunny, \"A Wild Hare\", directed by Tex Avery and released on July 27, 1940, is widely considered to be the first official Bugs Bunny cartoon. It is the first film where both Elmer Fudd and Bugs, both redesigned by Bob Givens, are shown in their fully developed forms as hunter and tormentor, respectively; the first in which Mel Blanc uses what became Bugs' standard voice; and the first in which Bugs uses his catchphrase, \"What's up, Doc?\" \"A Wild Hare\" was a huge success in theaters and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Cartoon Short Subject.\nFor the film, Avery asked Givens to remodel the rabbit. The result had a closer resemblance to Max Hare. He had a more elongated body, stood more erect, and looked more poised. If Thorson's rabbit looked like an infant, Givens' version looked like an adolescent. Blanc gave Bugs the voice of a city slicker. The rabbit was as audacious as he had been in \"Hare-um Scare-um\" and as cool and collected as in \"Prest-O Change-O\".\nImmediately following on \"A Wild Hare\", Bob Clampett's \"Patient Porky\" (1940) features a cameo appearance by Bugs, announcing to the audience that 750 rabbits have been born. The gag uses Bugs' \"Wild Hare\" visual design, but his goofier pre-\"Wild Hare\" voice characterization.\nThe second full-fledged role for the mature Bugs, Chuck Jones' \"Elmer's Pet Rabbit\" (1941), is the first to use Bugs' name on-screen: it appears in a title card, \"featuring Bugs Bunny,\" at the start of the film (which was edited in following the success of \"A Wild Hare\"). However, Bugs' voice and personality in this cartoon is noticeably different, and his design was slightly altered as well; Bugs' visual design is based on the earlier version in \"Candid Camera\" and \"A Wild Hare\", but with yellow gloves, as seen in \"Hare-Um Scare-Um\", and no buck teeth, has a lower-pitched voice and a more aggressive, arrogant and thuggish personality instead of a fun-loving personality. After \"Pet Rabbit\", however, subsequent Bugs appearances returned to normal: the \"Wild Hare\" visual design and personality returned, and Blanc re-used the \"Wild Hare\" voice characterization.\n\"Hiawatha's Rabbit Hunt\" (1941), directed by Friz Freleng, became the second Bugs Bunny cartoon to receive an Academy Award nomination. The fact that it did not win the award was later spoofed somewhat in \"What's Cookin' Doc?\" (1944), in which Bugs demands a recount (claiming to be a victim of \"sa-bo-TAH-gee\") after losing the Oscar to James Cagney and presents a clip from \"Hiawatha's Rabbit Hunt\" to prove his point.\nWorld War II.\nBy 1942, Bugs had become the number one star of \"Merrie Melodies\". The series was originally intended only for one-shot characters in films after several early attempts to introduce characters (Foxy, Goopy Geer, and Piggy) failed under Harman\u2013Ising. By the mid-1930s, under Leon Schlesinger, \"Merrie Melodies\" started introducing newer characters. \"Bugs Bunny Gets the Boid\" (1942) shows a slight redesign of Bugs, with less-prominent front teeth and a rounder head. The character was later reworked by Robert McKimson, then an animator in Clampett's unit, for \"Tortoise Wins by a Hare\" (1943), with more slanted eyes, longer teeth and a much larger mouth. The redesign at first was only used in the films created by Clampett's unit, but in time it was taken up by the other directors, with Freleng and Frank Tashlin the first. McKimson would use another version of the rabbit by Jean Blanchard until 1949 (as did Art Davis for the one Bugs Bunny film he directed, \"Bowery Bugs\") when he started using the version he had designed for Clampett. Jones came up with his own slight modification, and the voice had slight variations between the units. Bugs also made cameos in Avery's final Warner Bros. cartoon, \"Crazy Cruise\".\nSince Bugs' fifth appearance in \"A Wild Hare\", he appeared in color \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" films (making him one of the few recurring characters created for the series in the Schlesinger era prior to the full conversion to color), alongside Egghead, Inki, Sniffles, and Elmer Fudd (who actually co-existed in 1937 along with Egghead as a separate character). While Bugs made a cameo in \"Porky Pig's Feat\" (1943), this was his only appearance in a black-and-white \"Looney Tunes\" film. He did not star in a \"Looney Tunes\" film until that series made its complete conversion to only color cartoons beginning in 1944. \"Buckaroo Bugs\" was Bugs' first film in the \"Looney Tunes\" series and was also the last Warner Bros. cartoon to credit Schlesinger (as he had retired and sold his studio to Warner Bros. that year).\nBugs' popularity soared during World War II because of his free and easy attitude, and he began receiving special star billing in his cartoons by 1943. By that time, Warner Bros. had become the most profitable cartoon studio in the United States. In company with cartoon studios such as Disney and Famous Studios, Warners pitted its characters against Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Francisco Franco, and the Japanese. \"Bugs Bunny Nips the Nips\" (1944) features Bugs at odds with a group of Japanese soldiers. This cartoon has since been pulled from distribution due to its depiction of Japanese people. One US Navy propaganda film saved from destruction features the voice of Mel Blanc in \"Tokyo Woes\" (1945) about the propaganda radio host Tokyo Rose. He also faces off against Hermann G\u00f6ring and Hitler in \"Herr Meets Hare\" (1945), which introduced his well-known reference to Albuquerque as he mistakenly winds up in the Black Forest of \"Joimany\" instead of Las Vegas, Nevada. Bugs also appeared in the 1942 two-minute U.S. war bonds commercial film \"Any Bonds Today?\", along with Porky and Elmer.\nAt the end of \"Super-Rabbit\" (1943), Bugs appears wearing a United States Marine Corps dress blue uniform. As a result, the Marine Corps made Bugs an honorary Marine master sergeant. From 1943 to 1946, Bugs was the official mascot of Kingman Army Airfield, Kingman, Arizona, where thousands of aerial gunners were trained during World War II. Some notable trainees included Clark Gable and Charles Bronson. Bugs also served as the mascot for 530 Squadron of the 380th Bombardment Group, 5th Air Force, U.S. Air Force, which was attached to the Royal Australian Air Force and operated out of Australia's Northern Territory from 1943 to 1945, flying B-24 Liberator bombers. Bugs riding an air delivered torpedo served as the squadron logo for Marine Torpedo/Bomber Squadron 242 in the Second World War. Additionally, Bugs appeared on the nose of B-24J #42-110157, in both the 855th Bomb Squadron of the 491st Bombardment Group (Heavy) and later in the 786th BS of the 466th BG(H), both being part of the 8th Air Force operating out of England.\nIn 1944, Bugs Bunny made a cameo appearance in \"Jasper Goes Hunting\", a Puppetoons film produced by rival studio Paramount Pictures. In this cameo (animated by McKimson, with Blanc providing the usual voice), Bugs (after being threatened at gunpoint) pops out of a rabbit hole, saying his usual catchphrase; after hearing the orchestra play the wrong theme song, he realizes \"Hey, I'm in the wrong picture!\" and then goes back in the hole. Bugs also made a cameo in the Private Snafu short \"Gas\", in which he is found stowed away in the titular private's belongings; his only spoken line is his usual catchphrase.\nAlthough it was usually Porky Pig who brought the \"Looney Tunes\" films to a close with his stuttering, \"That's all, folks!\", Bugs replaced him at the end of \"Hare Tonic\" and \"Baseball Bugs\", bursting through a drum just as Porky did, but munching on a carrot and saying, in his Bronx/Brooklyn accent, \"And that's the end!\"\nPost-World War II era.\nAfter World War II, Bugs continued to appear in numerous Warner Bros. cartoons, making his last \"Golden Age\" appearance in \"False Hare\" (1964). He starred in over 167 theatrical short films, most of which were directed by Friz Freleng, Robert McKimson, and Chuck Jones. Freleng's \"Knighty Knight Bugs\" (1958), in which a medieval Bugs trades blows with Yosemite Sam and his fire-breathing dragon (which has a cold), won an Academy Award for Best Cartoon Short Subject (becoming the first and only Bugs Bunny cartoon to win that award). Three of Jones' films\u2014\"Rabbit Fire\", \"Rabbit Seasoning\" and \"Duck! Rabbit, Duck!\"\u2014comprise what is often referred to as the \"Rabbit Season/Duck Season\" trilogy and were the origins of the rivalry between Bugs and Daffy Duck. Jones' classic \"What's Opera, Doc?\" (1957), casts Bugs and Elmer Fudd in a parody of Richard Wagner's \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\". It was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1992, becoming the first cartoon short to receive this honor.\nIn the fall of 1960, ABC debuted the prime-time television program \"The Bugs Bunny Show\". This show packaged many of the post-1948 Warners cartoons with newly animated wraparounds. Throughout its run, the series was highly successful, and helped cement Warner Bros. Animation as a mainstay of Saturday-morning cartoons. After two seasons, it was moved from its evening slot to reruns on Saturday mornings. \"The Bugs Bunny Show\" changed format and exact title frequently but remained on network television for 40 years. The packaging was later completely different, with each cartoon simply presented on its own, title and all, though some clips from the new bridging material were sometimes used as filler.\nLater years.\nBugs did not appear in any of the post-1964 \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" films produced by DePatie-Freleng Enterprises or Seven Arts Productions, nor did he appear in Filmation's \"Daffy Duck and Porky Pig Meet the Groovie Goolies\". He did, however, have two cameo appearances in the 1974 Joe Adamson short \"A Political Cartoon\"; one at the beginning of the short where he campaigns on behalf of equal rights for cartoon characters everywhere, and another in which he is interviewed at a pet store, where he is on sale as an \"Easter Rabbit\". Bugs was animated in this short by Mark Kausler. He did not appear in new material on-screen again until \"Bugs and Daffy's Carnival of the Animals\" aired in 1976.\nFrom the late 1970s through the early 1990s, Bugs was featured in various animated specials for network television, such as \"Bugs Bunny's Thanksgiving Diet\", \"Bugs Bunny's Easter Special\", \"Bugs Bunny's Looney Christmas Tales\", and \"Bugs Bunny's Bustin' Out All Over\". Bugs also starred in several theatrical compilation features during this time, including the United Artists distributed documentary ' (1975) and Warner Bros.' own releases: \"The Bugs Bunny/Road Runner Movie\" (1979), \"The Looney Looney Looney Bugs Bunny Movie\" (1981), ' (1982), and \"Daffy Duck's Quackbusters\" (1988).\nIn the 1988 live-action/animated comedy \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\", Bugs appeared as one of the inhabitants of Toontown. However, since the film was being produced by Disney, Warner Bros. would only allow the use of their biggest star if he got an equal amount of screen time as Disney's biggest star, Mickey Mouse. Because of this, both characters are always together in frame when onscreen. Bugs was animated by Dave Spafford. \"Roger Rabbit\" was also one of the final productions in which Mel Blanc voiced Bugs (as well as the other \"Looney Tunes\" characters) before his death in 1989.\nBugs later appeared in another animated production featuring numerous characters from rival studios: the 1990 drug prevention TV special \"Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue\". This special is notable for being the first time that someone other than Blanc voiced Bugs and Daffy, both characters being voiced by Jeff Bergman for the program. Bugs also made guest appearances in the early 1990s television series \"Tiny Toon Adventures\", as the principal of Acme Looniversity and the mentor of Babs and Buster Bunny. He made further cameos in Warner Bros.' subsequent animated TV shows \"Taz-Mania\", \"Animaniacs\", and \"Histeria!\"\nBugs returned to the silver screen in \"Box-Office Bunny\" (1991). This was the first Bugs Bunny cartoon since 1964 to be released in theaters and it was created for Bugs' 50th anniversary celebration. It was followed by \"(Blooper) Bunny\", a cartoon that was shelved from theaters, but later premiered on Cartoon Network in 1997 and has since gained a cult following among animation fans for its edgy humor. Later that year, Bugs appeared in \"Yakety Yak, Take it Back\", a live-action/animated all-star public service music video produced by Warner Bros. Animation for the Take it Back Foundation. He also appeared in the logo for Warner Bros. Family Entertainment, animated by Bill Waldman.\nIn 1996, Bugs and the other \"Looney Tunes\" characters appeared in the live-action/animated film, \"Space Jam\", directed by Joe Pytka and starring NBA superstar Michael Jordan. The film also introduced the character Lola Bunny, who becomes Bugs' new love interest. \"Space Jam\" received mixed reviews from critics, but was a box office success (grossing over $230 million worldwide). The success of \"Space Jam\" led to the development of another live-action/animated film, \"\", released in 2003 and directed by Joe Dante. Unlike \"Space Jam\", \"Back in Action\" was a box-office bomb, though it did receive more positive reviews from critics.\nIn 1997, Bugs appeared on a U.S. postage stamp, the first cartoon to be so honored, beating the iconic Mickey Mouse. The stamp is number seven on the list of the ten most popular U.S. stamps, as calculated by the number of stamps purchased but not used. The introduction of Bugs onto a stamp was controversial at the time, as it was seen as a step toward the 'commercialization' of stamp art. The postal service rejected many designs and went with a postal-themed drawing. Avery Dennison printed the Bugs Bunny stamp sheet, which featured \"a special ten-stamp design and was the first self-adhesive souvenir sheet issued by the U.S. Postal Service.\"\n21st century.\nA younger version of Bugs is the main character of \"Baby Looney Tunes\", which debuted on Kids' WB in 2001. In the action-comedy \"Loonatics Unleashed\", his definite descendant Ace Bunny is the leader of the Loonatics team and seems to have inherited his ancestor's Brooklyn accent and rapier wit.\nIn 2011, Bugs Bunny and the rest of the \"Looney Tunes\" gang returned to television in the Cartoon Network sitcom, \"The Looney Tunes Show\". The characters feature new designs by artist Jessica Borutski. Among the changes to Bugs' appearance were the simplification and enlargement of his feet, as well as a change to his fur from gray to a shade of mauve (though in the second season, his fur was changed back to gray). In the series, Bugs and Daffy Duck are portrayed as best friends as opposed to their usual pairing as friendly rivals. At the same time, Bugs is more vocally exasperated by Daffy's antics in the series (sometimes to the point of anger), compared to his usual level-headed personality from the original cartoons. Bugs and Daffy are friends with Porky Pig in the series, although Bugs tends to be a better friend to Porky than Daffy is. Bugs also dates Lola Bunny in the show despite the fact that he finds her to be \"crazy\" and a bit too talkative at first (he later learns to accept her personality quirks, similar to his tolerance for Daffy). Unlike the original cartoons, Bugs lives in a regular home which he shares with Daffy, Taz (whom he treats as a pet dog) and Speedy Gonzales, in the middle of a cul-de-sac with their neighbors Yosemite Sam, Granny, and Witch Hazel.\nIn 2015, Bugs starred in the direct-to-video film \"\", and later returned to television yet again as the star of Cartoon Network and Boomerang's comedy series \"New Looney Tunes\" (formerly \"Wabbit\").\nIn 2020, Bugs began appearing on the HBO Max streaming series \"Looney Tunes Cartoons\". His design for this series primarily resembles his Bob Clampett days, complete with yellow gloves and his signature carrot. His personality is a combination of Freleng's trickery, Clampett's defiance, and Jones\u2019 resilience, while also maintaining his confident, insolent, smooth-talking demeanor. Bugs is voiced by Eric Bauza, who is also the current voice of Daffy Duck and Tweety, among others. In 2020, the USPS issued a new set of Bugs stamps. This was a part from a collection honoring the classic Looney Tunes characters. Bugs is presented there in a range of comical positions and facial expressions. Bugs made his return to movie theaters in the 2021 \"Space Jam\" sequel ', this time starring NBA superstar LeBron James. In 2022, a new pre-school animated series titled \"Bugs Bunny Builders\" aired on HBO Max and Cartoonito. He is again voiced by Eric Bauza. Bugs has also appeared in numerous video games, including the \"Bugs Bunny's Crazy Castle\" series, \"Bugs Bunny Birthday Blowout\", \"Bugs Bunny: Rabbit Rampage\", \"Bugs Bunny in Double Trouble\", \"Looney Tunes B-Ball\", \"Looney Tunes Racing\", ', \"Bugs Bunny Lost in Time\", \"Bugs Bunny and Taz Time Busters\", ', ', \"Scooby Doo and Looney Tunes: Cartoon Universe\", \"Looney Tunes Dash\", \"Looney Tunes World of Mayhem\" and \"MultiVersus\".\nPersonality and catchphrases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Some people call me cocky and brash, but actually I am just self-assured. I'm nonchalant, im\u00adperturbable, contemplative. I play it cool, but I can get hot under the collar. And above all I'm a very 'aware' character. I'm well aware that I am appearing in an animated car\u00adtoon...And sometimes I chomp on my carrot for the same reason that a stand-up comic chomps on his cigar. It saves me from rushing from the last joke to the next one too fast. And I sometimes don't act, I react. And I always treat the contest with my pursuers as 'fun and games.' When momentarily I appear to be cornered or in dire danger and I scream, don't be consoined \u2013 it's actually a big put-on. Let's face it, Doc. I've read the script and I al\u00adready know how it turns out.\"\n\u2014\u00a0Bob Clampett on Bugs Bunny, written in first person.\nBugs Bunny's fast-talking speech pattern was inspired to a degree by the character of Oscar Shapely in the 1934 film \"It Happened One Night\". In the film, Shapely addresses Clark Gable's character Peter Warne as \"Doc\", and Warne mentions an imaginary person named \"Bugs Dooley\" to frighten Shapely. Referring to the same film, Friz Freleng, Chuck Jones and Bob Clampett all claimed that Bugs' nonchalant carrot-chewing style came from a scene where Gable's character eats a carrot while talking.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"'What's up Doc?' is a very simple thing. It's only funny because it's in a situation. It was an all Bugs Bunny line. It wasn't funny. If you put it in human terms; you come home late one night from work, you walk up to the gate in the yard, you walk through the gate and up into the front room, the door is partly open and there's some guy shooting under your living room. So what do you do? You run if you have any sense, the least you can do is call the cops. But what if you come up and tap him on the shoulder and look over and say 'What's up Doc?' You're interested in what he's doing. That's ridiculous. That's not what you say at a time like that. So that's why it's funny, I think. In other words it's asking a perfectly legitimate question in a perfectly illogical situation.\"\n\u2014\u00a0Chuck Jones on Bugs Bunny's catchphrase \"What's up Doc?\"\nThe carrot-chewing scenes are generally followed by Bugs' most well-known catchphrase, \"What's up, Doc?\", which was written by director Tex Avery for his first Bugs Bunny film, \"A Wild Hare\" (1940). Avery explained later that it was a common expression in his native Texas and that he did not think much of the phrase. Back then \"doc\" meant the same as \"dude\" does today. When the cartoon was first screened in theaters, the \"What's up, Doc?\" scene generated a tremendously positive audience reaction.\nAnother catchphrase associated with the character's tendency to play the trickster is \"Ain't I a stinker\", an acknowledgement that he engages in unfair tactics. It was first used as early as the 1940s in shorts like the 1942 \"The Wacky Wabbit\". This was notably exhibited in the 1953 short, \"Duck Amuck\", in which Daffy Duck endures various humiliations at the hands of the unseen cartoonist, who in the end is revealed to be Bugs Bunny, who then says this line.\nVoice actors.\nThe following are the various vocal artists who have voiced Bugs Bunny over the last 80-plus years for both Warner Bros. official productions and others:\nMel Blanc.\nMel Blanc voiced the character for 52 years, from Bugs' debut in the 1938 short \"Porky's Hare Hunt\" until Blanc's death in 1989. Blanc described the voice he created for Bugs in 1940's \"A Wild Hare\" as a combination of Bronx and Brooklyn accents; however, Tex Avery claimed that he asked Blanc to give the character not a New York accent \"per se\", but a voice like that of actor Frank McHugh, who frequently appeared in supporting roles in the 1930s and whose voice might be described as New York Irish. In Bugs' following cartoon, \"Elmer's Pet Rabbit\", Blanc created a completely new voice for Bugs, which sounded like a Jimmy Stewart impression, but the directors decided the previous \"Wild Hare\" voice was better. Though Blanc's best known character was the carrot-chomping rabbit, munching on the carrots interrupted the dialogue. Various substitutes, such as celery, were tried, but none of them sounded like a carrot. So, for the sake of expedience, Blanc munched and then spit the carrot bits into a spittoon, rather than swallowing them, and continued with the dialogue. One often-repeated story, which dates back to the 1940s, is that Blanc was allergic to carrots and had to spit them out to minimize any allergic reaction, but his autobiography makes no such claim. In fact, in a 1984 interview with Tim Lawson, co-author of \"The Magic Behind The Voices: A Who's Who of Voice Actors\", Blanc emphatically denied being allergic to carrots.\nParodies.\nA list of voice actors of Bugs Bunny for parodies not produced by Warner Bros.\nComics.\nComic books.\nBugs Bunny was continuously featured in comic books for more than 40 years, from 1941 to 1983, and has appeared sporadically since then. Bugs first appeared in comic books in 1941, in \"Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies Comics\" #1, published by Dell Comics. Bugs was a recurring star in that book all through its 153-issue run, which lasted until July 1954. Western Publishing (and its Dell imprint) published 245 issues of a Bugs Bunny comic book from Dec. 1952/Jan. 1953 to 1983. The company also published 81 issues of the joint title \"Yosemite Sam and Bugs Bunny\" from December 1970 to 1983. During the 1950s Dell also published a number of Bugs Bunny spinoff titles.\nCreators on those series included Chase Craig, Helen Houghton, Eleanor Packer, Lloyd Turner, Michael Maltese, John Liggera, Tony Strobl, Veve Risto, Cecil Beard, Pete Alvorado, Carl Fallberg, Cal Howard, Vic Lockman, Lynn Karp, Pete Llanuza, Pete Hansen, Jack Carey, Del Connell, Kellog Adams, Jack Manning, Mark Evanier, Tom McKimson, Joe Messerli, Carlos Garzon, Donald F. Glut, Sealtiel Alatriste, Sandro Costa, and Massimo Fechi.\nThe German publisher Condor published a 76-issues Bugs Bunny series (translated and reprinted from the American comics) in the mid-1970s. The Danish publisher Egmont Ehapa produced a weekly reprint series in the mid-1990s.\nComic strip.\nThe \"Bugs Bunny\" comic strip ran for almost 50 years, from January 10, 1943, to December 30, 1990, syndicated by the Newspaper Enterprise Association. It started out as a Sunday page and added a daily strip on November 1, 1948.\nThe strip originated with Chase Craig, who did the first five weeks before leaving for military service in World War II. Roger Armstrong illustrated the strip from 1942 to 1944. The creators most associated with the strip are writers Albert Stoffel (1947\u20131979) &amp; Carl Fallberg (1950\u20131969), and artist Ralph Heimdahl, who worked on it from 1947 to 1979. Other creators associated with the Bugs Bunny strip include Jack Hamm, Carl Buettner, Phil Evans, Carl Barks (1952), Tom McKimson, Arnold Drake, Frank Hill, Brett Koth, and Shawn Keller.\nReception and legacy.\nLike Mickey Mouse for Disney, Bugs Bunny has served as the mascot for Warner Bros. and its various divisions. According to \"Guinness World Records\", Bugs has appeared in more films (both short and feature-length) than any other cartoon character, and is the ninth most portrayed film personality in the world. On December 10, 1985, Bugs became the second cartoon character (after Mickey) to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nHe also has been a pitchman for companies including Kool-Aid and Nike. His Nike commercials with Michael Jordan as \"Hare Jordan\" for the Air Jordan VII and VIII became precursors to \"Space Jam\". As a result, he has spent time as an honorary member of Jordan Brand, including having Jordan's Jumpman logo done in his image. In 2015, as part of the 30th anniversary of Jordan Brand, Nike released a mid-top Bugs Bunny version of the Air Jordan I, named the \"Air Jordan Mid 1 Hare\", along with a women's equivalent inspired by Lola Bunny called the \"Air Jordan Mid 1 Lola\", along with a commercial featuring Bugs and Ahmad Rashad. \nIn 2002, \"TV Guide\" compiled a list of the 50 greatest cartoon characters of all time as part of the magazine's 50th anniversary. Bugs Bunny was given the honor of number 1. In a CNN broadcast on July 31, 2002, a \"TV Guide\" editor talked about the group that created the list. The editor also explained why Bugs pulled top billing: \"His stock...has never gone down...Bugs is the best example...of the smart-aleck American comic. He not only is a great cartoon character, he's a great comedian. He was written well. He was drawn beautifully. He has thrilled and made many generations laugh. He is tops.\" Some have noted that comedian Eric Andre is the nearest contemporary comedic equivalent to Bugs. They attribute this to, \"their ability to constantly flip the script on their unwitting counterparts.\"\nCopyright status.\nUnder current US copyright law, Bugs Bunny is due to enter the US public domain in between 2033 and 2035. However, this will only apply (at first) to the character's depiction as Happy Rabbit in \"Porky's Hare Hunt\" which was published in 1938 (which will enter the US public domain in 2034). The debut of his later persona in 1940 will enter the US public domain in 2036. Although some of his pre-1948 cartoons had been in US public domain since the early 1970s, other versions of him with later developments may persist under copyright until the entry of his post-1948 cartoons in the public domain.\nLanguage.\nThe American use of \"nimrod\" to mean \"idiot\" is often said to have originated from Bugs's exclamation \"What a nimrod!\" to describe the inept hunter Elmer Fudd. However, it is Daffy Duck who refers to Fudd as \"my little nimrod\" in the 1948 short \"What Makes Daffy Duck\", and the Oxford English Dictionary records earlier negative uses of the term \"nimrod\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50287", "revid": "51066448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50287", "title": "Looney Tunes", "text": "Warner Bros. animated short film series and media franchise\nLooney Tunes is an American media franchise produced and distributed by Warner Bros. The franchise began as a series of animated short films that originally ran from 1930 to 1969, alongside its spin-off series \"Merrie Melodies\", during the golden age of American animation. Following a revival in the late 1970s, new shorts were released theatrically as recently as 2014. The two series introduced a large cast of characters, including Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Elmer Fudd and Porky Pig. The term \"Looney Tunes\" has since been expanded to also refer to the characters themselves.\n\"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" were initially produced by Leon Schlesinger and animators Hugh Harman and Rudolf Ising from 1930 to 1933. Schlesinger assumed full production from 1933 until he sold his studio to Warner Bros. in 1944, after which it was renamed Warner Bros. Cartoons. The \"Looney Tunes\" title was inspired by that of Walt Disney's \"Silly Symphonies\". The shorts initially showcased musical compositions owned by Warner's music publishing interests through the adventures of such characters as Bosko and Buddy. However, the shorts gained a higher profile upon the debuts of directors Tex Avery, Friz Freleng, Chuck Jones, Bob Clampett, and Robert McKimson, and voice actor Mel Blanc later in the decade. Porky Pig and Daffy Duck became the featured \"Looney Tunes\" characters, while \"Merrie Melodies\" featured one-shot cartoons and minor recurring characters.\nAfter Bugs Bunny became popular in the \"Merrie Melodies\" shorts of the early 1940s, \"Looney Tunes\" moved from black-and-white to color production between 1942 and 1943 (\"Merrie Melodies\" having already been in color since 1934). The two series gradually lost their distinctions, and shorts were assigned to each series arbitrarily. From 1942 to 1964, \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" were the most popular animated shorts in movie theaters.\n\"Looney Tunes\" has become one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time, spawning several television series, feature films, comic books, music albums, video games, and amusement park rides. Many of the characters have made and continue to make cameo appearances in television shows, films, and other media. Bugs Bunny, in particular, is regarded as a cultural icon as well as the mascot of Warner Bros. Pictures, and has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Many \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" films are ranked among the greatest animated cartoons of all time, and five of them have won Academy Awards. In 2013, TV Guide counted \"Looney Tunes\" as the third greatest television cartoon series of all time, behind \"The Simpsons\" and \"The Flintstones\", the latter of which also featured the voice talents of Mel Blanc and Bea Benaderet.\nHistory.\n\"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" were so named as a reference to Disney's \"Silly Symphonies\" and were initially developed to showcase tracks from Warner Bros.' extensive music library; the title of the first \"Looney Tunes\" short, \"Sinkin' in the Bathtub\" (1930), is a pun on \"Singin' in the Bathtub\". Between 1934 and 1943, \"Merrie Melodies\" were produced in color and \"Looney Tunes\" in black-and-white. After 1943, both series were produced in color and became virtually indistinguishable, varying only in their opening theme music and titles. Both series made use of the various Warner Bros. characters. By 1937, the theme music for \"Looney Tunes\" was \"The Merry-Go-Round Broke Down\" by Cliff Friend and Dave Franklin, and the theme music for \"Merrie Melodies\" was an adaptation of \"Merrily We Roll Along\" by Charles Tobias, Murray Mencher and Eddie Cantor.\n1930\u20131933: Harman and Ising era.\nIn 1929, to compete against Walt Disney's Mickey Mouse short cartoons, Warner Bros. became interested in developing a series of animated shorts to promote their music. They had recently acquired Brunswick Records along with four music publishers for US$28\u00a0million (equivalent to $ million in 2024) and were eager to promote this material for the sales of sheet music and phonograph records. Warner made a deal with Leon Schlesinger to produce cartoons for them. Schlesinger hired Rudolf Ising and Hugh Harman to produce a series of cartoons, impressed by their 1929 pilot film, \"Bosko, The Talk-Ink Kid\". The first \"Looney Tunes\" short was \"Sinkin' in the Bathtub\" starring Bosko, which was released in 1930.\n1933\u20131936: Leon Schlesinger Productions.\nWhen Harman and Ising left Warner Bros. in 1933 over a budget dispute with Schlesinger, they took with them all the rights of the characters they had created. A new character called Buddy became the only star of the \"Looney Tunes\" series for a couple of years, but quickly became unpopular.\nNew directors including Tex Avery, Friz Freleng and Bob Clampett were brought in or promoted to work with animators in the Schlesinger studio, with Avery's unit housed in a bungalow which the animators dubbed \"Termite Terrace.\" In 1935, Porky Pig, the first major \"Looney Tunes\" star, made his debut in the \"Merrie Melodies\" cartoon \"I Haven't Got a Hat\", directed by Friz Freleng, featuring an ensemble of characters headed by Beans the Cat. However, after Avery's \"Looney Tune\" debut \"Gold Diggers of '49\" it was Porky who emerged as the star instead of Beans. The ensemble characters of \"I Haven't Got a Hat\", such as Oliver Owl and the twin dogs Ham and Ex, were quickly dropped. Beans would be phased out as well by mid-1936, leaving Porky as the only star of the Schlesinger studio.\n1936\u20131944: More star characters and switch to color.\nThe debuts of other memorable \"Looney Tunes\" stars soon followed: Daffy Duck in \"Porky's Duck Hunt\" (1937), Elmer Fudd in the \"Merrie Melodies\" short \"Elmer's Candid Camera\" (1940), Bugs Bunny in the \"Merrie Melodies\" short \"A Wild Hare\" (1940), and Tweety in the \"Merrie Melodies\" short \"A Tale of Two Kitties\" (1942).\nBugs initially starred in the color \"Merrie Melodies\" shorts following the success of 1940's \"A Wild Hare\", and formally joined the \"Looney Tunes\" series with the release of \"Buckaroo Bugs\" in 1944. \nSchlesinger began to phase in the production of color \"Looney Tunes\" with the 1942 cartoon \"The Hep Cat\". The final black-and-white \"Looney Tunes\" short was \"Puss n' Booty\" in 1943, directed by Frank Tashlin. The inspiration for the changeover was Warner's decision to re-release only the color cartoons in the \"Blue Ribbon Classics\" series of \"Merrie Melodies\". A brief cameo at the end of Tashlin's 1943 cartoon \"Porky Pig's Feat\" would be Bugs' only official appearance in a black-and-white \"Looney Tunes\" short.\nSchlesinger sold the cartoon studio in 1944 to Warner Bros. and went into retirement; he died five years later.\n1944\u20131964: The Golden era.\nMore popular \"Looney Tunes\" characters were created (most of which first appeared in \"Merrie Melodies\" cartoons), such as Pep\u00e9 Le Pew (debuted in 1945's \"Odor-able Kitty\"), Sylvester (debuted in 1945's \"Life with Feathers\"), Yosemite Sam (debuted in 1945's \"Hare Trigger\"), Foghorn Leghorn (debuted in 1946's \"Walky Talky Hawky\"), Marvin the Martian (debuted in 1948's \"Haredevil Hare\"), Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner (debuted in 1949's \"Fast and Furry-ous\"), Granny (debuted in 1950's \"Canary Row\"), Speedy Gonzales (debuted in 1953's \"Cat Tails for Two\"), the Tasmanian Devil (debuted in 1954's \"Devil May Hare\"), and Ralph Wolf and Sam Sheepdog (debuted in 1953's \"Don't Give Up the Sheep\").\nIt was during this era that the series won five Academy Awards:\n1964\u20131969: DePatie\u2013Freleng and Seven Arts era.\nDuring the mid-late 1960s, the shorts were produced by DePatie\u2013Freleng Enterprises (and Format Productions) (1964\u20131967) and Warner Bros.-Seven Arts (1967\u20131969) after Warner Bros. shut down their animation studio. The shorts from this era can be identified by their different title sequence, featuring stylized limited animation and graphics on a black background and a new arrangement, by William Lava, of \"The Merry-Go-Round Broke Down\" which had first been used in the 1963 experimental short \"Now Hear This\" directed by Chuck Jones.\nIn 1967, Warner Bros.-Seven Arts commissioned an animation studio in South Korea to redraw 79 black-and-white Looney Tunes produced from 1935 to 1943 in color which were syndicated to TV stations from the late 1960s to the early 1990s.\nThe original \"Looney Tunes\" theatrical series ran from 1930's \"Sinkin' in the Bathtub\" to 1969's \"Injun Trouble\" by Robert McKimson.\nA Cool Cat cartoon called \"Stage Cat\" was planned, about Cool Cat being in a stage production, but it was cancelled when Warner Bros.-Seven Arts shut down.\n1970\u20131999: Syndication and return to television and film.\nThe \"Looney Tunes\" series' popularity was further strengthened when it began airing on network and syndicated television in the 1950s under various titles and formats. The \"Looney Tunes\" shorts were broadcast with edits to remove scenes of violence (particularly suicidal gags and scenes of characters performing dangerous stunts that impressionable viewers could easily imitate), stereotypes, and alcohol consumption.\nProduction of theatrical animated shorts was dormant from 1969 until 1979, when new shorts were made to introduce the \"Looney Tunes\" to a new generation of audiences. New shorts have been produced and released sporadically for theaters since then, though usually as promotional tie-ins with various family movies produced by Warner Bros. While many have been released in limited releases theatrically for Academy Award consideration, only a few have gained theatrical releases with movies.\nIn the 1970s through the early 1990s, several feature-film compilations and television specials were produced, mostly centering on Bugs Bunny and/or Daffy Duck, with a mixture of new and old footage. These releases include \"The Bugs Bunny/Road Runner Movie\" (1979), \"The Looney Looney Looney Bugs Bunny Movie\" (1981), \"\" (1982), \"Daffy Duck's Fantastic Island\" (1983), and \"Daffy Duck's Quackbusters\" (1988).\nIn 1976, the \"Looney Tunes\" characters made their way into the amusement park business when they became the mascots for Marriott's two Great America theme parks in Gurnee, Illinois, and Santa Clara, California. After the Gurnee park was sold to Six Flags in 1984, they also claimed the rights to use the characters at the other Six Flags parks, which continues to the present. (Warner Bros. parent company Time Warner would own the Six Flags chain in whole or part for most of the 1990s.)\nBetween 1985 and 1992, AMC Theatres showed selected late 1950s/early 1960s-era Warner Bros. cartoons before several films, most of them comedies and family-oriented movies.\nIn 1988, several \"Looney Tunes\" characters appeared in cameo roles in the Disney film \"Who Framed Roger Rabbit\". The more significant cameos featured Bugs, Daffy, Porky, Tweety, and Yosemite Sam. It is the only time in which \"Looney Tunes\" characters have shared screen time with their rivals at Disney (producers of the film)\u2014particularly in the scenes where Bugs and Mickey Mouse are skydiving, and when Daffy and Donald Duck are performing their \"Dueling Pianos\" sequence.\nOn July 10, 1989, after a battle with heart problems, Mel Blanc died at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center of cardiovascular disease. A picture depicting the \"Looney Tunes\" characters entitled \"Speechless\" was released shortly after his death.\nViacom-owned Nickelodeon aired \"Looney Tunes\" cartoons in a show called \"Looney Tunes on Nickelodeon\" between 1988 and 1999. Initially, the Nickelodeon package included cartoons that were typically omitted from the higher-profile Saturday morning network and syndicated weekday packages, including black-and-white Bosko cartoons that had not aired in many years and cartoons from the late DePatie\u2013Freling and Seven Arts eras. In January 1999, it was reported that the cartoons shown on Nickelodeon would move to Cartoon Network in the fall of that year. To date, \"Looney Tunes on Nickelodeon\" is the longest-airing animated series on the network that was not a Nicktoon.\nIn 1991, the Looney Tunes characters made their appearance at Warner Bros. Movie World on the Gold Coast in Australia. It marked the launch of \"Looney Tunes Land,\" the park's inaugural themed area.\nIn 1996, \"Space Jam\", a live-action animated film, was released to theaters starring Bugs Bunny and basketball player Michael Jordan. Despite a mixed critical reception, the film was a major box-office success, grossing nearly $100\u00a0million in the U.S. alone, almost becoming the first non-Disney animated film to achieve that feat. For a two-year period, it was the highest grossing non-Disney animated film ever. The film also introduced the character Lola Bunny, who subsequently became another recurring member of the \"Looney Tunes\" cast, usually as a love interest for Bugs.\nIn 1997, Bugs Bunny was featured on a U.S. 32 cent postage stamp, the first of five \"Looney Tunes\" themed stamps to be issued.\nThe \"Looney Tunes\" also achieved success in the area of television during this era, with appearances in several originally produced series, including \"Taz-Mania\" (1991, starring Taz) and \"The Sylvester &amp; Tweety Mysteries\" (1995, starring Sylvester, Tweety, and Granny). The gang also made frequent cameos in the 1990 spinoff series \"Tiny Toon Adventures\", from executive producer Steven Spielberg, where they played teachers and mentors to a younger generation of cartoon characters (Plucky Duck, Hamton J. Pig, Babs and Buster Bunny, etc.), plus occasional cameos in the later Warner Bros. shows such as \"Animaniacs\" (also from Spielberg) and \"Histeria!\". Traditional cel animation was used to animate the characters for \"Looney Tunes\"' cartoons until 1999 when it was replaced with digital ink and paint animation.\nIn 1979, \"Bugs Bunny's Christmas Carol\" premiered. After \"The Chocolate Chase\", there would not be another short released for seven years. In 1990, it was made so there would be about one short per year until 1998. In 2003, there would be seven shorts produced to promote \"\". The first of these to be released was \"Whizzard of Ow\", which appeared on a DVD release of \"Back in Action\" that was sold exclusively at Wal-Mart stores. Only about half of the shorts were shown in theaters; the rest would not be made available until 2004, when all seven shorts were included on the general home video release of the film. In 2010, five computer-animated shorts would be released and directed by Matthew O'Callaghan, who would also direct another short, \"Flash in the Pain\", in 2014.\n2000\u20132014: Network exploration.\nIn March 2000, it was revealed that the entire \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" library would be exclusive to Cartoon Network, starting with the fall of that year. \"Looney Tunes\" shorts were still airing on Disney's ABC as part of \"The Bugs Bunny and Tweety Show\" at the time and the decision led to the show's cancellation. This decision would remain in effect for over 20 years until MeTV began airing the classic Warner Bros. cartoons (along with MGM and Paramount's library) in January 2021. In 2003, another feature film was released, this time in an attempt to recapture the spirit of the original shorts: the live-action/animated \"\". Although the film was not financially successful, it was met with mixed-to-positive reviews from film critics and has been argued by animation historians and fans as the finest original feature-length appearance of the cartoon characters. In 2006, Warner Home Video released a new and Christmas-themed \"Looney Tunes\" direct-to-video film called \"Bah, Humduck! A Looney Tunes Christmas\", a parody of Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\". Other \"Looney Tunes\" TV series made during this time were \"Baby Looney Tunes\" (2001\u20132006), \"Duck Dodgers\" (2003\u20132005) and \"Loonatics Unleashed\" (2005\u20132007).\nOn October 22, 2007, \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" cartoons became available for the first time in High-definition via Microsoft's Xbox Live service, including some in Spanish. From February 29 \u2013 May 18, 2008, many \"Looney Tunes\" artifacts, including original animation cels and concept drawings, were on display at the Butler Institute of American Art in Youngstown, Ohio, just off the campus of Youngstown State University, near where the Warners lived early in life.\nAt the 2009 Cartoon Network upfront, \"The Looney Tunes Show\" was announced. After several delays, the series premiered on May 3, 2011. Produced by Warner Bros. Animation, the series centers on Bugs and Daffy as they leave the woods and move to the suburbs with \"colorful neighbors\" including Sylvester, Tweety, Granny, Yosemite Sam, etc. The series introduced the character Tina Russo, a duck who becomes Daffy's girlfriend. The show also features 2-minute music videos titled respectfully \"Merrie Melodies\" (as a tribute to the \"Looney Tunes\" sister shorts) which features the characters singing original songs, as well as CGI animated shorts starring Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner (which were removed after the first season). The series was cancelled after its second season.\nAlso, Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner returned to the big screen in a series of 3-D shorts that preceded select Warner Bros. films. There were six in the works that began with the first short, \"Coyote Falls\", that preceded the film ', which was released on July 30, 2010. On September 24, 2010, \"Fur of Flying\" preceded the film, ', and on December 17, 2010, \"Rabid Rider\" preceded the film, \"Yogi Bear\". On June 8, 2011, Warner Bros. Animation announced that there would be more \"Looney Tunes\" 3-D theatrical shorts; the first titled \"Daffy's Rhapsody\" with Daffy Duck and Elmer Fudd, the next being \"I Tawt I Taw a Puddy Tat\" with Sylvester, Tweety,\u00a0and\u00a0Granny. \"Daffy's Rhapsody\" was to precede the film \"Happy Feet Two\", until the studio decided to premiere \"I Tawt I Taw a Puddy Tat\" instead. \"Daffy's Rhapsody\" instead premiered in 2012, preceding \"\". All five shorts were directed by Matthew O'Callaghan.\nIn 2012, several announcements were made about a \"Looney Tunes\" reboot film titled \"Acme\", in development. Former \"Saturday Night Live\" cast member Jenny Slate was said to be on board as writer for the new film. Jeffrey Clifford, \"Harry Potter\" producer David Heyman, and \"Dark Shadows\" writers David Katzenberg and Seth Grahame-Smith were slated to produce the film. On August 27, 2014, writers Ashley Miller and Zack Stentz were hired to script the film, directors Glenn Ficarra and John Requa were in talks to direct the film, while actor Steve Carell was rumored to be starring in a lead role. By October 2014, the project was no longer in the works.\n2015\u20132022: Revival.\nAt the 2014 Cartoon Network upfront, another series titled \"Wabbit: A Looney Tunes Production\" (later \"New Looney Tunes\") was announced. Starring Bugs Bunny, the series premiered on both Cartoon Network and its sister channel Boomerang in late 2015. The series had an unusually slow rollout, with the series being moved to the Boomerang streaming service in 2017, and was eventually cancelled on January 30, 2020.\nOn June 11, 2018, another series, titled \"Looney Tunes Cartoons\", was announced by Warner Bros. Animation. It premiered on May 27, 2020, on the streaming service HBO Max. The series features \"1,000 minutes of new one-to-six minute cartoons featuring the brand's marquee characters\", voiced by their current voice actors in \"simple, gag-driven and visually vibrant stories\" that are rendered by multiple artists employing \"a visual style that will resonate with fans\", most noticeably having a style reminiscent of the styles of Tex Avery, Bob Clampett, Chuck Jones, Friz Freleng and Robert McKimson. According to co-executive producer Peter Browngardt, \"We're not doing guns, but we can do cartoony violence \u2014 TNT, the Acme stuff. All that was kind of grandfathered in.\" Sam Register, president of Warner Bros. Animation also served as a co-executive producer for the series. The final season was released on July 27, 2023, and a bonus episode was released on June 13, 2024.\nOn February 11, 2021, it was announced two new series were in the works: \"Bugs Bunny Builders\" and \"Tweety Mysteries\". \"Bugs Bunny Builders\" began airing on Cartoon Network as part of Cartoonito and HBO Max on July 25, 2022; \"Tweety Mysteries\" would also air on Cartoon Network. \"Bugs Bunny Builders\" is aimed towards preschoolers; while \"Tweety Mysteries\" would have been a live-action/animated hybrid. However, the latter was scrapped for unknown reasons.\nA sequel to \"Space Jam\" titled \"\", starring basketball player LeBron James, was released in theaters and HBO Max on July 16, 2021, after a Los Angeles special screening on July 12, 2021. It is a film with a story of LeBron James' second son, Dom (Cedric Joe), who gets kidnapped by an evil AI named Al. G Rhythm (Don Cheadle), into the Warner Bros. server-verse. LeBron then assembles the Tune Squad to play against the algorithm and get his son back. It received generally negative reviews and underperformed at the box office.\n2022\u2013present: Warner Bros. Discovery ownership.\nA reboot of \"Tiny Toon Adventures\" titled \"Tiny Toons Looniversity\" premiered on September 8, 2023, on Max and then aired the following day on Cartoon Network. The Looney Tunes characters reprise their roles as the professors at Acme Looniversity in this series.\nIn September 2021, it was reported that a film based on the \"Looney Tunes Cartoons\", titled \"\" and starring Daffy Duck and Porky Pig, was announced for release on HBO Max and Cartoon Network. However, it was reported in August 2022 that the film would instead be shopped around to other streaming services. In October 2023, it was announced the film would instead be released in theaters, becoming the first animated non-compilation feature film in the franchise to do so. In early August 2024, it was announced that Ketchup Entertainment acquired the North American theatrical distribution rights to the film. The film was released in theaters in the United States on March 14, 2025.\nOn December 31, 2022, 256 classic \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" shorts were removed from HBO Max, including \"What's Opera, Doc?\" and \"Duck Amuck\", though many were later re-added in March 2024 when the shorts on the service were rotated.\nIn August 2024, it was reported that Warner Bros. was planning to relaunch the \"Looney Tunes\" theatrical film series in 2028. In October 2024, it was reported that Warner Bros. was working on a \"super secret \"Looney Tunes\" project\" with directors Todd Wilderman and Hamish Grieve.\nOn March 16, 2025, two days after \"The Day the Earth Blew Up\" expanded to a wide release, all of the classic \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" shorts were removed from the Max streaming service. Three days later, it was reported that Warner Bros. was in talks with Ketchup, who had distributed \"The Day the Earth Blew Up\" in the United States, to sell the distribution rights to the shelved movie \"Coyote vs. Acme\". On March 31, the negotiations proved successful. The film is currently scheduled to be released in theaters in the United States on August 28, 2026.\nAt CinemaCon 2025, Warner Bros. Pictures Animation confirmed development on a new \"Looney Tunes\" animated feature film.\nOn August 15, 2025, the classic \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" shorts began streaming on the ad-supported free streaming service Tubi.\nHome media.\nIn the 1980s, the shorts received VHS releases, with the pre-August 1948 shorts released by MGM/UA Home Video and the post-July 1948 shorts released by Warner Home Video. In 2003, Warner Home Video began releasing select shorts on DVD, aimed at collectors, in four-disc sets known as the \"Looney Tunes Golden Collection\" starting with . This continued until 2008, when was released. Then, from 2010 until 2013, the company released the \"Looney Tunes Super Stars\" DVDs. There have been numerous complaints regarding the \"Super Stars\" releases, however (particularly the first two), having the post-1953 shorts in a 16:9 widescreen format. The last DVD in the \"Super Stars\" series was \"Sylvester and Hippety Hopper: Marsupial Mayhem\", released on April 23, 2013. 2010 and 2011 saw the releases of \"The Essential Bugs Bunny\" and \"The Essential Daffy Duck\" DVDs. In 2011, the shorts were released on Blu-ray Disc for the first time with the \"Looney Tunes Platinum Collection\" series. On September 19, 2017, Warner Home Video's Warner Archive Collection released the five-disc \"Porky Pig 101\" DVD set.\nIn 2023, it was announced that a new line of single-disc Blu-ray sets called the \"Looney Tunes Collector's Choice\" would release beginning on May 30. The following shorts known to be on this set are all newly remastered from the original negatives. It is a successor to the \"Looney Tunes Platinum Collection\" DVD/Blu-ray sets. Four Blu-ray sets were released until November 26, 2024. A two-disc successor to \"Collector's Choice\", titled \"Looney Tunes Collector's Vault\", began releasing on June 17, 2025.\nLicensing and ownership.\nIn 1933, Harman and Ising left, taking the rights to Bosko with them. However, Warner Bros. retained the rights to the cartoons and the \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" brand names, leaving their former producer Leon Schlesinger to start his own animation studio to continue the \"Looney Tunes\" series. With their retained Bosko rights, Harman and Ising began making cartoons at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1934 until they were fired in 1937 due to a lack of success. MGM proceeded to form their own studio to create its own cartoons. Time Warner eventually acquired the Bosko characters from Harman and Ising's estates. Meanwhile, the Schlesinger studio continued to make popular cartoons until 1944 when Schlesinger sold his studio to Warner Bros. Since then, Warner Bros. has owned all rights to all post-1933 characters created by Leon Schlesinger Productions and Warner Bros. Cartoons, even after the rights to individual cartoons were placed in other hands.\nIn 1955, Warner Bros. sold the television distribution rights to 191 of its cartoons (which included the black-and-white \"Looney Tunes\" and the black-and-white \"Merrie Melodies\" made after Harman and Ising left) to Guild Films. The copyrights to those cartoons were assigned to Sunset Productions, an entity owned by Warner Bros. The cartoons were distributed by Guild Films until it went bankrupt and was bought by Seven Arts Productions. Seven Arts bought WB in 1967, and WB regained the TV distribution rights to the black-and-white cartoons.\nIn 1956, Associated Artists Productions (a.a.p.) acquired television distribution rights to most of Warner Bros.' pre-1950 library, including all \"Merrie Melodies\" (except for those sold to Guild and \"Lady, Play Your Mandolin!\") and color \"Looney Tunes\" shorts that were released prior to August 1948, while Warner still owned the copyright to all of the cartoons. Unlike the previous TV package, this package had the Warner titles kept intact and an \"Associated Artists Productions presents\" title inserted at the head of each reel (as a result, each post-1936 \"Merrie Melodies\" cartoon and pre-1956 Blue Ribbon cartoon had the song \"Merrily We Roll Along\" playing twice). Two years later, United Artists bought a.a.p. (which had also bought Paramount's \"Popeye\" films) who merged the company into its television division, United Artists Television. In 1981, UA was sold to MGM. In 1982, Warner Communications was in talks to buy back rights to the pre-1950 Warner Bros. Pictures library (which consists of the live-action and animation short titles made before 1948) from MGM/UA for $100 million in cash. The deal was called off on July 28 of that year; the negotiations fell apart because of dozens of unresolved points, probably relating to the oldest Warner Bros. films. When in 1986, Ted Turner acquired all of MGM's legacy content up to that point, he also acquired the rights to the a.a.p. library. Turner's company, Turner Broadcasting System (whose Turner Entertainment Co. division oversaw the film library), was purchased by Warner Bros.' corporate parent, Time Warner (now Warner Bros. Discovery), in 1996. When MGM/UA terminated its distribution deal with Time Warner in 1999, it surrendered its home video rights to the a.a.p. library to Warner Home Video, restoring full rights to the pre-August 1948 cartoons to Warner Bros.\nStarting in 1960, the cartoons were repackaged into several different TV programs that remained popular for several decades before being purchased by Turner Broadcasting System. Turner's Cartoon Network reran the cartoons from its launch in 1992 until 2004, again from 2009 until 2017, and making a temporary return in April 2023 to celebrate WB's 100th anniversary. \"The Looney Tunes Show\" (not to be confused with the 2010s animated series of the same name), an early 2000s anthology produced by Warner Bros. Animation for the network, was broadcast from 2001 to 2004. The show featured shorts from the original \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" theatrical series. As of 2025, classic cartoons continue to air on CN's sister channels Boomerang and Discovery Family and are licensed to Weigel Broadcasting-owned MeTV. Starting in 2024, the classic cartoons began airing on MeTV's sister channel MeTV Toons. \nPublic domain status.\nFive dozen \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" shorts from before 1944 have fallen into the American public domain and are thus freely distributed through various unofficial releases. All shorts from 1930 and 1931 and most shorts from 1932 are believed to be in the public domain due to non-renewal. The earliest short with a known copyright renewal is \"Ride Him, Bosko!\" from 1932.\nCharacters.\nThe major characters of the original \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" series are Bugs Bunny, a clever and insouciant rabbit who is portrayed as a trickster; Daffy Duck, a black duck who was originally portrayed as a screwball, but later became greedy and egocentric; Porky Pig, a stuttering pig who often appears as the straight man to Daffy, and is the oldest of the franchise's recurring characters; Sylvester the Cat, his prey Tweety (a small canary), and their elderly owner Granny; Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner, who routinely engage in high-speed chases in their home in the Southwest American desert; Elmer Fudd, an unintelligent hunter who is Bugs' oldest nemesis; Yosemite Sam, a hot-tempered cowboy who is another of Bugs' archenemies; Foghorn Leghorn, a rooster who is known for his often excessive ranting; Marvin the Martian, an alien commander from the planet Mars, who aims to conquer the Earth; the Tasmanian Devil (often nicknamed \"Taz\" in later media), a vicious, brutal marsupial with an insatiable appetite; Pep\u00e9 Le Pew, a French skunk who is always looking for love and romance; and Speedy Gonzales, the self-proclaimed \"fastest mouse in all of Mexico\". One additional major character was introduced in post-Golden Age \"Looney Tunes\" media (starting with \"Space Jam\"): Lola Bunny, a female rabbit who is usually portrayed as Bugs' girlfriend.\nRacial stereotypes and censorship controversies.\nDue to content considered offensive, stereotyped or insensitive, in 1968 United Artists, then the owners of the pre-August 1948 color cartoon library, removed the \"Censored Eleven\" episodes of \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" cartoons from broadcast or distribution. Depictions included those of African Americans (as in \"Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs\" and \"Jungle Jitters\"), Native Americans, Japanese people (especially during WWII, as in \"Tokio Jokio\" and \"Bugs Bunny Nips the Nips\"), Germans, Italians, White Southerners, and Mexicans.\nIn 1999, Cartoon Network ceased broadcast of all of Speedy Gonzales' cartoons, due to concerns about stereotyping of Mexicans. Many Latinos protested that they were not offended, and expressed fondness for Speedy; the character's shorts were made available for broadcast on CN again in 2002.\nMany Warner Bros. cartoons contain fleeting or sometimes extended gags that make reference to racial or ethnic stereotypes, or use ethnic humor. The release of the ' includes a disclaimer at the beginning of each DVD in the volume given by Whoopi Goldberg. She explains that the cartoons are products of their time and contain racial and ethnic stereotypes that \"were wrong then and they are wrong today\", but the cartoons are presented on the DVD uncut and uncensored because \"editing them would be the same as denying that the stereotypes existed.\" A similarly phrased written disclaimer is shown at the beginning of each DVD in the ', ', and ' sets, as well as the Daffy Duck and Foghorn Leghorn \"Looney Tunes Super Stars\" sets, the ' and ' sets, the \"Porky Pig 101\" set, and the Warner Bros. Home Entertainment Academy Awards Animation Collection.\nRelated media.\nTelevision series.\nSeries marked with * are compilations of earlier shorts.\nComic books.\n\"Looney Tunes\" comic books were published beginning in 1941 by Dell Comics under license. These comics were, like many published by Dell, were produced in partnership with Western Publishing. After Dell and Western ended their partnership in 1962, Western continued the series under their Gold Key Comics and Whitman imprints through 1984. Beginning in 1990, DC Comics, which is owned by Warner Bros., has published \"Looney Tunes\" comics.\nVideo games.\nVideo games based on \"Looney Tunes\" characters began in 1979 with the \"Road Runner\" pinball machine. More titles would continue to be released as video game hardware evolved throughout the 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, and 2010s. Prominent characters who have received multiple video games include Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, the Tasmanian Devil, Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner, Speedy Gonzales, and Sylvester and Tweety.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50306", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50306", "title": "977", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 977 (CMLXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50307", "revid": "15945033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50307", "title": "V Olympic Winter Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "50308", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50308", "title": "Games of the XIV Olympiad", "text": ""}
{"id": "50309", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50309", "title": "973", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 973 (CMLXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50310", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50310", "title": "Games of the XI Olympiad", "text": ""}
{"id": "50311", "revid": "16344749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50311", "title": "Colorado River (disambiguation)", "text": "The Colorado River is one of the principal rivers of the southwestern United States and northwest Mexico.\nColorado River may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "50312", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50312", "title": "XIX Olympic Winter Games", "text": ""}
{"id": "50318", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50318", "title": "Symmetric multiprocessing", "text": "Equal sharing of all resources by multiple identical processors\nSymmetric multiprocessing or shared-memory multiprocessing (SMP) involves a multiprocessor computer hardware and software architecture where two or more identical processors are connected to a single, shared main memory, have full access to all input and output devices, and are controlled by a single operating system instance that treats all processors equally, reserving none for special purposes. Most multiprocessor systems today use an SMP architecture. In the case of multi-core processors, the SMP architecture applies to the cores, treating them as separate processors.\nProfessor John D. Kubiatowicz considers traditionally SMP systems to contain processors without caches. Culler and Pal-Singh in their 1998 book \"Parallel Computer Architecture: A Hardware/Software Approach\" mention: \"The term SMP is widely used but causes a bit of confusion. [...] The more precise description of what is intended by SMP is a shared memory multiprocessor where the cost of accessing a memory location is the same for all processors; that is, it has uniform access costs when the access actually is to memory. If the location is cached, the access will be faster, but cache access times and memory access times are the same on all processors.\"\nSMP systems are \"tightly coupled multiprocessor systems\" with a pool of homogeneous processors running independently of each other. Each processor, executing different programs and working on different sets of data, has the capability of sharing common resources (memory, I/O device, interrupt system and so on) that are connected using a system bus or a crossbar. \nDesign.\nSMP systems have centralized shared memory called \"main memory\" (MM) operating under a single operating system with two or more homogeneous processors. Usually each processor has an associated private high-speed memory known as cache memory (or cache) to speed up the main memory data access and to reduce the system bus traffic.\nProcessors may be interconnected using buses, crossbar switches or on-chip mesh networks. The bottleneck in the scalability of SMP using buses or crossbar switches is the bandwidth and power consumption of the interconnect among the various processors, the memory, and the disk arrays. Mesh architectures avoid these bottlenecks, and provide nearly linear scalability to much higher processor counts at the sacrifice of programmability:\nSerious programming challenges remain with this kind of architecture because it requires two distinct modes of programming, one for the CPUs themselves and one for the interconnect between the CPUs. A single programming language would have to be able to not only partition the workload, but also comprehend the memory locality, which is severe in a mesh-based architecture.\nSMP systems allow any processor to work on any task no matter where the data for that task is located in memory, provided that each task in the system is not in execution on two or more processors at the same time. With proper operating system support, SMP systems can easily move tasks between processors to balance the workload efficiently.\nHistory.\nThe earliest production system with multiple identical processors was the Burroughs B5000, which was functional around 1961. However at run-time this was asymmetric, with one processor restricted to application programs while the other processor mainly handled the operating system and hardware interrupts. The Burroughs D825 first implemented SMP in 1962.\nIBM offered dual-processor computer systems based on its System/360 Model 65 and the closely related Model 67 and 67\u20132. The operating systems that ran on these machines were OS/360 M65MP and TSS/360. Other software developed at universities, notably the Michigan Terminal System (MTS), used both CPUs. Both processors could access data channels and initiate I/O. In OS/360 M65MP, peripherals could generally be attached to either processor since the operating system kernel ran on both processors (though with a \"big lock\" around the I/O handler). The MTS supervisor (UMMPS) has the ability to run on both CPUs of the IBM System/360 model 67\u20132. Supervisor locks were small and used to protect individual common data structures that might be accessed simultaneously from either CPU.\nOther mainframes that supported SMP included the UNIVAC 1108 II, released in 1965, which supported up to three CPUs, and the GE-635 and GE-645, although GECOS on multiprocessor GE-635 systems ran in a master-slave asymmetric fashion, unlike Multics on multiprocessor GE-645 systems, which ran in a symmetric fashion.\nStarting with its version 7.0 (1972), Digital Equipment Corporation's operating system TOPS-10 implemented the SMP feature, the earliest system running SMP was the DECSystem 1077 dual KI10 processor system. Later KL10 system could aggregate up to 8 CPUs in a SMP manner. In contrast, DECs first multi-processor VAX system, the VAX-11/782, was asymmetric, but later VAX multiprocessor systems were SMP.\nEarly commercial Unix SMP implementations included the Sequent Computer Systems Balance 8000 (released in 1984) and Balance 21000 (released in 1986). Both models were based on 10\u00a0MHz National Semiconductor NS32032 processors, each with a small write-through cache connected to a common memory to form a shared memory system. Another early commercial Unix SMP implementation was the NUMA based Honeywell Information Systems Italy XPS-100 designed by Dan Gielan of VAST Corporation in 1985. Its design supported up to 14 processors, but due to electrical limitations, the largest marketed version was a dual processor system. The operating system was derived and ported by VAST Corporation from AT&amp;T 3B20 Unix SysVr3 code used internally within AT&amp;T.\nEarlier non-commercial multiprocessing UNIX ports existed, including a port named MUNIX created at the Naval Postgraduate School by 1975.\nUses.\nTime-sharing and server systems can often use SMP without changes to applications, as they may have multiple processes running in parallel, and a system with more than one process running can run different processes on different processors.\nOn personal computers, SMP is less useful for applications that have not been modified. If the system rarely runs more than one process at a time, SMP is useful only for applications that have been modified for multithreaded (multitasked) processing. Custom-programmed software can be written or modified to use multiple threads, so that it can make use of multiple processors.\nMultithreaded programs can also be used in time-sharing and server systems that support multithreading, allowing them to make more use of multiple processors.\nAdvantages/disadvantages.\nIn current SMP systems, all of the processors are tightly coupled inside the same box with a bus or switch; on earlier SMP systems, a single CPU took an entire cabinet. Some of the components that are shared are global memory, disks, and I/O devices. Only one copy of an OS runs on all the processors, and the OS must be designed to take advantage of this architecture. Some of the basic advantages involves cost-effective ways to increase throughput. To solve different problems and tasks, SMP applies multiple processors to that one problem, known as parallel programming.\nHowever, there are a few limits on the scalability of SMP due to cache coherence and shared objects.\nProgramming.\nUniprocessor and SMP systems require different programming methods to achieve maximum performance. Programs running on SMP systems may experience an increase in performance even when they have been written for uniprocessor systems. This is because hardware interrupts usually suspends program execution while the kernel that handles them can execute on an idle processor instead. The effect in most applications (e.g. games) is not so much a performance increase as the appearance that the program is running much more smoothly. Some applications, particularly building software and some distributed computing projects, run faster by a factor of (nearly) the number of additional processors. (Compilers by themselves are single threaded, but, when building a software project with multiple compilation units, if each compilation unit is handled independently, this creates an embarrassingly parallel situation across the entire multi-compilation-unit project, allowing near linear scaling of compilation time. Distributed computing projects are inherently parallel by design.)\nSystems programmers must build support for SMP into the operating system, otherwise, the additional processors remain idle and the system functions as a uniprocessor system.\nSMP systems can also lead to more complexity regarding instruction sets. A homogeneous processor system typically requires extra registers for \"special instructions\" such as SIMD (MMX, SSE, etc.), while a heterogeneous system can implement different types of hardware for different instructions/uses.\nPerformance.\nWhen more than one program executes at the same time, an SMP system has considerably better performance than a uniprocessor system, because different programs can run on different CPUs simultaneously. Conversely, asymmetric multiprocessing (AMP) usually allows only one processor to run a program or task at a time. For example, AMP can be used in assigning specific tasks to CPU based to priority and importance of task completion. AMP was created well before SMP in terms of handling multiple CPUs, which explains the lack of performance based on the example provided.\nIn cases where an SMP environment processes many jobs, administrators often experience a loss of hardware efficiency. Software programs have been developed to schedule jobs and other functions of the computer so that the processor utilization reaches its maximum potential. Good software packages can achieve this maximum potential by scheduling each CPU separately, as well as being able to integrate multiple SMP machines and clusters.\nAccess to RAM is serialized; this and cache coherency issues cause performance to lag slightly behind the number of additional processors in the system.\nAlternatives.\nSMP uses a single shared system bus that represents one of the earliest styles of multiprocessor machine architectures, typically used for building smaller computers with up to 8 processors.\nLarger computer systems might use newer architectures such as NUMA (Non-Uniform Memory Access), which dedicates different memory banks to different processors. In a NUMA architecture, processors may access local memory quickly and remote memory more slowly. This can dramatically improve memory throughput as long as the data are localized to specific processes (and thus processors). On the downside, NUMA makes the cost of moving data from one processor to another, as in workload balancing, more expensive. The benefits of NUMA are limited to particular workloads, notably on servers where the data are often associated strongly with certain tasks or users.\nFinally, there is computer clustered multiprocessing (such as Beowulf), in which not all memory is available to all processors. Clustering techniques are used fairly extensively to build very large supercomputers.\nVariable SMP.\nVariable Symmetric Multiprocessing (vSMP) is a specific mobile use case technology initiated by NVIDIA. This technology includes an extra fifth core in a quad-core device, called the Companion core, built specifically for executing tasks at a lower frequency during mobile active standby mode, video playback, and music playback.\nProject Kal-El (Tegra 3), patented by NVIDIA, was the first SoC (System on Chip) to implement this new vSMP technology. This technology reduces mobile power consumption during active standby state, and also maximizes quad core performance during active usage for intensive mobile applications. Overall this technology addresses the need for increase in battery life performance during active and standby usage by reducing the power consumption in mobile processors.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50319", "revid": "1319755453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50319", "title": "SMP", "text": "SMP may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "50320", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50320", "title": "Credit money", "text": ""}
{"id": "50321", "revid": "50962906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50321", "title": "Amy Tan", "text": "American novelist (born 1952)\nAmy Ruth Tan (born February 19, 1952) is an American author best known for her novel \"The Joy Luck Club\" (1989), which was adapted into a 1993 film. She is also known for other novels, short story collections, children's books, and a memoir.\nTan has earned a number of awards acknowledging her contributions to literary culture, including the National Humanities Medal, the Carl Sandburg Literary Award, and the\u00a0Common Wealth Award of Distinguished Service.\nTan has written several other novels, including \"The Kitchen God's Wife\" (1991), \"The Hundred Secret Senses\" (1995), \"The Bonesetter's Daughter\" (2001), \"Saving Fish from Drowning\" (2005), and \"The Valley of Amazement\" (2013). Tan has also written two children's books: \"The Moon Lady\" (1992) and \"The Chinese Siamese Cat\" (1994), which was turned into an animated series that aired on PBS. Tan's latest book is \"The Backyard Bird Chronicles\" (2024), an illustrated account of her experiences with birding and the 2016-era sociopolitical climate.\nEarly life and education.\nAmy was born in Oakland, California. She is the second of three children born to Chinese immigrants John and Daisy Tan. Her father was an electrical engineer and Baptist minister who traveled to the United States, to escape the chaos of the Chinese Civil War. John Tan was pastor of First Chinese Baptist Church of Fresno, California when Amy was born. She recounts that her father and she would read the thesaurus together, since \"he was very interested in what a word contains.\" This was the beginning of her path to becoming a writer, as she wanted to use words to create stories to make herself feel understood. Amy attended Marian A. Peterson High School in Sunnyvale, for a year. When she was fifteen, her father and older brother, Peter, both died of brain tumors within six months of each other.\nHer mother Daisy subsequently moved Amy and her younger brother, John Jr, to Switzerland, where Amy finished high school at the Institut Monte Rosa, Montreux. During this period, Amy learned about her mother's previous marriage to another man in China, of their four children (a son who died as a toddler and three daughters). She also learned how her mother left those children in Shanghai. This incident was a catalyst for Amy's first novel, \"The Joy Luck Club\". In 1987, Amy traveled with Daisy to China, where she met her three half-sisters.\nAmy had a difficult relationship with her mother. At one point, Daisy held a knife to Amy's throat and threatened to kill her while the two were arguing over Amy's new boyfriend. Her mother wanted Amy to be independent, stressing that Amy needed to make sure she was self-sufficient. Amy later found out that her mother had three abortions, while in China. Daisy often threatened to kill herself, saying that she wanted to join her mother (Amy's grandmother, who died by suicide). She attempted suicide but never succeeded. Daisy died in 1999 at the age of 83; she had Alzheimer's disease.\nAmy and her mother did not speak for six months, after Amy dropped out of the Baptist college her mother had selected for her, Linfield College in Oregon, to follow her boyfriend to San Jose City College in California. Amy met him on a blind date, and married him in 1974. Amy, later, received bachelor's and master's degrees in English and linguistics from San Jos\u00e9 State University. She took doctoral courses in linguistics at University of California, Santa Cruz and University of California, Berkeley.\nCareer.\nWhile in school, Tan worked several odd jobs\u2014serving as a switchboard operator, carhop, bartender, and pizza maker\u2014before starting a writing career. As a freelance business writer, she worked on projects for AT&amp;T, IBM, Bank of America, and Pacific Bell, writing under non-Chinese-sounding pseudonyms. These projects had turned into a 90-hours-a-week workaholism.\nThe Joy Luck Club.\nEarly in 1985, Tan began writing her first novel, \"The Joy Luck Club\", while working as a business writer. She joined a writers' workshop, the Community of Writers in Olympic Valley, CA, to refine her draft. She submitted a part of the draft novel as a story titled 'Endgame' to the workshop\".\" Before attending the program, Tan read Louise Erdrich's Love Medicine and was \"amazed by her voice... [she] could identify with the powerful images, the beautiful language, and such moving stories.\" Later, many critics compared Tan to Erdrich. Author Molly Giles, who was teaching at the workshop, encouraged Tan to send some of her writing to magazines. Tan credits Giles with guiding her to the end of writing the book. It began with Giles' seeing a dozen stories in the 13 page draft submitted to the program. Stories by Tan, drawn from the manuscript of \"The\" \"Joy Luck Club\", were published by both FM Magazine and \"Seventeen,\" although a story was rejected by the \"New Yorker\"\".\"\nAfter the acceptances and a rejection, Tan joined a new San Francisco writers' group led by Giles.\"\" Giles recommended Tan to academic-turned agent Sandra Dijkstra, in 1987. In May of that year, an Italian magazine translated and published 'Endgame,' without permission. Dijkstra advised Tan to send her another story; \"Waiting Between the Trees\" arrived, written as an experiment to decide whether the stories collectively become a novel or a book of short stories. Dijkstra signed up Tan and asked Tan to write a synopsis for the book, along with an outline for other stories.\"\"\nWorking with Dijkstra, Tan published several other parts of the novel as short stories, before it was sent as a draft novel manuscript. She received offers from several major publishing houses, including A.A. Knopf, Vintage, Harper &amp; Row, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, Simon and Schuster, and Putnam Books, but she declined them all, as they offered compensation that she and the agent considered to be insufficient. Tan eventually accepted a second offer from G. P. Putnam's Sons for $50,000 in December 1987. \"The Joy Luck Club\" consists of eight related stories about the experiences of four Chinese\u2013American mother\u2013daughter pairs. Tan dedicated the book to her mother, with the following words: \"You asked me, once, what I would remember. This, and much more.\"\nBeing a realist, Tan had predicted to her husband that the novel would disappear from the bookstore shelves, after six weeks. She thought that most first novels meet that fate, within that time. Putnam Books auctioned the reprint rights in April 1989, which were bought by Vintage Books, the trade paperback division of Random House. Vintage's successful bid was at US$1.2 million. However, Random House decided to alter plans, and Ivy Books was assigned to print the paperback version, first, in the mass-market version, followed by Vintage, for a smaller audience, as a more expensively produced version. When the paperback version came out, its hardcover had already undergone 27 printings, with sales of over 200,000 copies. By 1991, the book had already been translated into 17 languages.\nThe Kitchen God's Wife.\nTan's second novel, \"The Kitchen God's Wife\", also focuses on the relationship between an immigrant Chinese mother and her American-born daughter. On its writing inspiration, Tan explained, \"My mother said, when I started \"The\" \"Kitchen\" \"God\"'s \"Wife\", that she liked \"The Joy Luck Club\" very much, it's very fictional, but next time, tell my story.\" Tan added that there are many fictionalized parts in the story narration, too. Tan, later, referred to this book as the \"much more\" that she remembered, as mentioned in the dedication page of her first book. This novel is significant, as it narrates a historical period of China between the 1930s and 1940s, including Nanjing Massacre.\nG. P. Putnam's Sons released the book in June 1991 and priced the hardcover at US$21.95.\nOther books.\nTan's third novel, \"The Hundred Secret Senses\", was a departure from the first two novels, in focusing on the relationships between sisters, inspired, partly, by one of the half-siblings Tan sponsored to the United States.\nTan's fourth novel, \"The Bonesetter's Daughter\", returns to the theme of an immigrant Chinese woman and her American-born daughter.\nIn 2024, Tan published \"The Backyard Bird Chronicles\", her illustrated account of birding as a coping mechanism during the divisive 2016 US Presidential election.\nWhere the Past Begins: A Writer's Memoir.\n4th Estate published Tan's memoir, in October 2017. The book cover was released earlier in April. In the book, using family photographs and journal entries, she writes about the relationship with her mother, the death of her father and brother, stories of her half-sisters and grandmother in China, her diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease, and life as a writer. In comparison to her fiction writing, Tan said a memoir is \"unvarnished.\u201d While writing a memoir, her recollection and sequence of events might not be orderly for the reader. They emerge according to their importance and how they shaped her.\nOther media.\nTan was the \"lead rhythm dominatrix,\u201d backup singer and second tambourine with the Rock Bottom Remainders literary garage band. Before the band retired from touring, it had raised more than a million dollars for literacy programs. Tan appeared as herself in the third episode of Season 12 of \"The Simpsons\", \"Insane Clown Poppy.\"\nTan's work has been adapted into several different forms of media. \"The Joy Luck Club\" was adapted into a play, in 1993; that same year, director Wayne Wang adapted the book into a film. \"The Bonesetter's Daughter\" was adapted into an opera, in 2008. Tan's children's book, \"Sagwa, the Chinese Siamese Cat,\" was adapted into an PBS animated television show, also named \"Sagwa, the Chinese Siamese Cat\".\nIn May 2021, the documentary \"Amy Tan: Unintended Memoir\" was released in the American Masters series on PBS. (It was later released on Netflix.)\nCritical reception.\nTan's writing has been praised for its bravery in exploring both the personal struggles and triumphs of immigrant families. Her first book, \"The Joy Luck Club\", which is considered a prominent contribution to the Modern Period of American literature, was called \"a jewel of a book\" by the New York Times, noting Tan's \"deep empathy for her subject matter\" and the \"rare fidelity and beauty\" of her storytelling. \"The Joy Luck Club\" went on to be a bestseller, and was a finalist for both the National Book Award and the National Book Critics Circle Award. That book, and her subsequent novels, have spent forty weeks on the New York Times Bestsellers list.\nIn 2021, Tan was presented the National Humanities Medal for her contribution to expanding the American literary canon, and in the same year won the Carl Sandburg Literary Award. Tan also received the Common Wealth Award of Distinguished Service for her contribution to world community.\nTan has received criticism, notably from Sau-ling Cynthia Wong, a professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who wrote that Tan's novels \"are often products of the American-born writer's own heavily mediated understanding of things Chinese,\u201d and author Frank Chin, who has said that her novels \"demonstrate a vested interest in casting Chinese men in the worst possible light\". Tan, in response, however, has dismissed these criticisms, stating that her works arise from her personal family experiences as a Chinese-American and are not intended as a representation of the general Chinese/Asian American experience.\nPersonal life.\nWhile Tan was studying at Berkeley, her roommate was murdered, and Tan had to identify the body. The incident left her temporarily mute. She said that every year, for ten years, on the anniversary of the day she identified the body, she lost her voice.\nTan believes she developed chronic Lyme disease, a condition unrecognized by medical science, in 1998. She attributes health complications like epileptic seizures to chronic Lyme disease. Tan co-founded LymeAid 4 Kids, which helps uninsured children pay for treatment.\nTan also developed depression, for which she was prescribed antidepressants. Part of the reason that Tan chose not to have children was a fear that she would pass on a genetic legacy of mental instability\u2014her maternal grandmother died by suicide, her mother threatened suicide often, and she herself has struggled with suicidal ideation.\nIn February 2025, the Bancroft Library of University of California, Berkeley, announced that it had acquired an archive of Tan's work through a combination of donations and purchases using endowment funds. Having previously claimed that she would have her possessions shredded upon death to avoid posthumous scrutiny, Tan explained her change-of-heart as accepting posterity.\nTan lives near San Francisco in Sausalito, California, with her husband, Lou DeMattei (whom she married in 1974), in a house they designed \"to feel open and airy, like a tree house, but also to be a place where we could live, comfortably, into old age\" with accessibility features. In recent years, she has developed interests in birding and nature journaling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50322", "revid": "4897226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50322", "title": "Polari", "text": "Form of slang\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPolari (from it\u00a0'to talk') is a form of slang or cant historically used primarily in the United Kingdom among the gay subculture, as well as some actors, circus and fairground performers, professional wrestlers, merchant navy sailors, criminals, and prostitutes.\nThere is some debate about its origins, but it can be traced to at least the 19th century and possibly as early as the 16th century. Polari has a long-standing connection with Punch and Judy street puppeteers, who traditionally used it to converse.\nTerminology.\nAlternative spellings include \"Parlare\", \"Parlary\", \"Palare\", \"Palarie\" and \"Palari\".\nDescription.\nPolari is a mixture of Romance (Italian or Mediterranean Lingua Franca), Romani, rhyming slang, sailors' slang and thieves' cant, which later expanded to contain words from Yiddish and 1960s drug subculture slang. It was constantly evolving, with a small core lexicon of about 20 words, including: ' (good), ' (nearby), ' (face), ' (bad, in the sense of tacky or vile), ' (bad, in the sense of drab or dull, though borrowed into mainstream British English with a meaning more like that of '), ' (room, house, flat), ' (not, no), ' (man), ' (woman), ' (hair), ' or ' (smarten up, stylise), ' ('to be had', sexually accessible), ' (sex) and ' (see).\nThere were once two distinct forms of Polari in London: an East End version which stressed Cockney rhyming slang and a West End version which stressed theatrical and classical influences. There was some interchange between the two.\nIn the LGBTQ community, Polari also involves inverting gendered personal pronouns and names, typically switching them from male forms to female forms. For example, \"he\" may become \"she\" (known as \"she-ing\"), and the name \"Paul\" may become \"Pauline\".\nUsage.\nFrom the 19th century on, Polari was used in London fish markets, theatres, fairgrounds, and circuses, hence the many borrowings from Romani. As many homosexual men worked in theatrical entertainment, it was also used among the gay subculture to disguise homosexuals from hostile outsiders and undercover policemen. It was also used extensively in the British Merchant Navy, where many gay men worked as waiters, stewards, and entertainers.\nAccording to \"Oxford English Dictionary\" associate editor Peter Gilliver little written evidence of Polari exists before the 1890s. The dictionary's entry for \"rozzer\" (policeman) includes a quote from P. H. Emerson's 1893 book \"Signor Lippo \u2013 Burnt Cork Artiste\": \"If the rozzers was to see him in bona clobber they'd take him for a gun.\" (\"If the police were to see him finely dressed, they would know that he is a thief.\")\nThe almost identical \"Parlyaree\" has been spoken in fairgrounds since at least the 17th century and is still used by show travellers in England and Scotland. As theatrical booths, circus acts, and menageries were once common parts of European fairs, it is likely that the roots of Polari/Parlyaree lie in the period before both theatre and circus became independent of fairgrounds. The Parlyaree spoken on fairgrounds tends to borrow much more from Romani, as well as other languages and cants spoken by travelling people, such as thieves' cant and back slang.\nHenry Mayhew gave an account of Polari as part of an interview with a Punch and Judy showman in the 1850s. The discussion he recorded references Punch's arrival in England, crediting these early shows to an Italian performer called Porcini (John Payne Collier's account calls him Porchini, a literal rendering of the Italian pronunciation). Mayhew provides the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Punch Talk\"\n\" means language; name of patter. \" \u2013 no food. \" \u2013 no bed. \" \u2013 no drink. I've \", and \", and, what's worse, \"\". This is better than the costers' talk, because that ain't no slang and all, and this is a broken Italian, and much higher than the costers' lingo. We know what o'clock it is, besides.\nAdditional accounts of particular words relate to puppet performance:\nDecline.\nPolari had begun to fall into disuse among the gay subculture by the late 1960s. The popularity of the BBC radio comedy \"Round the Horne\", with its camp gay characters Julian and Sandy, ensured that some of the Polari terms they used became public knowledge. The need for a secret means of communication in the subculture also declined with the partial decriminalisation of adult homosexual acts in England and Wales under the Sexual Offences Act 1967; in the 1970s, the gay liberation movement began to view Polari as old-fashioned and perpetuating harmful camp stereotypes.\nMainstream usage.\nA number of words from Polari have entered mainstream slang. The list below includes words in general use with the meanings listed: \"acdc\", \"barney\", \"blag\", \"butch\", \"camp\", \"khazi\", \"cottaging\", \"hoofer\", \"mince\", \"ogle\", \"scarper\", \"slap\", \"strides\", \"tod\", \"[rough] trade\".\nThe Polari word ', meaning inferior or tacky, has an uncertain etymology. Michael Quinion says it is probably from the 16th-century Italian word ', meaning \"a despicable person\". There are a number of false etymologies, many based on backronyms\u2014\"Not Available For Fucking\", \"Normal As Fuck\", etc. The phrase \"naff off\" was used euphemistically in place of \"fuck off\" along with the intensifier \"naffing\" in Keith Waterhouse's \"Billy Liar\" (1959). Usage of \"naff\" increased in the 1970s when the television sitcom \"Porridge\" employed it as an alternative to expletives which were not broadcastable at the time. Princess Anne allegedly told a reporter to \"naff off\" at the Badminton horse trials in April 1982. However, the photographers who were present have since stated that this was a censored version of what she actually said.\n\"\" (; alternatively spelled \",\" \",\" and a number of other variety spellings), meaning to smarten up, style or improve something, became commonplace in the mid-2000s, having been used in the 2003 United States TV series \"Queer Eye for the Straight Guy\" and \"What Not to Wear\". \"\", an alternative spelling of the word, was popularised by drag queen Jasmine Masters after her appearance on the seventh series of RuPaul's Drag Race in 2015.\nLegacy and revival.\nSince the late 20th and early 21st century, there has been a renewed interest in Polari, especially as a part of LGBTQ+ heritage. Gay's the Word has held workshops in Polari, the Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence have translated (partially relexified) the King James Bible into Polari, and Madame Jo Jo's nightclub in Soho taught its staff to speak Polari.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now as \"reefing fakements\" offered unto idols, we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.\u2014\u200a\nLinguist Paul Baker attributes increased interest in Polari primarily to the growing body of academic work on the subject. Author George Reiner explains that \"the revival of a language like Polari offers the possibility of an alternate queer linguistic space\" at a time when closing LGBTQ+ venues and dating apps have reduced queer social spaces.\nIn 2007, writer and activist Paul Burston launched Polari Literary Salon in London to platform LGBTQ+ writers. He launched the Polari First Book Prize in 2011. This was followed by the Polari Prize for LGBTQ+ writers at all stages of their career in 2019 and the Polari Children's &amp; YA Prize in 2022. Other organisations have also taken names inspired by Polari, such as \"Polari Magazine\", \"Vada Magazine\", and VADA LGBTQ Community Theatre Company.\nIn 2012 and 2013, Manchester artists Jez Dolan and Joe Richardson presented a performance-based tour and exhibition titled \"Polari Mission\", which explored LGBTQ+ history and language use in the UK. This was presented at The John Rylands Library and Contact Theatre. In 2015, Dolan also translated sections of the 1957 Wolfenden Report into Polari for a commission from the UK Parliament. Dolan and Richardson also worked with Paul Baker to produce a 500-word dictionary of Polari as an app.\nIn December 2016, to launch LGBT+ History Month 2017 and celebrate the 50th anniversary of the 1967 Sexual Offences Act, poet Adam Lowe performed his Polari poem \"Vada That\" in Parliament's Speaker's House with accompaniment by musician Nikki Franklin. In 2017, a service at Westcott House, Cambridge was conducted in Polari. Trainee priests held the service to commemorate LGBT History Month; following media attention, Chris Chivers, the principal, expressed his regret.\nIn 2019, Reaktion Books published Paul Baker's third book on Polari, \"Fabulosa!: The Story of Polari, Britain's Secret Gay Language\". His first two books on the subject (\"Polari: Fantabulosa: A Dictionary of Polari and Gay Slang\" and \"Polari: The Lost Language of Gay Men\") were published in 2002 and 2003, respectively.\nGlossary.\nNumbers:\nSome words or phrases that may derive from Polari (this is an incomplete list):\nUsage examples.\n\"Omies and palones of the jury, vada well at the eek of the poor ome who stands before you, his lallies trembling.\" \u2013 taken from \"Bona Law\", one of the Julian and Sandy sketches from \"Round The Horne\", written by Barry Took and Marty Feldman\nTranslation: \"Men and women of the jury, look well at the face of the poor man who stands before you, his legs trembling.\"\n\"So bona to vada...oh you! Your lovely eek and your lovely riah.\" \u2013 taken from \"Piccadilly Palare\", a song by Morrissey\nTranslation: \"So good to see...oh you! Your lovely face and your lovely hair.\"\n\"As feely ommes...we would zhoosh our riah, powder our eeks, climb into our bona new drag, don our batts and troll off to some bona bijou bar. In the bar we would stand around with our sisters, vada the bona cartes on the butch omme ajax who, if we fluttered our ogle riahs at him sweetly, might just troll over to offer a light for the unlit vogue clenched between our teeth.\" \u2013 taken from \"Parallel Lives\", the memoirs of renowned gay journalist Peter Burton\nTranslation: \"As young men...we would style our hair, powder our faces, climb into our great new clothes, don our shoes and wander/walk off to some great little bar. In the bar we would stand around with our gay companions, look at the great genitals on the butch man nearby who, if we fluttered our eyelashes at him sweetly, might just wander/walk over to offer a light for the unlit cigarette clenched between our teeth.\"\nIn the \"Are You Being Served?\" episode \"The Old Order Changes\", Captain Peacock asks Mr Humphries to get \"some strides for the omi with the naff riah\" (i.e., trousers for the fellow with the unstylish hair).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50323", "revid": "1288786882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50323", "title": "Julian and Sandy", "text": "Camp characters in the BBC Radio show \"Round the Horne\"\nJulian and Sandy were characters on the BBC radio comedy programme \"Round the Horne\" from 1965 to 1968 and were played by Hugh Paddick and Kenneth Williams respectively, with scripts written by Barry Took and Marty Feldman. According to a BBC Radio 4 programme on the characters, they were named after the writers Sandy Wilson and Julian Slade.\nAlthough no longer referred to as such, the various characters played by Williams and Paddick in a section of \"Stop Messing About\" were in all but name Julian and Sandy.\nBackground.\nBarry Took describes the original conception of Julian and Sandy as two \"old theatrical chaps\" who were doing housework in the flat of Kenneth Horne (the \"straight man\" in the sketches), while waiting for their next acting job. However, the producer of \"Round the Horne\", John Simmonds, did not like them and viewed the characters as \"too sad\" and suggested making them younger \"chorus boy\" types. Their first appearance was in episode four of the first series, and \u2013 although Marty Feldman apparently \"got tired of them\" \u2013 Julian and Sandy proved to be the most successful part of the show, and appeared in every episode thereafter.\nAs well as being a successful comedy act, Julian and Sandy were notable for being two stereotypical camp homosexual characters in mainstream entertainment at a time when homosexual acts between men were illegal in the United Kingdom. The writers and cast thought the characters worked very well as they were not simply there to be the target of a joke: in fact most of the sketches revolved around Kenneth Horne's presumed ignorance being the target of their jokes. Paul Baker writes that these sketches, while mocking an oppressed gay identity, present gay people as cheerful, rather than \"indexing unhappy, ashamed identities like those in films such as \"Victim\" (1961), \"A Taste of Honey\" (1961) and \"The Boys in the Band\" (1970), or the openly politicised identity adopted by members of the Gay Liberation Front\".\nTheir use of Polari in sketches introduced the gay cant to a mass audience, and identified them as gay to those in the know. Although this prompted a brief revival, \"Round the Horne\" ultimately led to Polari's near-demise as a means of communication between gay men.\nHorne would start off usually by mentioning that he had found an advertisement in one of a selection of risqu\u00e9 magazines, which he would insist he bought for innocent reasons. This would lead him, more often than not, to a business in Chelsea starting with the word \"Bona\" (Polari for \"good\"). He would enter by saying, \"Hello, anybody there?\", and Julian (Hugh Paddick) would answer, to a round of applause from the studio audience, \"Ooh hello! I'm Julian and this is my friend Sandy!\" \u2013 only once, on their second appearance, does Sandy start by introducing his friend Julian.\nThis quote illustrating the use of double entendre is from the sketch \"Bona Law\" (itself a pun on the name of Bonar Law, a former prime minister of the United Kingdom), featuring Julian and Sandy as lawyers:\nHORNE: Will you take my case?\nJULIAN: Well, it depends on what it is. We've got a criminal practice that takes up most of our time.\nHORNE: Yes, but apart from that, I need legal advice.\nSANDY: Ooh, isn't he bold?\nHere, the \"criminal practice\" refers to both the fact that Julian is a \"practising homosexual\" and also the law practice where he is currently employed. Such innuendo and double entendre was the predominant form of British humour at the time, with the \"Carry On Films\" \u2013 in which Kenneth Williams featured prominently \u2013 being an iconic example of such.\nAt other times, Horne's character would pretend not to understand the more risqu\u00e9 meanings in Julian and Sandy's dialogue, although it was always hinted that he was secretly in on the joke. A good example was Horne attempting to use Polari himself:\nHORNE: Would I have vada'd any of them do you think?\nSANDY: Oooh! He\u2019s got all the Polari, ain't he?\nJULIAN: Hmmmm, I wonder where he picks it up?\nThe sketches also often had Horne drawing out more about Julian and Sandy's personal lives than he intended, as the two would misunderstand his meaning. In one sketch, discussing Julian and Sandy's time out travelling the world aboard ship, Sandy reveals Julian was swept overboard in a storm:\nHORNE: But did you manage to drag yourself up on deck?\nJULIAN: Ooh, no, we dressed quite casual...\nA recurring comedic theme of the series was Sandy (Williams) archly disclosing, or drawing out, a hinted-at salacious detail from Julian's (Paddick) past. Apparently Julian had had an \"experience up the Acropolis\" and a tale about \"Bognor\" had apparently been divulged by Julian after he had \"been at the gin\". There would then always be an anguished complaint from Julian of \"You traitor - you swore you'd never tell!\", before Sandy would prompt him to explain all by imploring him to \"Go on - purge yourself!\" On a rare occasion Julian turned the tables on Sandy, and after bellowing the \"purge yourself!\" line, he then ad-libbed \"I've been dying to say that for years!\"\nAd-libs were a prominent part of the sketch (although on 'That Reminds Me', Barry Took denied this, saying that most of what seemed to be ad lib was scripted), and were one of the reasons for how well the humour worked, as both Paddick and Williams were accomplished and very familiar with Polari in real life conversation. Williams, in particular, would add many lines of his own (\"Lau your luppers on the strillers bona\" \"(play the piano)\" being his most extreme use of obscure Polari).\nAnother catchphrase often used by both characters was \"That's your actual French\", although Barry Took acknowledged that Peter Cook had claimed to be the first to use \"your actual ...\" as a format phrase.\nThe humour acquired a real edge with jokes that were both risqu\u00e9 and controversial. Lines such as the following were very daring for their period:\nSANDY: Don't mention M\u00e1laga to Julian, he got very badly stung.\nHORNE: Portuguese man o' war?\nJULIAN: Well I never saw him in uniform...\nIn the last episode of Series 4 in 1968 (which turned out to be the last ever episode of the show, due to Horne's sudden death) Julian and Sandy are revealed, very incongruously, to be \"married\" to a pair of \"dolly palones\" named Julie and Sandra. Also, Julian's full name is revealed to be Julian Mungo Lestrange.\nOther appearances of the characters.\nOn 30 December 1987, a special edition of \"Wogan\" called \"Radio Fun\" paid tribute to BBC radio comedy. Hugh Paddick and Kenneth Williams appeared as Julian and Sandy, with Terry Wogan doing Kenneth Horne's lines, as Horne had died in 1969. Williams himself died in April 1988.\nIn the stage show \"Round the Horne ... Revisited\", which ran from 2003 to 2005 and was filmed for BBC Four, Paddick and Williams (and therefore Julian and Sandy) were played by Nigel Harrison and Robin Sebastian.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50324", "revid": "46272477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50324", "title": "Ahura Mazda", "text": "Highest deity of Zoroastrianism\nAhura Mazda ( ), also known as Ormazd and Horomazes, is the principal God and sky deity in Zoroastrianism. He is the first and most frequently invoked spirit in the \"Yasna\". The literal meanings of the words ' and ' are \"lord\" and \"wisdom\", respectively.\nThe first notable invocation of Ahura Mazda occurred during the Achaemenid period (c.\u2009550\u2013330 BC) with the Behistun Inscription of Darius the Great. Until the reign of Artaxerxes II (c.\u2009405/404\u2013358 BC), Ahura Mazda was worshipped and invoked alone in all extant royal inscriptions. With Artaxerxes II, Ahura Mazda was gathered into a triad of deities with Mithra and Anahita. In the Achaemenid period, the only known representation of Ahura Mazda at the royal court was an empty chariot drawn by white horses, which was used to invite Ahura Mazda to accompany the Persian army into battle.\nAhura Mazda was depicted in images starting from the 5th century BC, but during the Sassanid period, these depictions were replaced by stone-carved figures\u2014and eventually removed entirely\u2014due to an iconoclastic movement supported by the Sasanian dynasty.\nNomenclature.\nThe most likely etymology is from Proto-Indo-European \"*h\u2082\u1e3f\u0325suros\", from \"*h\u2082ems-\" (\"to engender, beget\"), and therefore it is cognate with Sanskrit \"\u00e1sura\" and Proto-Germanic \"*ansuz\". Finnish Indologist Asko Parpola locates a borrowing from Proto-Indo-Aryan \"*asera-\" to the Uralic languages, with the meaning 'lord, prince'.\n'Mazda', or rather the Avestan stem-form , nominative , reflects Proto-Iranian \"*mazd\u00e1H\" (a feminine noun). It is generally taken to be the proper name of the spirit and, like its Vedic cognate , means \"intelligence\" or \"wisdom\". Both the Avestan and the Sanskrit words reflect Proto-Indo-Iranian \"*mazd\u02b0\u00e1H\", from Proto-Indo-European , literally meaning \"placing () one's mind ()\", hence \"wise\".\nIn Old Persian, during the Achaemenid era, the name was either depicted using the cuneiform logograms \ud800\udfc8 or \ud800\udfc9 (genitive \ud800\udfca), or spelled out as \ud800\udfa0\ud800\udfa2\ud800\udfbc\ud800\udfb6\ud800\udfc0\ud800\udfad\ud800\udfa0 (\"a-u-r-m-z-d-a\", \"Auramazd\u0101\"). In Parthian, the name was written as \ud802\udf40\ud802\udf47\ud802\udf45\ud802\udf53\ud802\udf4c\ud802\udf46\ud802\udf43 (\"\u02be\u1e25wrmzd\", \"Ahurmazd\"), while \ud802\udf60\ud802\udf65\ud802\udf67\ud802\udf65\ud802\udf6c\ud802\udf66\ud802\udf63\ud802\udf69 (\"\u02bewhrmzdy\", \"\u014chramazd\u0113\") was the Middle Persian term used during the Sassanid era.\nThe name may be attested on cuneiform tablets of Assyrian Assurbanipal, in the form \"Assara Maza\u0161\", but that interpretation is very controversial.\nBefore Zoroastrianism.\nMazdaism is a religion that arose in Eastern Iran, modern-day Afghanistan, and Central Asia beginning in the early centuries of the first millennium. Unlike in Zoroastrianism, in Mazdaism Ahura Mazda is one of the gods, equal to Mithra.\nThe worship of Ahura Mazda, as some Zoroastrian historians believe, was not originated by Zoroaster, but existed before the prophet's message. According to Robert Zahner, the pre-Zoroastrian Ahura Mazda was undoubtedly associated with the concept of truth or the idea of some kind of \"universal order,\" as well as with water, light, or the sun.\nEmile Benveniste points out that Ahura Mazda is an ancient deity and that the Zoroastrians used this name to refer to the Zoroastrian god. Even the central role assigned to this god in Mazdaism is not a Zoroastrian innovation. The title Mazdaism (worshipper of Mazda) found in Aramaic papyri from the Achaemenid period cannot be evidence that the Achaemenids were Zoroastrian, and the mention of the name Ahura Mazda in stone inscriptions is not evidence of this either. In the Achaemenid inscriptions, not only is Zoroastrianism not mentioned, but nothing else is mentioned that could give these inscriptions a Zoroastrian signal.\nMarriage to Spenta Armaiti and Zurvanist theogony.\nIn some Zurvanist narratives, it is mentioned that Zurvan had a wife who gave birth to Ahura Mazda and Ahriman; later, Ahura Mazda married his mother and had children with her, including the sun, dogs, pigs, donkeys, and cattle.\nBut in non-Zurvanist Zoroastrian traditions, it is said that Ahura Mazda married his daughter Spenta Armaiti and she gave birth to Keyumars, and later she gave birth to Mashya and Mashyana. These traditions are considered to be that Keyumars was born to the same mother as Mashya and Mashyana, and not that Mashya and Mashyana are the children of Keyumars.\nZoroaster's revelation.\nAccording to Zoroastrian tradition, at the age of 30, Zoroaster received a revelation: while fetching water at dawn for a sacred ritual, he saw the shining figure of an Amesha Spenta, Vohu Manah, who led Zoroaster to the presence of Ahura Mazda, where he was taught the cardinal principles of the \"Good Religion\" later known as Zoroastrianism. As a result of this vision, Zoroaster felt that he was chosen to spread and preach the religion. He stated that this source of all goodness was the Ahura, worthy of the highest worship. He further stated that Ahura Mazda created spirits known as \"yazata\"s to aid him. Zoroaster proclaimed that some Iranian gods were \"daevas\" who deserved no worship. These \"bad\" deities were created by Angra Mainyu, the destructive spirit. Angra Mainyu was the source of all sin and misery in the universe. Zoroaster claimed that Ahura Mazda used the aid of humans in the cosmic struggle against Angra Mainyu. Nonetheless, Ahura Mazda is Angra Mainyu's superior, not his equal. Angra Mainyu and his \"daevas\", which attempt to attract humans away from the Path of Asha, would eventually be defeated.\nPlutarch.\nAccording to Plutarch, Zoroaster named \"Arimanius\" as one of the two rivals who were the artificers of good and evil. In terms of sense perception, Oromazes was to be compared to light, and Arimanius to darkness and ignorance; between these was Mithras the Mediator. Arimanius received offerings that pertained to warding off evil and mourning.\nIn describing a ritual to Arimanius, Plutarch says the god was invoked as Hades68 gives the identification as Pluto, the name of the Greek ruler of the underworld used most commonly in texts and inscriptions pertaining to the mystery religions, and in Greek dramatists and philosophers of Athens in the Classical period. Turcan232 notes that Plutarch makes of Arimanius \"a sort of tenebrous Pluto\". Plutarch, however, names the Greek god as \"Hades\", not the name \"Plouton\" used in the Eleusinian tradition (\"The Hidden One\") and darkness.\nThe Arimanius ritual required an otherwise-unknown plant that Plutarch calls \"\"omomi\" (Haoma or Soma), which was to be pounded in a mortar and mixed with the blood of a sacrificed wolf. The substance was then carried to a place \"where the sun never shines\"\" and cast therein. He adds that \"water-rats\" belong to this god, and therefore proficient rat-killers are fortunate men.\nPlutarch then gives a cosmogonical myth:\nOromazes, born from the purest light, and Areimanius, born from darkness, are constantly at war with each other; and Oromazes created six gods, the first of Good Thought, the second of Truth, the third of Order, and, of the rest, one of Wisdom, one of Wealth, and one the Artificer of Pleasure in what is Honourable. But Areimanius created rivals, as it were, equal to these in number. Then Oromazes enlarged himself to thrice his former size, and removed himself as far distant from the Sun as the Sun is distant from the Earth, and adorned the heavens with stars. One star he set there before all others as a guardian and watchman, the Dog-star. Twenty-four other gods he created and placed in an egg. But those created by Areimanius, who were equal in number to the others, pierced through the egg and made their way inside; hence evils are now combined with good. But a destined time shall come when it is decreed that Areimanius, engaged in bringing on pestilence and famine, shall by these be utterly annihilated and shall disappear; and then shall the earth become a level plain, and there shall be one manner of life and one form of government for a blessed people who shall all speak one tongue. \u2014 Plutarch47\nScholar Mary Boyce asserted that the passage shows a \"fairly accurate\" knowledge of basic Zoroastrianism.\nIn his \"Life of Themistocles\", Plutarch has the Persian king invoke Arimanius by name, asking the god to cause the king's enemies to behave in such a way as to drive away their own best men; de\u00a0Jong (1997)313 doubted that a Persian king would pray to his own national religion's god of evil, particularly in public.\nAccording to Plutarch, the king then made a sacrifice and got drunk \u2013 essentially a running gag on Persian kings in Plutarch's writing, and thus dubious evidence for actual behavior.314\nHistory.\nAchaemenid Empire.\nWhether the Achaemenids were Zoroastrians is a matter of much debate. However, it is known that the Achaemenids were worshipers of Ahura Mazda. The representation and invocation of Ahura Mazda can be seen on royal inscriptions written by Achaemenid kings. The most notable of all the inscriptions is the Behistun Inscription written by Darius the Great which contains many references to Ahura Mazda. An inscription written in Greek was found in a late Achaemenid temple at Persepolis, which invoked Ahura Mazda and two other deities, Mithra and Anahita. Artaxerxes III makes this invocation Ahuramazda again during his reign.\nIn the Elamite language Persepolis Fortification Tablets dated between 509 and 494 BC, offerings to Ahura Mazda are recorded in tablets #377, #338 (notably alongside Mitra), #339, and #771.\nThe early Achaemenid period contained no representation of Ahura Mazda. The winged symbol with a male figure formerly regarded by European scholars as Ahura Mazda has been now speculated to represent the royal \"khvarenah\", the personification of divine power and regal glory. However, it was customary for every emperor from Cyrus until Darius III to have an empty chariot drawn by white horses as a place for Ahura Mazda to accompany the Persian army on battles. The use of images of Ahura Mazda began in the western satraps of the Achaemenid Empire in the late 5th century BC. Under Artaxerxes II, the first literary reference, as well as a statue of Ahura Mazda, was built by a Persian governor of Lydia in 365 BC.\nParthian Empire.\nIt is known that the reverence for Ahura Mazda, as well as Anahita and Mithra, continued with the same traditions during this period. The worship of Ahura Mazda with symbolic images is noticed, but it stopped within the Sassanid period. Zoroastrian iconoclasm, which can be traced to the end of the Parthian period and the beginning of the Sassanid, eventually put an end to the use of all images of Ahura Mazda in worship. However, Ahura Mazda remained symbolized by a dignified male figure, standing or on horseback, which is found in Sassanian investiture.\nSasanian Empire.\nDuring the Sassanid Empire, a heretical and divergent form of Zoroastrianism, termed Zurvanism, emerged. It gained adherents throughout the Sasanian Empire, most notably the royal lineage of Sasanian emperors. Under the reign of Shapur I, Zurvanism spread and became a widespread cult.\nZurvanism revokes Zoroaster's original message of Ahura Mazda as the uncreated spirit and the \"uncreated creator\" of all and reduces him to a created spirit, one of two twin sons of Zurvan, their father and the primary spirit. Zurvanism also makes Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu of equal strength and only contrasting spirits.\nBesides Zurvanism, the Sassanian kings demonstrated their devotion to Ahura Mazda in different fashions. Five kings took the name Hormizd and Bahram II created the title of \"Ohrmazd-mowbad\", which was continued after the Muslim conquest of Persia and through Islamic times.\nAll devotional acts in Zoroastrianism originating from the Sassanian period begin with homage to Ahura Mazda. The five \"G\u0101hs\" start with the declaration in Middle Persian that \"Ohrmazd is Lord\" and incorporate the Gathic verse \"Whom, Mazda hast thou appointed my protector\". Zoroastrian prayers are to be said in the presence of light, either in the form of fire or the sun. In the Iranian languages Yidgha and Munji, the sun is still called \"ormozd\".\nRashidun Caliphate.\nManeckji Nusserwanji Dhalla described the doctrine of the Gayomarthians sect as another attempt to mitigate the dualism that has always been the essence of Zoroastrianism. This was due to the Prophet Muhammad\u2019s emphasis on monotheism and the Muslims\u2019 mockery of the doctrine of worshipping two gods, which made the Zoroastrians view dualism as a defect, so they added monotheism, which led to the Zoroastrians\u2019 division into sects and he mentions examples of the Zoroastrian attempt to establish a monotheistic belief by diminishing the importance of Ahriman, including that Ahura Mazda and Ahriman were created from time, or that Ahura Mazda himself allowed the existence of evil, or that Ahriman was a corrupt angel who rebelled against Ahura Mazda. Then he mentions the name of a Persian book from the 15h century in which it is written that the Magi (Zoroastrians) believe that Allah and Iblis are brothers.\nPresent-day Zoroastrianism.\nIn 1884, Martin Haug proposed a new interpretation of \"Yasna\" 30.3 that subsequently influenced Zoroastrian doctrine significantly. According to Haug's interpretation, the \"twin spirits\" of 30.3 were Angra Mainyu and Spenta Mainyu, the former being literally the \"Destructive Spirit\" and the latter being the \"Bounteous Spirit\" (of Ahura Mazda). Further, in Haug's scheme, Angra Mainyu was now not Ahura Mazda's binary opposite, but\u2014like Spenta Mainyu\u2014an emanation of Him. Haug also interpreted the concept of a free will of \"Yasna\" 45.9 as an accommodation to explain where Angra Mainyu came from since Ahura Mazda created only good. The free will made it possible for Angra Mainyu to \"choose\" to be evil. Although these latter conclusions were not substantiated by Zoroastrian tradition, at the time, Haug's interpretation was gratefully accepted by the Parsis of Bombay since it provided a defense against Christian missionary rhetoric, particularly the attacks on the Zoroastrian idea of an uncreated Evil that was as uncreated as God was. Following Haug, the Bombay Parsis began to defend themselves in the English-language press. The argument was that Angra Mainyu was not Mazda's binary opposite but his subordinate, who\u2014as in Zurvanism also\u2014\"chose\" to be evil. Consequently, Haug's theories were disseminated as a Parsi interpretation in the West, where they appeared to be corroborating Haug. Reinforcing themselves, Haug's ideas came to be iterated so often that they are today almost universally accepted as doctrine.\nIn other religions.\nSome scholars (Kuiper. IIJ I, 1957; Zimmer. M\u00fcnchner Studien 1984:187\u2013215) believe that Ahura Mazda originates from *vouruna-mi\u03b8ra, or Vedic Varuna (and Mitra). According to William W. Malandra both Varuna (in Vedic period) and Ahura Mazda (in old Iranian religion) represented same Indo-Iranian concept of a supreme \"wise, all-knowing lord\".\nIn Manichaeism, the name \"Ohrmazd Bay\" (\"god Ahura Mazda\") was used for the primal figure N\u0101\u0161\u0101 Qa\u1e0fm\u0101y\u0101, the \"original man\" and emanation of the Father of Greatness (in Manicheism called Zurvan) through whom after he sacrificed himself to defend the world of light was consumed by the forces of darkness. Although Ormuzd is freed from the world of darkness his \"sons\", often called his garments or weapons, remain. After a series of events, his sons, later known as the World Soul, will, for the most part, escape from matter and return to the world of light where they came from. Manicheans often identified many of Mani's cosmological figures with Zoroastrian ones. This may partly be because Mani was born in the greatly Zoroastrian Parthian Empire.\nIn Sogdian Buddhism, \"Xwrmzt\u02bc\" (Sogdian was written without a consistent representation of vowels) was the Sogdian derivation of the Avestan Ahura Mazda. Adhvagh was often used as a title for Ahura Mazda. Via contacts with Turkic peoples like the Uyghurs, this Sogdian name came to the Mongols, who still name this deity \"Qormusta Tengri\" (also \"Qormusta\" or \"Qormusda\") is now a popular enough deity to appear in many contexts that are not explicitly Buddhist.\nThe pre-Christian Armenians held Aramazd as an important deity in their pantheon of gods. He is thought to be a syncretic deity, a combination of the autochthonous Armenian figures Aram and his son Ara and the Iranian Ahura Mazda. In modern-day Armenia, Aramazd is a male first name.\n101 Names.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50325", "revid": "179697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50325", "title": "Polytheistic", "text": ""}
{"id": "50326", "revid": "50960699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50326", "title": "Cognitive neuroscience", "text": "Scientific field\nCognitive neuroscience is the scientific field that is concerned with the study of the biological processes and aspects that underlie cognition, with a specific focus on the neural connections in the brain which are involved in mental processes. It addresses the questions of how cognitive activities are affected or controlled by neural circuits in the brain. Cognitive neuroscience is a branch of both neuroscience and psychology, overlapping with disciplines such as behavioral neuroscience, cognitive psychology, physiological psychology and affective neuroscience. Cognitive neuroscience relies upon theories in cognitive science coupled with evidence from neurobiology, and computational modeling.\nParts of the brain play an important role in this field. Neurons play the most vital role, since the main point is to establish an understanding of cognition from a neural perspective, along with the different lobes of the cerebral cortex.\nMethods employed in cognitive neuroscience include experimental procedures from psychophysics and cognitive psychology, functional neuroimaging, electrophysiology, cognitive genomics, and behavioral genetics.\nStudies of patients with cognitive deficits due to brain lesions constitute an important aspect of cognitive neuroscience. The damages in lesioned brains provide a comparable starting point on regards to healthy and fully functioning brains. These damages change the neural circuits in the brain and cause it to malfunction during basic cognitive processes, such as memory or learning. People have learning disabilities and such damage, can be compared with how the healthy neural circuits are functioning, and possibly draw conclusions about the basis of the affected cognitive processes. Some examples of learning disabilities in the brain include places in Wernicke's area, the left side of the temporal lobe, and Broca's area close to the frontal lobe.\nAlso, cognitive abilities based on brain development are studied and examined under the subfield of developmental cognitive neuroscience. This shows brain development over time, analyzing differences and concocting possible reasons for those differences.\nTheoretical approaches include computational neuroscience and cognitive psychology.\nHistorical origins.\nCognitive neuroscience is an interdisciplinary area of study that has emerged from neuroscience and psychology. There are several stages in these disciplines that have changed the way researchers approached their investigations and that led to the field becoming fully established.\nAlthough the task of cognitive neuroscience is to describe the neural mechanisms associated with the mind, historically it has progressed by investigating how a certain area of the brain supports a given mental faculty. However, early efforts to subdivide the brain proved to be problematic. The phrenologist movement failed to supply a scientific basis for its theories and has since been rejected. The aggregate field view, meaning that all areas of the brain participated in all behavior, was also rejected as a result of brain mapping, which began with Hitzig and Fritsch's experiments and eventually developed through methods such as positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Gestalt theory, neuropsychology, and the cognitive revolution were major turning points in the creation of cognitive neuroscience as a field, bringing together ideas and techniques that enabled researchers to make more links between behavior and its neural substrates.\nThe connection between brain and behavior was first documented in the 16th century BC, in the Edwin Smith Papyrus of Ancient Egypt. While the Ancient Greeks Alcmaeon, Plato, Aristotle in the 5th and 4th centuries BC, and then the Roman physician Galen in the 2nd century AD already argued that the brain is the source of mental activity, scientific research into the connections between brain areas and cognitive functions began in the second half of the 19th century. The founding insights in the Cognitive neuroscience establishment were:\nOrigins in philosophy.\nPhilosophers have always been interested in the mind: \"the idea that explaining a phenomenon involves understanding the mechanism responsible for it has deep roots in the History of Philosophy from atomic theories in 5th century B.C. to its rebirth in the 17th and 18th century in the works of Galileo, Descartes, and Boyle. Among others, it's Descartes' idea that machines humans build could work as models of scientific explanation.\"\nFor example, Aristotle thought the brain was the body's cooling system and the capacity for intelligence was located in the heart. It has been suggested that the first person to believe otherwise was the Roman physician Galen in the second century AD, who declared that the brain was the source of mental activity, although this has also been accredited to Alcmaeon. However, Galen believed that personality and emotion were not generated by the brain, but rather by other organs. Andreas Vesalius, an anatomist and physician, was the first to believe that the brain and the nervous system are the center of the mind and emotion. Psychology, a major contributing field to cognitive neuroscience, emerged from philosophical reasoning about the mind.\n19th century.\nPhrenology.\nOne of the predecessors to cognitive neuroscience was phrenology, a pseudoscientific approach that claimed that behavior could be determined by the shape of the scalp. In the early 19th century, Franz Joseph Gall and J. G. Spurzheim believed that the human brain was localized into approximately 35 different sections. While phrenology remained a fixture at fairs and carnivals, it did not enjoy wide acceptance within the scientific community. The major criticism of phrenology is that researchers were not able to test theories empirically.\nLocalizationist view.\nThe localizationist view was concerned with mental abilities being localized to specific areas of the brain rather than on what the characteristics of the abilities were and how to measure them. Studies performed in Europe, such as those of John Hughlings Jackson, supported this view. Jackson studied patients with brain damage, particularly those with epilepsy. He discovered that the epileptic patients often made the same clonic and tonic movements of muscle during their seizures, leading Jackson to believe that they must be caused by activity in the same place in the brain every time. Jackson proposed that specific functions were localized to specific areas of the brain, which was critical to future understanding of the brain lobes.\nAggregate field view.\nAccording to the aggregate field view, all areas of the brain participate in every mental function.\nPierre Flourens, a French experimental psychologist, challenged the localizationist view by using animal experiments. He discovered that removing the cerebellum (brain) in rabbits and pigeons affected their sense of muscular coordination, and that all cognitive functions were disrupted in pigeons when the cerebral hemispheres were removed. From this he concluded that the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem functioned together as a whole. His approach has been criticised on the basis that the tests were not sensitive enough to notice selective deficits had they been present.\nEmergence of neuropsychology.\nPerhaps the first serious attempts to localize mental functions to specific locations in the brain was by Broca and Wernicke. This was mostly achieved by studying the effects of injuries to different parts of the brain on psychological functions. In 1861, French neurologist Paul Broca came across a man with a disability who was able to understand the language but unable to speak. The man could only produce the sound \"tan\". It was later discovered that the man had damage to an area of his left frontal lobe now known as Broca's area. Carl Wernicke, a German neurologist, found a patient who could speak fluently but non-sensibly. The patient had been the victim of a stroke, and could not understand spoken or written language. This patient had a lesion in the area where the left parietal and temporal lobes meet, now known as Wernicke's area. These cases, which suggested that lesions caused specific behavioral changes, strongly supported the localizationist view. Additionally, Aphasia is a learning disorder which was also discovered by Paul Broca. According to, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Aphasia is a language disorder caused by damage in a specific area of the brain that controls language expression and comprehension. This can often lead to the person speaking words with no sense known as \"word salad\" \nMapping the brain.\nIn 1870, German physicians Eduard Hitzig and Gustav Fritsch published their findings of the behavior of animals. Hitzig and Fritsch ran an electric current through the cerebral cortex of a dog, causing different muscles to contract depending on which areas of the brain were electrically stimulated. This led to the proposition that individual functions are localized to specific areas of the brain rather than the cerebrum as a whole, as the aggregate field view suggests. Brodmann was also an important figure in brain mapping; his experiments based on Franz Nissl's tissue staining techniques divided the brain into fifty-two areas.\n20th century.\nCognitive revolution.\nAt the start of the 20th century, attitudes in America were characterized by pragmatism, which led to a preference for behaviorism as the primary approach in psychology. J.B. Watson was a key figure with his stimulus-response approach. By conducting experiments on animals he was aiming to be able to predict and control behavior. Behaviorism eventually failed because it could not provide realistic psychology of human action and thought \u2013 it focused primarily on stimulus-response associations at the expense of explaining phenomena like thought and imagination. This led to what is often termed as the \"cognitive revolution\".\nNeuron doctrine.\nIn the early 20th century, Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal and Camillo Golgi began working on the structure of the neuron. Golgi developed a silver staining method that could entirely stain several cells in a particular area, leading him to believe that neurons were directly connected with each other in one cytoplasm. Cajal challenged this view after staining areas of the brain that had less myelin and discovering that neurons were discrete cells. Cajal also discovered that cells transmit electrical signals down the neuron in one direction only. Both Golgi and Cajal were awarded a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 for this work on the neuron doctrine.\nMid-late 20th century.\nSeveral findings in the 20th century continued to advance the field, such as the discovery of ocular dominance columns, recording of single nerve cells in animals, and coordination of eye and head movements. Experimental psychology was also significant in the foundation of cognitive neuroscience. Some particularly important results were the demonstration that some tasks are accomplished via discrete processing stages, the study of attention, and the notion that behavioural data do not provide enough information by themselves to explain mental processes. As a result, some experimental psychologists began to investigate neural bases of behaviour. \nWilder Penfield created maps of primary sensory and motor areas of the brain by stimulating the cortices of patients during surgery. The work of Sperry and Gazzaniga on split brain patients in the 1950s was also instrumental in the progress of the field. The term cognitive neuroscience itself was coined by Gazzaniga and cognitive psychologist George Armitage Miller while sharing a taxi in 1976.\nBrain mapping.\nNew brain mapping technology, particularly fMRI and PET, allowed researchers to investigate experimental strategies of cognitive psychology by observing brain function. Although this is often thought of as a new method (most of the technology is relatively recent), the underlying principle goes back as far as 1878 when blood flow was first associated with brain function. Angelo Mosso, an Italian psychologist of the 19th century, had monitored the pulsations of the adult brain through neurosurgically created bony defects in the skulls of patients. He noted that when the subjects engaged in tasks such as mathematical calculations the pulsations of the brain increased locally. Such observations led Mosso to conclude that blood flow of the brain followed function.\nCommonly the cerebrum is divided into 5 sections: the frontal lobe, occipital lobe, temporal lobes, parietal lobe, and the insula. The brain is also divided into fissures and sulci. The lateral sulcus called the Sylvian Fissure separates the frontal and temporal lobes. The insula is described as being deep to this lateral fissure. The longitudinal fissure separates the lobes of the brain length-wise. Lobes are considered to be distinct in their distribution of vessels. The overall surface consists of sulci and gyri which are necessary to identify for neuroimaging purposes.\nNotable experiments.\nThroughout the history of cognitive neuroscience, many notable experiments have been conducted. For example, the mental rotation experiment conducted by Kosslyn et al., 1993, indicated that the time it takes to mentally rotate an object via imagination takes the same amount of time as actually rotating it; they found that mentally rotating an object activates parts of the brain involved in motor functioning, which may explain this similarity.\nAnother experiment is describes the two mechanisms of processing visual attention: bottom-up attention, and top-down attention. They define bottom-up attention is the brain visually processing salient images first, and then the surrounding information, while top-down attention involves focusing on task-relevant objects first. The researchers found that the ventral stream focuses on visual recognition, the dorsal stream is involved in the spatial information concerning the object.\nAs experiments in cognitive neuroscience, what these have in common is that the researchers are measuring activities or behaviors that we can see, and then determining the neural basis of the function and what part of the brain is involved.\nEmergence of a new discipline.\nBirth of cognitive science.\nOn September 11, 1956, a large-scale meeting of cognitivists took place at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. George A. Miller presented his \"The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two\" paper while Noam Chomsky and Newell &amp; Simon presented their findings on computer science. Ulric Neisser commented on many of the findings at this meeting in his 1967 book \"Cognitive Psychology\". The term \"psychology\" had been waning in the 1950s and 1960s, causing the field to be referred to as \"cognitive science\". Behaviorists such as Miller began to focus on the representation of language rather than general behavior. David Marr concluded that one should understand any cognitive process at three levels of analysis. These levels include computational, algorithmic/representational, and physical levels of analysis.\nCombining neuroscience and cognitive science.\nBefore the 1980s, interaction between neuroscience and cognitive science was scarce. Cognitive neuroscience began to integrate the newly laid theoretical ground in cognitive science, that emerged between the 1950s and 1960s, with approaches in experimental psychology, neuropsychology and neuroscience. (Neuroscience was not established as a unified discipline until 1971). In the late 1970s, neuroscientist Michael S. Gazzaniga and cognitive psychologist George A. Miller were said to have first coined the term \"cognitive neuroscience.\" In the very late 20th century new technologies evolved that are now the mainstay of the methodology of cognitive neuroscience, including TMS (1985) and fMRI (1991). Earlier methods used in cognitive neuroscience include EEG (human EEG 1920) and MEG (1968). Occasionally cognitive neuroscientists utilize other brain imaging methods such as PET and SPECT. An upcoming technique in neuroscience is NIRS which uses light absorption to calculate changes in oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin in cortical areas. In some animals Single-unit recording can be used. Other methods include microneurography, facial EMG, and eye tracking. Integrative neuroscience attempts to consolidate data in databases, and form unified descriptive models from various fields and scales: biology, psychology, anatomy, and clinical practice.\nAdaptive resonance theory (ART) is a cognitive neuroscience theory developed by Gail Carpenter and Stephen Grossberg in the late 1970s on aspects of how the brain processes information. It describes a number of artificial neural network models which use supervised and unsupervised learning methods, and address problems such as pattern recognition and prediction.\nIn 2014, Stanislas Dehaene, Giacomo Rizzolatti and Trevor Robbins, were awarded the Brain Prize \"for their pioneering research on higher brain mechanisms underpinning such complex human functions as literacy, numeracy, motivated behaviour and social cognition, and for their efforts to understand cognitive and behavioural disorders\". Brenda Milner, Marcus Raichle and John O'Keefe received the Kavli Prize in Neuroscience \"for the discovery of specialized brain networks for memory and cognition\" and O'Keefe shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in the same year with May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser \"for their discoveries of cells that constitute a positioning system in the brain\".\nIn 2017, Wolfram Schultz, Peter Dayan and Ray Dolan were awarded the Brain Prize \"for their multidisciplinary analysis of brain mechanisms that link learning to reward, which has far-reaching implications for the understanding of human behaviour, including disorders of decision-making in conditions such as gambling, drug addiction, compulsive behaviour and schizophrenia\".,\nRecent trends.\nRecently the focus of research had expanded from the localization of brain area(s) for specific functions in the adult brain using a single technology. Studies have been diverging in several different directions: exploring the interactions between different brain areas, using multiple technologies and approaches to understand brain functions, and using computational approaches. Advances in non-invasive functional neuroimaging and associated data analysis methods have also made it possible to use highly naturalistic stimuli and tasks such as feature films depicting social interactions in cognitive neuroscience studies.\nIn recent years, there have been a lot of new advancements in the field of Cognitive Neuroscience. One new technique that has emerged is called shadow imaging. This method has combined different aspects of various neuroimaging techniques to create one that is more versatile. It uses standard light microscopy and melds it with fluorescence labeling of the interstitial fluid in the brain's extracellular space. This technique can help researchers get a bigger and more detailed look at brain tissue. This can help researchers understand more on anatomy and viability for their experiments. This technique has helped to see neurons, microglia, tumor cells and blood capillaries more closely. Shadow imaging is a new approach that shows a lot of promise in the field of neuroimaging.\nAnother very recent trend in cognitive neuroscience is the use of optogenetics to explore circuit function and its behavioral consequences. This new technology is a combination of genetic targeting of certain neurons and using the imaging technology to see targets in living neurons. This technique allows scientists to see the neurons while they are still intact in animals and be able to trace the electrical happenings in that cell. This new technology has been used successfully in many experiments and it is helping researchers in observing brain activity and understanding its role in disease, behavior and function.\nResearchers have also modified a fMRI and made it more efficient, in a technique called \u00a0direct imaging of neuronal activity or DIANA. This group of researchers changed the software to collect data every 5 milliseconds, which is 8 times faster than what the normal technique captures. After, the software can stitch together all of the images taken during the imaging and create a full slice of the brain.\nIn 2024, Prof. in bioengineering at RTU Liepaja Academy Igor Val Danilov introduced the natural neurostimulation hypothesis that explains the neuromodulation mechanism during pregnancy. Because the natural neurostimulation contributes to developing the healthy nervous system during pregnancy, artificial neurostimulation with the physical characteristics of a mother's care for her fetus scaled to the parameters of the specific patient can treat the injured nervous system. Basing on this insight, the novel APIN neurostimulation technique was introduced. The APIN technique exerts its neurotherapeutic effect by inducing mitochondrial stress and microvascular vasodilation of the specific neuronal circuits during an intensive cognitive load.\nCognitive Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence.\nCognitive neuroscience has played a major role in shaping artificial intelligence (AI). By studying how the human brain processes information, researchers have developed AI systems that simulate cognitive functions like learning, pattern recognition, and decision-making. A good example of this is neural networks, which are inspired by the connections between neurons in the brain. These networks form the foundation of many AI applications.\nDeep learning, a subfield of AI, uses neural networks to replicate processes similar to those in the human brain. For instance, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are modeled after the visual system and have transformed tasks like image recognition and speech analysis. AI also benefits from advancements in brain imaging technologies, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG). These tools provide valuable insights into neural activity, which help improve AI systems designed to mimic human thought processes.\nDespite the progress, replicating the complexity of human cognition remains a challenge. Researchers are now exploring hybrid models that combine neural networks with symbolic reasoning to better mimic how humans think and solve problems. This approach shows promise for addressing some of the limitations of current AI systems.\nMethods.\nExperimental methods include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nRelated Wikibooks"}
{"id": "50327", "revid": "15945052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50327", "title": "Darwinian selection", "text": ""}
{"id": "50328", "revid": "10041416", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50328", "title": "Quantum computational complexity", "text": ""}
{"id": "50329", "revid": "50609751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50329", "title": "Communication complexity", "text": "Complexity of sending information in a distributed algorithm\nIn theoretical computer science, communication complexity studies the amount of communication required to solve a problem when the input to the problem is distributed among two or more parties. The study of communication complexity was first introduced by Andrew Yao in 1979, while studying the problem of computation distributed among several machines.\nThe problem is usually stated as follows: two parties (traditionally called Alice and Bob) each receive a (potentially different) formula_1-bit string formula_2 and formula_3. The goal is for Alice to compute the value of a certain function, formula_4, that depends on both formula_2 and formula_3, with the least amount of communication between them.\nWhile Alice and Bob can always succeed by having Bob send his whole formula_1-bit string to Alice (who then computes the function formula_8), the idea here is to find clever ways of calculating \"formula_8\" with fewer than formula_1 bits of communication. Note that, unlike in computational complexity theory, communication complexity is not concerned with the amount of computation performed by Alice or Bob, or the size of the memory used, as we generally assume nothing about the computational power of either Alice or Bob.\nThis abstract problem with two parties (called two-party communication complexity), and its general form with more than two parties, is relevant in many contexts. In VLSI circuit design, for example, one seeks to minimize energy used by decreasing the amount of electric signals passed between the different components during a distributed computation. The problem is also relevant in the study of data structures and in the optimization of computer networks. For surveys of the field, see the textbooks by and .\nFormal definition.\nLet formula_11 where we assume in the typical case that formula_12 and formula_13. Alice holds an formula_1-bit string formula_15 while Bob holds an formula_1-bit string formula_17. By communicating to each other one bit at a time (adopting some \"communication protocol\" that is agreed upon in advance), Alice and Bob wish to compute the value of formula_18 such that at least one party knows the value at the end of the communication. At this point the answer can be communicated back so that at the cost of one extra bit, both parties will know the answer. The worst case communication complexity of this communication problem of computing formula_8, denoted as formula_20, is then defined to be\nformula_21 minimum number of bits exchanged between Alice and Bob in the worst case.\nAs observed above, for any function formula_22, we have formula_23.\nUsing the above definition, it is useful to think of the function formula_8 as a matrix formula_25 (called the \"input matrix\" or \"communication matrix\") where the rows are indexed by formula_15 and columns by formula_17. The entries of the matrix are formula_28. Initially both Alice and Bob have a copy of the entire matrix formula_25 (assuming the function formula_8 is known to both parties). Then the problem of computing the function value can be rephrased as \"zeroing-in\" on the corresponding matrix entry. This problem can be solved if either Alice or Bob knows both formula_2 and formula_3. At the start of communication, the number of choices for the matrix position corresponding to the inputs is the size of matrix, i.e. formula_33. Then, as and when each party communicates a bit to the other, the number of choices for the position reduces, as this eliminates a set of rows/columns, resulting in a submatrix of formula_25.\nMore formally, a set formula_35 is called a \"(combinatorial) rectangle\" if whenever formula_36 and formula_37 then formula_38. Equivalently, formula_39 is a combinatorial rectangle if it can be expressed as formula_40 for some formula_41 and formula_42. Consider the case when formula_43 bits are already exchanged between the parties. Now, for a particular formula_44, let us define a matrix\nformula_45\nThen formula_46, and it is not hard to show that formula_47 is a combinatorial rectangle in formula_25.\nExample: \"EQ\".\nWe consider the case where Alice and Bob try to determine whether or not their input strings are equal. Formally, define the \"Equality\" function, denoted formula_49, by formula_50 if formula_51. As we demonstrate below, any deterministic communication protocol solving formula_52 requires formula_1 bits of communication in the worst case. As a warm-up example, consider the simple case of formula_54. The equality function in this case can be represented by the matrix below. The rows represent all the possibilities of formula_2, the columns those of formula_3.\nIn this table, the function only evaluates to 1 when formula_2 equals formula_3 (i.e., on the diagonal). It is also fairly easy to see how communicating a single bit divides someone's possibilities in half. When the first bit of formula_3 is 1, consider only half of the columns (where formula_3 can equal 100, 101, 110, or 111).\nTheorem: \"D(EQ) = n\".\nProof. Assume that formula_61. This means that there exists formula_62 such that formula_63 and formula_64 have the same communication transcript formula_65. Since this transcript defines a rectangle, formula_66 must also be 1. By definition formula_62 and we know that equality is only true for formula_68 when formula_69. This yields a contradiction.\nThis technique of proving deterministic communication lower bounds is called the \"fooling set\" technique.\nRandomized communication complexity.\nIn the above definition, we are concerned with the number of bits that must be \"deterministically\" transmitted between two parties. If both the parties are given access to a random number generator, can they determine the value of formula_8 with much less information exchanged? Yao, in his seminal paper\nanswers this question by defining randomized communication complexity.\nA randomized protocol formula_39 for a function formula_8 has two-sided error.\nformula_73\nformula_74\nA randomized protocol is a deterministic protocol that uses an extra random string in addition to its normal input. There are two models for this: a \"public string\" is a random string that is known by both parties beforehand, while a \"private string\" is generated by one party and must be communicated to the other party. A theorem presented below shows that any public string protocol can be simulated by a private string protocol that uses \"O(log n)\" additional bits compared to the original.\nIn the probability inequalities above, the outcome of the protocol is understood to depend \"only\" on the random string; both strings \"x\" and \"y\" remain fixed. In other words, if \"R\"(\"x\",\"y\") yields \"g\"(\"x\",\"y\",\"r\") when using random string \"r\", then \"g\"(\"x\",\"y\",\"r\") = \"f\"(\"x\",\"y\") for at least 2/3 of all choices for the string \"r\".\nThe randomized complexity is simply defined as the number of bits exchanged in such a protocol.\nNote that it is also possible to define a randomized protocol with one-sided error, and the complexity is defined similarly.\nExample: EQ.\nReturning to the previous example of \"EQ\", if certainty is not required, Alice and Bob can check for equality using only &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; messages. Consider the following protocol: Assume that Alice and Bob both have access to the same random string formula_75. Alice computes formula_76 and sends this bit (call it \"b\") to Bob. (The formula_77 is the dot product in GF(2).) Then Bob compares \"b\" to formula_78. If they are the same, then Bob accepts, saying \"x\" equals \"y\". Otherwise, he rejects.\nClearly, if formula_51, then formula_80, so formula_81. If \"x\" does not equal \"y\", it is still possible that formula_80, which would give Bob the wrong answer. How does this happen?\nIf \"x\" and \"y\" are not equal, they must differ in some locations:\nformula_83\nWhere x and y agree, formula_84 so those terms affect the dot products equally. We can safely ignore those terms and look only at where x and y differ. Furthermore, we can swap the bits formula_85 and formula_86 without changing whether or not the dot products are equal. This means we can swap bits so that x contains only zeros and y contains only ones:\nformula_87\nNote that formula_88 and formula_89. Now, the question becomes: for some random string formula_90, what is the probability that formula_91? Since each formula_92 is equally likely to be or , this probability is just formula_93. Thus, when x does not equal y,\nformula_94. The algorithm can be repeated many times to increase its accuracy. This fits the requirements for a randomized communication algorithm.\nThis shows that \"if Alice and Bob share a random string of length n\", they can send one bit to each other to compute formula_95. In the next section, it is shown that Alice and Bob can exchange only &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; bits that are as good as sharing a random string of length \"n\". Once that is shown, it follows that \"EQ\" can be computed in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; messages.\nExample: GH.\nFor yet another example of randomized communication complexity, we turn to an example known as the \"gap-Hamming problem\" (abbreviated \"GH\"). Formally, Alice and Bob both maintain binary messages, formula_96 and would like to determine if the strings are very similar or if they are not very similar. In particular, they would like to find a communication protocol requiring the transmission of as few bits as possible to compute the following partial Boolean function, \nformula_97 \nClearly, they must communicate all their bits if the protocol is to be deterministic (this is because, if there is a deterministic, strict subset of indices that Alice and Bob relay to one another, then imagine having a pair of strings that on that set disagree in formula_98 positions. If another disagreement occurs in any position that is not relayed, then this affects the result of formula_99, and hence would result in an incorrect procedure. \nA natural question one then asks is, if we're permitted to err formula_100 of the time (over random instances formula_101 drawn uniformly at random from formula_102), then can we get away with a protocol with fewer bits? It turns out that the answer somewhat surprisingly is no, due to a result of Chakrabarti and Regev in 2012: they show that for random instances, any procedure that is correct at least formula_103 of the time must send formula_104 bits worth of communication, which is to say essentially all of them.\nPublic coins versus private coins.\nCreating random protocols becomes easier when both parties have access to the same random string, known as a shared string protocol. However, even in cases where the two parties do not share a random string, it is still possible to use private string protocols with only a small communication cost. Any shared string random protocol using any number of random string can be simulated by a private string protocol that uses an extra \"O(log n)\" bits.\nIntuitively, we can find some set of strings that has enough randomness in it to run the random protocol with only a small increase in error. This set can be shared beforehand, and instead of drawing a random string, Alice and Bob need only agree on which string to choose from the shared set. This set is small enough that the choice can be communicated efficiently. A formal proof follows.\nConsider some random protocol \"P\" with a maximum error rate of 0.1. Let formula_39 be formula_106 strings of length \"n\", numbered formula_107. Given such an formula_39, define a new protocol formula_109 that randomly picks some formula_110 and then runs \"P\" using formula_110 as the shared random string. It takes \"O\"(log\u00a0100\"n\") = \"O\"(log\u00a0\"n\") bits to communicate the choice of formula_110.\nLet us define formula_113 and formula_114 to be the probabilities that formula_115 and formula_109 compute the correct value for the input formula_117.\nFor a fixed formula_117, we can use Hoeffding's inequality to get the following equation:\nformula_119\nThus when we don't have formula_117 fixed:\nformula_121\nThe last equality above holds because there are formula_33 different pairs formula_117. Since the probability does not equal 1, there is some formula_124 so that for all formula_117:\nformula_126\nSince formula_115 has at most 0.1 error probability, formula_128 can have at most 0.2 error probability.\nCollapse of randomized communication complexity.\nLet's say we additionally allow Alice and Bob to share some resource, for example a pair of entangled particles. Using that ressource, Alice and Bob can correlate their information and thus try to 'collapse' (or 'trivialize') communication complexity in the following sense.\nDefinition. \"A resource formula_39 is said to be \"collapsing\" if, using that resource formula_39, only one bit of classical communication is enough for Alice to know the evaluation formula_18 in the worst case scenario for any Boolean function formula_8. \"\nThe surprising fact of a collapse of communication complexity is that the function formula_8 can have arbitrarily large entry size, but still the number of communication bit is constant to a single one.\nSome resources are shown to be non-collapsing, such as quantum correlations or more generally almost-quantum correlations, whereas on the contrary some other resources are shown to collapse randomized communication complexity, such as the PR-box, or some noisy PR-boxes satisfying some conditions.\nDistributional complexity.\nOne approach to studying randomized communication complexity is through distributional complexity.\nGiven a joint distribution formula_134 on the inputs of both players, the corresponding distributional complexity of a function formula_8 is the minimum cost of a \"deterministic\" protocol formula_39 such that formula_137, where the inputs are sampled according to formula_134.\nYao's minimax principle (a special case of von Neumann's minimax theorem) states that the randomized communication complexity of a function equals its maximum distributional complexity, where the maximum is taken over all joint distributions of the inputs (not necessarily product distributions!).\nYao's principle can be used to prove lower bounds on the randomized communication complexity of a function: design the appropriate joint distribution, and prove a lower bound on the distributional complexity. Since distributional complexity concerns deterministic protocols, this could be easier than proving a lower bound on randomized protocols directly.\nAs an example, let us consider the \"disjointness\" function DISJ: each of the inputs is interpreted as a subset of formula_139, and DISJ(x,y)=1 if the two sets are disjoint. Razborov proved an formula_104 lower bound on the randomized communication complexity by considering the following distribution: with probability 3/4, sample two random disjoint sets of size formula_141, and with probability 1/4, sample two random sets of size formula_141 with a unique intersection.\nInformation complexity.\nA powerful approach to the study of distributional complexity is information complexity. Initiated by Bar-Yossef, Jayram, Kumar and Sivakumar, the approach was codified in work of Barak, Braverman, Chen and Rao and by Braverman and Rao.\nThe (internal) information complexity of a (possibly randomized) protocol R with respect to a distribution \u03bc is defined as follows. Let formula_143 be random inputs sampled according to \u03bc, and let \u03a0 be the transcript of R when run on the inputs formula_144. The information complexity of the protocol is \nformula_145\nwhere I denotes conditional mutual information.\nThe first summand measures the amount of information that Alice learns about Bob's input from the transcript, and the second measures the amount of information that Bob learns about Alice's input.\nThe \u03b5-error information complexity of a function f with respect to a distribution \u03bc is the infimal information complexity of a protocol for f whose error (with respect to \u03bc) is at most \u03b5.\nBraverman and Rao proved that information equals amortized communication. This means that the cost for solving n independent copies of f is roughly n times the information complexity of f. This is analogous to the well-known interpretation of Shannon entropy as the amortized bit-length required to transmit data from a given information source. Braverman and Rao's proof uses a technique known as \"protocol compression\", in which an information-efficient protocol is \"compressed\" into a communication-efficient protocol.\nThe techniques of information complexity enable the computation of the exact (up to first order) communication complexity of set disjointness to be formula_146.\nInformation complexity techniques have also been used to analyze extended formulations, proving an essentially optimal lower bound on the complexity of algorithms based on linear programming that approximately solve the maximum clique problem.\nOmri Weinstein's 2015 survey surveys the subject.\nQuantum communication complexity.\nQuantum communication complexity tries to quantify the communication reduction possible by using quantum effects during a distributed computation.\nAt least three quantum generalizations of communication complexity have been proposed; for a survey see the suggested text by G. Brassard.\nThe first one is the qubit-communication model, where the parties can use quantum communication instead of classical communication, for example by exchanging photons through an optical fiber.\nIn a second model the communication is still performed with classical bits, but the parties are allowed to manipulate an unlimited supply of quantum entangled states as part of their protocols. By doing measurements on their entangled states, the parties can save on classical communication during a distributed computation (see an application in Collapse of Randomized Communication Complexity).\nThe third model involves access to previously shared entanglement in addition to qubit communication, and is the least explored of the three quantum models.\nNondeterministic communication complexity.\nIn nondeterministic communication complexity, Alice and Bob have access to an oracle. After receiving the oracle's word, the parties communicate to deduce formula_18. The nondeterministic communication complexity is then the maximum over all pairs formula_117 over the sum of number of bits exchanged and the coding length of the oracle word.\nViewed differently, this amounts to covering all 1-entries of the 0/1-matrix by combinatorial 1-rectangles (i.e., non-contiguous, non-convex submatrices, whose entries are all one (see Kushilevitz and Nisan or Dietzfelbinger et al.)). The nondeterministic communication complexity is the binary logarithm of the \"rectangle covering number\" of the matrix: the minimum number of combinatorial 1-rectangles required to cover all 1-entries of the matrix, without covering any 0-entries.\nNondeterministic communication complexity occurs as a means to obtaining lower bounds for deterministic communication complexity (see Dietzfelbinger et al.), but also in the theory of nonnegative matrices, where it gives a lower bound on the nonnegative rank of a nonnegative matrix.\nUnbounded-error communication complexity.\nIn the unbounded-error setting, Alice and Bob have access to a private coin and their own inputs formula_149. In this setting, Alice succeeds if she responds with the correct value of formula_4 with probability strictly greater than 1/2. In other words, if Alice's responses have \"any\" non-zero correlation to the true value of formula_4, then the protocol is considered valid.\nNote that the requirement that the coin is \"private\" is essential. In particular, if the number of public bits shared between Alice and Bob are not counted against the communication complexity, it is easy to argue that computing any function has formula_152 communication complexity. On the other hand, both models are equivalent if the number of public bits used by Alice and Bob is counted against the protocol's total communication.\nThough subtle, lower bounds on this model are extremely strong. More specifically, it is clear that any bound on problems of this class immediately imply equivalent bounds on problems in the deterministic model and the private and public coin models, but such bounds also hold immediately for nondeterministic communication models and quantum communication models.\nForster was the first to prove explicit lower bounds for this class, showing that computing the inner product formula_153 requires at least formula_104 bits of communication, though an earlier result of Alon, Frankl, and R\u00f6dl proved that the communication complexity for almost all Boolean functions formula_155 is formula_104.\nLifting.\nLifting is a general technique in complexity theory in which a lower bound on a simple measure of complexity is \"lifted\" to a lower bound on a more difficult measure.\nThis technique was pioneered in the context of communication complexity by Raz and McKenzie, who proved the first query-to-communication lifting theorem, and used the result to separate the monotone NC hierarchy.\nGiven a function formula_157 and a gadget formula_158, their composition formula_159 is defined as follows:\nformula_160\nIn words, formula_2 is partitioned into formula_1 blocks of length formula_163, and formula_3 is partitioned into formula_1 blocks of length formula_166. The gadget is applied formula_1 times on the blocks, and the outputs are fed into formula_8. Diagrammatically:\nIn this diagram, each of the inputs formula_169 is a bits long, and each of the inputs formula_170 is b bits long.\nA decision tree of depth formula_171 for formula_8 can be translated to a communication protocol whose cost is formula_173: each time the tree queries a bit, the corresponding value of formula_174 is computed using an optimal protocol for formula_174. Raz and McKenzie showed that this is optimal up to a constant factor when formula_174 is the so-called \"indexing gadget\", in which formula_2 has length formula_178 (for a large enough constant c), formula_3 has length formula_180, and formula_181 is the formula_2-th bit of formula_3.\nThe proof of the Raz\u2013McKenzie lifting theorem uses the method of simulation, in which a protocol for the composed function formula_184 is used to generate a decision tree for formula_8. G\u00f6\u00f6s, Pitassi and Watson gave an exposition of the original proof. Since then, several works have proved similar theorems with different gadgets, such as inner product. The smallest gadget that can be handled is the indexing gadget with formula_186.\nG\u00f6\u00f6s, Pitassi and Watson extended the Raz\u2013McKenzie technique to randomized protocols.\nA simple modification of the Raz\u2013McKenzie lifting theorem gives a lower bound of formula_173 on the logarithm of the size of a protocol tree for computing formula_184, where formula_171 is the depth of the optimal decision tree for formula_8. Garg, G\u00f6\u00f6s, Kamath and Sokolov extended this to the DAG-like setting, and used their result to obtain monotone circuit lower bounds. The same technique has also yielded applications to proof complexity.\nA different type of lifting is exemplified by Sherstov's pattern matrix method, which gives a lower bound on the quantum communication complexity of formula_184, where g is a modified indexing gadget, in terms of the approximate degree of f. The approximate degree of a Boolean function is the minimal degree of a polynomial that approximates the function on all Boolean points up to an additive error of 1/3.\nIn contrast to the Raz\u2013McKenzie proof, which uses the method of simulation, Sherstov's proof takes a \"dual witness\" to the approximate degree of f and gives a lower bound on the quantum query complexity of formula_184 using the \"generalized discrepancy method\". The dual witness for the approximate degree of f is a lower bound witness for the approximate degree obtained via LP duality. This dual witness is massaged into other objects constituting data for the generalized discrepancy method.\nAnother example of this approach is the work of Pitassi and Robere, in which an \"algebraic gap\" is lifted to a lower bound on Razborov's \"rank measure\". The result is a strongly exponential lower bound on the monotone circuit complexity of an explicit function, obtained via the Karchmer\u2013Wigderson characterization of monotone circuit size in terms of communication complexity.\nOpen problems.\nConsidering a 0 or 1 input matrix formula_193, the minimum number of bits exchanged to compute formula_8 deterministically in the worst case, formula_195, is known to be bounded from below by the logarithm of the rank of the matrix formula_196. \nThe log rank conjecture proposes that the communication complexity, formula_195, is bounded from above by a constant power of the logarithm of the rank of formula_196. Since D(f) is bounded from above and below by polynomials of log rankformula_199, we can say D(f) is polynomially related to log rankformula_199. Since the rank of a matrix is polynomial time computable in the size of the matrix, such an upper bound would allow the matrix's communication complexity to be approximated in polynomial time. Note, however, that the size of the matrix itself is exponential in the size of the input.\nFor a randomized protocol, the number of bits exchanged in the worst case, R(f), was conjectured to be polynomially related to the following formula:\n formula_201\nSuch log rank conjectures are valuable because they reduce the question of a matrix's communication complexity to a question of linearly independent rows (columns) of the matrix. This particular version, called the Log-Approximate-Rank Conjecture, was recently refuted by Chattopadhyay, Mande and Sherif (2019) using a surprisingly simple counter-example. This reveals that the essence of the communication complexity problem, for example in the EQ case above, is figuring out where in the matrix the inputs are, in order to find out if they're equivalent.\nApplications.\nLower bounds in communication complexity can be used to prove lower bounds in decision tree complexity, VLSI circuits, data structures, streaming algorithms, space\u2013time tradeoffs for Turing machines and more.\nConitzer and Sandholm studied the communication complexity of some common voting rules, which are essential in political and non political organizations. Compilation complexity is a closely related notion, which can be seen as a single-round communication complexity.\nNayebi has studied the communication complexity of unbounded and bounded Bayesians, establishing no-free-lunch theorems (lower bounds) on AI alignment.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50330", "revid": "15945055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50330", "title": "G. A. Hansen", "text": ""}
{"id": "50331", "revid": "42690393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50331", "title": "Gerhard Armauer Hansen", "text": "Norwegian physician (1841\u20131912)\nGerhard Henrik Armauer Hansen (; 29 July 1841 \u2013 12 February 1912) was a Norwegian physician, remembered for his identification of the bacterium \"Mycobacterium leprae\" in 1873 as the etiologic agent of leprosy. His distinguished work was recognized at the International Leprosy Congress held at Bergen in 1909.\nLife.\nHansen was born in Bergen, Norway, and attended the Bergen Cathedral School. He worked at Rikshospitalet in Christiania (now Oslo) and as a doctor in Lofoten. In 1868 Hansen returned to Bergen to study leprosy while working at Lungeg\u00e5rd Hospital () with Daniel Cornelius Danielssen, a noted expert.\nLeprosy was regarded as largely hereditary or otherwise miasmic in origin. Hansen concluded on the basis of epidemiological studies that leprosy was a specific disease with a specific cause. In 1870\u201371 Hansen travelled to Bonn and Vienna to gain the training necessary for him to prove his hypothesis. In 1873, he announced the discovery of \"Mycobacterium leprae\" in the tissues of all people with the condition, although he did not identify them as bacteria, and received little support. The discovery was made with a \"new and better\" microscope.\nIn 1879 Hansen gave tissue samples to Albert Neisser, who then successfully stained the bacteria and announced his findings in 1880, claiming to have discovered the disease-causing organism. There was some dispute between Neisser and Hansen, Hansen as discoverer of the bacillus and Neisser as identifier of it as the etiological agent. Neisser tried to downplay the assistance of Hansen. Hansen's claim was weakened by his failure to produce a pure microbiological culture in an artificial medium, or to prove that the rod-shaped organisms were infectious. Further, Hansen had attempted to infect at least one female patient with the nodular form of leprosy without consent, and although no damage was caused, the case ended up in court and Hansen lost his post at the hospital. The case helped introduce informed consent for medical research in Norway.\nHansen remained medical officer for leprosy in Norway and it was through his efforts that the leprosy acts of 1877 and 1885 were passed, leading to a steady decline of the disease in Norway from 1,800 known cases in 1875 to just 575 cases in 1901.\nHansen had had syphilis since the 1860s but died of heart disease. He was an atheist.\nWomen's rights.\nHe was a co-founder and a board member of the Bergen chapter of the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights, led by his sister, prominent women's rights advocate Amalie Hansen.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "50332", "revid": "50368418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50332", "title": "Utrecht (province)", "text": "Province of the Netherlands\nUtrecht (), officially the Province of Utrecht (), is a province of the Netherlands. It is located in the centre of the country, bordering the Eemmeer in the north-east, the province of Gelderland in the east and south-east, the province of South Holland in the west and south-west and the province of North Holland in the north-west and north. The province of Utrecht has a population of about 1,388,000 as of January 2023. With a land area of approximately , it is the second smallest province in the country. Apart from its eponymous capital, major cities and towns in the province are Amersfoort, Houten, IJsselstein, Nieuwegein, Veenendaal and Zeist. The busiest railway station in the Netherlands, Utrecht Centraal, is located in the province of Utrecht.\nHistory.\nThe Bishopric of Utrecht was established in 695 when Saint Willibrord was consecrated bishop of the Frisians at Rome by Pope Sergius I. With the consent of the Frankish ruler, Pippin of Herstal, he settled in an old Roman fort in Utrecht. After Willibrord's death the diocese suffered greatly from the incursions of the Vikings. Better times appeared during the reign of the Saxon emperors, who frequently summoned the Bishops of Utrecht to attend the imperial councils and diets. In 1024 the bishops were made Princes of the Holy Roman Empire and the new Prince-Bishopric of Utrecht was formed. In 1122, with the Concordat of Worms, the Emperor's right of investiture was annulled, and the cathedral chapter received the right to elect the bishop. It was, however, soon obligated to share this right with the four other collegiate chapters in the city. The Counts of Holland and Guelders, between whose territories the lands of the Bishops of Utrecht lay, also sought to acquire influence over the filling of the episcopal see. This often led to disputes and consequently the Holy See frequently interfered in the election. After the middle of the 14th century the popes repeatedly appointed the bishop directly without regard to the five chapters.\nDuring the Hook and Cod Wars, Utrecht was fought over by forces of the Duke of Burgundy leading to the First Utrecht Civil War (1470\u20131474) and Second Utrecht Civil War (1481\u20131483).\nIn 1527, the Bishop sold his territories, and thus his secular authority, to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and the principality became an integral part of the Habsburg dominions, which already included most other Dutch provinces. The chapters transferred their right of electing the bishop to Charles V and his government, a measure to which Pope Clement VII gave his consent, under political pressure after the Sack of Rome. However, the Habsburg rule did not last long, as Utrecht joined in the Dutch Revolt against Charles' successor Philip II in 1579, becoming a part of the Dutch Republic.\nIn World War II, Utrecht was held by German forces until the general capitulation of the Germans in the Netherlands on May 5, 1945. It was occupied by Canadian Allied forces on May 7, 1945. The towns of Oudewater, Woerden, Vianen and Leerdam were transferred from the province of South Holland to Utrecht in 1970, 1989, 2002 and 2019 respectively. In February 2011, Utrecht, together with the provinces of North Holland and Flevoland, showed a desire to investigate the feasibility of a merger between the three provinces. This has been positively received by the Dutch cabinet, for the desire to create one Randstad province has already been mentioned in the coalition agreement. The province of South Holland, part of the Randstad urban area, visioned to be part of the Randstad province, and very much supportive of the idea of a merger into one province, is not named. With or without South Holland, if created, the new province would be the largest in the Netherlands in both area and population.\nGeography.\nIn the east of Utrecht lies the Utrecht Hill Ridge (Dutch: Utrechtse Heuvelrug), a chain of hills left as lateral moraine by tongues of glacial ice after the Saline glaciation that preceded the last ice age. Because of the scarcity of nutrients in the fast-draining sandy soil, the greatest part of a landscape that was formerly heath has been planted with pine plantations. The south of the province is a river landscape. The west consists mostly of meadows. In the north are big lakes formed by the digging of peat from bogs formed after the last ice age; these lakes are now popular recreational areas for boating, fishing, and water sports.\nNature.\nOne of the most attractive natural areas in the province is the Vechtstreek (\"Vecht region\"), situated on either side of the Vecht river.\nAn international nature conservation organisation that has settled the head office of its Netherlands branch in this province (at Zeist) is the WWF.\n\"Natuur en Milieu\" (\"Nature and Environment\") is a national nature protection organisation whose head office is in this province (at Utrecht city).\nMunicipalities.\nThe Province of Utrecht is divided into 26 municipalities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2015, 20.3% of the population belonged to the Protestant Church in the Netherlands, while 13.2% were Roman Catholic, 6.6% belonged to other churches or faiths, and 5.6% were Muslim. Over half of the population (54.3%) identified as non-religious.\nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the region was 71.5 billion \u20ac in 2018, accounting for 9.2% of the Netherlands economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 47,900 \u20ac or 159% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
